Professor Lee Cronin, thanks so much for coming on to Evolution Soup from your home in Glasgow,
Scotland.
You hold the Registrar of Chemistry at the University of Glasgow and have given over 300
international talks and published over 400 peer review articles in journals such as Nature
and Science.
And your main interest is in the origin of life and how biology emerged from non-living
matter.
How are you doing Lee?
I hear Scotland recently went into lockdown again.
So did this affect your work in any way or is it just business as usual?
Good morning.
The lockdown started and basically the group is going in as normal with some additional
precautions to minimise the number of interactions on campus and in the lab, but because the
lab is we're fortunate to have enough space, it's possible to social distance according
to the legal guidelines.
So it's tough, we're back in, everyone's safe and which is the best news, but also
good news is we're able to continue doing science and some of the genesis engines I've
got or selection engines as I probably it's better to call them, we're also starting to
run now.
Well, before we find out about your fascinating work, let's just hear a little bit about your
background.
Lee, did you always have an interest in science and in particular the question of how life
came to be?
Yeah, I've always been interested in science since I can remember, you know, since I was
I suppose five, four, five, six years old where I can recall those memories and I don't
think the quite the origins question was there.
In fact, I mean, I must confess, I'm not interested in the origin of life or what did happen.
I'm more interested in what does happen because I think the process that gave rise to the
origin of life is ongoing right now.
So I guess I've always been deeply interested in how things work in the universe and one
of the things that mystified me is basically the mechanism for selection and evolution in
the universe and I've always been interested in causation.
I think that's, you know, there's a lot of, I've done a lot of kind of introspection
and been thinking about how I got to where I am in terms of why am I interested and I
can just remember as a child trying to manipulate, you know, the sun photons reflecting things
through bits of glass and understanding how things interact with each other.
And I guess I've always wanted to understand how the universe works and what is more fundamental
about asking how the universe works, which is about asking how life got started and is
that how is that process working now.
So the search for the origins of life, also known as a biogenesis, is nothing new.
For those who don't know, can you give us a brief overview of the experiments that have
been conducted leading up to your first experiment in 2011?
Yeah, so the origin of life or looking at a biogenesis is not new.
It's been going on for hundreds of years, thousands in fact.
As opposed in recent history, you might, the people who are trying to think about
how matter could be animated, and I suppose in medieval times there was a kind of morbid
fascination with life and death still is.
So there are people thinking that life could just spontaneously generate and because people
saw suddenly bacteria growing or maggots growing and things like that, but then that was shown
to be a fallacy that life cannot spontaneously generate in inorganic stuff.
But the irony is really that, and we'll talk about that, is it actually does.
But let's talk about experiments.
So people looked at the kind of inorganic stuff becoming alive, and then as we went through
to the kind of 17, 16, 17, 1800s, obviously alchemists wanted to turn metal into gold,
based metals into gold, so they were kind of thinking about whether matter had some kind of
essence. And then when we started to get really serious about chemistry and understand how
chemistry worked, people started to do very fascinating experiments with what happens in
the soup of chemicals. And the first of those was really happening, say in the 1950s, where
two guys, Miller and Yuri, decided to do the Miller-Yuri experiment, which literally takes
the simplest things you could imagine. Some methane, so that's kind of, that's the simplest
gas molecule that will burn on Earth is, just one carbon atom and four hydrogens.
Some ammonia, that's the simplest nitrogen based atom, that's one at nitrogen 300 atoms,
which is used for the fertilizer. And then some water, H2O, so water is all around,
and some hydrogen H2, one of the most, you know, simple gases in the universe,
put it all together in a bell jar and just have two electrodes and zap the material to
simulate, you know, lightning and kind of other reactions going on, you know, thousands of volts,
between 50,000 volts. And when they did that, they found that there was a soup of molecules made,
like the primordial soup, as they called it. That was in the 1950s. In the 60s and 70s,
sugar chemists started to look at very simple reactions, would make very simple sugar molecules
and take formaldehyde, which is the simplest kind of aldehyde, and then do reactions with that,
would make sugar-like molecules and make a big, gooey mess. So there'd be lots of reaction and
stuff like that, and then going on into the 80s and 90s, people have been doing soup experiments
with, with DNA and RNA to see if you could make kind of genes spontaneously in the test tube,
and then, also, I've looked at the components of RNA and DNA and said,
can these molecules be made in the laboratory easily? And I have, you know, views on all of this,
and people will be trying to string them together to try and come up with a plausible route that
connects dead earth, no organic chemistry, to a biological earth that we have now.
Right, and I remember when you were talking about spontaneous generations,
even as a kid in early science books, this idea that if you put some rubbish out, rats will
appear. It was basically that, wasn't it? Basically, yes. The spontaneous generation
really was, you know, there were biological materials inside the container, which were
basically decaying, and, you know, if the flies had been there, there were larvae that turned
into maggots, and there were, or if it was just bacteria or fungi, they would grow,
so they were already present. And it was showing, if you sterilize the material,
then obviously nothing would grow because everything was dead. So spontaneous generation
was ruled out. But my comment I made about spontaneous generation is, of course,
spontaneous generation does not occur without evolution, but if you have a few, if you have
some time, you can get evolution into biology. So on a billion year time scale, spontaneous
generation using evolution is the answer on a quick time scale, spontaneous generation is just
misunderstanding biology in the seeds that are in the system. Well, you conducted your own experiment,
the first of many, in 2011, an experiment known as inorganica. But before you tell us about that,
is it appropriate to define life? And if so, how would you define it?
It is appropriate to attempt to define life, but I think the problem with defining life
is more arguments have gone into defining life than actually making it. And the problem is,
it's hard to define something you don't, you can't remake or understand. It's like saying,
define an automobile. What is an automobile? Well, automobile was defined by, you know,
the people that first generate them, is an automobile defined by four wheels?
A steering wheel? No, you could probably move around in a, with a car without four wheels,
you could do with three wheels or five wheels. Do you need a steering wheel? No,
you could have a couple of levers. So the problem is people got themselves confused about the
definition and what is the core definition and what is the functional definition and what is the
kind of add-on definition. And so I found that really arguing about definitions of life then
led you into, oh, well, we need this and this and this. No, let's define an automobile, let's
define, well, we need wheels, we need a steering wheel, we need an engine, we need an exhaust pipe.
Well, if it's an electric car, you don't need an exhaust pipe. If you use levers,
you don't need a steering wheel. If you don't, if you decide you're not going to use four wheels
and you have more, you can have eight wheels, right? So some of your definition of your car
has no meaning yet what does the car, what do you do with a car? We get in it and you travel from
A to B. So what I decided to do is rather than get trapped in this loop of what is life defined by
and how do I make life in the lab and say, well, what universal thing characterizes all life on
Earth that we know of and probably all life in the universe? Is there one such thing?
And I realized very quickly there is and that is life using it uniquely, uniquely
defined by its ability to generate complexity via evolution. And what I mean by and what is
prerequisite for complexity that is functional information. So life generates functional information
and if you could have a measure for functional information, you could say something is alive
or dead. So virus, does it have functional information? Yes. So virus is on by this definition
alive and you go but viruses aren't alive, but let's go on. Does a fly have functional information?
Yes, flies are alive. Then when you start to say, oh, there are some things that have functional
information that are not metabolically alive, what connects them and what connects them all
is evolution. And so what we need to do is to say, let's not look at life per se because there's
lots of different types of life, metabolically alive things, viruses, AI's, where do they all come
from? Well, they are all connected via the chain of evolution. So viruses could not exist without
Darwin and evolution, they are related to the all the living organisms on Earth. Human beings
are also similarly related. Donkeys, you know, and classes of animals that can't be produced
anymore and therefore are not genetically alive anymore, dead ends if you like, but we're all
unified by the fact that evolution made us. And that I think is a new definition that I would
like to put out there to say, hey, let's not worry about whether a virus is alive or dead,
because of course, if you're unlucky enough to have COVID, when those COVID virus particles
inside your cell, they have hijacked the cell and they are alive for that moment in time.
And then when they eject the cell and they're going out to infect someone else, they are not alive
metabolically, but they have the potential to be alive. And I think that's a very important
distinction, but we need to understand that the connection, the hard connection, the irreducible
connection is evolution. Well, on this channel, Lee, we talk about the signs of biological evolution
and in many of the debates that we see between evolutionary scientists and evolutionary skeptics,
such as creationists, the skeptics will usually end up saying, well, we may not fully understand
evolution, but you can't tell us how life began, to which the evolution proponent will respond,
that's a biogenesis, not evolution. Those are two different things stick to the topic.
But Lee, you're saying that these things are actually inextricably linked. Is that right?
Yeah, I think that they are linked. And the problem with the debate that creationists all
have to try and disprove evolution through complexity is that they are creationists in
general that do this are they're not taking part in the discussion in a way that is an argument
that means that you can change someone's mind. If you have an argument with someone, then for me,
the prerequisite of an argument is you have a point of view you believe in. But when your point
of view is shown to be inconsistent with the evidence, then you are willing to revise that
point of view. What creationism is, is creationism over the last 50 years, is this evidence of a
body of people that don't want to accept the method of dialogue, logical discussion, you know,
is my axion correct, yes or no, and then move on. They are trying to muddy the borders with
questions and lack of information has been evidence of their point of view.
What they don't understand is science, the process of science is about explaining where you don't
know. That's it. You know, I reason I'm focusing in on a biogenesis is because we don't know how
that works scientifically yet and we're trying to uncover the mechanism. The creationists will say,
look, evidence of the creationist viewpoint and like, no, no, evidence of the scientific method.
It's like, we didn't know how to land rockets on legs, but we knew it was possible. And then Elon
Musk with Space X worked out the mechanics of landing the rocket on legs. It's a very hard thing
to do, use technology. So I think the problem I have with the creationist debate is that isn't a
debate, it is a religious cult. And if you're not able to question it, and the questioning is done
unprofessionally, illogically, and with mal intent, then you're not going to have a productive
discussion. So I think that I find that most creationists is very easy to talk to them and say,
look, if you're not willing to debate the actual thing we're doing in the lab,
and what that means in the divide between falsifiable hypothesis, which means it's
falsifiable, and faith, then you have a problem. Because what I'm not saying as a scientist,
I'm not saying people who are religious are stupid. I'm saying people who have a religion or have a
faith, faith by definition, is in something that can't be falsified. Whereas the origin of life
is a hard problem, but the experiments can be falsified. So the creationists in a way are in
they're in a sticky wicket, because they're always going to lose because, you know, it's like
adopting a point of view. And so they're always on this adversarial front. So I think there's a
contradiction there they try and make doesn't exist. It's a bit like the way you would convince
someone in the fake news, you just bombard them with ever more outrageous examples of the thing
that you want your the thing that you want to argue against and then use that as a straw man.
So I think we need to take it down and say, what is your faith? What is the science doing?
And how is the science and the faith interacting together? And now you can have a really interesting
discussion with theology. And that is actually happening between science and theology. But
creationists are just like a parasitic cult that they don't have anything to add to the debate
other than they're a virus on religion, right? In the same way viruses exist in biology. What are
they doing? They're meant to sow kind of, you know, skepticism in in the wrong way. You know,
we're not skepticism. They're supposed to pretend to be skeptic, but so for Nazism. It's okay,
you can very easily cut down these discussions by by reason and debate. And when people start
ad hominin on you, then you know that you've won and they've lost. But it's not about winning and
losing. It's about critical thinking and giving evidence and finding the answer.
Exactly narrowing down the space in which your hypothesis works. You know, it would be really
interesting if we were able to make a life form tomorrow. But it's going to be hard to make a life
form. But we will be able to show the mechanism of evolution in the same way we see the evolution
is working on earth right now. In fact, indeed, it's working in real time. And the way the UK
locked down and didn't lock down allowed the virus to mutate. Because why? Well, there's two
arguments here. Let me take a segue. America didn't lock down like the UK. South Africa didn't
lock down like the UK. So mutation of the more virulent viruses didn't emerge. Why? Because
people were exchanging the virus freely, people getting ill. Lots more people died in have died
sadly in the US. Now, of course, the proportion of death in the UK is actually quite high. In fact,
the highest right now. Now, why has that happened? Well, there's demographic reasons, but we locked
down, then unlocked down and locked down and locked down. And when you went through cycles of
amplification of mutation and propagation, and that was a really, I think that would turn to be a
hard thing to see for society. But that was evolution in action right before your eyes.
Like a weird petri dish. You know what? Unfortunately, the vaccines seem to be robust
touch word against the mutations that come out. And we will need to revise the vaccines in a
couple of years. But the good news is the UK have done a brilliant thing after making mistakes or
well, that's not mistakes. After what's happened, it's really sad. You know, over 110,000 deaths in
the UK, I think it is now, where we stand on the February 23rd. But we've vaccinated almost 17 million
people. And so that means our death rate should drop dramatically. Of course, this isn't a competition
with other countries about who's the best, who's the worst. It's about saving humans. And also,
it's about looking at how evolution and epidemiology interact and our cultural interactions. But
that's a bit of a segue. Excellent. Okay, take us through the inorganica experiment. Now,
if I had been in the lab with you that day, what would I've seen? So inorganica was really,
is really three separate experiments. And they're still going on now, but they were three ideas.
The first one was to try and take the miliuri experiment, which is why I told you it's a really
basic experiment using gas and water, but to add in a very big missing component, which was the
Earth's crust, because you need the solid material, almost like you needed a, you know, in the first
gramophone, the first record was a wax. You can record the sound in the wax and the rotating
disc. That wax was able to store the sound waves on that disc and they could be played back.
In the miliuri experiment, we couldn't get very much complexity because there's no way to store
that the information in the soup kept getting reset. It's like kept being erased. It's like you
go into a cave and you say a word and it echoes. The echo will die over time. You need a way of
storing that echo. So what I did with inorganica, the first one was to say, right, let's put inorganic
materials into the miliuri and start to record those echoes. So those echoes could influence
the future and to start to build an evolutionary dynamic. Then the second experiment inorganica
was an attempt to start to manipulate the environment by programming the environment like
you program a computer. So in the same way, you could program a computer to do certain things.
Inorganica, the idea with the program was to change the Earth's crust systematically through
different mineral worlds. So you could put the material through the pyrite world,
which is a kind of mineral of iron, then maybe through some kind of copper mineral world.
And so on and so forth and go through those. And then the third experiment was an experiment
where we had, we were making cells, blobs, if you like, of oil and water, like salad dressing,
and seeing how these oil and water blobs could start to evolve on their own spontaneously.
By shaking them and providing some energy and some disequilibrium. So inorganica was really the
dream to kind of see evolution in the inorganic world, amplify in the changing the environments
in the inorganic world and then ending up with cells. So we could go from sand to cells, because
that's what had to happen at the origin of life. And that's what the Miller-Yuri experiment, and
I suppose some others missed out, was the inorganic elements. Yeah, I mean, so of course,
all these experiments are really simple models. And if you think back then, it was a really big
paradigm shift for people to think that you could make so many molecules from just such a simple
experiment. But then the vast space of molecules that was possible can be reduced down by having
the inorganic materials, because they would amplify some reactions at the expense of others,
because they would add constraints. It's a bit like, if you say, I'm going to go to a water
floor and I'm going to drink water. Well, if you don't have a bottle, you could use your hands.
With your hands, the water will be spinning out everywhere. They're at the constraints. If you
have a bottle, that acts as some constraints. You can boundary commission, you can fill up the
bottle with the water and then drink it. And it's understanding how those constraints can be used
in chemistry to stop all the reaction spinning out everywhere, contain them in a bottle, if you
like. So you can get just do one type of reaction or a subset of possible reactions and see what
happens in time. So let's say that we do get the answer, the answer to how life began. Now,
there are bound to be critics out there that are saying, Lee Cronin, you are going to destroy
the mystery of life as human beings. We need that. So what do you say to this criticism?
I'm going to destroy the mystery of life. No, I don't think so. I mean, it's like saying that,
you know, Watson and Crick destroyed the mystery of life when they found
the structure of the double helix with Ross and Franklin's data. I guess what I'm saying is that
science is about elucidating things and getting mechanisms. So from that point of view, it's about
us making progress. But the mysteries are all there. The mysteries don't exist in science. The
mysteries exist in our heads, right? DNA always existed for biology. We didn't understand it.
And so by keeping that mystery, we were not able to understand genetic disease, how we decay,
how life gets going. You know, I think that we have to really be very careful about what we
say is a valuable mystery. So I think there are really important things in the universe about,
you know, we need to understand where life is going on Earth, how precious is life on Earth?
Is there how populated is the universe with other life? And I think once some of these
experiments is absolutely critical, we do them because we want to know how live the universe is.
And, you know, in the same way that when we first realized that stars were powered by hydrogen and
not coal, that did not destroy the mystery of the stars and the sky allowed us to work out
how big the universe was and what is the right of star genesis. So for those people that say
I'm destroying the mystery, I don't think that's the right question. I would say, oh my gosh,
I'm helping us understand the wonder. So I think that wonder is more positive than mystery.
Because mystery has a rather negative connotation at the end, doesn't it? Uncertainty, fear,
where wonder is like, my God, it actually works. If you look at double-stranded DNA,
you see it unwinding. You think that that's happening in myself all the time, as it's
being read out, as the cells are replicating. That's just mind-blowing that it works. So yeah,
okay, if I can replace mystery with wonder, then I think that that's probably a good thing. But I'm
not in the wonder mystery game. I'm in the science reducing uncertainty game.
Lee, is there a theory that can help us tell if something has interacted with a living system
or not, a bit like a signature of life? And if so, how would that work?
This is one of the things that I kind of theories that I built a few years ago. I've probably been
building it since I'm five years old. And I'll tell you about how I built it quickly. I used to
be obsessed about minimal survival kits. I used to like going out in the outdoors and things.
And I was wondering about, what is the minimal amount of information I would need to survive on
my own? And then I could take a box for all the things I need, a first aid kit, some water bottles,
or maybe water purification, some ways to get food, catch animals, grow vegetables, catch fish,
whatever. And then I thought, well, how can I make this thing smaller? So how, what is the minimum
set of tools I would need to create the tools that would create the tools to create the tools,
to create the tools, you know, if I got transported to that desert island. And then I,
using that imagination, I thought, if I take a molecule or anything, can I use this technique
to find out if that molecule was built by a genetic system built by evolution? And the
long story short, the answer is yes, because there are some things in the universe. If I take,
say, my iPhone, my iPhone, if you went to Mars and found an iPhone, and you could see it turn on,
just say, well, that clearly, and using the word has a creator is really bad in the connotation
of creationists. But let's just say it was made by a system. It was made by human beings. It's a
technology, not quite, effect. Information was required. In the same way, if you found the
molecule Taxol, which is one of the most complicated natural products that human beings have identified
in nature, that molecule was made by biology by Pacific uteri. So this molecule, although it has
normal, it looks like normal, a normal molecule, that molecule could not be made randomly in a
primordial soup. It was just too complicated. It's like saying, I expect to stir, if I take the
iPhone and grind it up into atoms and put it in a pot, shake it. If I shake that pot, will that
iPhone ever come out ever, ever, ever? No, the probability of that happening is precisely zero,
not very small even, just zero. So what I realized is when I was grinding up my iPhone in my head,
how many steps are there to grind up the iPhone? So how many unique features? Like,
how many steps do I need in my survival kit? So how many things do I need to do to build the tool,
to build the tool, to build the tool, to build the house? Right? So it's basically the minimum
number of pieces of information that tells me about the amount of memory required. And basically,
evolution requires memory. And so I developed a theory called a 70 theory, which basically says,
given any object or any state of stuff, I can calculate rigorously whether that object or state
was created by the process of evolution. And that's kind of hard, right? You think, well,
what do you mean? Well, let's just say the molecule was made in my cell. Well, I could say if that
molecule was created by the number of steps related to a genome, let's say I go to my workshop and I
build some artwork. That artwork was built by me and therefore that artwork was created by evolution,
because I'm created by evolution. There's a chain of events. Artwork, Lee, Lee's parents, Lee's grandparents,
they're going all the way back to the last universal ancestor of life on Earth.
You're talking about an evolution detector of sorts.
So exactly. So what this is, basically, when I find objects, identical copies, number one,
is required of objects in any abundance molecules. And I find that they have a number of unique
features. I can basically tell you how evolved they are. And the more unique features they have,
the more the evolution, it's like an evolution speedometer. So I can say zero evolution,
1000 miles an hour. And I can measure that in the lab. And that's really exciting, because it means
we can measure in the lab, we can go to our space, we can go anywhere in the universe and measure
whether evolution has occurred or not. It's like we've built, like a gravity detector, but for evolution.
Well, speaking of the lab, you and your laboratory, the Cronin group, continue to work on this
thought-provoking and important question. But you're also involved in digitizing chemistry.
So what is that all about? So I realized very early on that when I wanted to kind of build a system
that would look at the amount of information required to get evolution going, I wish a few
evolution would be like a computer program, and I needed to basically look at the number of variables
and how those variables would change in space and time. And human beings can only do so many
experiments per day, and we might need to do literally countless trillions of experiments.
And so I realized the experiment is probably out of reach of manual labor. And so because I've built
a new theory for life, which is that life produces complexity from evolution and the memory in the
universe, which is created in stuff. It's not like a vague thing, it's a concrete thing. Then I could
come up with a model of that to say how much memory, how much stuff. And then I was able to make a
measuring device, to then make this measuring device, and then I could then go in the lab and
actually make it. Now it's a bit like the Large Hadron Collider to find the Higgs boson. The Higgs
boson is the boson associated with gravity, one of the most important forces in the universe.
How did they do this? Well, number one, they had a theory, the standard model of physics, which
predicts the Higgs boson. Number two, they then looked at that theory and estimated the energy
range in which that boson would be created to search to collide particles together. So then they
built the collider and the detector in that energy range, and they then did the experiment and look
for the signature. And once they got above the threshold, they were able to say for sure we've
discovered the Higgs boson. Now think, I've got a theory for life, I can make a model, I can work
out roughly where to look, I then build the machine, I then run the machine to find the signature of
life. But in doing the calculation, I realized the machine required many more operations mixing
together liquids and solids and things than a human being could feasibly do in a lifetime.
So I decided to make a programming language for chemistry and make a robotics for chemistry.
And that's what we did. And in the process, I've made the first universal robot that does chemistry.
And of course, when I was saying to people, can I have money to make robots for origin of life?
They said, no. I said, well, can I have money to make robots to discover new drugs? And they went,
that's a better idea to do that. And so I built the digital chemistry system to initially
discover new drugs. So in my lab, I have a drug discovery system that makes molecules.
But then obviously, I was then asked permission to repurpose that technology
for the origin of life, which was my initial ambition. But it's a bit like, you know, Elon
Musk wants to go to Mars. But really, to make money, he has to go to orbit and service the
space station, put satellites in and give internet and GPS. So he's using SpaceX as a vehicle to
make money. So he can have his dream to go to Mars. I'm using the digitization of chemistry as a
vehicle to solve drug discovery problem and make human health better. And then my reward for that
is to get to use technology to find out if there's life in the universe. So I think it sounds as though
you're saying you could 3d print your prescription or something. Is that right? Not quite 3d print.
But I would say almost analogous to that, take a code like in a 3d printer file,
put it in a robot and then make your drug. Interesting.
Lee, if your purpose is to get one particular message across to the world, what would it be?
I think the most important thing is that there isn't really a mystery of the origin of life,
right? I think we're looking at it all wrong. I think what we're trying to understand is
my very strong inclination based on the science at the moment is that we can generalize evolution
beyond biology. So one message I'm trying to say in a very concrete way is that biology did not
create evolution. Evolution created biology. And what biology has done is massively sped up
that process of evolution. And evolution isn't just a vague term of progressing time,
it's about the universe storing memories about the past that can be used in the future direct
actions. So in a chemical system, the chemistry can remember what happened a few days before
and use that information to then change to react differently tomorrow than if those
few days had not happened. So all that evolution is, is the amount of memory in the universe
or associated with an agglomeration of matter. So take Earth. Earth has been 4.7 billion years old.
It started very chaotically as the birth of the planet cooled down a bit. Chemistry was able to
go. Chemistry basically then was able to read out the state of the Earth at the time and record
that information. And then biology emerged, transformed the Earth, made it more comfortable
for biology. Biology flourished, flourished, flourished, and then we got to human beings
and the end of technology. And so what I'm trying to say to everyone is that life probably,
probably, because we don't know for sure, but the data is looks pretty exciting that life is a
property of the universe in the general sense is life everywhere. And that life is created by the
process of evolution. And that we should really be thinking about how to find life elsewhere in
the universe and what that might mean if the emergence of life on Earth is as common as the
birth of a star in the universe. And I think that is the kind of the main thing I want to get people
really comfortable with, that this isn't just some kind of science fiction fantasy. It's liable to be
a fact. Some people on the scientific side would be much more conservative and say, oh,
we only have one point that's heretical or not heretical because it's not I'm not breaking the
laws. I'm just saying I'm making some assumptions that this process of evolution is more strong than
others might determine. And people on the other side might say that's impossible, you know, God
made life on Earth, God made the universe, God made Earth. But what I'm trying to say is that there
science we can do right now we did we uncovering that mechanism of evolution and we're seeing it
right now. And so I'm really excited because really I'm discovering of I mean, okay, I feel
really kind of really arrogant to say, you know, like discovery of gravity, because obviously Newton
was a massive figure. But there are other figures along with Newton at the time that you know,
hook and so on the limit. Sorry. What I'm saying is the discovery or the
realization that evolution is like gravity, gravity is a force in physics, one of the four
fundamental forces, yes, there across the entire universe. I'm not saying evolution is a mechanical
sorry, a force. I'm saying that evolution is a common phenomena when you have matter and bonds
and molecules and polymers, because those objects are able to store information about the past
to affect the future. And that mechanism gives us life, complexity, technology and consciousness.
And that's it. That's the in a nutshell. Well, this has been such a fascinating dive into the world
of life, non life and evolution. It's something I've always wanted to do on this channel. And
I'm really pleased to have been able to have you on the show to talk about your amazing work.
I will leave links to your social media writings and of course, TED Talks in the description below.
And hopefully we can have you back on again one day in the not too distant future.
Thanks very much. It's really been a pleasure to be on and to kind of discuss how we're searching
for the the the emergence of evolution in the universe. And I hope that people have listened
and seen this, found it thought provoking.
