There's something oddly reassuring about how bad most of us are at predicting the future.
25 years ago, I was an innocent kid exploring a relatively new internet through an old dial-up
modem. For me, at least, all these connections were pure excitement and possibility. I was
blissfully unaware of the vast changes and controversies they'd bring. Looking at my own
ten-month-old today, I realized that about the only thing I can predict is that he'll consider
dial-up modems, and probably me too, to be about as relevant as an ancient Greek chariot.
But for just a moment here, I want to try to see the world through the eyes of someone else who
unlike me, was deeply worried about the effects of new technology. This someone was a keen observer
of how technology shapes the world around us. They saw people using it to gain personal and
political power in ways that weren't always truthful. They noticed us being more obstinate
than ever, just clean to our own opinions, not even considering the other side. And they were
keenly aware that ideas are now being spread at an ever more blistering pace. Because of all this,
the person I have in mind was deeply worried about the effects on our ability to have a real
conversation with each other. Now you might be thinking, okay, okay, we've heard these concerns
before. But what you might not know is that they've been around for a bit longer than you might
expect. This person wasn't talking about Twitter or Facebook. They weren't a pioneering computer
scientist or cognitive psychologist. It was the philosopher Plato. And what he was worried about
over 2,500 years ago was this new technology of writing. Now, as a philosopher myself,
I'm very grateful that Plato wrote down his concerns about writing. Otherwise, we wouldn't
have access to them today. And I should say, well, Plato's solution is going to be about
encouraging conversation. If you ever need to end the conversation, just try announcing I'm a
philosopher. I found that works pretty well. But Plato really is fascinating, not just for the
surprising relevance of what he has to say, but for the creative way that he says it. So today,
I'd like to walk through three of Plato's stories with you that really highlight the challenges
that new technology brings. Its tendency to trade in reasoning for convenience, its dependence on
just a single viewpoint, and its emphasis on speed. Let's start with speed. This is a familiar aspect
of our world today. Everything needs to be available in an instant and broadcast in real time.
But Plato thought that speed has its drawbacks, especially when it comes to something like writing.
Think of, say, just reading a written essay as opposed to having a conversation. When reading,
it's easy just to skim through and think you're done. The back and forth of conversation tends
to take a little more time, but it can really also lead to deeper engagement. Plato uses a really
neat image to drive this point home. He likens the way that we approach writing to gardens of Adonis.
These were part of a yearly ritual that the Greeks used to commemorate the famed lover of
Aphrodite who had an all too short life. What they would do is they would plant seeds in these shallow
pot shards and they'd force them to sprout in just a few days. The result was this beautiful bed of
lush green leaves. But soon those plants would wither from their shallow roots, so the Greeks
would just take them down to the coast and ritually cast them into the waves.
Now Plato isn't saying that these little gardens are entirely useless. In a way,
the whole point is that they're temporary, beautiful one moment and then gone the next.
But make no mistake, they're not designed for nor will they provide long lasting sustenance.
I have to say, I can't help but imagine how odd it must have been to watch people
rushing these shallow little gardens just to toss them into the sea. But at the same time,
I can't help but wonder if Plato could watch us today posting to social media, would he see it
any differently? If he was worried about the speed of writing, what does that tell us about our
on-demand culture today? Now his concerns about speed have to do partly with the second point,
about the difficulty of truly engaging with other perspectives. Plato talks about how
speech, once written down, simply wanders around saying the same things over and over again.
If you already agree, you aren't likely to learn anything new. If you don't, it's easiest just to
ignore it. This brings us to a second story that he uses about the Egyptian gods meeting to discuss
the merits of writing. The inventor of writing is of course very excited. He presents his wares
to the king of the gods and tells him, I have discovered a potion for memory and for wisdom.
But the god king isn't convinced. He says that writing will actually instill forgetfulness
and give people the false sense of thinking that they know when they actually don't.
Just think for example of how few phone numbers we can recite today
now that they're all stored in our smartphones. Now it's easy to think here, okay, got it. Obviously
inventor of writing thinks it's good, but the wise god king shows that it's bad. But more is
going on here than meets the eye. According to Plato, the king had good things to say about writing
too. Plato just doesn't tell us what they were. And he's presenting us with criticism after criticism
of writing in the form of a written dialogue. Surely he doesn't think writing is all bad.
Now this brings us to one more point that Plato actually found this really creative way
to create writings while still preserving the benefits of conversation. We call them dialogues
because they depict a thorough discussion that genuinely takes multiple perspectives seriously.
Instead of simply announcing these benefits to us, Plato shows us through the way that he crafts
these written dialogues. If he could do it for writing, in writing, despite all of his concerns
about writing, how might that translate to our context today? How can we preserve the benefits
of dialogue while still engaging with modern technology? Okay, so Plato has one more story
for us. This one has to do about the importance of reason. Plato tells us that the most valuable
thing you could get your hands on in ancient times was one of these mythical statues of
Daedalus. They were so skillfully made, so lifelike in their design, that they actually moved.
But even if you were able to get your hands on one and say to get on home, the minute you weren't
looking, that statue might just move on over to some other person's yard. Turns out they're not
going to retain their value unless you have some way of tying them down. Plato stresses that we
need to tie down our ideas too with the underlying reason that motivates them. Otherwise, they too
will get us get away from us, just like one of those elusive statues.
Now, part of Plato's concern here is that sometimes we have this false impression,
say just liking a quote will get us out of the hard work of truly understanding it.
There's this seductive idea that even philosophy culminates with some pity statement, something
just so true, it exudes wisdom. But even the people we like to quote most, they have a whole body
of work to back up what they're saying. So similarly, modern shortcuts like hashtags,
they're great at collecting information, giving a quick read on where someone stands,
but they're not so great at communicating the underlying motivation. We have to ask ourselves
for any given claim, what's going to tie down that idea? Why should we support it? What's the
evidence? Now, I want to take just one more moment here to appreciate how uncanny it is
that these concerns from well over 2,000 years ago can still speak to us today.
That's not to say that all of our problems have been solved. For all their inventions,
the Greeks never even figured out how to make clothing with pockets.
But it is to say we need to think hard about how technology impacts our most deeply held values.
We need to continue that dialogue that Plato started for us so many years ago.
When we do, we should remember that technology is a tool for crafting our own intricate statues
and that they retain their value when grounded in what we really care about.
We need to work on including different perspectives just like that Egyptian god king.
Rather than meaning that we've got something wrong, exploring both sides is more often a sign
that we're really doing something right. And not everything can serve its purpose in an instant,
like those beautiful gardens of Adonis, but changes that come about more slowly
often bear the greatest fruit. New technologies are inevitable, so it would be pointless to
insist on richly casting them into the sea. But Plato's challenge is for us to keep finding new
ways to enable and encourage this old technology of conversation, ways that retain those core values
of reason, of patience, and of open-mindedness. Thank you.
