Alright, so you probably don't realize that right now you're actually looking at something
quite rare because I am a millennial computer scientist book author standing on a TED stage
and yet I've never had a social media account.
While this happened was actually somewhat random, social media first came on to my radar when
I was at college, my sophomore year of college, this is when Facebook arrived at our campus
and at the time which was right after the first dot-com bust, I had had a dorm room
business, I had had to shut it down in the bust and then suddenly this other kid from
Harvard named Mark had this product called Facebook and people were getting excited about
it so it was sort of a fit of somewhat immature professional jealousy, I said I'm not going
to use this thing, I'm not going to help this kid's business, what's I ever going to
mount to?
So as I go along my life I look up not long later and I see that everyone I know is really
hooked on this thing and from the clarity you can get when you have some objectivity,
some perspective on it I realized this seems a little bit dangerous so I never signed up,
I've never had a social media account since.
So I'm here for two reasons, I want to deliver two messages, the first message I want to deliver
is that even though I've never had a social media account I'm okay, you don't have to
worry, it turns out I still have friends, I still know what's going on in the world,
there's a computer scientist, I still collaborate with people all around the world, I'm still
regularly exposed serendipitously to interesting ideas and I rarely describe myself as lacking
in entertainment options.
So I've been okay but I'd go even farther, I'd go even farther and say not only am I
okay without social media but I think I'm actually better off, I think I'm happier,
I think I find more sustainability in my life and I think I've been more successful professionally
because I don't use social media.
So my second goal here on stage is to try to convince more of you to believe the same
thing, to see if I could actually convince more of you that you too would be better off
if you quit social media.
So if the theme of this TEDx event is future tense, I guess in other words this would be
my vision of the future would be one in which fewer people actually use social media.
Okay, so that's a big claim, I think I need to back it up, so my thought what I would
do is take the three most common objections I hear when I suggest to people that they
quit social media and then for each of these objections I'll try to defuse the hype and
see if I can actually push in some more reality.
So this is the first most common objection I hear, that's not a hermit, that's actually
a hipstered web developer down from H Street, I'm not sure, hipster a hermit sometimes
is hard to tell.
So this first objection goes as follows, Cal social media is one of the fundamental
technologies of the 21st century to reject social media would be an act of extreme bloodism,
it would be like riding to work in a horse or using a rotary phone, I can't take such
a big stance in my life.
So my reaction to that objection is I think that is nonsense.
Social media is not a fundamental technology, it leverages some fundamental technologies
but it's better understood as this, which is to say it's a source of entertainment,
it's entertainment product.
The way the technologist Jaron Lanaire puts it is that these companies offer you shiny
treats in exchange for minutes of your attention and bites of your personal data which can
then be packaged up and sold.
So to say that you don't use social media should not be a large social stance, it's
just rejecting one form of entertainment for others, it should be no more controversial
than saying I don't like newspapers, I like to get my news from magazines or I prefer to
watch cable series as opposed to network television series, it's not a major political or social
stance to say you don't use this product.
My use of the slot machine image up here also is not accidental because if you look a little
bit closer at these technologies it's not just that they're a source of entertainment
but they're actually a somewhat unsavory source of entertainment.
We now know that many of the major social media companies hire individuals called attention
engineers who borrow principles from Las Vegas Casino Gambling among other places to try
to make these products as addictive as possible.
That is the desired use case of these products is that you use it in an addictive fashion
because that maximizes the profit that can be extracted from your attention and data.
So it's not a fundamental technology, it's just a source of entertainment, one among
many and it's somewhat unsavory if you look a little bit closer.
So here's the second common objection I hear when I suggest that people quit social media,
the objection goes as follows, Cal, I can't quit social media because it is vital to my
success in the 21st century economy.
If I do not have a well-cultivated social media brand people won't know who I am, people
won't be able to find me, opportunities won't come my way and I will effectively disappear
from the economy.
So again my reaction is once again this objection also is nonsense.
So I recently published this book that draws on multiple different strands of evidence
to make the point that in a competitive 21st century economy what the market values is
the ability to produce things that are rare and are valuable.
You can produce something that's rare and is valuable, the market will value that.
What the market dismisses for the most part are activities that are easy to replicate
and produce a small amount of value.
Well social media use is the epitome of an easy to replicate activity that does not directly
produce a lot of value, it's something that any 16 year old with a smartphone can do.
By definition the market is not going to give a lot of value to those behaviors.
It's instead going to reward the deep concentrated work required to build real skills and to
apply those skills to produce things like a craftsman that are rare and that are valuable.
To put it another way, if you can write an elegant algorithm, if you can write a legal
brief that can change a case, if you can write a thousand words of prose that's going to
fixate a reader right to the end.
If you can look at a sea of ambiguous data and apply statistics and pull out insights
that could transform a whole business strategy, if you can do these type of activities which
require deep work that produce outcomes that are rare and valuable, people will find you.
You will be able to write your own ticket, you will be able to build the foundation of
a very meaningful and successful professional life regardless of how many Instagram followers
you have.
So this is the third common objection I hear when I suggest to people that they quit social
media and in some sense I think it might be one of the most important.
So this objection goes as follows, Cal, maybe I agree with you, maybe you're right, it's
not a fundamental technology, maybe using social media is not at the core of my professional
success, but you know what, it's harmless.
I have some fun on it, weird Twitter is funny.
I don't even really use it that much, I'm a first adopter, it's just kind of interesting
to try it out and maybe I might miss out on something if I don't use it.
What's the harm?
So again I look back and I say this objection also is nonsense.
In this case what it misses is what I think is a very important reality that we need to
talk about more frankly, which is that social media brings with it multiple well documented
significant harms.
And we actually have to confront these harms head on when trying to make decisions about
whether or not we embrace this technology and let it into our lives.
So one of these harms that we know this technology brings has to do with your professional success.
So I just argued before that the ability to focus intensely to produce things that are
rare and valuable, to hone skills that the marketplace values, that this is what's going
to matter in our economy, but right before that I argued that social media tools are
designed to be addictive.
The actual design, desired use case of these tools is that you fragment your attention
as much as possible throughout your waking hours.
That's how these tools are designed to use.
Well we have a growing amount of research which tells us that if you spend large portions
of your day in a state of fragmented attention.
So large portions of your day where you're constantly breaking up your attention, take
a quick glance, do a just check, let me just quickly look at Instagram, that this can permanently
reduce your capacity for concentration.
In other words you could permanently reduce your capacity to do exactly the type of deep
effort that we're finding to be more and more necessary in an increasingly competitive
economy.
So social media use is not harmless, it can actually have a significant negative impact
on your ability to thrive in the economy.
I am especially worried about this when we look at the younger generation coming up which
is the most saturated in this technology.
If you lose your ability to sustain concentration you're going to become less and less relevant
to this economy.
There's also psychological harms that are well documented that social media brings that
we do need to address.
So we know from the research literature that the more you use social media the more likely
you are to feel lonely or isolated.
We know that the constant exposure to your friends carefully curated positive portrayals
of their life can leave you to feel inadequate and can increase rates of depression.
And something I think we're going to be hearing more about in the near future is that there's
a fundamental mismatch between the way our brains are wired and this behavior of exposing
yourself to stimuli with intermittent rewards throughout all of your waking hours.
So it's one thing to spend a couple hours at the slot machine in Las Vegas but if you
bring a slot machine with you and you pull that handle all day long from when you wake
up to when you go to bed we're not wired from it.
It short circuits the brain and we're starting to find that it has actual cognitive consequences
one of them being this sort of pervasive background hum of anxiety.
So the canary in the coal mine for this issue is actually college campuses.
If you talk to mental health experts on college campuses they'll tell you along with the rise
of ubiquitous smartphone use and social media use among the students on the campus came
an explosion of anxiety related disorders on those campuses.
So that's the canary in the coal mine.
This type of behavior is a mismatch for our brain wiring it can make you feel miserable.
So there's real cost to social media use which means when you're trying to decide should
I use this or not saying it's harmless is not enough.
You actually have to identify a significantly positive clear benefit that can outweigh these
potential completely non-trivial harms.
So people often ask okay but what is life like without social media that can actually
be a little bit scary to think about.
What I found from people I know who have gone through this process there can be a few weeks
that are difficult that actually is like a true detox process.
The first two weeks can be uncomfortable.
You feel a little bit anxious you feel like you're missing a limb but after that things
settle down and actually life after social media can be quite positive.
There's two things I can report back to you from the world of no social media use.
First it can be quite productive, be quite productive.
So I'm a professor at a research institution I've written five books I rarely work past
five p.m. on the weekday.
Part of the way I'm trying to able to pull that off is because it turns out if you treat
your attention with respect so you don't fragment it you allow it to stay whole you preserve
your ability to concentrate when it comes time to work you can actually do one thing
after another and do it with intensity and intensity can be traded for time it's surprising
how much you can get done in eight hour day if you're able to give each thing intense
concentration after another.
Something else I can report back from life without social media is that outside of work
things can be quite peaceful.
So I often joke I'd be very comfortable being a 1930s farmer because if you look at my leisure
time I read newspaper while the sun comes up I listen to baseball on the radio I honest
to God sit in a leather chair and read hardcover books at night after my kids go to bed.
It sounds old fashioned but I'll tell you they were on to something back then it's actually
a restorative very peaceful way to actually spend your time out of work you don't have
the constant home stimuli and the background home of anxiety that comes along with that.
So life without social media is really not so bad.
So we pulled together these threads and you see my full argument for why I think not everyone
but certainly much more people than right now use social media much more people should
not be using social media and that's because we can first summarize discard with the main
concerns that somehow it's a fundamental technology you have to use nonsense it's a slot machine
in your phone we can discard with this notion that you're not going to get a job if you
don't use social media nonsense anything a 16 year old with a smartphone can do is not
going to be what the market rewards and then I emphasize the point that there's real harms
with it so it's not just harmless you really would have to have a significant benefit before
you would actually say this trade off is worth and finally I noted that life without social
media there's real positives associated with it.
So I'm hoping that when many of you actually go through this same calculus you'll at least
consider the perspective I'm making right now which is many more people would be much
better off if they didn't use this technology.
Now of course some of you might disagree some of you might have scathing but accurate critiques
of me and my points and of course I welcome all negative feedback I just ask that you
direct your comments towards Twitter thank you.
