Well, imagine a 14-year-old teenager in the largest city of Brazil, facing a modeling
career which is in the beginning, chasing a dream.
I found myself in my black bikinis and high heels, holding my modeling portfolio for the
very first time, and I was standing in front of this designer who had the power of choosing
me or not for his fashion show.
And let me tell you, in the modeling industry, if you're lucky, the designers will ask you
to walk, try and close, and return another day.
On the other hand, if you're unlucky, they'll coldly and maybe even rudely ask you to leave.
Let's just say this time I was pretty unlucky, and I felt devastated.
But that traumatizing moment allowed me to discover the amount of power I had in my hands.
Literally, in my hands.
As soon as I left that room, I grabbed my cell phone and I began opening up to my 500
followers at the time about my failure and how it ignited a flame on me to do better
the next time.
But I was most surprised with the response I had from my followers.
So many of them identified themselves and deeply thanked me for the words of motivation.
And from that moment on, I began sharing my daily experiences on social media, and I used
my platform to showcase my modeling work, arts, love for the environment, my hardships,
and most importantly, how I overcame them, but always maintaining a smile on my face.
And I saw my followers beginning to grow.
And now I'm 17 years old, and I have almost 340 followers on all my social platforms.
And I call it the art of connecting through vulnerability.
As soon as I left that room, I opened up for all my followers.
And by sharing the messages, and by sharing the lessons I learned while trying to become
the best individual I possibly can, I'm able to inspire and be inspired by so many
people.
I'm able to change someone's day.
I have the power to make someone smile.
Actually, we all do.
Even if it's only one person, it's worth it, because smiles multiply exponentially when
they're ignited by love.
And now, I guess you're waiting for the moment where I'm going to talk about the negative
aspects of social media, which, well, there are many.
A classic example is this one.
I'm sure we've all seen.
All our friends in the dinner table, in a party, and everybody's looking down.
Everybody's looking at their phones.
So yeah, if we do not use it with caution, we can become passive consumers of it, and
maybe even addicts to it.
But we have a tendency to focus on the negative aspects of things.
And if personal interrelationships are one of the key aspects in life, then social media
allows us to facilitate this.
It has allowed us to break barriers in communication.
I can literally send a tweet to the president.
I don't know if you'll answer me, but still, I have the power to do so.
We all have.
And that's what matters.
This device, which I'm sure we all have less than a meter away from us, allows us to communicate
with the entire world.
And social media is the present and the future of our generation.
We can fast from it, control the amount we use it, but there's no definite escape from
it.
And that's why, while using our social media, we should be careful and always maintain a
positive attitude.
It has caused such an impact because it's changed the way we live our lives.
Now, we don't need huge physical encyclopedias anymore, but we do need to be careful with
what we post on social media.
And that's scary, right?
Yeah.
It's scary to leave our comfort zones, but maybe we should.
And I've always heard people talking about social media as if it is this toxic environment.
And for a while, I ended up believing it was.
But as soon as I discovered that by sharing the lessons we learn, and by knowing that
it will only become a toxic environment, because we allow it to be, I changed my mind.
So I was curious to see if people actually thought it was such a toxic environment.
And I decided to make a survey on my Instagram account, which I would say is quite ironic.
And these were the answers.
9,050 people entered the survey, and 90% believed it is a toxic environment.
But what is most shocking about these results is why they thought it was such a toxic environment.
Most of the answers referred to this illusion we are able to create virtually.
We can selectively share only the positive aspects of life, while the people who are
viewing it, they will compare their entire life.
And therefore, I decided to ask them how they thought we could change the situation.
And there were three main answers.
Firstly, we should share our reality, meaning that sharing our hardships may be more powerful
and more impacting on people's lives than only sharing the positive things.
Secondly, stop comparing each other.
We are all unique, and that's what makes us special.
And thirdly, we should be more aware of what is shared on social media.
Every single thing we share will have an impact on someone.
Therefore, let's be careful and not be shared, and make sure we only share what's positive.
And therefore, I decided to create this formula called effects.
And effects measures the impacts every single post will have on the followers on social media.
I decided to measure how much I impacted my followers.
And as soon as I noticed the amount I actually impacted on their lives, I tried to merge
what I discovered from the survey and my personal experiences to create this formula.
A means aesthetic.
Is the aesthetic of your post visually pleasing?
F stands for function and purpose.
What is the function of your post?
What is the intention?
Is it for the good?
E stands for energy.
Does the energy your post creates is a positive one?
K stands for knowledge.
Does your post create relevant and new knowledge?
And S stands for sustainability.
Is your post encouraging sustainability?
This is a formula which you can use in every single post and it will work just fine.
So, an example is this photograph I posted on my social media.
Before I posted it, I checked its effects.
My intention was to raise awareness about plastic use and encourage people to use to run beach cleanups.
So, it has a pleasant overall aesthetic.
It is providing, it has a clear function.
It is providing people with good energy.
It will generate good energy.
And the knowledge is provided by the caption.
And obviously, it's encouraging sustainability.
But these are vital aspects which I consider in every single post I make on my social account.
But the formula is easily malleable and easily adaptable to the intention of your post.
This is a video I posted on my Instagram channel.
And it has as an intention to help students, just like me, to organize their mind before studying.
And this time, the knowledge is much more important than the sustainability aspect.
Therefore, I simply cut sustainability out and introduce another case as a formula.
And this is a form of joining our digital life and our real life and making them run side by side.
Every single time this formula is applied, your post will necessarily provide good energy and positive energy.
And therefore, this will boost people's lives when they're offline, when they're off the platform.
And while I came to the conclusion that while I cannot control the behavior of others,
I can control my own.
And I'm far from perfect, don't get me wrong.
But still, I try to use my space inside this platform for good.
And social media has allowed me to become not only a fashion model, but a role model for so many people.
And I invite you all to do the same.
I invite you all to try applying the effects formula on your next five posts on social media.
And simply observe its effects.
We have a very powerful tool on our hands.
Let's use it for the good.
Let's enjoy the right of life while trying to become the best individual we possibly can.
And helping others, by the way, let's help others to expand.
Thank you.
