Lecture 5 Historical Linguistics and Studying Culture
Words and Worlds
The Indo-European world was full of words, and we can gain access to their past by looking at the words that survive in modern languages.
In this lecture, I'd like to extend and develop some of the issues I've been raising in previous lectures
about the ways in which we can use the techniques of comparative and historical philology
to understand the social and imaginative world of the Indo-European peoples.
But I'd also like to show, as I've tried to show in previous lectures,
that the study of those Indo-European peoples and languages is fascinating not only for its own sake,
but for the light it sheds on the words of English that descend from those earlier Indo-European languages.
So in order to look closely at the Indo-Europeans, we need to understand their intellectual, their literary, and their social life.
And in particular, I'd like to show how the relationship between the real and the imagined in Indo-European culture
informs some of the literary tropes and metaphors, some of the great themes and genres of the Western tradition.
Let's begin, if you like, at the top. Let's begin with the belief system of the Indo-European peoples.
Scholars have reconstructed a belief system that has a pantheon to it.
In other words, it is a collection of many gods.
Let me just pause and say a little something about pantheon.
We think of that as a word from Greek, but it is a word made up of Indo-European roots.
Phaos in Greek comes from the same root that Deus comes from, or the word Zeus comes from.
Deiu in Indo-European, that is, the root that was reconstructed, is a root that comes from a word meaning light or shine.
And it also gives over time the Latin word dies day.
So it is assumed that the godhead, if you like, or the chief deities, there's our word again, deities,
of the Indo-European peoples were deities of sky, of sun, of light.
Pantheon. Pantheon means all the gods. Pan means all.
But it is also the Indo-European root for five.
Look at your hand. I have five fingers. That's all the fingers on my hand.
And so the root for five and the root for all is the same.
A fascinating way in which the bodily condition of life generates a verbal condition of description.
And so the pantheon has at the top a deupater, as we would say in reconstructed Indo-European.
That is, a deus, a god, pter, pter, father.
There is a paternalistic structure to the pantheon.
And this god, the father, shows up in several Indo-European languages, not the least of which is Latin.
Deus pter becomes, if you say it very quickly, over a period, if you like to imagine, of a thousand years Jupiter.
And so Jupiter's name simply means god, the father.
The great Calvert Watkins, who I mentioned in my earlier lecture, was a scholar of the Anatolian languages,
the languages of Hittite, and the languages of Asia Minor, has found in Hittite a phrase,
Tatus tuus. Tatus is father, dada, pter, and tuus deus, another father god.
What do you do with a god? You believe in a god. And if you believe in a god, you have a creed,
credo in unum deum, in Latin christenedum, I believe in one god.
The word credo, in Latin, the verb meaning I believe, comes from an Indo-European root,
cred-do, and cred, or cred, is the root for heart, cardia.
Do means to put, to donate, to give.
So the word credo, or creed, in Latin comes from an ancient Indo-European expression,
which means to place in the heart. That is what belief is.
You place in the heart, but you also place the believing body in the ground.
You will remember from an earlier lecture that I noted how the Indo-European peoples
were, as archaeologists have shown, inumators rather than cremators. They buried their dead.
And to bury is sepaleo. Now this is an old verb meaning to venerate the dead.
And in Latin, it becomes the verb sepaleire, which means to bury. And in English,
we have borrowed this word from Latin to give us the word sepulcher, a place in which the dead
are buried. Now this set of examples can tell us something about the Indo-European peoples,
and also about how the surviving languages that descended from these Indo-European roots
preserve an older set of beliefs, a paternalistic god, a way of believing, a belief that the
heart is the locus of faith, and a social ritual of faith that is burial.
The Indo-European languages are rich with theological terms, but they are also rich
with legal terms. Terms for law have ancient roots. Our very words, law, legal, come from the same
words that give us ligature to link. A law is something that links or binds up a people.
Who is the linker, but the reg, the rex, the raj, the rix, the ruler? In my earlier lecture,
I had mentioned how one of the earliest correspondences among the Indo-European languages
that scholars such as William Jones had noticed were the words for rule. And what I'd like to
add to that observation is the idea that these words are also words that survive in, if you like,
the languages on the geographical periphery of Indo-European culture. That is, rix is Celtic,
and raj is Indic. Reich is German, and rex is Latin. It is as if the Indo-Europeans carried
with them from their point of origins notions of rulership that survived at the borders, at the
endpoints, at the very edges of the Indo-European migration. Now, I have been talking about some
of these words, and I've been talking about law and culture, words like rule, words like law,
take a word like jus, justice, bond, and net. All of these are words that concern the binding
together of the peoples. But what's also interesting is that what binds a people together
are habits of exchange, gift-giving, and hosting. What is fascinating about the words
for giving and taking is that the Indo-European roots very often descend into later languages
to mean two opposite things. For example, the root do in Indo-European survives in Latin to the verb
donare, meaning to give, and we use it today in our word donate. But in hitite, the word do meant
to take or to receive. The root nem in Indo-European was the word forgiving, and nemesis in ancient
Greek was the god who gave out or meted out justice. But the word survives in the Germanic
languages to give us words such as modern German, nemen, meaning to take. So you have a single root
which probably meant something like exchange or give and take. And in the surviving languages,
and in the later cultures, it sorted itself out as one or the other. Another good example of this
are the words for host and guest. Now, Indo-European had a root that scholars have reconstructed,
ghosti. Now, you'll remember that as in my previous lecture, I mentioned that Indo-European
had a distinctive set of sounds aspirated stops, ghosti. We would write it with a G-H now, ghosti.
This doesn't give us ghost in modern English, but it does give us two sets of words that do come
into modern English, host and guest. Ghosti must have meant something like the one who hosts and
guests. That is, the same word used for the shared experience rather than for one person
or another. It is a kind of social ritual word, and it gives us in Greek the word xenos,
which means stranger. It gives us hostess, host, but it also gives us hostile. And so, host and
guest, stranger and friend, we're looking here at a constellation of terms, concepts of otherness,
of friends and potential enemies, a world of giving and taking, a world of hostsmanship.
To be xenophobic is to have a fear of the foreign. Geographical and topographical
reconstructions are what's at stake. We have not just belief, but we have the world. We have living
in the world of experience and imagining the world of desire. And so, when we look in Indo-European,
we're looking not only for words of things in the sky or social forms, but we're looking for
everyday things. We're looking for plants. We're looking for animals. We're looking for the Indo-European
economy. So many of the surviving Indo-European languages have a word that descends from grano,
grain, rugel, rye, baharis, barley. And so, we can assume that the original Indo-European peoples,
living in probably the shores, along the shores of the Black Sea, as some have postulated,
were cultivating grain. They domesticated animals. Gu is the root for cow. Su for swine.
Agno is sheep. And that, you can hear an agno. You can hear the Latin agnus, Agnus day, Lamb of God.
Con is hound or dog. Echo is horse. One of the fascinating things, as I've mentioned in my previous
lectures, is not just what the Indo-European languages share, but what they don't share.
And you'll remember how all the Indo-European languages did not have a word, a shared word,
for the sea, but they did have shared words for rowing or navigating on a small body of water.
One of the interesting things about the Indo-European languages is that while they all
share a word for dog or hound, they do not share a word for cat. And so, the assumption is that
cats were domesticated later than dogs in Indo-European culture, or a way of putting it might be to say
that after the Indo-European peoples broke up into their constituent groups after they migrated
east and west, each new group learned how to domesticate the cat on their own, and that they
named the domestic cat in their own descendant languages. I've mentioned in a previous lecture
the way in which we can do not just historical, but also cultural reconstruction, and that that
cultural reconstruction depends on sound. And I want to go back to an example that I'd given earlier
in greater detail. I've mentioned that so many of the languages in Indo-European have a word
that descends from a kind of p-word in reconstructed Indo-European, it's piwo. And this becomes in
Latin, pecunia, which means wealth. Sanskrit, it's pasu, livestock. Old English, feyach,
because you'll remember by Grimm's law that Germanic words with an f that are cognate with
Indo-European words are cognate with words in Indo-European that had a p. So old English feyach,
cattle, old Norse fey, possessions, modern German fee, cow, modern English fee, meaning a payment
for something. What we have here is evidence for a culture that considered livestock a form of wealth,
and also a culture that if you like domesticated, it's livestock. The idea here is movable goods,
or wealth in the form of domesticated animals. And it seems significant, too, that so many
of the descendant Indo-European languages had a word not only for cattle, but a word for yoke.
And so the assumption is that this culture, with its shared vocabulary, was a domestic
agricultural economy. Now, let me digress and give you some more examples along these lines.
And one way of doing it is to do it, if you like, topically or thematically. Another way of doing
it is to do it, if you like, phonetically. I mentioned the p and f, and we saw how this is one
of the most recognizable correspondences among the Indo-European languages. Let me give you a few
more examples to pique your interest, but also to suggest the range of Indo-European culture and
belief as it descends into the modern European cultures. Now, we have a word flow. We have a
word fly. We have a word feather. There is, in the Germanic languages, a set of words that begin
with f that all seem to suggest movement through a medium of some kind. These, if they have
Indo-European cognate roots, should correspond to p words, and indeed they do. Flow, pluo. Now,
if you ask yourself, what is the relationship between a word like English flow and an imagined
root like pluo? What happens when it rains in France? That is, the idea of the rain, the verb
for the rain, goes back to this Indo-European root to flow or to move through a medium. And so,
the non-Germanic Indo-European word for rain seems to be cognate to the Germanic word for flowing.
You fly, but we have feathers. All of these are going back to a word that an Indo-European is a
root pet. And this pet word means also to move through the air. Pen is a word which in Latin
does not mean a writing implement. A penna is a feather. And the f and the p look back to an old
Indo-European root, which imagines for us movement through a medium. Let me give you one more example
of this. My favorite, pluto. What is pluto the god of? Pluto is certainly the god of the underworld,
but we use the word pluto in a phrase like a plutocrat. Now, a plutocrat is not someone who
rules from hell. A plutocrat is someone who gains power by virtue of his or her wealth. Plutonic,
that is, the ancient name of pluto, comes from the same word as the word flow. What happened
when you dug metallic ore from the ground? You smelted it. And when you smelted it, it would
melt. And the metal would flow out. And so for pluto was the god of the underworld. Pluto was
also the god of the wealth buried in the underworld. And so flow and pluto go together so that we can
see historically the way in which the ancient name of the Greek god is in fact a word meaning
to flow through a medium and therefore it takes us back to ancient principles and techniques
of smelting, of metallurgy, and of bullion wealth. When we think of wealth, we think of cattle,
we think of gold, but we also think of the wealth of the imagination. And I'd like to conclude
this lecture with an extended reflection on the Indo-European literary imagination. Scholars
have reconstructed shared words for poet and for poetry and for certain literary concepts
in the Indo-European languages. Let me give you some examples. There is a Latin word vates,
which means a fear or a prophet. And this is cognate with a whole set of other Indo-European
words. Fight in Old Irish, meaning a bard. It's cognate with the word woad in Old English,
which means crazy. Woden or Odin. Woden is the chief god in the Scandinavian pantheon.
Why is he Woden? He's Woden because he's not just crazy, but because he's a poet. Woden or Odin is
the master of runes. He's the master of poetry. He gave an eye for wisdom. And so what Indo-Europeanists
have seen in this collocation of words is an Indo-European root wet, which goes back to this
image of a crazed seer, vatic figure, a poet, and a madman. What do poets do? Poets weave words.
And roots, such as weck and tex, are the old Indo-European roots for weaving. Now in Latin,
the verb texere, which comes from that root, meant to weave. And it could mean two things. In Latin,
just as it means two things, in the languages that borrow that Latin word like English. It can mean
to weave with words, and that gives you a text. But it can also mean to weave with thread,
and that gives you a textile. The poet was a weaver of words, much as the woman was a weaver
of threads. And it is no accident that in the most ancient epics of the Western tradition,
Homer's Odyssey, for example, you see Penelope weaving and unweaving just as Homer himself
weaves his words. This act of weaving shows up in Old English, where we are told the poet's
wordum rixlan. They weave words together. And yet, weaving was not the only thing that people did.
They built with clay. They built with dirt. There is a wonderful Indo-European root,
der, which means to build or to make something out of mud or clay. And to
build around, para, deg, para, around. The root meaning around or about means to encircle
with a mud wall, para, deg. To encircle with a mud wall is to create in the language of Iran,
Farsi, Old Persian as well, para, degs, a paradise. This word is borrowed by the Greeks,
and it is borrowed by the other European languages to mean in religious contexts the place of the
first beginning. But paradise simply means a walled space, an enclosed garden. The paradise,
if you like, of Indo-European is the place of origin. And fame, heroic fame, was something that
the Indo-Europeans and their descended peoples pressured, much as they would treasure gold,
or they would treasure cattle. Now, klios is the Greek word for spoken fame. And in an earlier
lecture, I mentioned how klios is so much a part of the idiom of Greek epic. Klios athiton is a
phrase, undying fame. That's what the hero wants. What can we do with klios? As I mentioned,
hera klios. Hera klios, the god or the hero Hercules, has a name which means nothing other
than redounding to the praise of Hera. You can play this game with other names. How about
Sophocles? Sophocles was a real person, but Sophocles is a meaningful name. Sophos klios.
Fame or famous for wisdom. And so you can see how so many of the names of historical Greek figures,
of Greek gods, of heroes, go back to these words that have their Indo-European roots.
In the 19th century, scholars reading Greek knew of klios athiton, and they began to discover,
as William Jones had discovered half a century before them, the texts of the Sanskrit religion,
belief, and social structure, the Rig Veta, the Bhagavad Gita, the great texts of ancient
subcontinental India. And in those texts, they found poems and they found phrase, and the phrase
they found was shravas aksiton, klios athiton, shravas aksiton. An Indo-Europeanist of great
facility in the 19th century would have recognized that the K corresponds to the S, and that as they
would work through each correspondence, remember, kentum and satum. And they would realize that
klios athiton and shravas aksiton are cognate phrases. They meant the same things. They descended
from the same root. The sound laws and correspondences between the Sanskrit and the Greek worked
perfectly, and they scanned poetically the same way. That is, they were a metrical phrase.
This is the idea of the formula. Indo-European poetry is formulaic, and we can see that in
Homer in such phrases as the wine dark sea, cow-eyed penelope, rosy-fingered dawn, or odysseus
of many wiles, polytropos odysseus, many tropes, polytropos odysseus. We see it in old English
poetry in its formulae. We even see it in the surviving oral epics of the Serbo-Croatian
peoples. And so what was discovered here was not simply a word or phrase, but a poetic, an idea
of a poetics. The study of Indo-European, as I've tried to suggest in this and in my previous
lectures, is a revelation. And what I mean by that is that so much of our history of language
has been veiled, that we need to get behind the words to see the origins. And if we think of
revelation and we think of the veil, we must think too of Indo-European. The concept of the secret
or of the prophetic is as central to Indo-European literary and religious thought as is the concept
of the open and the famous. Now there is a Greek word, calypsoin, and it means to hide. And this
corresponds to a set of Germanic words and English words that begin with H. Calypsoin is actually
cognate with hull, meaning a shell or a covering. Now how could we take this observation and turn
it into myth? Who is the goddess of calypsoin? It is, of course, calypso. The figure in the
Odyssey who is the sorceress, the one who hides or conceals. What happens if you take away the
covering? Apo in Greek is the prefix to take away. Apo calypsoin, to take away the covering.
When Latin scholars translated the Greek for the Vulgate Bible, they simply translated it as
removing the cover. Vilum veil the cover. Revelare to reveal. Apocalypse and revelation
mean the same thing. And what the study of Indo-European can reveal to us, I think,
is precisely the way in which these ancient word roots give us some of our most modern,
but also some of our most deeply held beliefs, social rituals, and imaginative structures.
