Lecture 10, Chaucer's English
Chaucer's England was a trilingual world.
As I mentioned in my last lecture, the languages of Latin and French and English coexisted
in the British Isles as, if you like, strata of verbal expression and experience.
Latin was the language of the church, it was the language of intellectual and philosophical
inquiry, it was the language of science and natural observation.
French was the language of the court, it was the language of government and it was
the language of high or prestige culture.
English was the language of the street and of the farm, it was the language of personal
expression and it was the language of intimate communication.
These three languages coexisted for over 200 years and in their coexistence they gave
rise to a form of the vernacular that we can see reaching, if you like, its literary
apogee in the writings of the poet Geoffrey Chaucer.
Even though Chaucer did most of his work in English, indeed as far as we can tell, there
are no absolutely attributable poems to Chaucer in anything other than English, he too is
a trilingual writer, for he had close contact with French and Latin and his English synthesizes
several regional dialects.
In this lecture I'm going to look in detail at Chaucer's English, I'm going to look at
the ways in which he develops out of the matrix of regional dialect, English, French and Latin
and the history of the language as he experienced it, how he develops out of that matrix a supple
poetic form, vocabulary and idiom.
But I also want to look at the ways in which Chaucer's language reflects the culture and
experience of its time.
And so before I look in detail at his pronunciation, at his vocabulary, at his syntax and grammar
and at his attitude towards language, I want to look a little bit at his life and times.
Chaucer was born probably about the year 1340 and he very soon entered aristocratic service,
rising very high in, if you like, the circles of court and the city of London.
Eventually he became a member of the clerk of the king's works, his job in the 1380s
and 90s, staging great events and spectacles for the court of the king, Richard II.
He served in Parliament, he worked in the economic life of England and when he lived
in his apartment overlooking the streets of London, he could see the commerce and the
culture of his time recorded, most memorably as many of us know, in the prologue portraits
of his Canterbury tales.
When we talk about Chaucer's English, we are therefore talking about the language of
an educated public servant in late 14th century London, someone who probably had been schooled
in Latin, someone whose court and courtier experience would have been in French, and
someone whose political and cultural life took him outside of England.
We know that Chaucer made some diplomatic forays into Italy in the 1370s, where he may have
met the great Italian poets Petrarch and Boccaccio.
Many of his Canterbury tales and other poems draw on Giovanni Boccaccio's works as their
sources.
Chaucer was aware of Petrarch as the great poet laureate of 14th century Italy.
He was traveled and he was aware of Italian literary and political culture.
So what we have in Chaucer is a metropolitan and a cosmopolitan poet.
Now let me just pause and say that in a trilingual world there were some writers who really did
write in all three languages.
Chaucer's friend and contemporary and indeed his lawyer was a poet named John Gower, and
John Gower wrote three major poems.
He wrote a poem called The Vox Clamantis, The Crying Voice, and he wrote it in Latin.
He wrote a poem called The Confessio Amantis, The Lovers Confession, and he wrote it in English.
And he wrote a poem called The Miroir de l'homme, The Mirror of Man, and he wrote it in French.
Gower may be unique in his linguistic facility, but he's not unique in representing this
trilingual literary culture for 14th century England.
So when we look at Chaucer, we're looking at an individual who knows other languages
and cultures, who's synthesizing vocabulary, syntax, form, and idiom, and who is bringing
together into unique literary expression the metropolitan and cosmopolitan life of his
time.
Now when we look at Chaucer also, we're going to look at dialects.
And I'm going to say a little bit about Chaucer's regional dialect in this lecture, but I'm
going to save for my next lecture an extended discussion of Middle English dialects and
their literary representation.
So for now, let's look in detail at the language of Chaucer's poetry, pronunciation, vocabulary,
syntax, and grammar attitudes towards language and towards language change.
Let's begin with pronunciation.
Chaucer's English is a dialect of Middle English made up of elements drawn from the
East Midland dialects to help form what would become a London standard.
That statement means something like the following, that Chaucer's vowel system would have been
very much like the Southern Old English vowel system and very similar to the vowels of the
modern spoken European languages, A-E-I-O-U, or A-E-O-U.
So we say not name, but nama.
We say not meet, but met.
We say not bite, but beat.
We say not house, but hoose.
We say not do, but dough.
We say not sow, but sow.
And here in these vowels you can hear the sounds of the old Chaucerian Middle English
vowel system.
Consonants would have been different from the cluster consonants of Old English.
You'll remember from a previous lecture how I talked about how the classic or characteristic
consonant clusters of Old English were disappearing.
Chlo became le, chlud loud, ring became ring, chwat became wat, and so on.
So Chaucer's consonant system is simpler, if you like, than the Old English system,
but there are no so-called silent letters.
Final E is always pronounced.
So for example a word like night, the one riding on a horse, is knished.
Marriage would have been pronounced mariage.
Chaucer's vocabulary deploys for the first time a whole range of new words from French
and Latin.
He relies on the learned vocabulary of the university, of the courts, of the guilds,
and of the literary traditions.
But Chaucer is also aware of the native, older Old English resources of his language.
And what I hope to illustrate in this lecture is in particular the ways in which he will
juxtapose a new, imported word from French or Latin with an old native or Anglo-Saxon
word that's still in the language.
He will create striking literary effects.
Let's talk about syntax and grammar.
Now because Chaucer is writing poetry for the most part, he does produce several major
works of prose, but in his poetry his word order is very often influenced by the meter
of the poetry.
That is, he is writing iambic poetry, poetry with a rhythm, poetry that scans and rhymes.
And remember, unlike Old English poetry that alliterated, Chaucer does not write alliterative
verse, although he may occasionally use alliteration for special effects.
So the rhythm of his iambic pentameter, that is, of his five-beat, ten-syllable lines in
the Canterbury Tales and the need to have them rhyme in couplets, these constraints occasionally
influence his word order.
But it is fair to say that his word order patterns are, if you like, standing midway
between those of the old, inflected forms of Old English and what we see today as the
full, uninflected patterns of modern English.
Let me call attention to a few features of Chaucerian word order.
Chaucer uses the standard subject-verb object.
I give the ball.
This is, by Chaucer's time, the standard word order pattern for a declarative sentence.
You asked a question in Middle English, not by using the word do at the beginning of a
sentence.
This feature does not emerge until the mid-16th century, and it will be the subject of a later
lecture.
But rather, you asked a question by inverting the order of the subject and the verb.
You gave the ball.
Gave you the ball.
That's how you ask a question.
Similarly, you could reverse the word order for a command or in claims of negation or
for stress.
So for example, gave you the ball.
Gave the ball you.
I gave the ball.
I, the ball, gave.
These are grammatical utterances in Chaucer's Middle English, and the switching, now not
of the subject and the verb, but of the verb and the object, indicate levels of stress or
levels of emphasis.
It is important to note that negation in old, middle, and early modern English is cumulative.
Now part of the legacy of 17th and 18th century grammarians, pedagogues, and pedants is that
double negatives cancel themselves out.
This is largely a pedagogical invention, and it was to make English look logical, the idea
that two negatives made a positive.
But for a great deal of time in the history of English, negative or negation was cumulative.
That is, the more negatives you used, the stronger it could be.
They reinforce each other.
You could have double negatives.
You could have triple negatives.
You could have, as in this line from the Canterbury Tales, the general prologue, the description
of the night, you could have a staggering quadruple negative.
That is, he never yet in no way said anything bad, know how, to nobody.
This kind of quadruple negative is a feature of the language.
And so in the course of reading Chaucer and of looking at Middle English, we need to recognize
that there are certain forms that are not ungrammatical, but certain forms that are
actually grammatical, and that it is the legislation of our grammar that has changed.
Pronouns are very important in Chaucer's Middle English.
In Old English, in Middle English, and even in early modern English up to the time of
Shakespeare, you had, as you have in many modern European languages, two sets of pronouns.
You had a second person, singular and informal, thou in the nominative, thee date of accusative,
thy or thine genitive.
That is, when you wanted to address a single individual, or when you were speaking intimately
to someone who was familiar, or when you were speaking down to someone, you vowed them.
This is like in French, to, to twyaying them, or in German, using do, or Spanish, using
to, or in Italian, using to.
Now if you wanted to address a group of people, or if you wanted to speak formally to someone,
you would use the pronoun you.
And so ye, you, and your correspond to thee, thou, and thou, and thine.
And this distinction becomes one of class, and not simply number.
Now let me just say something of the following.
We think of thee and thou as formal.
And this will be an interesting issue later in the course.
Let me just anticipate by saying, thee and thou are not originally the formal forms.
They are, rather, the informal forms.
You and your are the formal forms.
They're like, vous in French, thee in German, usted in Spanish, lay in Italian.
And so you have a double system of the second person pronoun operating in Chaucer, which
Chaucer will use for very special literary and cultural effects.
So I've given you some of the highlights of the pronunciation, of the grammar, of the
morphology, and syntax of Chaucer's language.
And now what I would like to do is read to you in Middle English the opening sentence
of the general prologue of the Canterbury Tales, perhaps one of the most famous sentences
in all of English literature.
And I'd like to show you how Chaucer makes meaning out of the linguistic resources of
his time and place.
I'm going to read it in Middle English, and then I'm going to give you a modern English
translation.
Juan that April, with his suree sorte, The draught of March hath perced to the rotte,
And bathed every vein in switchlecour Of which vertu engendred is the floor.
One Zephyrus, ache, with his suet a breath, In spirit hath, in every halt, and hath,
The tondle of corpus, and the youngest son hath in the ram, His half-course, Ironna.
And smaller, foolless makin' melodia That's sleepin' all the nicht with open ear,
So pricketh him, natur, in here corages, Than longin' folk, to goin' on pilgrimages,
Than palmarous, for to sakin' stronger strondus, To ferna hallus, coath in sundry londus,
And specially, from every shearest end of Engeland, To contibut of the Wender, the holy
blissful martyr Fortaseca, That hem hath hulpen, one that they were saca.
And it happens, that April, with his sweet showers, Has pierced the drought of march to
the root, And bathed every vein in that fluid,
From whose power the flower is given birth, When Zephyrus also, with his sweet breath,
Has inspired the tender crops in every wood and heather, And the young son has run half
of his course through the sign of the ram, And little birds make melody, who sleep all
the night with their eyes open, So nature stimulates them in their hearts.
Then people desire to go on pilgrimages, And professional pilgrims desire to seek
strange shores, And they wend their way, especially,
From the end of every county in Engeland to Canterbury,
In order to seek the holy blissful martyr, Who had helped them when they were sick.
This is one sentence and it's 18 lines long.
Let's think about this sentence first as a piece of literature, and perhaps it's easiest
to think about it a little anachronistically if you're coming to Chaucer for the first
time.
Let's think about it cinematically.
The camera of the poet's eye pans down, From the imperian to the surface of the earth,
And we move from the sky, From the zodiac, the sign of the ram,
The winds, the west wind, Then down with the rain,
Through the treetops, where the birds are singing,
To the land itself, And then in a kind of parallel focus move,
We move almost like the spokes of a wheel Move towards the hub,
From the periphery, From every sheeress ender,
From the end of every county of Engeland, To that focal point in Canterbury.
This double movement of focus is, if you like, the projection of this passage,
And Chaucer's language gives us the vocabulary for understanding that kind of focus.
Let's look at the words now.
This is an opening of a poem that juxtaposes new words of French and Latin origin with
words and forms of Old English or of Anglo-Saxon origin.
Sweet showers, drought, march, the root, piercing, piercing is a French word,
And bathing every vein, French word, In switch, liqueur, O-U-R at the end, very French word,
And of course it's going to rhyme with, Fleur, another French word.
Now what is the power?
The power is vertu.
Now we think of virtue in a distinctively feminine way, and that really is a late 18th
century innovation.
Virtue rewarded, virtue as a kind of form of chastity.
But virtue comes from the Latin, weir, veer, v-i-r, meaning man.
And so it's manliness, it's power, it is a form of control, and what does manly power
do?
It engenders, it engenders.
There is a gendered quality now to the rebirth.
This isn't just the birds and the bees, but it is the power of regeneration in spring.
You have the West Wind, what does it mean to call the West Wind Zephyr?
It means to invoke a world of classical mythology.
Zephyr is the Greek god of the West Wind.
And what does Zephyr do?
With his sweet breath he inspires.
As far as I can tell, inspire, used as a verb in this way, appears for the first time
in this passage in English poetry, that Zephyr is breathing into.
Now to inspire is to breathe into, Spirare, Latin, to breathe.
To respire is to breathe again and again.
To expire is to stop breathing.
To perspire is to breathe through.
Now where is he inspiring?
Every halt and heath, the tender crops and the young sun has run half its course through
the sign of the ram.
So what Chaucer is doing is he is juxtaposing here the sign of the ram, not Aries, with
the mythology of Zephyr.
In addition to these French words, Chaucer uses English words.
Now I've been calling attention primarily to the new and imported terms here.
Words like virtue, engender, inspire, the name of the Greek god Zephyr.
But it is important to see these opposed to English terms.
Zephyr has a sweet breath, English words.
He inspires French word, but he inspires into halt and heath.
Not just English words for an English landscape, but an alliterative phrasing, halt and heath.
The ram runs through half of its course.
Now that is ultimately a Latin and a French word.
And the small of foolish, these little birds are doing what?
They're making melodia, ultimately a Latin term for music.
Why are they making music?
Because they're sleeping with their eyes open.
That is, they're not sleeping, they're having bird sex.
And yet the birds are having bird sex in French.
It's almost as if in Chaucer's world, as in our own, the language of sex is the language
of French.
Because nature has pricked them in their courages.
Not in their hearts, but in their cur, their courage.
In Old English, if you had a lot of heart, you were hearty.
In French, if you had a lot of cur, you were courageous.
And so courage means not just courage, heartiness, it literally means heart.
And so imagine Geoffrey Chaucer walking out into a world that has so changed that even
the birds are singing in French.
Then people long to go on pilgrimages, this technical term from French.
Then it must rhyme too with corages.
And we move through this opening sentence in this juxtaposition here of the English and
the French.
To summarize the words for high culture concepts.
The words for intellectual, for sexuality, for courtliness, for poetry, for culture and
the imagination of French.
The words for the landscape are English, Holt, Heath, Breath, Sun, Ram.
So there's, if you like, a narrative here of French playing itself again into the English
landscape, would it be going too far to say that the opening of the Canterbury Tales replays
in an imaginatively linguistic way, the impositions of the Norman conquest, as French speakers
enter an English landscape?
Let's look at the final couplet of this passage.
The Holy Blissful Martyr for Tussaca, that Hem Hoth Hulpen won the day for Tussaca.
That is, that they went to seek the Holy Blissful Martyr, who'd helped them when they were
sick.
Holy, Old English, Blissful, Old English, Martyr, French, ultimately from Greek, but a French
word, for Tussaca, English.
So when Thomas a Beckett, who is the martyr in Canterbury that they're going to see, when
they're going to see Thomas a Beckett's shrine, what an effect they're going to see is someone
who had been martyred.
That is, the concept word, Martyr, enters into this linguistic landscape as an imported
word, that Hem Hoth Hulpen won that day for Tussaca.
That had helped them when they were sick.
I stressed in reading that this is really an evocatively illiterative line, Hem Hoth Hulpen.
Help, helped.
That's a weak verb now.
Do you remember strong verbs and weak verbs?
Well, in Old English, help, help, Hulpen.
Help was a strong verb.
It's changing in Chaucer's time.
Chaucer can use the strong form, but it's a little bit of an archaism.
In other words, there's an evocation at the end of this great sentence, that Chaucer is
having the forms of English reassert themselves, that Hem Hoth Hulpen won that they were sick.
One word means seek, the other means sick.
This is the technical term rhyme rich, that is, where you rhyme on the same word, but
where it means two different things.
So there is a sense of profound closure at the end of the first sentence of the Canterbury
Tales, that is signaled not just through vocabulary, but through sound.
And in my reading, what I tried to stress was that the alliteration at the end forces
the reader to slow down.
It is the breath of the speaker that's mirroring, if you like, the breath of Zephyr.
And that this is therefore not simply an opening description, but an act of inspiration.
Inspire me, oh muse, this is what the classical poets always asked at the beginning.
And if Zephyrus is breathing new life into the landscape, then the classical inheritance
is breathing new life into English poetry.
We are now in a world not of heartiness, but of courage, where Zephyr inspires us all.
What I'm trying to suggest is this, that what Chaucer has done in the opening of the Canterbury
Tales is he has written, if you like, in nuce, in a nutshell, the history of the English language
to this point, as I have sought to trace it, that you see French and English words jockeying
for position in the line, that you see the shards of alliterative poetry poking themselves
through, and you see an, if you like, evocation of a larger, classical way of thinking, that
is a way of going back to the ancients that Chaucer is using here to show us the momentousness,
the portent, if you like, of the opening of the Canterbury Tales.
Chaucer's world is trilingual, Chaucer is writing in English, yet he is bringing the
vocabulary from all three languages together into a profound synthesis of landscape and
culture.
Chaucer will also bring together the dialects of English, and in my subsequent lecture I'm
going to talk primarily about Middle English regional dialects and what the study of dialect
can do for us in understanding not just Chaucer, but earlier English literary culture.
But what I want to stress is that Chaucer is a great synthesizer, that not only does
he reach back into the past of English, but he reaches across from every shires enda,
from the end, or the border of every county, to embrace the entire dialectical richness
of the English language as he heard and read it at the end of the 14th century.
