These lectures are part of the Great Courses series. They are produced by the Teaching
Company. These lectures are titled, The History of the English Language, 2nd Edition, Part
2, Lecture 13, The Return of English as a Standard.
English makes a comeback. Throughout the Middle Ages, as I have discussed in my previous lectures,
the British Isles was a trilingual country. That is, English, French and Latin. And for
centuries, Latin and French were the prestige languages of court and culture, education
and economy. During the late 14th and early 15th centuries, however, English seems to
return as a prestige language. What I would like to do in this lecture and in the next
few lectures will be to talk about how English reasserts itself after the decline of French
in the late Middle Ages and what is different about the English that reemerges as a prestige
language in England in the 15th and 16th centuries. I'm going to talk about how we can chart
changes from the English of Chaucer to the time of Shakespeare. And in this lecture and
in the next few lectures, I'm going to be looking in detail at how modern English, the
English that we can recognize in sound and spelling and in sense today, how that modern
English finally emerged. Of course, English had not disappeared after the Norman conquest,
or even though French was the language of court and commerce and Latin was the language
of church and school and university learning, English remained as we have seen as the language
of imaginative expression. It was the language of the street. It was the language also of
the poem. And a whole range of English verse and prose survives from the 12th, 13th and
14th centuries to testify to the vitality of the vernacular during this period. But during
this period, English is not, as it were, an official language. And so one of the interesting
questions we need to ask is how English returns as a language of official proclamation, of
economic control, and of political and social order. You'll remember that the Norman conquest
was in 1066. The first official use of English after the conquest was not until almost two
full centuries later. And this is a proclamation of King Henry III that was issued in October
of 1258, 18 October 1258. The document was issued in French and in Latin and in English.
And the idea of this document is that King Henry swears to observe the dictates of Magna Carta.
Magna Carta was that great document that had been signed by King John in 1215. Now Henry
had never kept his word on this. And the proclamation was designed to assure the Barons
that he would respect the order of political control that had been established in Magna
Carta. The fact that the document is issued in three languages suggests that business
was going on in three languages. But I think that there's something else at work here.
A close reading of this document, and I'm going to look just at the opening of it, has
shown to many scholars that in fact the document was originally written in French. That French
for the 1250s, for Henry III, was the official language. It was Henry's own language. But
there is an effort, or if you like, a rhetorical gesture towards the English Barons and towards
the realm of England as a whole to have the document in English. And so my point is that
the publication, or the presentation of this English document, is less about language than
it is about politics. Let me read to you the opening phrases of this document.
Henry, par la grâce de ré l'Angleterre, s'il-di-lande, duc de Normandie, d'Arquitaine,
et cunt en jus, et tous ces faux clairs et les saluts. In Middle English that reads, Henry,
for goddess fulthumme, king on Englandlande, clavard in Irlande, duc on Normandie, on Aquitaine,
and Earl on Anjou, send a greeting to his holder, Illerade and Ilewad, on Hontentenshire. Now this
is fascinating because it's quite clear that at a certain level what the English scribes and
translators are trying to do is come up with English versions of the French. Par la grâce de,
by God's grace. Now that is a Frenchism, it is a Gallic expression by the grace of God,
grâce de, the grace of God. Now what the English translator does is translates it into the words
goddess fulthumme. Now the word ful has as its root fullness or completion. It passes into Middle
English but it seems clear that by the 13th century this is a very antique or Archaic word. In fact,
according to the dictionaries of English, this document of 1258 is the last recorded use of
the word fulthumme. Now there are many examples like this and the point to make is this, that what
has been going on here is that this French text is translated into a deliberately Archaic sounding
English. That is, that it is being translated into an English that sounds old and also an English
that is deliberately purged of newer phrases. And so when Henry greets all of his clerks and all of
his laymen in French, the clair, the clerks, les and the laymen, in the English it is phrased as an
old English alliterative pair, ilerde and illuida, the learned and the lewd. Lewd here means uneducated.
And so what I'm suggesting here is this, that our documents from early English history are not
simply documents of language but they are documents of politics. That Archaeism can be used for
special political effect and that when we see translations and when we see this trilingual
or multilingual world going on in medieval England we have to be extremely careful about what the
language is signaling. Now Parliament was not addressed in English until almost another century
later and in 1362 Parliament is opened for the first time with a speech in English. Now the
problem is this, that the records of that speech are in French. Now the so-called records of
Parliament are the Rotally Parliamentorum, that is the rolls of Parliament because they were
kept on large rolls of parchment. And if we read the entry for 1362 for the opening of
Parliament we're told that Arquel jour on this day étant notre Seigneur les Rois in the presence of
our King, and it goes on in the presence of our King and the Counts and the Barons and the Privy
Councilors and everyone else, the Chief Justice, Chef Justin les Rois summoned Parliament monster
and Englois, that is he announced in English the following thing, but that is recorded for us in
French. Now I find this another fascinating document because what I want to ask is this,
what's going on here? Is this a text that's being translated from an English transcription? In other
words do you have scribes in Parliament who are taking dictation and they're taking dictation in
English and then when the time comes to record it officially, it's recorded officially in French.
That's option number one. Option number two, which I actually prefer to believe, is that all of the
transcription was going on in French. In other words, what you have is a case of simultaneous
translation and the trained scribes are bilingual and they are writing it down and translating it
into French as it is being spoken in English. French is the language of written legal record.
So what happens at the end of the 14th and the beginning of the 15th century, English comes to
predominate as not just the language of court or culture or commerce, but as the official language
of record. So let me give you some dates now. By 1423, Parliament's records were kept virtually
all in English. King Henry V who reigned from 1413 to 1422 established English as an official
language and it is fair to say that he is the first English king for whom the idea of a king's
English exists. Statutes, that is, laws that were based on petitions, are in the following
languages. To 1300, they're in Latin. Until 1485, they're in French. In English and French until
1485 to 89 and then after 1489, they are solely kept in English. So what we're looking at is really
a century of transition. What's going on in commerce? The London Brewers Guild, that is,
the group responsible for the brewing and the distribution of beer in London, which was an
extremely important guild in medieval England, they adopted English as its official language
in a record of 1422. Let's look at wills. The first, as far as we can tell, major noble English
will after the conquest is the 1397 will of the Earl of Kent. In 1438, the Countess of Stafford
made her will in English and the wills of kings Henry IV, Henry V, and Henry VI are all in English.
Now, it is true that these documents are in English, but it is also true that French remained
still the prestige language of the court. And if you know Shakespeare's play Henry V,
what Shakespeare does there is he rewrites history by reinforcing Henry's role as master
of the king's English, Henry the victor of the Battle of Agincourt, Henry the war of the French
princess, he makes Henry monolingual in English, which certainly would not have been the case,
but he wants to rewrite history, he wants to rewrite linguistic history to suggest that.
Some critics have also argued that there was a revival of the works of Geoffrey Chaucer,
and you'll remember from my previous lecture that Chaucer was writing in the 1380s and 1390s.
He died in 1400. There is no manuscript, that is, there is no document of Chaucer's poetry
from his own lifetime. There's nothing in his own hand, and there's no datable text to the 14th
century. Manuscripts of Chaucer's work do not appear until the first two decades of the 15th
century. And one reason for this may well have been that with the revival of English as an official
language, certain circles in English courts and aristocratic culture wanted a poet in English to
match, as it were, a king in English. And so Chaucer's poetry was rediscovered and recopied.
So Chaucer becomes, in effect, an English poet for an England after his own time.
So what we're looking at here is a new rise of official English. And as that English rises,
French is undergoing a decline. William Caxton was England's first printer,
and he was born sometime around 1422, and he died probably in about 1491 or 1492. In works
published that is printed by him in England in 1490 and 1491, Caxton has prologues or
prefaces to his work. And in one of them he writes that the greatest number of people in the realm
of England no longer understand either Latin or French. And so it's quite clear that by the end
of the 15th century, French is beginning to decline as a prestige language. This statement
suggests that these languages are no longer the languages of culture and social prestige.
And so one question is when Caxton sets up his print shop, what is going to be the form of language
he's going to use to print English literature and to print official English? And so at this point,
I want to turn to an institutional development that had a great impact on, if you like, the
crystallization of late middle English and the return of English as an official language.
And this institution is known as Chancery. Chancery is a word that comes from the word
chancel or chapel of the king. And this is where the chaplains of the court originally spent their
time between services writing the king's letters. By the end of the 14th century,
Chancery came to be the place where official documents were produced. By the mid 15th century,
the term came to refer to the national bureaucracy as a whole except for the exchequer,
that is the economic side of administration. So what Chancery was was it was a kind of,
now remember this is before print, so we're producing handwritten documents. It's a kind of
combination of official government printing house, well they're not printing, government
document house, a kind of official place of dissemination of government documents,
a secretariat of state, and also a school. Scribes would be coming from every sheer ascender
to Koch Chaucer again. From all over England, young men were coming to London to make their way
and the smart and the literate ones could enter Chancery and they could be taught in Chancery
schools how to read and write and how to produce those documents. What Chancery did was it
established a very special form of spelling and a very special form of handwriting, an idiom of
language that was used for these official documents. Caxton set up his print shop in Westminster,
which was the city then, now it's part of London, but Westminster was a separate entity,
the city of London in the Middle Ages, what we is what we now call the city, that is the financial
centre, the old area of the tower, the east end, that was the city of London, but Westminster
was the administrative seat of government and so by setting up his print shop there, Caxton makes
the point that he is going to be printing in a language of official English. Chancery was official
English and so what happens here is that you have a system of writing, of spelling, of letter
formation, of organisation that was a standard irrespective of the speech or the dialect of
the writer. What matters is not the usage of an individual scribe, what matters is if you like
the institutional or official set of uses and royal clerks were writing almost exclusively in English
after 1417. So let's look at some details of Chancery English. Chancery English
developed a form of writing that was standard irrespective of pronunciation, spelling was
a convention, the official language ceased to represent any living spoken dialect, writing
became truly conventional and arbitrary and this was the first standard of writing the
vernacular in England probably since Ethelwald's school at Winchester 400 years before. I want to
just give you a little taste of Chancery English. Chancery English survives for us in a set of
documents or in a set of petitions and here is a little bit of one and I'm going to just read you
just a little bit and talk about it to analyse this Chancery language.
But I want to call attention to some key things about spelling. It should be very clear to you
what's going on. This is a plea from William Walsby, a courtier, he is the royal orator
and he's writing to Henry VI in the year 1437 and he's asking for a favour and what he's asking to
be is Dean of Hastings Cathedral in the Diocese of Chichester and it's submitted, it's dated
the 8th day of November in the 15th year of the reign of Henry VI and that's 1437.
Now what's very interesting about this document from the point of view of scholarship
is the way in which spellings are being regularised regardless of dialect so words like benign
are spelled b-e-n-i-g-n and this is a spelling convention that is the scribes are using
this g-n to signal that the vowel before it is long. The word said is being written s-a-i-d
and standardised whereas in middle English it would have been written s-e-i-d or s-a-i-d
or s-e-i-d-e. There are many other conventions that are operating as well here and one of the primary
conventions I think in chancery English as well is the way in which the you and the your forms
become the standard second person forms. In other words you'll remember from my earlier lecture
that old middle and early modern English as all of the modern european languages
had informal and singular forms of the second person pronoun the vowel thine and formal and
plural ones you and your informal singular formal plural. What's going on in chancery is that a
convention is being set up that regardless of whom you are addressing you're going to call them you
and this begins if you like to percolate through learned written English spoken English so that
over the next hundred years you becomes if you like the unmarked form and thou becomes the marked
form. Now what does all of this have to do with William Caxton? What Caxton did was when he decided
to print the works of English literature he printed them in chancery English so when you
look at for example his printings of Chaucer Caxton is printing Chaucer in the 1470s and 80s
Chaucer was writing a century before Caxton in effect translates or modernizes or recasts
Chaucer's language into chancery English. This is I want to stress a profound change that is
a national literary standard in print is now based on a written standard of official documentation
and this is a radical change in the notion of standard and in the notion of that standard's
relationship to regional dialect and to official forms. Now Caxton as a printer did not change
things overnight there are many myths about printing and I just want to pause to review
few of them printing did not create literacy overnight printed books early printed books
did not appear in vast quantities they were very expensive they were items of value much
as handwritten manuscripts were items of value they were designed for clerks and gentlemen in
other words in other words printing is not about democratizing literacy printing for Caxton is
another kind of commodity if you like and printed books look no different from manuscripts the type
faces of early printed books were based on handwriting what printing did however was it
fostered the rise of chancery standard English and in the course of this rise because Caxton
bases press in Westminster and because he established himself as a printer with royal
aristocratic and gentle patrons his work has an official cast to it and so what you see in Caxton
is a self-consciousness if you like about the kind of language that should be standard Caxton
adopted a standard of official writing to the printing of literary texts and just to reiterate
he made an official standard a literary standard now Caxton was acutely aware of the problems of
these standards and in the prologue to his book called the anados this is an English translation
of a French translation of a version of Virgil's Aeneid printed in 1490 in this preface Caxton
reflects on attitudes towards language change dialect variation the arbitration of English usage
by the educated and the elite what Caxton reflects upon is precisely what kind of dialect
and what kind of spelling should be used in the printing of official documents and English literature
and one of the ways he reflects on this is he tells a little story and here's his story
and i'm going to read it in Caxton's late middle English and translate it for you
it happened that certain merchants were in a ship in Tomsay for to have sailed over the Sey
into Zeeland and for lack of wind they tarried at a forland and went to land to refresh them so it
happened that certain merchants were in a ship in the Thames River and they were planning to sail
across the Channel into Zeeland that is to Holland in the low countries but because of a lack of wind
they had to wait on the coast and so they went to land to refresh themselves here are London
merchants and they're going until land and this is Kent and you'll remember the Kentish dialect
of middle English was very distinctive and so Caxton goes on one of them calm into an hoose
an oxyd for Met and especially he oxyd after Eges he asked for food the middle English word for
food is meat what it says is he asked for something to eat and in particular he asked for eggs and
the good wife answered that she could speck no French and the good woman of the house answered
that she could speak no French and the merchant was angry for hey also could speck no French but
would have had Eges and she understood him not and the merchant was angry because he also could
speck no French but he wanted eggs and she didn't understand him and thought at last another said
that he would have Eira and the good we've said that she understood him well and then another
man said that he want what he wanted was Eira and the good wife said she understood him clearly
now eggs is a northern form the old English and southern form of the noun meaning the thing that
a chicken lays is air Eira or ayren in the old English plural the northern or Scandinavian form
is egg and Eges and you'll remember that the Scandinavian languages and northern English
had those go sounds muggy ugly that were very distinctive what happened was that by the end
of the 15th century northerners coming into London working in chancery the ins of court
going to the universities people who were in effect the descendants of the kind of clerks
the Chaucer parodied in the Reeves tale parts of their dialect were absorbed into the metropolitan
standard and one part of the northern dialect that was absorbed into the metropolitan standard
was the word for eggs and so here's this educated London merchant and what imagines him you know
with his hat and with his cloak coming in from the ship and knocking on a farmhouse door and he
asks for eggs and the wife says I don't speak French and so he's very angry because he couldn't
speak French either and so the point is that in Kent it's still the old southern and old English
form Aaron and so what Caxton then goes on to say is what should a man in these days new rate
what should a man write these days Eges or Aaron it is hard he says to please every man because
of diversity and change of language it's hard to please every man because of diversity and
change and language so what Caxton is doing is he is recognizing that English is historically
and dialectically diverse and that as a printer as a printer of official documents as a printer
of English literature as a printer based in Westminster Caxton must decide what forms of
English to use and those forms in effect will become a standard but there is a philosophical
question as well and there's something wonderful about this story that has the feel of a medieval
romance about it now go back to st. Augustine go back to the middle ages go back to those
theologians man is a grammatical animal we live in a land of unlikeliness the diversity of languages
alienates man from man recall John of Travisa and the sharp slitting frothing and unshopped sounds
of the north what Caxton has given us is if you like a little allegory of linguistic alienation
we come upon a landscape now not of northern barbarians but of Kentish housewives who cannot
understand what we are saying for the English language is so mutable and so diverse that we
live in a babble in a fallen world just before he tells this story Caxton says we English men and
now I'm just going to translate are born under the control of the moon which is never the same but
is always wavering waxing at one time waning and decreasing at another time and the common English
that is spoken in one county varies from that of another and so what Caxton reflects on at the
end of the 15th century is he reflects on diversity and alienation but he's also reflecting on the
relationship between English and the self what is the English language now what makes someone
English is a merchant from London any more or less English than a housewife from Kent in my
subsequent lectures I'm going to be showing how the changes in pronunciation in vocabulary and in
grammar were happening so quickly in the late 15th and 16th centuries that many people were asking
what English might be and we're lamenting the fact that living in this sublunary world
we find ourselves alienated from the tongues we speak
