Lecture 16, Early Modern English Syntax and Grammar
Three little words.
So much of English to this point has been the story of big words, of the oriate and
incorn vocabulary terms, of the new worlds of words that came in with science and technology,
with exploration and colonization, words from European and non-European languages,
coinages and polysyllables that broke like waves over the shore of England.
We saw how Alexander Gill rejected this new influx of terms and he rejected it in a language
redolent of metaphor and figure that we can see, I think as well, in the language of his
most famous pupil, John Milton, in Paradise Lost.
The English language for Gill is horrid in its root sense.
It is bristling with the polysyllables of loans and coinages, but there were little words
as well and the history of the English language is a history of little words.
Three little words like do, like will and like, well not even a word, the suffix ing.
These are forms that are so radically changing their function and their meaning in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries that we might say that the very shape of modern spoken idiomatic
English hinges on their changes.
So in this lecture, I'm going to pay attention to some very little words and I'm going to
look at some little words as changing their form and function and I'm going to conclude
with a reading of a great text, a bit of Shakespeare's play, Henry IV, part one, as
really a play about little words.
Now the English of the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries is not modern English.
Through the great val shift had changed pronunciation from middle English and many of the words
that were coming in from science and exploration and from coinages and from borrowings, many
of them would fill in the English vocabulary as we still have it today.
But certainly in idiom, in spoken expression, in colloquialism, the language of the time
of Shakespeare is not our own.
What I would like to suggest is that this very idiomatic quality of modern spoken English
is what emerges in the age of Shakespeare, the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries.
But I want to just pause for a minute to say something about the nature of idiom itself.
Now when we talk about idiom, we talk about expressions that are, if you like, more than
the sum of their constituent parts.
So that if for example you were to look up the words get and over, under, into, out of
in a dictionary and try to put them together, that wouldn't tell you what expressions like
get over, get under, get into, get out of, get up on.
What these kinds of expressions mean, they are idioms in that they collocate together
meanings that go beyond simply the lexical and the dictionary.
And it is this idiomatic quality of English that emerges at the time.
I think a large part of that idiomatic quality comes from changes in the verb do.
Now do has a very ancient history.
It goes all the way back to Indo-European and it appears in Old English and in Middle
English but the uses of the word change dramatically in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
And one could argue that the tone of modern spoken English is in many ways shaped by the
way in which we use the verb do.
In addition, the ing forms are going to add to the flavor of our language.
This is a suffix that also goes back to Indo-European origins that survives in the Germanic languages
and that signals nouns and participles of verbs.
But the way in which it comes to be used in the sixteenth and seventeenth century gives
rise to a new structure of the English verbal system.
Now let's look at do.
As a full verb, do means to perform an action.
I did this.
This is its oldest and most sustained use and this appears in Old English.
But do can also be used as a replacement verb.
I went to the store and having done that, I bought some eggs or something like that.
So here the verb do replaces the verb go, that is go went.
I went to the store and having done that, in other words, we don't say I went to the
store and having gone to the store, we could say that, but we can also say having done
that.
Do is a replacement verb and this usage develops in the Middle English period.
What develops in the early modern English period in the sixteenth century is what we
call a paraphrastic or a place-holding verb.
Do you know the way?
This is a way of asking a question and you'll remember from my previous lectures that in
Old and Middle English and even in certain forms of early modern English, the way you
asked a question was by inverting the order of the subject and the verb in a sentence.
You know the way is a statement, know you the way is a question.
What emerges in the sixteenth century is a way of asking a question by using the verb
to do and its forms as a paraphrastic or as a place-holder.
So what we see also is the way in which do can function as an emphatic modal or helping
verb.
Do you know the answer?
I know the answer.
I do know the answer.
This emphasis on do develops also in the sixteenth century.
The idea, I did you do it?
I did it.
I did do it.
What does a fellow say at that great moment in his play, perdition catch my soul, but
I do love thee?
He's able to use do in a new way to emphasize the fact that he really does love her.
In addition to these changing forms of do, there were changes in the forms of ing.
Old English had words that ended in ing or ung as did all the Germanic languages to indicate
a noun's ownership or genealogy or to turn a verb into a noun.
Hrmting is the name of a sword.
The shieldings in Beowulf are a clan or family and in modern German you use the ung ending
in order to signal a noun made out of a verb or a concept noun.
This is true too in old and in middle English and in the middle English period the ing forms
as participles were used but only in southern dialects.
Now what do I mean by that?
Going, having.
I'm going to the store or I'm having something or I was doing something.
This all of these ing forms as participles in the northern and the midland forms of English
are enda or anda, havanda, loveanda, loveanda is the participial form of to love.
In the south of ingland you'd say loving, in the midlands in the north you'd say loveanda
or loveanda and so this is a regional dialect form that is gradually accepted into standard
English by the close of the middle English period and it's another product I think of
that great migration of dialectical forms and of regional speakers into the London metropolis.
Now what happens in the 16th century is that some of these forms start to enter into the
metropolitan standard and so ing forms develop as follows.
I'll do this in the abstract.
The X being Y, he did this, you know the house being on fire he ran out.
Alright now that is a kind of expression that you can only start to say towards the end
of the 16th century or the X-ing of the Y like the what, the mowing of the grass, the
growing of the grain, the lowing of the cows.
These kinds of expressions using ing are idioms that do not appear until the late 16th century.
Expressions such as don't blame me for having done it.
Shakespeare is really the first writer to use this form or for example new ways of expressing
perfect tenses.
I have been waiting, I had been waiting.
In other words what's going on here is the way of expressing pasts in different ways.
I have been waiting means I began an action in the past and it continues into the present.
I had been waiting means that I began an action in the past and continued it and it ended
in the past.
And these are new ways of using ing to signal these forms.
There are also ways of expressing the future.
I am going to hit you.
I am going to grade your papers.
I'm going to get something to eat.
While this form in fact didn't appear until the late 16th century it's really not idiomatic
in English, in other words it doesn't gain currency until the 19th.
Modern English I believe is founded on changes such as these.
And the point is not simply that these changes alter the way in which we speak but that they
become characteristic of the way we speak.
That is using the verbs of do and using forms in ing are characteristic of the idiom of
modern spoken colloquial English.
While these things are going on, see it's almost too natural to avoid, new forms of
the pronouns are taking shape.
Now recall that there were two kinds of pronouns.
You had the singular and you had the plural and they corresponded in old and middle and
early modern English to that same kind of pronominal system that you see in the modern
European languages where you had the informal and the formal and they were you for the formal
and the plural and the for the informal or the intimate and the singular.
I want to say a little bit about the third person pronoun.
The third person pronoun signals the neuter.
Now you remember in an earlier lecture how I talked about how grammatical gender was
beginning to disappear in the late old English period and by the middle of the 13th century
Walter of Bibisworth in his treatise for aristocrats try and gentry trying to learn French has
to remind them that grammatical gender is a central feature of French.
Natural gender begins to replace grammatical gender.
So instead of saying say we've hit the wife it you would say the wife she.
Now what happens in the 16th and 17th centuries is that it if you like becomes a place where
gender and relationships of grammar in general find themselves played out.
It and it's here a tiny little word it's.
This is our notion of the third person neuter genitive it's this is a very late development.
This is not it apostrophe s which is a contraction for it is this is it's it's time it's person
but even as late as Shakespeare and the King James Bible.
Grammatical gender can still be used here's a line from the merchant of Venice how far
that little candle throws his beams this is not personification this is a grammatical throwback
if you like it is by this time most likely an archaeism but it's a deliberate archaeism
and that is it harkens back to a time when grammatical gender was still operating take
this phrase from the King James Bible if the salt have lost his savor that is the salt
has lost its taste again we are not personifying salt as masculine we're simply going back
to a time when grammatical gender mattered and so this is not personification it's grammar
but look at the language in flux again in the time of Shakespeare it and it's hadn't
fully sorted themselves out there's a line if from King Lear which in which a character
says that nature which condemn it origin now we would have to say that nature which condemns
its origin Shakespeare is being perfectly grammatical for his own time this is not a
question of someone miss speaking the possessive here is just it it's not quite sorted out
that it's it's so when we see these cracks and fissures in grammar what we're looking
at is a system of pronouns in transition and this is also true for comparatives and superlatives
at this time Shakespeare can talk about the most unkindest cut of all and this multiplication
is not on grammatical it's perfectly grammatical it is the legacy of later 18th century pedagogues
who eliminate things like multiple negation and multiple comparatives and superlatives
believing that they are illogical or contradictory what else is happening at this time to shape
the way in which we speak there are changes in a set of verbs which we call modal verbs
or helping verbs these are verbs like shall and will can may ought and the like and they
modify the tense or mood of a main verb but they cannot by themselves be the only verb
in a sentence that is in modern spoken English they cannot take an object alone they cannot
be transitive verbs now originally these verbs were full verbs there was a time when you
could say something like I can music in the 17th century you could say I can music which
means I have a certain skill and ability in music or Chaucer in the 14th century could
say I shall to God and you meaning I am indebted to God and you I owe something to God and
you or in old English you could use may as a full verb and you could say each may well
which means I'm in good health I really I may be well but may is being used as a full
verb now in the 16th and the 17th centuries these verbs were changing usage and meaning
and I want to trace some of their development shall or should will and would may and might
can and could these are distinctions that arose during this period to create a subjunctive
mood comparable to Latin now what does this mean the subjunctive in Latin was used to express
the counterfactual that is something that hadn't happened it was also used to express
what was called the optative that is the desire would that Mary would be making pies
you know oh that she would love me this is a use of a form that is deliberately designed
in the 16th and the 17th centuries to evoke a Latin grammatical category that is to come
up with a real subjunctive in this way and what happens is that shall and will come to
be restricted for forms of the future by the end of the 16th century they lose their full
verbal sense so the idea of shall as a form of obligation this is no longer being used
and will as the form of the action of an individual's will or desire in modern spoken German
will means I want not I will this is being used in the King James Bible to translate
wallow that is the verb meaning desire or felition in everyday speech what seems to be
fascinating to me is the way in which this becomes something of emphasis I remember when I was a
child being taught grammar I was taught to say that the standard non-emphatic form of expressing
futurity was I shall you will he will if you were to be emphatic about it you were supposed to
say I will you shall he shall where do we draw the line between grammar and stylistic idiom
here I have no I mean I have no sense now that anybody in modern spoken English makes this
kind of distinction and certainly I have to think very very very very carefully about making such
a distinction between shall and will as forms of emphasis so it seems to me that what's going
on here is that there is a change in the modal structure of verbs during the 16th and 17th
century which up until what shall I say up until my own lived memory seems to be operating and
what we see in words like do and shall and will and forms like in what we see are changes in
the structure of spoken English that make it more idiomatic than it was so what is happening at
this time is a different kind of colloquialism but we need also to understand the relationship of
this colloquialism to how can I put it the language of ritual now we can say things like how is it
going or how do you do and these are relatively modern ways of expressing questions of experience
these are idioms of everyday speech and they rely on these grammatical forms newly developed in the
16th and 17th centuries but what about formal speech what about ritual I would like to close
this lecture with an analysis of a wonderful moment in Shakespeare's play Henry the fourth part
one where the language of ritual is evoked in a new way and where for Shakespeare's audience of
the late 16th century the changes in forms of do and will would have been palpable and pointed
and so here it is act to scene four Henry the fourth part one the young Prince Hal and his
old friend fall staff are taking turns playing the parts with each other they banter back and
forth and Hal says do thou stand for me and I'll play my father and so he invites fall staff to
pretend that he is Hal and Hal will play his father who is King Henry the fourth and finally in one
of the great set pieces of this play fall staff whose playing Hal gives what may be one of the
grandest self eulogies in all of English literature and he concludes it by saying the following
but for sweet Jack fall staff kind Jack fall staff true Jack fall staff valiant Jack fall
staff and therefore more valiant being as he is old Jack fall staff banish not him thy Harry's
company banish not him thy Harry's company banish plump Jack and banish all the world and at this
moment how speaking perhaps as his father or speaking as himself others what to my mind are
the four saddest words in Shakespeare and he says I do I will what's happening in this scene
fall staff is making a plea for the sustained company and support from Prince Hal and he imagines
himself as Prince Hal pleading with Hal's father King Henry the fourth saying how wonderful
staff is and if you banish him you banish all the world and what Hal says is I do I will now this
play probably written in the 1590s uses these little words in ways that could not have been used
before for when he says I do and I will he's using do now in that new sense of the replacement for
fall staff's verbs banish I do means I banish but I do and I will mean something else by the end of
the 16th century in 1549 Archbishop Thomas Cranmer put together what he called the Book of
Common Prayer and he put it together for the church under King Henry the 8th's successor Edward the
6th over the next five decades this book in various revisions served as the base text for English
Protestantism its language is familiar to us still today and I read from the marriage ceremony
from the Book of Common Prayer dearly beloved friends we are gathered here together in the site
of God and in the face of this congregation to join together this man and this woman in holy
matrimony and at this moment the priest is supposed to turn to the man and he asks will
thou have this woman to thy wedded wife the man she'll answer I will and when he turns to the
woman and asks the same question she shall answer I will this moment from a Shakespeare play and
this ritual from the Book of Common Prayer resonate for what we see now in the marriage ritual is the
affirmation of matrimony through new words used in these ways do and will are now the loci if you
like of English understanding and identity and what happens at the end of this scene in Shakespeare
is I think not a marriage but a divorce that Hal and Falstaff playing out this comic scene of power
use these little words in deep and profound ways these pledges now become not pledges of uniting
but pledges of separating Hal offers up in essence not the rituals of marriage but the rights of a
divorce Shakespeare was a master of the large word and the little word and in my subsequent
lectures we're going to see how Shakespeare and so many of his contemporaries could take the new
world of words the great vocabulary of expansion of polysyllables and polysemy and weave it into a
tapestry of the imagination but as I've stressed here we need also to look at the little words we
need to see the changes in the modal system of verbs we need to see the changes in the forms of
do and will and we need to see the ways in which these changes radically affected the rituals of
power and desire in early modern England and so I leave you with I do I will the things that I
will plan to do the things that you will hear in later lectures
