Lecture 29 American Regionalism
In the year 1832, a certain Reverend Jonathan Boucher wrote, and I quote,
There is no dialect in America.
Boucher's remark fits into many of the historical, social, and political issues that I have been raising in this course.
Issues about the relationship between region and standard, about education and identity,
and about nationalism and linguistic choice.
One of the central questions for the study of English in America
is precisely the question of what dialect variation is.
And when we look at dialect, we need to look at it from several perspectives.
What I'm going to be doing in this lecture and in the next couple of lectures
will be to look at American regional speech, writing, and literature
by examining some of the technical details of pronunciation, grammar, vocabulary, and style,
but also looking at literary and imaginative evocations of regional dialect.
And so this set of lectures looks back to the lectures on dialects in Middle English
and to Chaucer's representations of regionalism
and also to the Second Shepherd's plays, Representation of Regionalism.
It also speaks to a larger theme throughout this course,
which is the theme of the relationship between the region and the center
and the standard and the personal.
And what I'm also going to be doing in this and my subsequent lectures
will be calling attention to some of the lexicographical resources
for the study of American regional English.
And so I'll be also touching on another theme of the course,
which is the history of lexicography.
How do we make dictionaries and what is the relationship between
describing forms of language use and prescribing those forms?
So when we look at American dialects, let's look at the settlement patterns
that began, if you like, the nodes of American dialects.
And there are six major regional dialects
that developed in the eastern part of America
descending from these original settlement patterns.
There is Eastern New England, east of the Connecticut River.
There's New York City.
There's the so-called Upper North, which is Western New England,
Upstate New York, and the Great Lakes.
There's the Lower North, which is the Mid-Atlantic States.
The Upper South, which is the area around West Virginia,
the mountain regions of Virginia, North Carolina, and into the Northern
Ozark area.
There is the Lower South, the Virginia Piedmont area,
the South Carolina coast, and what in the 19th century was called
plantation country.
Now there are, of course, many sub-dialects and smaller regional variants,
but my goal here is to identify the major differences in these dialects by region
and also to see how points of contact with other dialects in each region
for example Dutch and French in some areas, German and Irish in other areas,
and African languages and the Creole Gullah in other areas
have affected speech and pronunciation.
So let's look at some of the most general
and obvious features of American regional dialects.
Now in the North, especially in Eastern New England,
it has been observed that the traditional dialect does not retain
the historical R sound in words, and you'll remember
how complex R is in spoken speech.
And a good example of this might be the pronunciation of the word
orange, which in New England probably sounds more like
orange, that is use a word like orange as if you like a kind of test case
for the pronunciation of R and therefore for your regional variation.
In New England, the A sound appears in words like dance
rather than the Ash sound, and so one can imagine
the pronunciation of D-A-N-C-E more like dance
than dance. In the New England dialect, the three words
Mary, M-A-R-Y, Mary, M-E-R-R-Y, and Mary, M-A-R-R-Y
are clearly contrasted, and there is a distinctive pronunciation
of several other words that are, if you like, touchstones of regionalism.
And for my purposes here, those words are going to be the word
Creek, C-R-E-E-K, and the word Greci, which is pronounced
invariably with an S sound rather than a Z sound.
Now if we move down the coast, we can move to New York City,
and New York City is a fascinating area for dialectology. New York
traditionally is thought of as the sort of life of Riley
Brooklyn dialect, the confusion of oy and ur sounds, the
green-pernt ursters, and doidi-toid street. And I think to some extent this is an
exaggeration, although I can visually and vividly remember
an uncle of mine in the late 1950s talking about
eating ursters, and I think for many people of my generation and older,
there is a very vivid sense that the oy and the air sounds are
characteristic of New York. The R is a very interesting issue again,
and I just want to digress a little bit to report on the researchers
of the great American scholar of dialect and language,
William LeBov. And William LeBov reported in the 1960s that we might see
social stratification in New York, keyed to the pronunciation of the R. In other
words, that the New York dialect was not simply a matter of region,
but it was a matter of social class, and I want to just
read a little bit from LeBov's work. And LeBov noted that the floor walkers
at Saks Fifth Avenue, the great store, pronounced the R in fourth floor
very precisely, whereas the people at Macy's
pronounced the R in fourth floor a little less precisely,
and the habitashers at S. Clines on the square in Union Square,
the bargain basement, as it were, of stores that
I remember as a child visiting most frequently, at S. Clines there was
virtually no R in fourth floor, so it came out sounding more like
fourth floor or something like that. So what we see here
is a very important nuance for New York English, and that is the recognition
that we may have in the case of New York English
an instability of R in certain sounds, but also that that instability is
characterized not just by region, but by class stratification.
Similarly, there is the loss of what's called the post-vocalic R
in some situations, which leads to an exaggerated rounding of vowels,
so a sound like O for example, rather than R, and also
these issues of class and education difference
may map on to issues of region. So what I'm suggesting is that when we look at
the New York dialect in particular, and I'm focusing on it
really largely out of personal fascination, what we need to recognize
is that our, if you like, caricature of a region
may also be a caricature of a subgroup and of a subclass.
Nonetheless, it seems to me there are some recognizable forms
of speech that in effect mark a New Yorker as talking the talk.
Now when you get to the upper north, you can see many features shared with New
England, but unlike the New England dialect, the
upper north of New York, upper New York state,
retains the post-vocalic R and the ash sound, so instead of orange
and dance, you'll hear orange and dance. In the lower north, you have a
distinctive pronunciation for what we might call the unrounded O sound
in words such as forest and hot, not forest and hot.
And you also tend to hear the conflation of the sounds
in the name Mary and in the word Mary, so M-A-R-Y and M-E-R-R-Y may come out
sounding Mary and Mary, very, very similar. And also you tend to hear
a conflation of the sounds in words like caught,
C-O-T, and caught, C-A-U-G-H-T, which I in my New York accent
would have pronounced caught and caught. Now in the upper and lower south,
there are many similarities, though there are important differences of detail
and many of these details I can't go into. What I want to suggest however
is that whatever regional dialect you come from,
that you think of this as a provocation
to analyzing and characterizing the sounds of your own pronunciation.
So for example, if you are from the south, do you, for example, pronounce the long
I sound as a long A sound? So L-I-N-E, line, do you say something more like
line than line? Do you say something more like
mile than mile? Do you, for example, pronounce the words
gem, G-E-M, and pin, P-I-N, with the same vowel? I had a
gem in my pen. Are Mary and Mary pronounced in the same way?
And do you pronounce creak like crick? And do you pronounce greasy with a Z?
Greasy. Now I've given you some examples of regional
dialect pronunciation and the study of dialect is about much more
than this kind of phonological variation. The historical study of dialects in
America is something that begins in the 19th century
and it's very much wrapped up in the earlier philological study of middle
English dialects and also the study of regionalisms like
Scottish. And so what happened in the American late 19th century
is that the American dialect society was founded.
This society was founded in 1889 and it provoked a whole range of resources
and researchers available to study American regional speech.
Now in the 1980s, the publication of the Dictionary of American Regional
English, or D-A-R-E, or dare, as I will call it, the
publication of dare, which began in the 1980s and was just
finished at the beginning of the 21st century, the publication of dare
really is the culmination of this more than a century of work
in American dialectology. And I want to read you a quotation from the
opening of the dare and this quotation is from an
early president of the American dialect society
who's speaking at the beginning of the 20th century.
This man was named William E Mead and he was a philologist, he was a scholar of
old and middle English, and he was a scholar of American
dialects. I want to read this quotation from Mead
because it begins the D-A-R-E, that is, in the 1980s, dare begins
with a quotation from the early 20th century.
But I also want to read it because Mead uses some very important terms and
images which we can see throughout this course as
central to the figurative language of the study
of speech and writing. And here's Mead's quotation.
The most ardent admirer of the achievements of the society
must admit that all the investigation that has been done,
however thorough for certain districts, is fragmentary
in the extreme. To one who has reviewed the whole situation
it seems clear that the time has come when we should definitely
abandon the drifting policy which we have followed
and set out on a systematic investigation.
If our chief aim is to publish detached studies of a district here or there,
as chance may offer them, we shall doubtless accomplish
something of value. But if we cherish the hope
that by such means we shall within a reasonable time
succeed in preparing an adequate dialect map
of our vast country and in bringing together
a sufficient amount of trustworthy material for an American dialect
dictionary worthy to stand beside the English
dialect dictionary, we are optimistic indeed. Now this is a fascinating quote
and it's a quote which I hope that this time in the course
you recognize some of the key words. Certainly the word that should
strike you immediately is the word ardent at the very beginning,
the most ardent admirer of the achievements of the society.
This is a word that has shown up repeatedly in writings about language
to define the nature of linguistic change itself.
I talked in great detail about the energy that Samuel Johnson
in his dictionary of 1755 expended on the word ardent as it represents the
shift from a literal to a figurative meaning.
And certainly you'll remember H. L. Menken
in his book The American Language where he said,
and just to remind you I'll quote again,
the American remains the most ardent of recorded
rhetoricians. And ardent shows up again and again and again.
I could give you more examples. Basil Lenu Gildersleeve, perhaps the most
brilliant classicist of the 19th century, recalls his childhood in
pre-Civil War South as quote being an ardent
lover of literature. And in 1878 Gildersleeve addressed
the American Philological Association as its president
and he defined academic scholarship as quote the ardent
quest for truth. Philology, if you like, burned
in America. And throughout the 19th century
the fascination with the history of language
and with the history of dialect came together
into the kinds of social and institutional context
that Meade is calling attention to. And so ardent admiration leads to the
need for what he calls a systematic investigation. In other words,
what Meade is saying is that we have to temper
amateurism with professional systematic inquiry,
that we need a rigorous methodology for the study of language
and that the product of that study will be, as he says,
a map, an adequate dialect map of our vast country. So one of the things that's
very important to understand about the study of American dialects and
dialectology is that very often it takes as its goal
the production of visual or cartographic representations
of speech use. So you will see if you open the DARE,
or if you open a textbook on English, or if you look at any work on American
dialects, or if you go to William LeBov's website where he has
online the new Atlas of American Speech, what you will see
are maps that look like weather maps with isobars, with lines that demarcate
not shifts in currents or changes in the winds,
but the line between where people say pale and where people say
bucket, where people say marry and people say marry,
where people say greasy and people say greasy,
where people say caught and people say caught and the like.
And so this mapping on of dialect becomes a way, you know, I think very
profoundly, it becomes a way of locating dialect as part of
the American topographical experience. And this was very much a
central issue in the 19th century when the study of dialectology developed.
So what Meade is talking about, what the DARE
is in effect the survivor of and is looking back to,
is a time when the discussion of American regional dialects was keyed
to the discussion of what America really was. And so
when we think about the 19th century and we think about
debates about the national significance of dialect,
we're also getting to the notion of literature. And that is the subject of
my next lecture, which is precisely the way in which
not simply literature represents dialects by evoking it,
but the idea of dialect and literary regionalism
as central to American speech and American identity.
So for these scholars of language, when we
look at works like the DARE, we need to see exactly what they're doing.
And in the remainder of this lecture, I want to look a little closely
at DARE as a way of locating it in the traditions of lexicography
and some of the traditions of language discussion and language
ideology that I've been talking about so far.
So the job of DARE is to classify speech communities. That's its
first job. In other words, it's primary
responsibilities to say what do we mean by a particular region
and how can we use particular methodologies to understand
what that region is. So what we're talking about is an issue
of a speech community. And it also tries to distinguish
between dialect and colloquialism, but also it distinguishes
among regional dialect and slang, jargon,
argo, folk terms, vulgarity, and the like. In other words,
there are many regionalisms which may be slang
and regional speech may become part of colloquial American.
But not every slang term is a regionalism. The DARE is not a dictionary
of slang. And so what the DARE uses as its criteria
are the following issues. First, any word or phrase not used
generally in American speech. So what does this mean? This means that they are
taking a body of terms that have currency region by region,
but which don't necessarily have currency across regions.
Also, the DARE takes as its purview any word or phrase,
quote, whose former meaning is folk in usage
regardless of region. And now I find this fascinating. What do we mean
by folk usage? Here we're talking about terms that are not bounded by
geography, but are terms that are bounded by
strata or terms that are bounded by the levels of community.
So what do we mean by folk? The DARE has several definitions
of folk terms. Let me sort of share a couple of them with you.
One of them is the idea of multiple plurals. So what does this mean?
What this means is that in certain aspects of folk
or regional speech, whatever region we're talking about,
there is occasionally a tendency to add an additional plural to a word that's
already plural. So let's take, for example, the word
ant, A-N-T. The plural of ant is ants. One ant,
two ants. In some regions of America, in particular
in the south and in the area defined as the panhandle speech
of Florida, the plural, if you like, the folk
or regional plural of ants is answers. So here what you have is a kind of multiple
or double plural. And the DARE identifies this not as simply
a unique feature of the speech of a region,
but as an example of a grammatical characteristic
of folk speech. Another characteristic of folk speech
is the handling of verbs. So for example, you can turn out the light,
but in certain regional areas of Pennsylvania,
perhaps on the influence of Dutch, Pennsylvania Dutch and German,
what you have is the expression, out in the light.
In the area around Pittsburgh, for example,
there is not just an issue of sound, but an issue also of grammar,
that the western Pennsylvania and northern West Virginia forms
of the verbs very often confuse issues of the past tense
and the participial form. So for example,
in this area one would not say, your hair
needs washing, or your hair needs to be washed,
but you would say, your hair needs washed.
Actually, if you were to evoke the sound, as well as the grammar of that region,
what you'd probably say is, your hair needs washed.
So these are some examples of what regionalism or folk speech does, that is
not simply evocative or imaginative words,
but also issues of grammar and some issues of pronunciation.
Now when we look at a text like the DARE, we need to go back to some of the
historical dictionaries that we've seen earlier in this course of lectures.
And here we need to ask questions about what constitutes evidence. Samuel
Johnson set the precedent in his dictionary of 1755,
of using literary works as evidence for linguistic usage
and having a primarily aesthetic criterion for the selection of those
literary works. The Oxford English Dictionary developed
that set of criteria that Johnson had used in order to use not just
literary works, but all forms of writing that could be
gathered to illustrate word histories. And so the OED
is a kind of, like Johnson's dictionary, an anthology
of quotations. What the DARE is very interested in
is trying to blend this textual historical and literary material with a
body of field work. And so the evidence for the regional dialect
vocabulary and pronunciation is both evidence from written texts,
whether they're works of literature, journalism,
or other forms of fiction and non-fiction publication,
but also field work. And so the field workers, if you like, for the DARE
came up with a set of questions or a set of prompts
where they would go out and ask, much as anthropologists did,
native informants, in effect, to pronounce certain kinds of words
or to say certain kinds of things. So for example,
what is the metal object that you use to carry water from a well?
And this is a question that's designed to elicit the answer either
pale or bucket. And the question for the field worker is precisely
how do you ask a question in a neutral enough way
that you do not, in effect, predict the answer? See, if I were to go up to
someone and say, do you say pale or bucket, I'm giving them two choices,
and I put one first. Is the answer going to be different
if I said, do you say bucket or pale? The problem of field work is also the
problem of the social and regional class differences
between the field workers and the native informants.
So if I were to go out into the field and speak
with my accent now calibrated, not according to the language
of my Brooklyn childhood, but the rigors of my mother, who was a speech
therapist, and who bled that accent out of me,
certainly I might create the impression
on the part of the person I was talking to that,
look, that person had to speak up to me.
And that I might not get the full range of information
that I might otherwise get. So the problem with dialectology
in this sense is the problem of field work.
And one of the questions that we're going to look at in subsequent lectures
is precisely the way in which we can use the resources of lexicography
to illuminate literature and experience, but how we also have to
recognize the limitations of that lexicography.
So let me see if I can sum up this lecture on regionalism and dialect with
some provocations for my next lectures. The issue is really this.
How does the history of American English
become, in effect, not just the history of a language across the board,
but the history of levels or subgroups among that language?
Projects such as the DARE help us redefine American language as, if you
like, the aggregate of or the composition of regionalism, slang, and colloquialism.
So when we say what is American English, that's a different question
from what is English in Britain, English in South Africa,
English in Australia, English in India. In other words,
that beginning in the 19th century there is the recognition
that even though, as the Reverend Boucher said, there are no dialects in America,
there were strata and levels of pronunciation.
And by the beginning of the 21st century we need to say to ourselves,
look, is American English a uniform thing, or is it the sum of region,
class, and local form? How does this view of American English
contrast with, let's say, Menken's notion of American as more stable and homogenous
a language than that of Britain? This seems to me to be a profoundly
social question, because if we're going to focus on the regional,
then we're going to ask for issues of difference,
rather than issues of similarity. And finally, when we look at literary
representations, and when we look at the history of African American English
in later lectures, we're going to ask ourselves,
are we privileging the folk over the educated? In other words,
are we saying that the heart of American speech
and of American culture lies in the language of the folk, that there's
something more authentic about the dialect than about the standard?
And are we really playing into older notions of a kind of noble savage,
where we are privileging the uneducated or the original
over the educated and the, if you like, rhetorical?
These, it seems to me, are the questions that lead into
our study of the literary representation of dialect, and there are questions that
I hope motivate you as you think about where you come from
and where you're going in your own personal speech.
