Lecture 30 American Dialects in Literature
Is American English something that crosses boundaries, that crosses boundaries of region,
that crosses boundaries of class and culture, or is American English in effect the sum of its regional forms?
In my last lecture, I tried to identify some of the features of American regional dialects
and call attention to the way in which original settlement patterns spawned or developed different dialect areas.
I also called attention to the way in which some of the resources of contemporary dialectology and lexicography,
notably the dictionary of American regional English, still explicitly ground their projects in the 19th century debates
about national linguistic identity and also about the relationship between amateur desire,
the ardent fascination with language on the one hand,
and the need to create a systematic historical methodology on the other.
In this lecture, I'd like to develop some of those issues by looking at the literary representation of American dialects,
and I'm going to try to read a few passages in American regional dialects.
I'm going to call attention to vocabulary, grammar, and syntax,
and I'm going to call attention to some issues as well of pronunciation.
But what I want to stress here is that I am trying very hard not to caricature speech,
even though some of these literary representations may be caricatures,
and even though they may be written by individuals who were not themselves,
members of the regional, or the ethnic, or the class speech community they represent,
nonetheless, their literary representations may provide us with evidence
for the historical pronunciation and the historical grammar of certain regions in America.
They may provide us with evidence for the survival of certain forms of folk speech
or folk idiom in American culture, and they also provide us with examples of narrative.
And the thing that I want to stress is that regional or folk speech is not simply the sum of funny words
or strange pronunciations, it is a form of narrative, it is a way of telling a story,
and so what I'll be stressing here are the ways in which American regional experience tells a story.
Now, in representing dialect in literature, we come across another example of an issue
I've been talking about throughout this course, and that is, I dialect.
How do we create the impression or evoke the illusion of someone speaking non-standard English?
We may write CES, S-E-Z, for S-A-Y-S, and the pronunciation of CES and CES may be actually identical,
but by writing S-E-Z, or by writing W-A-N-N-A for WANA, or G-O-N-N-A for GANA,
even though these may be the ways in which most people pronounce want to and going to.
I'm going to do this. We don't think of this as necessarily uneducated or dialectical.
These forms of I dialect, these kinds of spellings, are designed to evoke regional affiliation
or level of literacy or level of class. In other words, what's being evoked is
how the individual might write the word where that individual to write says, let's say.
There's a wonderful example in Mark Twain's Huckleberry Finn when the Duke and the Dauphin are putting on Hamlet,
and Huck asks if there are going to be any encores, and the word encores is spelled not E-N-C-O-R-E-S,
but O-N-K-O-R-E-S, encores. Now, when you say encores and you say encores,
regardless of how it's spelled, it may be the same thing, but the idea is to evoke by using a particular spelling
the unusualness of the word or the way in which it is pronounced or stressed.
In other words, are there going to be any encores, as if I want you to know that I know this high concept
or Francophone word. So the issue of I dialect is central to the problem of literary representation,
and in mentioning Twain, I call attention to probably the most famous figure in the literary representation
of dialect in America. He's best known for his attempts in books like Huckleberry Finn
to try to represent accurately and sympathetically the language of Missouri, white and African-American
speech in the middle of the 19th century. Now, Twain's novel, Huckleberry Finn in particular,
from which I will be drawing, is set in the 1840s, but it's written a generation later,
and Twain is no longer living in the Missouri of his childhood.
Twain in mature life lived in Elmira, New York. He lived in Hartford, Connecticut.
Twain is ensconced in the American Northeast establishment, and so there is an issue also
in the representation of dialect that is very keyed to the issue of nostalgia, and I want to stress this.
In other words, in looking at dialect, are we going back not simply to something that is original
or authentic in America? Are we going back in effect to the childhood of America?
Does regional dialect stand to standard English as childhood speech stands to adult speech?
And therefore, when writers go back to set works in the time of their childhood, are they doing so
to create the impression that their characters, in a sense, are not simply children,
but that the speech of the time and place is somehow immature on the one hand,
or perhaps more authentic and felt on the other hand.
I'm going to do my best with Twain, and here's a moment in Huckleberry Finn where Tom says,
I know how to fix it. We've got to have a rock for the coat of arms and mournful inscriptions,
and we can kill two birds with that same rock. There's a gaudy big grindstone down at the mill,
and we'll smooch it and carve the thing on it and file out the pens and the saw on it too.
Now, I've read this lightly because there's almost no eye dialect in Tom's speech,
but when Huck, who is the narrator, speaks and writes, there is an enormous amount of eye dialect.
There weren't no slouch of an idea, and there weren't no slouch of a grindstone, another,
but we allowed, we'd tackle it. We weren't quite midnight yet, so we cleared out for the mill,
leaving Jim at work. We smooched the grindstone and set out to roll her home,
but it was a most nation-tough job. Sometimes, do what we could, we couldn't keep her from falling over,
and she'd come mighty near mashing us every time. Tom said she was going to get one of us sure before we got through.
We got her halfway, and then we was plum-played out, and most grounded with sweat.
We see it warrant no use. We got to go and fetch Jim, so he raised up his bed and slid the chain off of the bed leg
and wrapped it round and round his neck, and we crawled out through our hole and down there,
and Jim and me laid into that grindstone and walked her along like nothing,
and Tom super-intended. He could out-super intend any boy I ever see. He knowed how to do everything.
I think that this is Huck's speech. Now, what I've tried to do is call attention,
not just to particular sounds, but to particular grammatical issues.
And as I stressed, when Huck writes or speaks, there's more eye-dialect than when Tom does.
So it seems clear that Twain wants to represent Huck's speech either more accurately on the one hand
or more regionally on the other. So what do we see in this passage?
We see spellings like W-A-R-N, apostrophe T. We see N-O-T-H-E-R. We see W-R-A-P-T.
Warrant, another, wrapped. This is pure eye-dialect, and it is designed not to transcribe phonetically
the sound of speech. It is designed to evoke the flavor of pronunciation.
When we talk about morphology, that is, the way in which the forms of words are represented
to indicate grammatical distinction, we can see a characteristic of regional or folk speech.
In words like Drownedead and Node, we see the multiple past instead of the participial form,
drowned and known. In the course of the narrative I read as well, we can see something that is
characteristic of folk original narration, and that is an oscillation or a variation between
telling a story as something that happened in the past and telling a story as something that is
happening in the present. So if you go through a passage like this and you look at the tenses
of the verbs, what you'll see is that some of them are in the past tense, cleared out, smooched
the grindstone, we couldn't keep her, Tom said, we was plum, and then on occasion there is a
present tense. We see it, Warrant, no use. We got to go. And this kind of oscillation between
the present and the past is, I think, characteristic of folk narration. So I says to my son, Aaron,
I says, and here is an example again of the way in which we narrate in the present. What's also
interesting is the vocabulary, words like smooch, meaning to steal, or nation-tough job. This is a
euphemism. A euphemism is the use of an elaborate or heightened word or phrase to cover up a
potentially offensive or obscene form. Now what's very interesting is the way in which nation becomes
a regional euphemism. You have a damn tough job. You have a damn nation tough job, and therefore
you have a nation-tough job. Plum played out. These are the landmarks of regionalism here, and what's
also interesting is the way in which hypercorrection can be the landmark of regionalism. That is, one of
the things that's very interesting about the passage is the way in which, in Huck's voice, you have this
regional, local folk vocabulary, and then you have something exceedingly learned, and that is super
intended. Tom, super intended. What Huck does is he uses this word, and then his narration becomes
exceedingly self-conscious about it. In other words, it's almost as if he is surprised to hear that word
himself, or coming from his pen, because it is a learned term. And so what he wants to do is use it in a
kind of hypercorrect form. That is, use it in a way that makes a new word so that it seems as if Huck is
genuinely learned. And so he out-super intended any boy I ever see. And this combination of out-super
intended as a kind of nonce or coinage, and I ever see, instead of I ever saw, the return to a folk regional
narrative present. He knowed how to do everything. This collocation of grammatical terms brings out the
uniqueness of the nonce term out-super intended, and it contributes to the regional flavor. I think more than
any form of pronunciation for Twain. Another important writer of the 19th century who is best known for his
representation of regional English is Joel Chandler Harris in his Uncle Remus stories. And he seeks to represent
the language and the culture of the African-American slaves of the mid-19th century, in particular the
Piedmont district. But also there are some aspects of his writing that point to regional speech and forms and idioms
further south around the banks of the Mississippi. And here is a passage from a run of luck. And I want to look at this
for its representation of this version of African-American speech. In a subsequent lecture, I'm going to go into some
detail about the history and features of African-American English. And I want to stress here that what I'm trying to do is
I'm trying to recreate the sounds and forms of speech that Chandler Harris is illustrating with his eye dialect.
And so it goes something like this. Well, sir, he said after a while, I come out and I went off with my young master.
A speck out of gunoff, he'd had any children, but he ain't had a blessed one. And it looked like to me such that of the Lord
Gwyn to stand by a man, he Gwyn to give him children. But that ain't all, sir. I done been out to Mississippi with my young master.
And at one time was too much for me. First, there was the rip it under steamboat. And then there was the burning of the boat.
And then come the swamps and then the cane breaks. And I tell you right now, sir, I don't know which was worse.
The rip it on the boat or the fire or the swamps or the cane breaks. That ain't no country like on, sir.
There's enough water in the status of sip for the float to his arc. It's in the very land what they plant the cotton in, sir.
The ground is mushy and black. You may not believe me, sir, but there was times when I was out there that I'd have paid seven pence for to get a whiff, a dish, a red dust up my nose.
When you come to farming, sir, give me the red line or the gray. It may not make as much cotton in one season, but it lasts longer and it's lots more wholesome.
So what is characteristic of the speech that Joel Chandler Harris is trying to evoke here by using particular spelling forms?
What is characteristic is the dropping of the final R sound. And so, sir is spelled S-U-H. So you get not only the lack of the R, sir, instead of sir,
but you also, in the U form, in the U spelling, you get a lowering of the vowel S-U instead of S-U-R.
But you have the intrusion of R in a word like master, which is spelled M-A-R-S-T-E-R instead of master.
You see various grammatical forms that scholars have subsequently recognized as characteristic of African-American English.
This is what we might call the use of the durative in the phrase, I done bin.
Now, this is, as I will call attention to us in a subsequent lecture, not an issue of ungrammatical or illiterate speech,
but it is something perfectly consonant with the grammar of African-American English, which uses durative aspects rather than tenses.
In other words, it calls attention, using done bin, to actions that are ongoing.
And I'm going to call attention to this in greater detail in my lecture on African-American English.
The thing I want to stress now is that this is an evocation of a grammatical feature of a language rather than an evocation of illiteracy.
In other forms, Mississippi is reduced to Marcesip.
The TH sound is consistently written as D, so instead of there and them, there and them.
And occasionally, you have phrases where the G is dropped.
So instead of burning, you have burning, for example.
Now, it seems to me that what is also fascinating about a passage like this is not simply the pronunciation or the grammar, but the vocabulary.
And there seems to be a word in this passage which exemplifies to me the nature of this problem of vocabulary.
And that's the word, cane break.
That is, that in this particular swamp, there are cane breaks.
And cane break is a word that shows up, if you look it up in the D-A-R-E, as early as 1770.
It's in an 1810 and an 1836 quotation.
It appears in D-A-R-E well into the 1970s.
And what it makes clear is that the cane break is a particular kind of vegetation growing on the banks of the Mississippi in a certain area.
In other words, that this is a particular local word that's designed to evoke a very special time and place.
But also, that this is a word that fits into the narrative spectrum of Chandler Harris's African American way of telling a story.
And that is the feature of narration here.
This is a story, if you follow it through.
This is a story about disaster on a river.
Well, Mark Twain's Huckleberry Finn has a story about disaster on a river.
But now, the allusions make it very, very different.
Because there enough water in the state of Massachusetts for to float Noah's Ark.
Now, as soon as you make the association that there's enough water in the state of Mississippi to float Noah's Ark,
what you're doing is you are associating your story with biblical narrative.
And you are giving this story now not simply the flavor of folk narration,
but the flavor of pulpit oratory, that this is in effect a sermon.
And the nature of the sermon is to bring us back as we saw in Frederick Douglass's story of the runaway slave
to the ways in which the African American experience is so frequently an experience of alienation,
an experience of being lost, that the swamp or the river or the disasters that are represented here
are figures for the swamp in which the African American experience in the 19th century was represented.
And the language here is so much a language of the story of the African American slave.
The ground is mushy. The ground is mushy. The ground is always mushy.
When we deal with American region, dialect, race and class,
and we should not let ourselves be swamped by these details or by the fear of caricature in our discussion.
Now, when we move north and we look at a couple of passages that are representative of different regions in American English,
we might turn to the late 19th century main writer, Sarah Orn Jewett.
In her story, Andrew's fortune, she illustrates the literary representation of the eastern New England dialect,
the so-called down-easter form of Maine.
And you have a poor couple discussing here,
we was dreadful concern to hear a cousin Stephen's death, said the poor man.
He went very sudden, didn't he? Great loss he is.
And Betsy says, yes, he was very much looked up to, too.
And it was some time before the air plucked up courage to speak again.
And he says, Waff and me was lotting on getting over to the funeral,
but it's a great way for her to ride.
And it was perishing day that day.
She had been troubled more than common with her physique since the cold weather come.
I was all crippled up with the rheumatism.
We want neither of us fit to be out.
It was all I could do to get out the barn to feed the stock while Jonas and Tim was gone.
My boys was over.
I suppose you know.
I don't know they've come to speak with you.
They're backward with strangers, but they're good, steady fellows.
Then was the louts that was hanging around the barn, I guess, said Betsy to herself.
They're the mainstay now.
They're ahead of poor May already.
Jonas, he's got a rise in $100 laid up.
And I believe Tim's got something, too.
He's younger, you know.
So, Jewett uses eye dialect to indicate the characteristic vowels of the main down east.
So she spells great, GRE apostrophe T, great.
And steady, STIDDY, is steady.
In addition to this, there are several words, there are several vocabulary terms,
that locate the speaker as a member of a class as well as a region.
For example, the use of such apparently ungrammatical expressions is dreadful concerned,
or my boys was over.
But my favorite, just as cane break, is my favorite representation,
my emblem, if you like, of the language of Joel Chandler Harris.
My favorite here is PHYSIC, and it's spelled P-H-T-H-I-S-I-C.
It is a physical ailment.
Now, what is PHYSIC?
If you go to the dictionary of American regional English, as I will do right now,
and you look up PHYSIC, what you get is any of a variety of conditions
produced in coughing or difficulty in breathing, especially asthma,
rarely used as the name of an imaginary illness, hence PHYSIC-E,
affected by such a condition, asthmatic or wheezy.
And it is tested as early as 1806.
Now, it's quite clear that PHYSIC is a, not just dialect term,
but a very technical regional term,
and this spelling, P-H-T-H, is designed to evoke the spelling
of a technical ailment from Greek science.
That is the way in which science coins words on Greek models,
so there is an element of the pseudo-scientifically Greek in here.
But there's a fascinating entry from the D-A-R-E, from 1975.
And here's the quotation that they give from an author who's writing about the main language.
And the author says that PHYSIC is sometimes spelled PHYSIC.
It's included here because somebody who didn't know how to spell it
suggested it was a good main word.
PHYSIC is in any good dictionary.
Its peculiar orthography made it a favorite in old time spelling bees,
and until spelling bees went out of style, almost all manors could spell PHYSIC.
Now you get a wonderful sense here that the idea is that this is a word
that sort of lives in the spelling bee.
It's a trick word.
It's a main word.
It's a dictionary word.
PHYSIC is in any good dictionary.
Go back to the phrase, good dictionary.
Remember when I read that selection from Webster's 9th?
A good dictionary.
What is a good dictionary?
The mark of a good dictionary can be many things.
Is the mark of a good dictionary one that has the word PHYSIC in it spelled correctly?
Now I want to read one more passage and then summarize some of the issues that I'm trying to raise here.
And the passage I'm going to read is from Marjorie Kinman Rawlings, my friend Moe.
And this is the evocation of the cracker speech.
And I'm not going to stress the pronunciation as much in this,
but what I want to call attention to are a couple of the terms and again the words, the grammar, and the narrative.
As he worked he noticed a row of glass jars of huckleberries that I had canned.
His grave face brightened.
Now that's the way to live, he said.
All the good things we got here in Florida,
blueberries and blackberries and beans and cowpeas,
all them things that ought to be canned and put up on a clean cupboard shelf with white paper on it.
That's the way Mama did.
She lived fine, not the way you live.
But just as good when it comes to canning things and keeping things clean, his face darkened.
I've tried and I've done tried to get my wife to do it that way, but it just ain't no use.
One time I bought two dozen glass jars and I went out by myself and I picked about a bushel of blackberries.
And I went to the store and bought a 25 pound sack of sugar and I taken it home and I said,
Wife, here's a bit of blackberries to put up for us and jam and jelly for the winter.
He hesitated, his loyalty pricking him.
She probably didn't have time to do it, I suggested.
She had time.
She let the blackberries spoil and the answers got in the sugar.
And I found the jars throwed out in the backyard.
Now what we have here is it seems to me a narrative that is as much about language as it is about marriage.
That here the man is complaining how he went out and got all these blackberries and he got all these glass jars
and he hoped that his wife would can them and preserve them and she didn't.
What's going on technically in this passage?
Just as we saw cane break and physics, so I want to focus on answers here.
The answers got in the sugar.
You have the, again, regionalism of the past tense, throwed out in the backyard.
You have illusions in regional speech.
You have the use of O for of.
You have bait.
You have large amount.
You have all of these issues that come together to evoke not just a particular region,
but if you like the very idea of regionalism.
But I want to pause now and I want to call attention to some things that so many of these passages have in common.
And that is that I think these are really stories about the place of the regional and American literary culture.
Let me ask it this way.
Is dialect comparable to answers in the sugar?
Is the American language the sugar of our lives?
And is dialect something which is like a set of ants that get in and infect it?
By contrast, is the study of language like putting up blackberries, where we go out and we collect all of the varieties.
And then I, as a teacher, bring in my pristine sterile glass jars to preserve these berries for your delicitation.
And yet, what's happened in the end?
The blackberries spoiled, the ants has gotten the sugar, the jars were thrown out in the backyard.
As Samuel Johnson said, to try to record or fix a language is like trying to lash the wind.
To enchain a syllable is like trying to lash the wind.
And we saw how the Mississippi River in Noah Webster, in Mark Twain, in Joel Chandler Harris,
stands as an emblem of language itself constantly flowing, constantly changing, constantly mutating.
The English language in these passages is something that is being represented, being evoked, if you like, through eye dialect and special spellings.
But what I think so many writers on dialect have recognized, and what so many of the writers that I've quoted from have recognized as well,
is that we may try to, if you like, put up dialect in the glass jars of our lexicons.
We may go out one night and smooch a gaudy big grindstone of the regional.
We may wish at some moment to tell a story, and the physics comes upon us and breaks in.
That is, it's no accident that physics is an ailment that has to do with breath, an ailment that has to do with the sound of speech.
And so, when we think about regional dialect, when we think about the ways in which America is a nation of areas and classes, regions,
social, ethnic, and linguistic strata, we need to ask ourselves if the sugar of our tongue has been tainted by the answers,
or if, in fact, what really makes Americans so tasty are those blackberries in the glass jars of our imagination.
