Lecture 35 Linguistics and Politics in Language Study
So in the end, what is language?
Is it a habit of social behavior?
Is it a way of representing the world?
Is it an articulation of cognitive principles?
Do we study language by observing phenomena and recording data?
Or do we study language by positing theories of language universally and then finding ways
in which living languages correspond to or represent aspects of those theories?
In my previous lecture, I looked at the development of structural linguistics in the 20th century
in America, and I presented quotations from Edward Sapir and Benjamin Lee Worf that were
designed to illustrate a hypothesis that was emerging, that somehow language shaped
thought, and that different speech communities potentially had not just different ways of
looking at the world, but different worlds themselves.
The discipline of structural linguistics and its relationship to anthropology was firmly
ensconced in mid-20th century American universities when the young Noam Chomsky came on the scene
and published his first book, Syntactic Structures, in 1957, and he developed this work in his
major review, Aspects of the Theory of Syntax, in 1965.
So much has been said about Chomsky, and Chomsky has become, in the second half of the 20th
century, in the beginning of the 21st, a figure of such controversy, not just in the
professional study of language, but in politics and in the study of American institutions
in the large, that just even bringing up Chomsky's name for many people shows a red flag.
What I'm going to try and do in this lecture is look at some of the details of Chomsky's
work as it originated, to see how his notion of language study differs from that of his
predecessors, and to see what some of the implications of that notion might be for us
today.
In looking at Chomsky's theories of language, we're also looking at a kind of revolution.
And some have argued that Chomsky's place in linguistics is comparable to Einstein's
place in physics, Newton's place in the study of energy, Galileo's place in cosmology,
and the like, Darwin's place in biology, and so on.
And so, what was revolutionary about Chomsky and Chomsky's work?
The first thing that Chomsky did in his early work in the 1950s and 1960s was he called
for a formal deductive, rather than an empirical, inductive method of studying language.
You'll remember from my previous lecture that much of structural linguistics was empirical
and inductive.
You collected data, and then you induced from that data aspects of the language.
What Chomsky was interested in doing was setting up formal theories of language, and then
from these theories deducing what languages should be and how living languages corresponded
to these forms.
Therefore, Chomsky was interested not in phonology and not in morphology, that is, he was not
interested in the isolated bits of data that the structural linguists collected.
He was interested in syntax.
So, the next radical move of Chomsky was to say that the first thing you should do when
studying language, or to put it more radically, that the study of language is the study of
syntax.
That is, it is the study of the ways in which words are organized into meaningful utterances,
and the ways in which those utterances convey meaning at the level of the sentence.
In order to study syntax, Chomsky developed a notion of mental categories that he called
deep structures.
Deep structures were patterns in the mind, from which we generated utterances.
All human beings have a capacity, Chomsky argued, for language.
It wasn't simply that all human beings potentially had the same language, Chomsky was not interested
in historically going back to an original language, but what he was interested in was
what we might today call the hard wiring of the human mind.
In other words, the idea that what we have in our brains is, at birth, a capacity for
language, and that all human beings share a set of deep structures, that is, a set of
patterns in the mind for communicating linguistically.
What distinguishes one language from another is the set of transformational rules.
In other words, the rules by which those deep structures become what he called surface structures.
These structures were the actual forms of language, or the actual forms of speech, or
the actual structures of well-formed sentences.
So at stake was not building a house of consciousness where each group had a different view of the world.
What was at stake was distinguishing the transformations, the rules and the conventions that got you
from something that every human being had in their head, to something that was distinctive
about the forms of expression of language groups.
So this came to be known as transformational generative grammar, because it was concerned
with the transformations that generated surface structures from deep structures.
This is a theory about language rather than a description of languages.
Chomsky, in his early work, was not interested in fieldwork.
He was not interested in collecting data.
He was not interested in building up bodies of material from the study of languages.
He was interested in was a theory of language and a notion of transformation that's primarily
grounded in syntax.
So what Chomsky develops is, along with deep structures and surface structures, a parallel
set of categories.
And this parallel set of categories is what he called competence and performance.
All of us possess a certain competence, Chomsky argued, in language.
What differentiates us as individuals is our performance as speakers.
Now let me pause for a second and go back to Sassour.
Ferdinand de Sassour, in his course in general linguistics, posited something very similar
or superficially similar.
And what Sassour said was that there were two aspects to language as a system.
One of them was what he called in French, long.
That is, the system of the language as a whole.
And the other he called in French, parole.
That is, the way in which individuals learned their language, knew it, and articulated things
from it.
Now, the difference between Chomsky and Sassour on this idea is that even though both of them
superficially seem to believe that there's something inside and something outside, Chomsky
replaced Sassour's distinction between long and parole with competence and performance
because what Chomsky was interested in was an underlying system of rules that a speaker
has mastered.
In other words, when you're talking about competence, what Chomsky was arguing is you
were talking about analyzing language into the elements that it had and the rules for
combining those elements.
So Chomsky is less interested in system in that 19th century sense than he is interested
in rules.
And Chomsky argued that these rules were in effect recursive processes.
In other words, that you formed sentences by taking rules and applying them back to
the structures in your mind.
And so when we say things like, the boy hit the ball, what we're talking about is a sentence
and that that sentence is an articulation of linguistic performance.
In order to perform that sentence, I need a certain competence in English and that competence
is grounded in the transformational rules that in modern spoken English have a word order
pattern of subject, verb, object that do not mark the ends of words with case endings and
that also mark the singular of the verb in the particular way it's marked.
The boy hit the ball, the boy hits the ball, but an ill-formed utterance would be the group
of boys hits the ball or the group of boys hit the ball.
Are we talking collective?
Are we talking singular?
And we saw how in British English collective nouns take the plural.
Ford have organized and in American English, Ford has organized.
What you could say in Chomsky in terms is that one of the things that distinguishes
British from American English is that there is a different set of transformational rules
that generate the morphemic ending to indicate whether or not the verb is going with a verb.
A plural or a singular noun.
This is a very elaborate way of describing something that might be very, very simple,
but this is one of the implications of Chomsky's notion of competence and performance and it's
an implication of his notion of deep structure, transformation, surface structure.
So what are some of the implications of this theory and how can we understand Chomsky
himself in these categories?
Let me read to you a passage from aspects of the theory of syntax that Chomsky published
in 1965 and he said, the main task of linguistic theory must be to develop an account of linguistic
universals that on the one hand will not be falsified by the actual diversity of languages
and on the other will be sufficiently rich and explicit to account for the rapidity and
uniformity of language learning and the remarkable complexity and range of the generative grammars
that are the product of language learning.
So what is he saying here?
The main task of linguistic theory is to develop an account of linguistic universals.
What he means is that the job of linguists will be to understand what language is across
the board, what deep structures are, not what an original language was, not whether or not
there is a single language that every human being will understand intuitively or innately,
but rather to say what are the features of language that all languages share.
The way you do this methodologically is not by going out and learning every single language
and figuring out what they have in common.
The way you do that, according to Chomsky, is by positing theoretically a set of features
that language with a capital L will share and recognizing that the test of your theoretical
or formal proposition about what these universals are, that the test of that will be the power
that it has to explain all the features of living languages.
So it must explain, but it must also be rich enough to account for everything.
So if you're right, following Chomsky, if you're right about what language is or what
linguistic universals are, if you imagine a scenario in which you discovered a hitherto
unknown group of people, and if they were speaking a language that no one had ever heard
and that was seemingly unrelated to any other language, if you were right, that language
would behave fundamentally in the way that your theory of linguistic universals would
posit.
In other words, there would be nothing in that language that would falsify this theory.
It's a very complicated and controversial notion, and at the end of this lecture I'm
going to raise some questions about it, but that's where Chomsky was in the 60s.
So what are the implications here?
Here are some of the following implications.
All human beings possess language, and therefore language is a species-specific feature.
In other words, in its original formulation, humans, as humans, are creatures of language.
Only humans are creatures of language.
No language is any more complicated than any other, nor is any language simpler than any
other.
That is, some languages may have more complex tense systems, some languages may have richer
vocabulary, some languages may seem to have simpler patterns, but in the aggregate, no
language as a whole is more simple or more complex than any other.
Therefore, no stage in the historical development of a language is more simple or more complicated
than another.
Another implication is the following.
We argue that all human beings can produce an infinite number of well-formed grammatical
utterances in their respective languages.
In fact, it's this observation that is the go to the development of Chomsky in linguistics.
In other words, what provokes Chomsky, if you like, is the philosophical question.
Why is it that speakers of languages can make new sentences that they've never heard before?
You see, part of the question would be this.
If language learning was imitative, then we shouldn't be able to produce an infinite number
of grammatical sentences.
We can produce an infinite number of grammatical sentences, not because we are imitating behavior
we've heard, but because we are generating these from the deep structures of our linguistic
competence.
And so all human beings can produce and comprehend an infinite number of unique and hitherto
never uttered sentences.
So the idea here is that I could say something that you've never heard before, and you would
know what I was saying.
So the capacity to make and to understand an infinite number of sentences is at the
heart of this theory of language.
And so what this does in effect is it creates a theory of language that says that languages
are generated out of the deep structures and that what transformation provides are rules
for generation, but it does not provide the actual sentences that what we do when we speak,
when we read, when we hear, when we write is we create sentences, we create things that
have never been there before.
Deep structures are patterns of linguistic communication, their ideas, or some people
have even argued the genetically encoded mental phenomena that are common to all individuals.
So they don't represent a universal language as such.
In other words, it's not that there was one language at the beginning of time, at least
this is Chomsky's argument, rather what they represent are relational concepts that can
be expressed linguistically.
In other words, that what all human beings possess are a body of concepts that languages
can express.
The transformations are a set of rules peculiar to each language that turn deep structures
into the well-formed patterns of utterance known as surface structures, and these surface
structures are the actual utterances.
It's only at the level of surface structure that languages appear to differ from one another.
And here is another quotation from Chomsky, 1965, Aspects of a Theory of Syntax.
He says,
The existence of deep-seated, formal universals implies that all languages are cut to the
same pattern, but it does not imply that there is any point-by-point correspondence between
particular languages.
It does not, for example, imply that there must be some reasonable procedure for translating
between languages.
Now notice his use of the word pattern, because it goes back, I think, to Worf's argument,
as we heard in my previous lecture, that as he said, quote, every language is a vast pattern
system.
And so what Chomsky says is that the existence of these deep structures implies that all
languages are cut to the same pattern, but it doesn't imply that all languages are mutually
translatable point-by-point.
So it's an interesting sort of synthesis or midway position.
In other words, the idea here is that all human beings possess language as a concept,
and all human beings express themselves linguistically, but the rules that are generating our surface
structures can be so different from one language to another that languages themselves are not
simply inventories of things for the world.
So the level of transformational rules are the differences, surface structures articulate
those differences, and the level of deep structure lies a fundamental similarity among
these speakers.
I'd mentioned competence and performance, and this has, therefore, an implication not
simply for speech, but for learning.
What are the implications of this approach to language for learning?
And according to Chomsky, do not learn language, they acquire a language.
In other words, if we have competence, the innate deep structures, and innate human-born
ability to have language, then children are not learning language.
That is, you're not learning something that you don't have.
You are acquiring a language when you grow up and speak.
And what you are acquiring is the set of rules that will transform deep structures of thought
into surface structures of articulation.
At the level of psychology, this was profoundly challenging to 20th century notions of behaviorism.
In other words, the great behaviorists like B. F. Skinner, who Chomsky reviewed in so
many powerful and challenging ways in the 50s and 60s, behaviorism argued, in effect,
that language was a form of human behavior that was learned or conditioned and was therefore
imitative.
In other words, that learning a language was just really simply a far more complicated
version of a rat learning amaze, let's say.
And that this went back to a larger philosophical debate.
What is the human mind at birth?
Is it a blank slate, as John Locke might say, a tabula rasa, on which sense impressions
could be laid, and on which things could be pressed or written, so that we were born
with nothing and we learned everything?
Or are there innate ideas, as somebody like Plato would argue?
That is, are we born as human beings with stuff already in our head?
And what we do as we grow and learn is we acquire the social and local conventions for
turning that stuff into forms of behavior.
So the child has skills to use the language of computer science programmed in.
All the parent does in teaching a child to speak is provide the child with specific items
for the slots, or to put it another way, the pegboard is there, it's the pegs we put in.
So the child is the deep structures.
The child learns the rules of transformation, particular to a language, in order to bruise
well-formed surface structures.
And I've been using this phrase well-formed because this is the Chomskyan phrase.
Chomsky replaces the idea of grammaticality with the idea of well-formateness.
In other words, what Chomsky's interested in is how do we communicate?
So the idea of focusing on syntax rather than on phonology or morphology argues that successful
communication between individuals results in developing a system of transformations
to express meaning rather than imposing a pattern of grammar from above.
So what he's talking about is this, grammar is not something that is imposed from above.
We can talk about, you know, well, you've said something grammatical or you've said
something ungrammatical, it's me versus it is I, okay?
And we can say that that is a matter of grammar.
What we could say also is that it's me is a perfectly well-formed utterance because
it conveys to a speech community an idea and it does so in a way that everybody understands.
And so Chomsky's replacement of grammaticality with the idea of well-formateness.
In other words, a well-formed sentence is something that communicates to another in
a meaningful way and the other understands it.
One implication of this has been research precisely in such phenomena as African American
English so that when we study such forms of expression as African American English as
I studied it and presented it to you in earlier lectures, we should pay attention to the criteria
of well-formateness rather than measure African American English against a standard grammar
of English so that scholars of African American English as I called attention to in my previous
lecture are concerned less with particulars of sound or particulars of dialect or particulars
of vocabulary.
But really if you like just casually what really got to them as scholars of language
was the observation that the syntax of African American English seems different from the
syntax of standard or hegemonic white English and some features of that syntax included
an aspect rather than a tense system of the verb.
So when you look at scholarship on African American English, one of the things that you'll
notice is that scholars of African American English spend less time saying things like
oh let's look at the vocabulary or let's look at particular sounds or let's look at
regionalism.
What they will spend time on primarily is the analysis of the verbal structure, the
syntactic patterns, saying things like she be sick or she done be sick or she sick.
Those kinds of distinctions that indicate duration, those aspect features of the verbal
system of African American English, this is I believe a legacy of the Chomskyan theory
of language.
So as I suggested, the philosophical notion that Chomsky has of deep structures is a notion
that goes back to an idea of innate ideas, a Platonic or a notion Cartesian, that is
from René Descartes, of what we might call idealism that posits that all human beings
at birth have within them some innate abilities to acquire language, we're not blank slates.
Language is therefore a mental habit rather than a social fact according to this theory.
So therefore an implication is that the study of language is inseparable from the study
of mind and that the politics of linguistics in turn leads us to see issues of innate ideas
and deep structures that transcend the boundaries of culture and time.
Some people have argued that Chomsky's own famously radical politics is in part a consequence
of his linguistic theories, in other words that he saw in the 20th century such broad
affiliations between the peoples of the world that such what seemed to him to be racially
or culturally motivated phenomena as the Vietnam War or the conflicts in the Middle
East that these seem to him to violate a fundamental principle of the shared humanness
of humanity.
One of the interesting implications of Chomsky's work has therefore been in the work on artificial
intelligence and the way in which computer science has sought to program in as it were
language.
For here the question is this.
When you program a computer are you simply entering individual items of data or is it
possible to program a computer with a deep structure, with a template, in other words
with the pegboard rather than the pegboard and the pegs.
And so here one of the sort of motivating relationships between Chomsky's linguistic theory on the
one hand and computer science on the other is the very notion of language itself not
as a programmable collection of data but as if you like a deep structure that may be
wired in.
And in the work of individuals like Stephen Pinker or Ray Kurzweil or Jerry Fodor, individuals
who hold very very different views about specifically what it is that's in the head or what the
relationship is between innate ideas and the words we speak.
What they do share I think is a notion that the study of language is the study of mind
and that the study of mind is the study of language.
These implications I think will find their articulation throughout the 21st century as
we find ways not simply of programming data but of imagining a world in which the deep
structures of linguistic ability are transferable to non-biological entities and where someday
we will find ourselves not only talking to ourselves and talking to each other but talking
to machines.
