Lecture 36 Conclusions and Provocations
So in the end, what have we learned?
What is the nature of language?
What is the relationship between English and the languages to which it is related?
How is the study of language, the study of society, the study of linguistic form, the
study of literature, the study of mind, and how do some changes in contemporary technology,
culture and science, how do these changes affect our understanding of the history of
English?
It has been a thesis and a theme throughout this course that contemporary discussions
have historical antecedents and that we can study the history of the English language
not simply for the fascinations of its own material, but for its explanations for our
own time.
And therefore, the study of the history of the English language is, I believe, central
to our understanding and appreciation of the history of literature, the history of the
nations that have spoken and written English and, in many ways, the history of ourselves
as individuals.
Let me review the key themes and approaches to this course and let me call attention to
some of the ways in which its individual units fit into a trajectory of understanding.
One might say that in reviewing this course, we have attended to three subjects broadly
conceived.
First, we could talk about the facts of observable information about language change.
What are these facts?
In other words, what are the actual objects of our study?
They include the sounds of a language, that is, phonology.
They include the forms that the words take in grammatical categories, morphology.
They include the arrangement of words into grammatical units, syntax, and they include
the collection of words deployed to describe the world of experience and the imagination,
what we would call vocabulary or, more technically, Lexis.
These facts have come to us, they have been gleaned from written documents such as works
of literature, works of history, and personal statements such as diaries, letters, and journals.
But such facts may also be garnered by reconstructing earlier forms and by deploying such techniques
as comparative philology to use surviving words and pronunciation as evidence for earlier
and no longer extant usages.
So our inquiry has focused on ways of finding and ways of recovering objects of study.
Second, in addition to these facts of language, we can talk about styles.
And so I have been interested throughout this course of lectures into the ways in which
writers of literature have taken the resources of their language and have turned it into
individual styles or forms of imaginative expression.
I have presumed throughout this course of lectures that the history of the language
is also the history of literature.
Figures such as Cadman, Chaucer, Shakespeare, Twain, Melville, but also the figures I discussed
in my work on African American English, Frederick Douglass, Martin Luther King, Ralph Ellison,
Tupac Chaucure, women writers such as Emily Dickinson, or figures from the past such as
the anonymous writers of various letters or of diaries or journal entries, all of these
figures used the verbal resources available to them to make new and striking collocations
of words and ideas to express their social and their physical worlds as well as to express
their personal and cultural imagination of those worlds.
The impact of writers such as Chaucer or Shakespeare or texts such as the English translation of
the King James Bible, we can feel this impact in the words, the idioms, and the cliches
that we use today often without recognizing that we are in some sense quoting some writers.
Recall that anecdote about the playgoer who goes to a Shakespeare play and says it was
alright but it was full of quotations.
Now is the history of literature full of quotations.
One of the ways in which it is has been through the printing and publication history of major
writers and so I have attended in this course of lectures two aspects of, if you like, the
material culture of the written word.
You have manuscript traditions.
You have scribes who are making texts by hand and then at the end of the 15th century you
have William Caxton who sets up the first printing press in England.
You have traditions of printing and reprinting the major works of literature.
You have Shakespeare who exists in various ways in print and I called attention to the
so-called good and bad texts of Hamlet.
What you have in the history of print are a variety of ways of codifying language be
it in terms of spelling convention, regional dialect, or literary expression.
And so when we looked at Caxton we looked at the way in which he took an official standard
that was developed for non-literary public documents and used it to print literature.
When we looked in Anglo-Saxon England at the scribes who transformed the Northumbrian
dialect of Cadman into West Saxon, when we look at any form of printing today what we're
looking at are forms, if you like, of translation.
And as we saw in the case of Shakespeare's texts and as scholars of the early printed
book stress, print does not always confer stability.
Just because a book is printed does not mean that it is not full of errors and just because
a text exists in print does not mean that it represents the intentions or the traditions
of reading of an author.
The third object of our study, facts, styles, and now the way in which the facts or the
styles are treated by those who write about language from the Middle Ages to the present.
I've stressed throughout this course that the history of language is also the history
of attitudes towards language.
Language change and variation are always present and educators, theorists, and literary writers
have often reflected on the nature of standard English, on differences among dialects, and
on the impossibility of fixing language so that it cannot be changed by time or usage.
We saw how in the Middle Ages, writers such as Walter Bibisworth called attention to the
nature of English as fundamentally different from French in the 13th century, that is that
English had lost grammatical gender.
We saw how Geoffrey Chaucer in his poetry reflected both on historical change in word
meaning and on regional variation among dialects.
We saw how William Caxton in the preface to his Enados of 1490 reflected not simply on
whether we should say eggs or eren, but also on what dialect or what language or what register
we should print works of literature in.
These debates on spelling and pronunciation and grammar and style provoked a larger range
of pedagogical inquiries in the 16th, 17th, and 18th centuries, and I spent a fair amount
of time attending to scholars and writers such as Putnam, Gill, Mulcaster, and also Samuel
Johnson in the ways in which they asked whether spelling should reflect speech sounds or whether
it should reflect history, about what the relationship was between regional dialect and national
standard, about whether education should confer a standard irrespective of region or class
origin, and furthermore about the ways in which the burgeoning vocabulary of English
was changing just how people were speaking and writing, indeed was it changing the nature
of English itself.
All of these debates have gone on since the Middle Ages, and they will continue to go
on as long as people speak and write.
What are the institutions that legislate our language?
The church in the Anglo-Saxon period, the schools and the universities in the Middle
Ages and in the Renaissance, the dictionary makers of the 17th and 18th century, we may
also add the journalists of the 18th, 19th, and 20th century, taste makers from Samuel
Johnson to H. L. Menken, university presidents such as Witherspoon, scholars such as Douglas
Bush, grammarians such as Henry Fowler.
All of these individuals, and now the media, all of these individuals and representatives
of institutions have sought sometimes in vain and sometimes with vivacity to regulate or
comment on the language.
There is little difference, I think, between the blogs of today and the journalism of two
hundred years ago.
This is a world of the public sphere, and whatever is going on on the internet can be
seen to have its historical precedent in the discussions that went on in the print shop,
in the coffee house, in the monastery, in the scriptorium, and in the schoolroom.
We have reviewed a variety of historical issues, and in addition to these major themes, we've
looked at the ways in which the English language has emerged historically.
I began the historical section of this course by looking at the matrix of the Indo-European
languages, that is, the postulated original set of languages that eventually moved out
into Europe and into Western Asia.
A group of speakers who probably in the fourth millennium BC were agricultural, they were
inhumators, that is, they buried their dead, and they had a variety of social, religious,
economic, and geographical experiences that are preserved and recoverable in the surviving
languages that descend from Indo-European.
One of those language groups was the Germanic languages, and English emerged from the mix
of Germanic languages as speakers came to the British Isles in the fifth and the sixth
centuries, and as those speakers developed in what we call Old English, a range of regional
dialects, a distinctive form of pronunciation, a distinctive habit of vocabulary formation,
and a highly inflected syntax with a morphology that produced a language in which word order
patterns were not the primary bearers of meaning, that the world of Old English poetry was a
world of alliteration rather than a world of rhyme.
With the Norman conquest and with the influx of French, Old English changes to what is
called Middle English, where we see gradually the elimination of grammatical gender in nouns,
where we see word order predominate over case ending as the determiner of meaning in a sentence,
where we see a heightened and increased Latinate and romance vocabulary, where we see accompanying
changes in word stress and patterns of intonation, and where we see also changes in the literary
structure, in particularly of poetry, as we move from an alliterative pattern to a pattern
that is quantitative, that is, where the number of syllables in a line matters, and where
the organization of poetry is keyed to rhyme.
Early modern English emerges from Middle English in the 15th and 16th centuries through a variety
of changes.
One is a change in the sound of English, the great vowel shift, that systematic change
in the long, stressed monophthongs of Middle English that produce a unique set of sounds
for the English language that distinguish the vowels from the other European languages,
and furthermore, make the sound, and to a large degree the spelling, of early English
opaque to or incomprehensible to modern English readers and writers.
In addition to the great vowel shift, there are changes in syntax and word usage, the
rise of forms undo and ing, the rise of a greater idiomatic quality to the English language
as a whole, and furthermore, the rapidly increasing vocabulary that not simply increases
the raw word stock of English, but which, in effect, creates an ideology for speakers
and writers of English that holds that the language should accept new words, that it
should be voracious or omnivorous, that what we see as English moves into America and across
the world are other comparable challenges, contacts with new cultures, contacts with
other languages that bring new words in, changes in the ideologies of English, the way in which
American independence changes the ways in which the American language is fundamentally spelled
or the ways in which certain words are developed, the ways in which Noah Webster can become
an American Samuel Johnson in his American Dictionary of 1828, and we can also consider
the way in which dialect changes and differs.
This has been a course in many ways about dialect and region, and we've seen from the
Old English period and the Middle English period, and also in the American period, what we've
seen is the debate on the relationship between regional dialect and national standard.
And in the case of America, I called attention to the ways in which dialect writers of the
19th and 20th century, in their literary fictions, used forms of spelling to evoke the sound and
sense of regional speech.
And in the course of this activity, they raised larger fundamental questions about what the
nature of being an American was, and what the nature of a national language was.
Is a national language a band of national union?
As Webster said, Mark Twain said famously, a nation's language is a very large matter.
And yet we saw, in Huckleberry Thin, the way in which Huck can describe the smooching or
the stealing of the grindstone as a nation-tough job.
And now that word nation must resonate not simply as a euphemism for damn nation or damn,
but with the simple fact that the study of language is a nation-tough job.
It is a nation-tough job because the study of the English language is a study of nations.
And as we enter the beginning of the 21st century, we need to ask ourselves once again,
as we encounter the languages of hispanophone peoples, as we encounter languages of new immigrants
from Asia, as we see again English as a world language through the internet, through the
legacies of colonialism, and through popular culture.
We need to ask ourselves once again, what is the relationship between nation and language?
It is a nation-tough job.
The encounter with the other, that is, with someone different from ourselves, shapes our
sense of self.
English is not simply infused with the words of other languages, but the discipline of the
study of language historically and theoretically is grounded in the encounter between the self
and the other.
We would not have the discipline of Indo-European studies were it not for William Jones and
his contemporaries, who, as English colonial officers and agents, encountered the languages
of the Indian subcontinent.
We would not have, in turn, questions about modern 20th century linguistics were it not
for individuals like Benjamin Lee Worf and Edward Sapir, who encountered the languages
of the Southwestern American Indians, and in those encounters raised questions about
what language was and how it may be described.
So what I want to stress is that the encounter with the other is not simply a matter of bringing
in new words, it is the occasion for reflecting on the nature of language itself.
It is the occasion for reflecting on the history of language.
And as we enter the 21st century, and as peoples hitherto undiscovered or unheard are
revealed to us, whether they be the islands of the Pacific or in the rainforests of South
America, these are peoples whose languages will provoke and challenge scholars to ask
fundamental questions about the relationship between mind and word, word and world.
And so I'd like to conclude this course of lectures with some provocations.
I've looked at the question of language's relationship to society and mind.
And what has emerged here is very much a personal take.
That whatever I have done to reflect, I hope objectively, I hope accurately, I hope fairly,
the thoughts and ideas of others, I cannot get away from some convictions of my own.
And among those convictions is that language is a human institution.
That is, that there may be forms of communication that extend beyond the human to our animal
compatriots and brethren, that there may be something about being a primate, that there
may be something about having certain mental structures that enable forms of communication
where we may say ultimately that language is not restricted to humanity.
But what I think distinguishes the human relationship to language is the way in which
language has become a vehicle of communication, the way in which groups define themselves
through languages, and the way in which our languages are made up of signs that are used
arbitrarily but conventionally to describe and give shape to a visible world.
What I mean here is that there is no living language in which there remains an essential
meaning of a thing.
There is no word in every single living language that is shared.
Mama may sound like mama in lots of different languages, but in the language of the Republic
of Georgia, mama means father, and dada means mother.
And so what we have here in the living and the surviving evidence of earlier languages
is I think a sense that language is a human institution and that language in some sense
reflects the world as we experience it.
Let me also ask whether we should consider language as a reality.
In other words, does language reside in some real structure?
Now Plato would have us believe that there was a divine spark, a scintilla of knowledge
with which we were born.
Chomsky talks about innate ideas.
Is there a physical thing in our heads that is the locus of language?
Or is language something else?
Is it the aggregate sum of patterns of behavior?
Is language an embodied thing?
Recent scholarship on the origins of humankind has suggested and has debated whether language
was something that needed to develop with particular anatomical structures as well.
In other words, do we need certain anatomical structures in the throat, in the tongue, in
the mouth, in order not simply to speak, but in order to be linguistic creatures?
Is there a relationship between dexterity and language?
Dexterity you will remember comes from the Latin word for the right hand.
And is there a sense that as human beings developed facility with hands that freed them
up to use words or to record signs in some ways that were symbolic?
What are the scientific and the social disciplines that we use to study language?
And even though scientific and sociological disciplines may tell us much about language
study, I as a professor primarily of literature still hold to the belief that the study of
language and its history remains a humanistic enterprise.
What does that mean?
I think that it means that the study of language and its history needs to be seen within the
study of literature, that there is an association between the authors of our canons, that is
the authors that we value as not just innovators in style or innovators in substance, but as
innovators in language.
Chaucer, Shakespeare, Milton, Melville, Douglas, Dickinson, Toni Morrison, that the range of
writers in the English language is a range of linguistic innovators.
And furthermore, that the provocations of the study of language should tell us perhaps
not just about how our minds work, but about how our minds imagine.
And so the object of study for the history of language for me remains the study of the
imagination.
So in this course of lectures, I've studied language with literature, and I've tried
to call attention to the ways in which literary history and linguistic history dovetail.
Such an attitude implies a certain view about language and literature in society.
I have selected a variety of texts, not simply because they exemplify the English language
in its detail at a given moment, but because many of these texts are about individual identity,
they're about ideals of creation, they're about notions of social formation.
Cadman's hymn may very well be the earliest surviving text in English.
Is it the first English poem?
I think we want it to be, because it is a poem of creation.
Sing me from Shaft.
Sing to me, the angel says, about creation.
What is being created here is not just the world, but the world of language, that Cadman
self-creates, as all poets do, that he creates himself in language, and that the structure
of creation, both of the world and of the individual, becomes a central theme for all
of the texts we've looked at, to be or not to be.
This is not simply a statement about an individual debating the end of his own life, it is the
fundamental question of existence.
What does it mean to call the universe into existence?
What does it mean to utter, and in uttering, to make things be?
And God said, let there be light, and there was light.
This notion that still stays with us, that there is, fundamentally, an idea of language
as itself, the creating thing in the beginning, was the word.
So many of the texts I've looked at, Cadman, Chaucer, Shakespeare, Twain, Joel Chandler,
Harris, that these are all stories, Frederick Douglass, of finding oneself, whether it's
in the scope of creation, or the swamp of language, and that in finding oneself we look
back not to experience, but we look back to texts, and I've stressed throughout this course
of lectures, that literary writers are always readers, and that even when it would appear
that we have the unmediated expression of experience, Frederick Douglass giving us the
mind of the runaway slave, Martin Luther King eloquently talking about the possibilities
of freedom, that in any of these writers we have structures of allusion to earlier texts,
that is, we are meant to recall a history of literature and a history of language in
each word.
So whether we are white or black, whether we are speakers of English because it is our
first language, or because it is our last language, whether we are old or young or man or woman
or straight or gay, we have ways of expressing ourselves that are grounded in experience and
that are grounded in history, and what I've tried to call attention to are the ways in
which if we are sensitive to the history of the language, we can be sensitive to the roots
and flowers of our culture, and I would end by saying that to know a language is not simply
to know how to speak, but to know its history, and in the end, to know its history is to
know ourselves.
We hope you have enjoyed these lectures from our great courses series.
Our courses are now available to order online.
Visit our website at www.teach12.com or call our customer care representatives at 1-800-TEACH-12.
Thank you very much.
