Lecture 3 Sark and the Roads to Freedom
In this third lecture I'd like to discuss a figure that is, in one sense, a paradigmatic
intellectual of the twentieth century. Certainly one of the most famous intellectuals, a person
who many of you know not only as a philosopher, but also as a writer and a dramatist, and
that's Sartre, the famous French philosopher. Sartre is best known, I suppose, in the United
States for his literary works, and I can recommend them. They are, as it were, foundational
in our culture for the sort of existential experience. And I have in my novel, his novel
Nazia, which is a nice existential phrase. It gets you off in the right direction. In
Sartre, it's again, remember, these are not just moods for existentialists. They're structures
of our being, not simply moods. This kind of Nazia that Sartre discusses can't be fixed
by Dramamine, in other words. Sartre as existentialist will be the first part of this talk. Sartre's
existentialism is rooted in a strange misreading of Heidegger. Sartre thought that because
Heidegger had developed an analytic account of Daphne or being there, human being in the
world, that Heidegger had somehow created what Sartre thought was a humanism. This Heidegger
informed Sartre in a letter, a famous letter called Letter on Humanism, was not the case.
It was not Heidegger's intention to place human being and the self at the center of
his discussion. No, the self or human being was just that entity Heidegger wanted to interrogate
in order to discover, as it were, the question of being, the meaning of the question of being.
However, even though Sartre misunderstood him and thought that Heidegger was an existentialist
and a humanist, it was a productive misunderstanding because it led, as many misreadings do, to
a very interesting position, which is Sartre's own early position, which I will briefly discuss
as an existential humanism. I mean, after all, St. Paul's misreading of the early teachings
of Christ led to Christianity. And so, I mean, it's not always bad to have a misreading
and Sartre's misreading of Heidegger has a whole series of interesting effects. There
are a couple of principles of Sartre's existential humanism that I'd like to make clear, lay
out in a very simple fashion. One is this. Sartre is an atheist, right up front. In fact,
it's almost the first principle of his work. In a certain way, his atheism already separates
him from Heidegger, who is deeply concerned with the question of being with a capital
B, which certainly retains, at least resonates with a theological tradition. Sartre's atheism,
on the other hand, is unrelenting. By that I mean, for Sartre, the only thing that could
determine humans in their essence would be God. And without such a determination, human
beings have no essence. So if you ask Sartre, the early Sartre, the humanist Sartre, what
are human beings? What is the self? Sartre will say, it has no essential structure until
his existence. So for Sartre, the principle is as follows. Existence precedes essence.
For man alone, for human beings alone, for no other creature, every other creature for
Sartre has some, as it were, a brute role in the world, whether it's a rock, a dog,
or a cat, whatever. It's just brutally there. I mean, Sartre talks about the subject versus
the object in a way that makes it look like a real struggle. The out there is all that
crap we have to deal with, whether it's somebody's dog or even some other person, as I'll get
to in a moment. But for Sartre, for the individual human subject, for that singular subject of
existentialism, your existence precedes your essence, which means you are what you make
of yourself. This is why I've called this lecture the Roads to Freedom, because Sartre
is engaged in a project where what he wants to make himself is an absolutely free man
in the sense in which Fidel Castro told Barbara Walters that he was an absolutely free man,
and he wants to become his own making. And Sartre thinks that this is not a personal
choice. He believes, since God doesn't exist, we are, as he puts it, condemned to be free.
We don't have any choice. We have to make our life a project. The only option we have
is what Sartre calls bad faith. Bad faith for Sartre is when you treat yourself as a
thing, as something with an essence created by another where you just act out of your
upbringing and don't make your life a creation. This is bad faith. I think bad faith is one
of the most useful concepts of the early Sartre. It's a quite common phenomenon. It's something
you can say of someone they've acted in bad faith. Another way you might put that is out
of character, but that's not strong enough. Bad faith is when someone makes an excuse
to you along the lines of, I couldn't have done otherwise, don't you see? Or, I couldn't
have avoided that, don't you see? But on Sartre's radical view of the freedom of the human to
construct himself, there is simply no situation in which you're allowed to say, I couldn't
have done otherwise. I mean, even on pain of death, you could choose death, Sartre gives
even that radical example. Even in prison, you can refuse to be, you know, to be complicitous
with the authorities. These are dramatic examples that are drawn from Sartre's experience as
a resistant spider, I'm sure, in the war against fascism. This is not to try to localize or
make his views mean nothing, they're to try to show how important they are for this period.
I mean, he may not have understood Heidegger well, but politically he made choices that
we can only wish that Heidegger would have made politically. Well, for Sartre we have
this project of freedom from which one can fall, and you see some formal similarity to
Heidegger's inauthenticity here. One can fall in bad faith, and that's by treating oneself
as though you're the creature of necessity when actually you are free to do otherwise.
And so this is, this for Sartre's bad faith. On the other hand, there's a kind of an existential
ethic in Sartre's view of radical freedom, and that existential ethic goes something
like this. When you do act freely, you still need to ask yourself a question that is styled
in a form that might have appealed to Kant. Namely, could others act as I do? Could everyone
choose as I've chosen? This is a task to which Sartre would like to put his own actions.
In other words, when you face a moral dilemma, you've got to put yourself, he thinks, in
this perspective in which you can say, is this a rule that I would want others to adopt
for their actions, what I've just decided? This is not a limit on your freedom as long
as, and this is a key word for Sartre, it's been a key word since Kant, and it's a key
word of some very interesting modern political movements, as long as such a decision is made
with autonomy. In other words, not under the guidance of a moral postulate, in that regard,
it's different than Kant. You ask yourself this question as part of your project, you
go, well, could everyone do this? You may go ahead and do it even though everyone can't.
But this is, this is at least, at least this gives Sartre's position some slight ethical
dimension missing from the position of Heidegger, where I discussed how you can be authentic
in many different ways. Well, similarly, you can be an existentialist and a humanist in
many different ways too, but there are some limits on how the project can go. In fact,
the humanist part of it means that without God, man is left all alone to create a new
state, his or her destiny in their own hands. And that's the sense in which Sartre says
we are condemned to be free. Not only is Sartre an atheist, but as I say, he's not a nature
lover either. The world of brute facticity sort of surrounds us. Everything that limits
Sartre's freedom really pisses him off. It's like Sartre discusses the wall, you know,
or any other objectivity as though it were an obstacle. Well, it is, if you think about
it. I mean, you know, perfect freedom I guess would be to float and fly and jump and zoom
anywhere. So the world, sort of the subject, object world for Sartre, all the freedom is
on the subject side and on the object side is the world of nature, which also stands
in the way of our actions and our free actions. Now, it's bad faith to say that they always
do. See, follow me. Sometimes, you know, the biggest mountain you can either climb it or
better still to follow the advice of my grandfather, walk around it. My grandfather used to like
to say the damn mountain had no business being there. I guess it meant that he believed in
God, but just thought he had a sense of humor. I'm not sure. Sartre's account, though, of
the brute facticity of nature being a block to freedom. I mean, we're condemned to be
free, but there are blocks to it like the facticity of the object world around us. Unfortunately,
the self is under siege in Sartre decision extent that other people are also a block
to our freedom. This has been noted a long time in political theory. You know, I mean,
it's easy to imagine a completely free and artistic singularity, but you get two or three
people together and they're bound to start getting in each other's way. Now, already
you begin to see their problems limiting your freedom. I think Sartre engages in a bit of
existentialist overkill in this period in his life. In one of his plays, I'm sure that
you've heard about it. It's called No Exit. Sartre goes so far as to say, hell is other
people. You know, if there was a heaven, I'd be there by myself so that you folks wouldn't
be around to piss me off. And he has a wonderful section in being and nothingness. And I think
women should be able to relate to this more than men about the gaze of the other. It's
especially true if you're like a stranger in a Texas town and you're in town for just
that one day to buy some things and everybody's looking at you and you're the stranger. Yeah.
And they fix you with their gaze. Sartre has a brilliant and beautiful passage in being
in nothingness about the alienation and distancing effect of the gaze. This, of course, has become,
you know, like so hip and popularized in feminism that men, at least politically, aware men
don't look at women anymore or other men or objects or at their notes. No, I'm sorry.
You can't say again, there's a tendency to excess in Sartre. In any case, he has this
discussion of the world as both a field in which we are condemned to be free, but one
in which our actions are limited not only by objects, the facticity of the world the
way it is. Facticity is a fancy word for the way the damn thing set up and by other people.
This is where Sartre's thought undergoes, as he gets older, a profound change. And I
marked that and I do mark that with his autobiography, The Words. This is where he looks back on
his young existentialist period when he painted the hell the world was in no exit and the
nausea he felt at other people and at himself and at his, you know, fear before nothingness
and death. And he looks back on that period and he says, I was, as it were, doubled. On
the one hand, I was I, Jean-Paul Sartre, you know, the just person. On the other hand,
I was the chronicler of hell. The privileged young writer allowed to observe all the torments
of the modern personality. I was extremely happy, fake and hoodwinked to my very soul.
So this is something when you have your lecture in here and I know we'll have a lecture series
on existentialism, be sure and remind whoever's lecturing here that Sartre came to view existentialism
in a different light later. In other words, if you're too happy about things like death,
despair, dread and anxiety, then it's time to wonder, you know, if this thrills you
too much. This is the period at which Sartre turned to what one might call the more outer
worldly tasks of trying to join with other human beings in solidarity in order to alter
the facticity of the world, not simply look at it as an obstacle, but to alter it through
collective action. Now, you know, it's misleading without a long discussion to go into Sartre's
Marxism, but it's fair to say that his attempt to fuse Marxism and existentialism, which
appears in his book Search for a Method, is a transitional work. The mature Sartre becomes
a rather unfortunate orthodox Marxist, in my view, at least two orthodox for my taste
in anything. I mean, I don't even like a Baptist who's orthodox or an orthodox any damn thing.
So an orthodox Marxist isn't a particular irritation for me, it's just a limitation on
some of his later work. But in the period when he's trying to fuse the two, he undergoes
a brilliant set of insights about the relationship between the single solitary self, condemned
to be free in a world without God, and the Promethean project of people getting together
in groups in order to make the world not a paradise, but a place worth living in. This
becomes a project that Sartre sees as doable, as one that's not only doable, but as one
that's only avoidable if you engage in bad faith. I mean, if you see that the problem's
there, and you've got the freedom to go out and try to do something about the problem,
and of course in this world it wouldn't take a genius to start enumerating them. Massive
poverty, massive ignorance, people that are sick that can't find out, and just on and on.
You don't need to be a genius to enumerate those problems. Sartre considers it bad faith
that you don't try to, as it were, fuse yourself into a group. You don't lose your own autonomy,
but you try to form a collectivity with other people who can act together with you to change
some of these more horrible necessities. By the way, these necessities are just things
that have been passed along by the role of history. History which, as Mark said, weighs
on the brain of the living like a nightmare. It's sort of a scary passage, but when you
think about the history of nearly all groups that came to this country, immigrants, and
there's a struggle of all groups. It's not a bad phrase at all.
Well, anyway, this fusion in Sartre's book, Search for a Method, will take place through
a discussion of the work of Kierkegaard, a great philosopher of the singular, autonomous
individual, and his insistence upon the particularity of the individual, and Hegel, the great philosopher
of the collective, of the spirit of the time, of the group, of the culture. Sartre's discussion
of them in Search for a Method is a discussion about himself as young existentialist humanist
and his older socially engaged radical and Marxist. It's sort of an interesting theoretical
book because it's hard not to see that the theories stand in the way he places them against
each other as two parts of his personality in the process of farming and one transmogrifying
into the other. In Search for a Method, he points out, I think, very cleverly that either
side can hold forth against the other. In other words, Kierkegaard can hold forth against
Hegel that no matter how grand your system of co-activity is, of totality, the singular
individual can stand against it as an objection. I mean, Kierkegaard would admit as much.
Kierkegaard once wrote, and I think it's a beautiful sentence, he once wrote that, I
guess this isn't an existentialist vein, if you like that word. Kierkegaard once said
that to be an absolute defiance against God was like being an error written into a large
text that refused to have yourself erased because you wanted to stand in that text as witness
that who wrote it was a bad author. Now, that showed that Kierkegaard understood the singularity
of the person even in defiance of God himself. So there's no question that the singular individual
can stand in this relation of defiance. On the other hand, Hegel has already anticipated
this moment as a moment of what he calls the unhappy consciousness. One can stand in such
relation to one's fellow men and women, but not without an unhappy and divided consciousness.
And this is the two sides that he plays off in search for a method. Search for a method
heads towards the position of the more mature sartre, which is the position that one must
join in the revolutionary struggle. By the way, a position that if modified up to at least
the late sixties remains at least quasi-applausable. Certainly in Europe, I mean, we have in France,
we have the government falling in 1968. It would be hard to say at that point that Sartre's
idea of a revolution was just a pipe dream while it had actually occurred. I mean, if
a thing is actual, it's possible. If it's occurred, that means it can occur. So Sartre's
revolutionary hopes weren't totally without foundation. A revolution had actually occurred
around him. So the possibility that one could occur was not a utopian projection of Sartre's
own wishes. In fact, he was in a way, one of the few intellectuals in Europe, to experience
both the horror of fascism and the moment of release and rebellion that was the 1960s,
to experience both of those and to write and live through both those moments. And by that
I mean in a way that is accessible enough to us as readers to understand. Sartre's experience
of the 60s was, in many ways, as remarkable as Marcuse's, whom I will discuss in the next
lecture. Sartre's experience of the 60s was one of incredible liberation in a way because
Sartre saw in the 1960s the possibility of a group that was truly fused around a few
principles that led toward a society that for him would be one in which liberation would
have meaning. In other words, the themes that have grown so corny in popular culture. A
society based on solidarity, peace, understanding, mutual respect, love. These are all strange
values for a man who began by saying, hell is other people. But this is the journey of
an extraordinary life. Sartre's main interlocutors during this period, of course, were, on the
one hand, Marxists who were more orthodox than Sartre, who viewed the 60s not as a rebellion
in the style of Marx, with the working class marching forward arm in arm in the style of
the old worker posters, but rather as this outburst of anarchistic love and madness and
music and so on. On the one hand, the official communists of Europe, who had been around
quite a while and had done quite a few things, they were a political party in France, viewed
Sartre's involvement with the students of Scance. Of course, on the other hand, the forces
of the status quo of the ardor of France of that day also viewed his activities with
some skepticism. This put Sartre in a position to develop a uniquely revolutionary theory,
at least during that period, which search for a method only covers in part. One of the
important distinctions that Sartre works on in search for a method is the distinction between
a working class limited to a factory setting alone, which is the model of the working class
that dominates political and even philosophical speculation in Europe as a political class
and a working class considered more broadly, which leads into the work in the late 20th
century of philosophers like Tony Negrae and Mario Tronti and others. That's a working
class considered as those who work. That's much broader categories than the traditional
members of labor unions. If you're a housewife, for example, out there, you may feel that
you work. If an orthodox Marxist doesn't view you as a worker because you don't have a waged
job, you may resent that. In fact, you should, because the distinction that is relevant to
a revolutionary politics of the kind developed in the 60s is not the liberation of one class
or another, but of the liberation of the human race, of human beings. Sartre has hung on
to his humanism because this is a very humanistic revolutionary view he has. Not simply the
liberation of the working class, but of groups that work that are not traditionally considered
a part of the working class. Well, or housewives, the only group I can think of, not at all.
Although I will say this about mothers and housewives, that is undoubtedly the largest
pool of unwaged labor in the world. I mean, I can't think of another job that has those
kind of hours with that kind of pay. If only you had a union. Well, I've got news for you.
The late 20th century develops forms of struggle in which women do get together in groups called
wages for housework. And who knows, the 21st century may see women struggle together in
groups called wages for sexual work. I mean, prostitutes already have such groups and I
am not a person to put them down on any moral grounds. I mean, that seems to me what James
Joyce called the inanity of extolled virtue. I don't look down with some kind of extolled
virtue on people making a living. The radicality of the Marxism that Sartre was at least polemically
presenting, later gets worked out theoretically, as I've said by these other people. But polemically
what he's presenting is the radicality that we get in a film like John salesmate on, where
you have the guy telling everyone their look. They've got you divided men against women,
race against race, old against young, ethnic group against ethnic group. When you all know,
there are only two sides to this world. Those who work and those who don't. You work, they
don't. That's all you need to know about the enemy. Great line and might one. And it's that
crude and powerful analysis that Sartre was working toward in this period. Now, I admit
he doesn't achieve the clarity that's later achieved about this analysis. One reason he
doesn't achieve it is that he's working under the constraints of being a French intellectual.
And that already, you know, is part of the general intellectual's malady. I mean, I'm not
sure, you know, I'm not up here saying I'm free from the intellectual's malady. The intellectual's
malady is always to think you know what other people are thinking better than they know
themselves before you've asked. Okay, this is, this is a malady that's awfully hard to
overcome after years spent dealing with books and ideas. But from an account like the one
Sartre was developing of Marxism, an account relevant for that period, one would see that
a person who spends their life with books is no more or less valuable than a person who
spends his life, you know, laying down highways. I mean, we have to get from here to there.
Or someone who, you know, makes the hotel beds up that we're going to sleep in tonight
for those of us who are from out of town. In fact, this has been a faithful division that
has marked and will mark the rest of these lectures. And that's the division between
mental and manual labor. A division that is super important to understand the history
of ideas. In fact, one of the wonderful slogans to develop out of this period which I will
identify with Sartre's Marxism in France is the idea that intellectual labor would not
be at all possible unless it was on the foundation of manual labor. I mean, if there are things
that need to be done first, like fixing supper so that you won't go hungry, that will be done
first, Balzac will be read later. So Marxism in a way has, at least of the kind that Sartre
is developing in the 60s, has a non-elitist undertow. Again, one that Sartre does not
fully develop, but one which he begins to develop in response to his critics in the
Orthodox Communist Party who still want to focus on just the worker and not on issues
of culture and not on these issues of a broader and richer notion of the working class. If
one wants this broader and richer notion, one needs to look further into that period which
was the most fertile period of Sartre's intellectual life and certainly was a period that helped to
farm my own. And that's to look at the student as a kind of worker. The student has a boss,
the teacher. The student works without a wage. In fact, in a certain way a student is a
peculiar, peculiar kind of worker. Even the housewife and mother doesn't pay to work. They
work for free. That's silly to work for free. They don't pay, though. The student does something
silly or still. The student pays to work. Duke, this is phenomenal given the rights they pay.
I go, you're paying me this much to work? I mean, you're doing the work. I mean, you're
writing the papers. You're doing the homework and you're paying someone else to work. Under
the rules of a society based on work, this is not sensible, but of course you know the rationale.
It's as old as every sort of hokey game of chance you can imagine and that you put it in the pot
now and you'll get more out of the pot later. Under the current economic conditions that I'm
discussing this in today, though, the late 20th century, 1993, if one's talking about making a
lot of money now, I think some students would be better off to place a few dollars on a roulette
wheel, turn it and then have a hell of a lot of a lot better chance of getting rich than they
will spending four years at Duke and kissing their butt up the carpet ladder. I think their
shots are a lot better in Vegas and they'll know a lot sooner and their lives will be
somewhat simpler and while I'm not in general for reducing complexity, this is one form where it
might make some sense to reduce a little complexity. Anyway, that's not too far off the
track with Sarkra because the Marxism that he's developing is an unorthodox one during this
period. Later in his life as the 60s subsides, and by the way, in France the government could
not have come back to power without the help of the Communist Party, so anytime you hear the
word Communist, don't get excited. If a revolution really starts and there are a few
communists left, they'll join with the Republicans to make sure everybody goes back to work. I
mean, don't worry about them. That form of the world has passed away. Sarkra's style of
thinking about it has become, as it were, a little bit dated. We're trying to make some of it live
again, but many elements of it are quite dated. I mean, this is obvious now to nearly
everyone. The last point that I want to make about Sarkra, I think, is about his own life.
In a way, it's one that I want to make about him, although I could also make it about Herbert
Marcisa, who I was lucky enough to meet, but since I consider that to be too charming, I'll
make the point about Sarkra's life. If one looks at the troubled history of the 20th
century, Sarkra, perhaps as much as any other intellectual, attempted to maintain his fragile
human dignity, first in the face of the indignities of being in an occupied country in a
struggle with fascists, where some of your former friends are collaborators and others
are in bad faith doing nothing, and that experience deeply marks the young Sarkra. No
doubt that's where we get many of the existential motifs of nausea and bad faith and
nothingness. I mean, these are the concepts of a bleak and dark period, and
certainly Europe in the Second World War is such a period. Sarkra manages to live through
that and reform himself, as it were, into a human capable of contact with other human
beings. Even after those horrible and hideous experiences, he's able to reform himself and
to start another project, again one that is headed for a dubious end, although I don't
think even the most conservative person would compare the end of the Third Reich with the
end of the 60s. I don't even think William Bennett would go that far, or even George
Will. I mean, you know, the 60s were out of control, but not like that, okay? I mean,
at least I was there, and I don't think it was that bad, okay? Sarkra, as I say, was
able to reform himself and to make of himself, as it were, a new project to redirect his
life. The reason this, I think, is exemplary for the 20th century is as the century has
progressed, the need to be able to do that, to have some flexibility in the way we view
the world in the face of catastrophe and rapid change is extremely important. It's
extremely important to be able to do this. Sarkra was able to do it. If in the end he
ended up a somewhat too orthodox Communist, and if in the end the Communist world fell
and, according to our contemporary stories, this is all what happened, it did not somehow
make of his life a failure. It made of his life an interesting adventure of voyage, as
it were, through one of the most significant parts of the 20th century. One of the reasons
I want to discuss him early in these series of lectures is because his voyage prepares
the way and shows some of the missteps, as well as some of the steps that will be taken
further later by thinkers that we will discuss as we continue through the course. And I guess
if I wanted to leave you with a moral to be drawn from that, it's that Sarkra does have
an important point for our topic about the self under siege. And that's that the degree
of siege can range extremely deep, wide, in the case of fascism across a span of horror
that's almost unbelievable, but we have not somehow escaped that in the late 20th century.
I mean when we look at the average diet, in the average copy of the Average Woman's Magazine,
the number of calories that women are expected to eat today are less than the average diet
of the average prisoner at Treblinka, then we haven't really advanced as far as we may
think. And it may be that Sarkra's project of freedom is not as outdated as we think.
And if the 60s have come back into fashion, in fashion, it might be worthwhile for the
other elements of the 60s to come back into fashion. I mean after all, many people today
say they are bored with watching television and in the 60s people at least had an opportunity
to get on it. One of those was Sarkra, who by the way did an interview for Playboy just
in case you were wondering. You know you're a famous philosopher when you do an interview
with Playboy that tells about your life story. I will mention a few of his books if you're
interested because I think that they're very good. And I think that the literary ones are
very nice. Nausea, which is his young man's book, a very short book called The Words by
Sarkra that's been translated. And then rather than try to read his long Marxist works, look
for Search for a Method, which is the book that I brought in and read it. Because he makes
a point in Search for a Method that I want to leave you with, I think it's a time to
leave you with some point here, makes a point in his book Search for a Method that we need
to remember. And that's that modernity, both in the sense of capitalism being a part of
modernity and its criticism, Marxism, are in their infancy. This is very important to
remember. In other words, we look at these things as structures that have already become
old, outdated, thrown away and I've been talking that way myself. On the other hand, as
structures of ideas, these things are barely in their infancy. By that I mean in human
terms they haven't been around that long. I mean the first trade union is only a little over
a hundred years old. And it was the trade union movement that created Marxism, not the
reverse. Although frequently the propaganda we hear in our own country makes it sound like
it was the reverse. It's actually working people that created socialism, not socialism
created them. This seems to me to be an odd way to think anyway. So Marx gave his life
for that project and in the course of it produced these powerful works. And for anyone who wants
to pursue it even further, let me mention a critique of dialectical reason. I only want
to mention it, critique of dialectical reason, because I don't want you to read it. And here's
why. For long and complicated reasons that I won't engage here, I think it's wrong, but
that's not why. It's too down long and life is too short. It's too long and life is too
short. We're here having a lecture about the self under siege. We're in a culture where
people spend time, huge amounts of time running hither and thither to buy, you know, sharts
for the kids for school to go up and down stair masters and so on. We haven't got time
for these four or five thousand pages. So, I mean, one function that people who at least
used to be intellectuals like me can perform is to say about certain books, don't worry
about it. You don't have time for it. And then of course if you're irritated by me, that'll
make you read it, and if not, you don't have to. But certainly you can look at the words.
That's his autobiography. You can learn a lot about Sartre from that. I didn't really want
to talk about his work. I wanted to talk about him as a human being because in his case, trying
to be an existentialist and trying to be a revolutionary was his way of seeking his
selfhood under siege. For him, and this is what I think is his highest glory, the best
thing about him, for him philosophy was not just an academic exercise of thinking, but
a way he tried to construct a life worth living, a self worth talking about as a kind of destiny.
And I'm in no position to say he didn't do a decent job at it.
