Lecture 5, Habermas and the Fragile Dignity of Humanity
In this lecture, I want to discuss one of the most important philosophers who is still
working, still alive. His work ranges over many areas in social theory, it ranges in
areas of philosophy, linguistics and so on, and that's Jurgen Habermas. Habermas is one
of the last great defenders of rationalism in a period in philosophy in which rationalism
is not held in very high esteem. In many ways, Habermas is an outgrowth of one of the figures
that we discussed last time, namely Herbert Marchusa and the Frankfurt School, that would
include D'Adoro Adorno and Max Horkheimer. Habermas was in fact Adorno's graduate assistant,
so the original project that Jurgen Habermas set himself was to reformulate the kinds of theories
being worked on by Marchusa, by Horkheimer and by Adorno. In particular, his first venture
was to reformulate their distinction between traditional theory, understood as both philosophy
and science, both as opposed to what they called critical theory, a theory whose interest was in
the emancipation of human beings. Now this may sound a little sort of fancy dine, the whole attempt
was a way to attempt to reformulate Marxism in a setting appropriate for the late 20th century.
So this is a very important school of thinkers of which Habermas is in a way the last and leading
exponent. It's clear, especially in his later work, that he's moved a considerable distance away
from Marxism. That would be obvious for almost any thinker in the late 20th century. What I want
to do is to start and move you through in 45 minutes from Marchusa's rather exuberant radicalism,
his useful radicalism. I want to move from there through Habermas's attempt to reformulate that
project while keeping in mind our central theme, which is the self-under siege. I mean, what was
important to Marchusa about social systems was not what would be important to the average economist,
which was maximizing utilities. What was important to Marchusa about economies and other things
was their effect on the lives of selves. How did they cause the self to be able to construct
itself? In other words, how was the economic and cultural impact of that lived out in human
beings? And I discussed a whole series of pathologies of both the period in which he wrote and the
pathologies that have continued down to the present day. So that was Marchusa's interest
was in liberating people from that unnecessary part of life suffering. Not death, you know,
I mean, I think again, I don't think we can get around that. But there's a vast difference between
living to be 90 and being well educated and fed and relatively healthy and dying at the age of
three weeks in Biafra with flies in your eyes. There's a significant difference there, a difference
that people have found worth fighting over and worth dying for. So Habermas attempts to reformulate
this project. He begins with a distinction that central throughout his early work between labor
and what he initially called interaction, but which I think can safely be called by now communication.
And his argument was a fundamental argument. He said, if you look at the human species,
it has fundamental human interests. One is to reproduce its life
through labor. In other words, through work. That's a fundamental interest of the human species. You
don't do that one and sort of nothing else gets off the ground. It's a fundamental human interest.
Habermas locates a second fundamental human interest, and this one is different, quite
different for him, in communication. In other words, in the interest that human beings have,
and it's a deeply seeded interest in communicating with one another. If you think about this,
it would be required for everything from any kind of social bonding without which
even human life in the anthropological sense wouldn't be possible and so on. It's a fundamental
interest, not just in communication. This is important, but in undistarded and clear communication.
That's our fundamental human interest. Because we have a fundamental human interest in undistarded
communication, we need to understand what Habermas calls systematically distorted communication,
and I will be on to that in just a minute. First, I want to briefly lay aside the part
of the older critical theory and of Marx that Habermas leaves alone as he reformulates his project.
The labor half of the distinction is pretty much left over to the standard economic accounts
that grow out of his tradition in the early Habermas. Labor is understood as a kind of
monological or instrumental endeavor. In other words, it's an instrumental endeavor driven by
the imperatives of efficiency and so on. It's an instrumental endeavor, and he defines it as
being monological. He also says about it something that's sort of banally true. He calls it a
productive endeavor. It's the endeavor surrounding production as opposed to those surrounding
communication. Communication is, according to Habermas, by its very nature, dialogic.
What Habermas wants to locate, because he knows that there are traditional disciplines
and throughout the history of Western or Indo-Western, Indo-European societies and Western
civilization, that deal with problems both in the area of labor and communication. In the area
of labor and instrumental reason, we have the sciences, and in the area of communication,
we have the humanities, which are supposed to enlighten us about dialogue, tell us more about
how to talk to one another. For a Habermas, we really form ourselves as selves in both dimensions,
but we could not, for Habermas, possibly become subjects, selves, without the communicative
dimension of dialogue. So he would utterly reject a sort of empiricist account like David Hume would
give, or like Skinner in a more modern period would give, that we could become human simply by
looking at patches of blue and listening to pieces of phonetic sounds. Because for him,
we become selves in much the way we do for Mead, the great American sociologist, we become
selves in our interaction with other selves. In other words, it's by seeing how other people
respond to the things that we say, that we cue in on who we are, we may adjust it and so on. I mean,
this seems to me at one level an obvious point, and this seems to me obvious, but you'd be surprised,
it's not obvious in philosophy. Now, the most controversial part of the early Habermas' work
is his claim that the human race has a third interest, and of course his whole argument
will hinge on this, and that's the critical interest in emancipation, that the human race
really has an interest that's fundamental. By that he means an interest that's so important that
we need it in order to survive, to free ourselves from both the distortions of instrumental reason
and the distortions of what could be called, and will later in his work be called, communicative
reason. We need to free ourselves from these distortions. In other words, for the human race
to survive, we need to learn to labor more humanely to the extent that we can manage that,
and in the focus of his early work, perhaps more important still, we need to be able to
communicate with one another freely and clearly, and without doing so, our chances of a long
survival are not great. So, throughout this work, you can see in a way that we have first the
reformulation of a kind of marxian side of the account of human beings in Habermas' labor part
of the distinction. Now, for his communication model, we have what I would call a hermeneutic
base for it. By hermeneutic here, again, I mean interpretive, and the philosopher he discusses
Diltai and others, where he says the great art of the humanities, if you will, the way they
further communication is through the interpretation of texts, and I'll be talking a lot today about
the interpretation of texts, because in the humanities, when you get right down to it,
that's what we do. Let me say it in a simple West Texas way. We read books. We read books.
We tell our students what they mean. This is what we do for a living, and so don't let hermeneutics
throw you because it's a big word. It means interpretation of texts. Now, don't think that
this is some fancy Dan academic exercise. A lot of people have died because they read a book the
wrong way. I want you to think of the history of the world's great religions. One could write a
book called The History of Heresies and retitle it to history of misreadings that led to death.
I don't mean to be cynical. It's just obvious that reading a book and interpreting a certain
way can get you in a lot of trouble. Similarly, those familiar with the law know that just any
reading of the Constitution won't work. I mean, Congress shall make no law prohibiting the free
exercise of religion, except if Rick decides me, if I decide I want to start a religion of my own
that includes slaughtering innocent babies with ostriches, in which case my reading of the Constitution
will lead me into deep trouble. I can support my reading. The Constitution says no law. It must
mean that. I'll be literal about it the way that some people are about the Bible. I'll go no law
means no law. So whatever my religion, be it baby slicing or whatever, but I'm afraid that that won't
be considered a reasonable reading. In fact, I'm sure of it and don't think that I'm suggesting
it as a possible religion to any of you out there in the world of video. I'm not.
So this is the field of interpretation, but this is not enough for Habermasists to have this field
of instrumental reason within which science and technology and human labor advanced the world
technologically. And this field of interpretation, where humanity advances itself through conversations
in an ethical and an aesthetic way, there's a third human interest. And this is, of course,
crucial to his argument because like Mark Hewser and Adorno and Marx and Freud and Nature and all
the people that I've discussed, Sartre, he has a fundamental interest in human liberation,
the liberation from unnecessary constraints to our freedom and to our full development.
So he wants to show where that interest lies and where does it come from? Well,
he looks around and he can find only one model and it's unsurprisingly Freud because in a way,
when you reformulate these things, you always sort of seem to fall back on the earlier models
in one way or another, updated, jazzed up in some way. So the model he uses for
a distorted communication, that corresponds to what Marx called ideology. Those remarks that
we make that reflect the interests of classes other than the ones we belong to. Those remarks
that we make that are shaped by that truism of Marx to me, which is that in every age,
the ruling ideas are the ideas of the ruling classes. That, to me, is just the truism. It's
not even a theory. I think any fair reading of philosophy will bear it out. In every age,
the ruling ideas are the ideas of the ruling classes. And if you read the Nicomatean ethics
by Aristotle, it has independent interest. But basically, it's a handbook on how good
Athenian gentlemen should be, good Athenian gentlemen. I mean, that's still interesting
because people today would probably be better off behaving that way. But what the hell, it still
shows the ruling interests and so on. Now, according to Habermas, what replaces ideology
in his model is what he calls systematically distorted communication.
He doesn't give me any examples. This is a really bad habit German philosophers have,
is to make complex arguments and then not give you a damn example once, so you're just lost
wondering, what is he talking about? Well, I think he has in mind blocks between communication
that, for example, you're having a trade union meeting. Let's do solidarity for an example.
That ought to tickle people in America, even though if we had an organization
like solidarity in America, it wouldn't tickle us. But since it's over in Poland, I think we can
praise it. Trade unions, one of the funniest things I ever remember is Reagan praising solidarity,
and then I thought, well, I wonder how he'd like a trade union that large in this country
with those kind of demands. I don't think he would have been praising it. But in any case,
let's talk about a dialogue among them, and it doesn't have to be other world. It could be
the kind of dialogue you could have among any trade union as well. It's a right to work state,
so we don't have a chance. Well, for Habermas, this falls under the model he wants of systematically
distorted communication, because sort of a flat statement, it cuts off debate, and debate needs
to go on. Moreover, it passes that famous test of ideology, and that's when you ask yourself if
what you believe is in the interest of other people for you to believe it. In other words, I
always suspect to believe if I hold it, and I go, well, you know, the very powerful would love for
me to believe that. Maybe I should rethink it, because I don't know exactly where all my ideas
come from. I haven't had many of them come from the people who control the means and the dissemination
of information and communication. Okay, so he looks for a model where systematically distorted
communication is overcome, and he finds it in Freud's practice of symptoms, of removing symptoms
in the situation between an analyst and a patient. And in that situation, what you get is not an
interpretation. In other words, the patient doesn't say something, and then Freud interpreted it,
right? The patient just babbles on and on and on and on and on. This is not a normal interpretive
situation. There are a couple of differences. Unlike trying to read a text, it's a situation
where the goal is practical. In other words, it's to cure the person, to make them stop having
the symptom. So it's got a practical goal, interpretation frequently will not. Another
difference that is very important for Habermas is that Freud succeeded, to a certain extent,
in developing a practice that did remove blocks to communication. You have your patient babbling
away, sort of the talking cure style of revolution is what we've got going here. You have your
patient babbling away. And the only way you can bring this analysis to a conclusion is when
the therapist intervenes, presents a possible interpretation, but it will not work until what
happens. Both parties agree to it. In other words, it won't be your analysis until you go,
yeah, I keep biting people because. And then you go, uh-huh. And when you're in the therapist's
degree, you have then all the sort of confirmation that your previous behavior and our communication
was distorted. It was distorted. Now, that's the model he wants to work with. And he thinks we
have an interest in removing these distortions to communication so that we can have what Sydney
Green Street calls in the multi-falcon, clear speaking and plain understanding. This is a
good, this is something civilization needs. Well, this forces him to another level of argument,
of course, because if what you want to remove as opposed to ideologies or if what you want to
counter or ideologies, if instead of that, you've reconstructed this as systematically
distorted communication, the next question someone may ask you is this. What in the devil
would undistorted communication look like? In other words, now you need some kind of account
of communication undistorted. The reason is that our communication is nearly always distorted.
If you ever noticed that, a little take a transcription of any conversation and you'll
notice there are gaps in it, miss spoken words, misunderstandings. The materiality of language
is filled with these anomalies and with these mistakes. And I even have to say, along the
Freudian dimension, certain sexual jokes and so on, many sort of what you would call distortions
of communication appear along other dimensions besides just the dimension that would reflect
on human labor, for example, many other dimensions you get to get distortions as well.
Habermas here, and this is a bold thing for him to do. I want to point this out in the late 20th
century. After all I told you that was going wrong and after what looked like the destruction of
reason itself in just, you know, in a society of subjects that have become kind of humanoids,
it is quite a valuable thing to try to defend human reason, you know, in any form. And he does
try to do so in this limited form. He wants to mark off a sphere of undistorted communication
that can serve as the basis for a concept of what he calls communicative rationality.
Now, before we get into that argument, I want to explain why he does that other than what I've
already said, other than the reasons internal to his early work. He wants to do it to untangle
the entwinement I talked about last time between enlightened thought and barbaric action that
we've seen since the history of modernity. In other words, we've seen on the one hand,
people making these individually monological instrumental decisions based on instrumental
reason leading to these horrible paradoxes. And for Habermas, the trick is not to give up on
modern life. It's not to fall beneath the level of civilization reached by capitalism. The trick
is to disentangle enlightenment from terror, mythology and barbarism. That clearly we haven't
succeeded in doing in the 20th century. That's why I spent a lot of time in the first four lectures
discussing or sometime discussing the experience of fascism and its effect on the earlier thinkers
we talked about. Because fascism was the proof that enlightenment and technology
had not led to the liberation of human beings as the great philosophers of the enlightenment
thought it would. Instead, it had led to dark hour and this was not its destination. Now,
this was not the destination that had been hoped for it. You know, the 19th century believed in
progress. Adorno once cynically remarked, there is no history that leads from slavery to freedom,
but there is a history that leads from the slingshot to the megaton bomb. So what Habermas wants to do
is to try to find a way to disentangle the more distorting, barbaric aspects of enlightenment
from those that we clearly want to hang on to. In Habermas's opinion, there have been advances
in modern life, and I don't think anybody would dispute this. The advances in modern life include
one, this simple. It is much better to have a toothache in 1993 than in 1493. That's simple.
Whenever anyone asks me about this, I go, well, there's one. In 1493, a toothache,
if it's bad, impacted, it's the end of your theoretical work. It may be the end of your life.
If you get one now, you go to a dentist. That's better. Not everything that modernity has produced
has been a disaster, obviously. I mean, this is an obvious point. So the trick then is, as it were,
not throw out the baby with the bathwater, not throw out the advances of modernity
when we are in the process of trying to clear up this distorted communication forms
and these distortions to people's ways of life. That's the trick.
So there's a lot riding on his argument concerning systematically distorted communication.
Well, Habermas holds, and this is the rationalist thesis, this is the enlightenment part,
that the sentences that we utter, even from an early age, have, as it were, built into them
the desire for consensus, for mutual understanding, that whether you consciously bring it to mind
or not, when you speak a sentence, it has built into it, if you're following my argument, built
into it the desire that you be understood by others.
In other words, it has the critical impulse already built into it, that impulse
that you communicate with that other person if they're from a different class, if they're
from a different gender, you know, I mean, this is difficult, men and women talking,
different class, different race, different ethnic group. When you utter a sentence, Habermas says,
built into that utterance, into that communication, as one of its conditions
is the desire for unconstrained understanding. Now you don't, when you say pass me the salt,
bring to mind a desire for universal unconstrained understanding, but he thinks it is built into
the structure of languages, the desire to understand one another, the desire to have
clear communication. He begins to lay out a series of conditions which
time will force me to just run through very quickly for such communication.
One, and this of course is what I like to call the equality provision,
under-started communication would have a symmetry condition.
Truly under-started communication would have a symmetry condition like this.
Everyone would have an equal opportunity to talk and to listen. Everyone
would have an equal opportunity to talk and to listen. Let me try to explain why this is more
politically interesting than it sounds. It means everyone has an equal right to command
as to obey. That's a speech act. That's a communicative act. It means everyone has an
equal right to question and to an answer. This symmetry condition has more political power
than it seems at first. It is a very egalitarian principle. Habermas believes that we couldn't
have under-started communication without it. Now again, he does it, but I'll try to give
examples to make it understandable. I know as a teacher that it's an important condition,
but it's impossible to achieve in a classroom under these current social conditions,
because I have the power to grade a child and give him an F and keep him out of law school,
even if his rich daddy sends me 500 letters. Because I have that power, I can't expect that
student and I to communicate in an under-started way, because our communication is distorted by
my power to judge what the student says. This is why the people who run operations, bosses, seldom
get the under-started truth about their situation. I also think, being a husband,
that it's why husbands seldom get the truth about the relationship they have with their
wives and their sons and their daughters and so on. Because when you're in a relative position of
power, the other person's aware of it too and of their role, and you cannot expect an under-started
communication, one not. Again, I don't mean personally, but systematically distorted.
This is systematically distorted. It's distorted by relations of unequal power.
If you're to be communicatively rational, everyone has to have the same right to speak
and be heard. I also need to give you a real-world example of that, and that would be something
like the great early meetings of solidarity. I mean, Lex Valesa recognized people, but anybody
could stick their hand up, union member or not. That was when they crossed the line into a total
revolution, and Lex Valesa, sure, he was recognizing people, but everyone had a right to do that,
and it wasn't always him either, even though that was what was presented in our media.
And that is, while not perfect, and we're not expecting the world ever to be perfect,
neither is Habermas, this is a model of communication that is what you would call
dialogic. You're dialoguing now, you're not monologuing. You may notice that this is based
on a quite ancient idea, a Socratic ideal. When Socrates argues with an interlocutor,
he never pulls the argument that, well, I'm more powerful than you, so you're wrong.
As a matter of fact, one of the charms of Socrates is that he owns almost nothing and has almost
no position, and the only force he expects you to recognize is the force that Habermas says
is the only force a free human being can ever recognize, and that is that peculiar, strange,
un-forced force of the better argument. Habermas believes that much in rationality,
that we can change our minds if we hear a better argument, and a free person can do that without
being ashamed of himself or herself. You know, if you're in a free and equal situation of communication
and someone convinces you through a better argument, you go, well, I now believe differently,
but not through distortion or anything, but through just that strange force that a person feels when
they become convinced. They go, oh gee, now I agree with that. That is the force that a free human
can recognize according to Habermas. Okay, another condition, and these are obvious conditions
that arise, I mean obvious, that each one can be disputed, and I will discuss philosophers later
today who dispute everything I'm saying now, but I want to present Habermas since this is one of
my main areas, I want to present his position as powerfully as I can. Habermas also thinks that
in various dimensions, we try to communicate in certain ways. For example, while we do occasionally
lie, it belongs to Habermas to the structure of, say, instrumental reason in the sciences that
when we contribute to a discussion on that topic about what's in the world, what entities there
are and how they behave, that we try to make our contribution to the conversation one that is true.
Now, this is the sort of linguistic reformulation of a Kantian postulate, but no, I mean in a way,
it's a piece of good advice. I mean, if I was to say, you know, how should you talk? Well, try to be
relevant. It's a relevancy conditional, you know, built into speech. This is how, I mean, this Habermas
gets some of this from grass, and I'm adding a little as I go along. Make your contribution to
the conversation relevant. So if you're at lack of a less as trade union meeting, don't start discussing
Harrison Ford's latest performance compared to Arnold Schwarzenegger, it's not relevant. So try to be
relevant, true. Try to make your contribution one that is true. Doesn't mean you will, but try to
make one that's true. Another condition built into this, what Habermas has now begun to call
the ideal speech situation. The ideal speech situation. Well, why ideal? Well, because he
realizes this is an idealization that human beings won't be able to fully carry this out. But to the
extent that we can, we will be engaging in communicative reason. Try to be relevant. Try to make
your contribution one that's true and see, and this is obvious to me too, try to make your
contribution one that's sincere. When I think about that, I always think about an article written
in philosophy that is a brilliant article that would be praised by all my colleagues, but it
ended with the sentence, oh, by the way, I'm only joking. In a way that one sentence would undo the
whole article. I mean, it would be like, no matter how good the article, someone would go, well,
what a joke. I mean, this guy's like, no. The idea here is that when you contribute to what's
called a reason conversation that we expect, humans expect a contribution to be a sincere
contribution. And let's see, the final one is a moral condition. And that's that we expect
that you try to make your contributions to language ones that advance the cause of what is right.
Now, there's no theory here of right other than the ones that you've just heard in the
communication theory itself. It would be wrong to be insincere. It would be wrong to lie. It would
be wrong to violate the symmetry condition. It would be wrong and so on. In fact, this is a quite
thin moral theory. But come to think of it when we tell our children, look, you ought to do this.
What stands behind our art is something implicit in language, namely, that our children can depend
on us, you know, sincerely telling them a moral truth. This is what before you earlier when I
said we don't learn moral theories from philosophers, I didn't mean in this sense,
Habermas is talking about because we do learn it in this sense. Habermas means that when mothers
tell their children or fathers don't lie, they mean it. It's not distorted. They mean don't lie
or don't whatever. This is the ethical, as it were, dimension of language.
Now, he doesn't want us to confuse these various spheres.
They all interplay in language. But for Habermas, and this is a tradition that goes back to Kant,
these each represent different practical areas. Science, morality, art, and even religion all
represent different value spheres. Each one will have certain conditions that will be much more
important in it than in others. In the scientific sphere, truth conditions will be most important.
In the ethical sphere, the conditions for what we ought to call rightness or how one ought to behave
will be most important. In the aesthetic sphere, sincerity conditions, Habermas says, are important,
mainly because he wants everything to fit. I'm not sure that's true about beauty or not. I'm not
sure we want the beautiful to also, our communication about it maybe shouldn't even be sincere,
shouldn't even be sincere. But these things need to fit. This is a
German theory that needs to fit. Okay. Well, it looks like we've replaced Marx now by ignoring
the economy, which wouldn't please any of the coal miners in West Virginia, tried to replace
it as a way of understanding ourselves in the world. And we have traded in the class struggle,
which marks it to be the driving force of history for Freud's talking cure.
Well, there are some obvious criticisms raised by young Turks like myself in the early phase of
his work, namely that the class struggle is not a psychoanalysis writ large. The reason it's not
is because workers have every reason to believe that their bosses are not prepared to engage in
a process of undistorted communication with them. Now, a patient may believe about his
analyst or her analyst that they're prepared to, especially at those rights, as Freud once said,
if you don't pay, you don't get better. But at those rights, you can expect some sincerity and
some give and take, but we have no reason to believe the class struggle is a kind of
psychoanalysis writ large or that the struggle of human beings over ethnicity or the struggle of
women to find dignity and equality is some kind of analytic process writ large. Habermas is aware
of these objections and responds to them in several ways. The one that bothers him the most is the
following, that his model is elitist, his model of communicative reason, which I have counterposed
to all these pathologies to which it is addressed. When I mentioned all those pathologies that the
young people I know have, and you know, anomy, in other words, meaninglessness and anxiety,
dread, so on, you mentioned all of those. Well, those are all systematic distortions of communication
that come out in the way they talk and interact and theories addressed at those. But here's the
problem. It's not just that this doesn't reconstruct Marxism, which is of little interest if it's
not a true and interesting theory of the present age. The deeper problem is that it looks like
an elitist theory. It looks like a theory that trades Marx's analysis of society as a giant
factory for an analysis by Habermas of society as a giant seminar room. Have you noticed how
all these conditions are the ones that ought to hold in the seminar? Everybody in a seminar should
be relevant, concise, sincere, and make their contributions true. And it's not lost on any of
Habermas's critics that he's spent his whole adult life as a professor. So this is, now,
I don't want to just stomp on him with one of these West Texas ad hominem arguments here. Habermas
responds in a way quite livingly to this objection. He says, you have missed the point because what
I'm talking about in communicative rationality is a process of enlightenment that includes all.
Janitors, cooks, everybody includes this. It includes everyone. So we've missed its
universality. But more importantly, and I think this is a beautiful quotation from Habermas,
he says, in a process of enlightenment, there can only be participants.
No analyst and patient. So in that way, the model was misleading originally. No
Lex Valesa and the lead. No Clinton and the Clintonians. No Ross Perot and United We Stand America.
In a true process of enlightenment, there can only be participants.
Now that stated that way, Habermas's communication theory looks like a linguistic variant of
anarchism and I like it because it means that everybody gets a chance to talk. I enjoy that.
So now let me, in the time remaining to me here, let me move a little further along to
how he's reformulated the theory. And he's had to under the force of various objections.
And they've come from all kinds of people. I gave you the Marxist style objections,
but hermeneutic or interpretive people in the humanities didn't like his account of the humanities
as limited either. In other words, they didn't like that account as it limited to a single interest
because they pointed out something that's come up in here several times. And that's that the
sciences are also interpretive. And they went, look, the work of interpretation isn't just for us
humanists, but everybody interprets. I mean, it was Galileo that said that the world was like
this giant text and mathematics was its language. Well, the analogy of the world as a text is one
that's very familiar to scientists to read as it were and interpret is not something that's
limited to books alone. Interpretation, in fact, may be one of the fundamental conditions
for selfhood. One of the problems in the current situation, with what I have called previously,
information overload and complexity, may be the difficulty that gives us an interpreting
everyday life situations. Because everyone, whether they know it or not, is always already
an interpreter. When you stop at a stop sign, you've interpreted something already. Now you've
done that without too much interpretive work. Red, in our country, means not only commie,
it also means stop. Red means commie to me, commie anarchist hippie type scum, but it also,
when it's a light, means stop. Acts of interpretation go on constantly, all around us,
in all forms of conversation. As it were, in our encounter with the world itself,
we see some smoke down the road. We have to interpret, is it a wreck? Do I need to go another
way? People who've lived together a long time and think they know each other well are still
constant interpreters. My wife will see a certain look on my face, and it's interpreted, and I
don't think correctly, but she just goes, and then we're off on something. This shows the
ubiquity of interpretation in human life. In a certain way, one of the characteristics of what
the self is, and one of the reasons it's under siege, is we're interpretive beings, and now,
by the late 20th century, we're in a situation where interpretation has never been more difficult,
never been more difficult. I can name artifacts that we've developed technologically
that are almost completely close to interpretation, and I'll name one, although we attempt to
interpret it, television. Television tries to interpret itself to us, bypassing the upper
brain functions and directly feeding into our minds. This is why I said off-camera between classes
that Arwell was a pod optimist. 1984 arrived in sort of the early 70s, and Arwell's vision of
a horrible future, which was a boot stomping on a human face forever, is a utopian image,
because he assumed there would be resistance and human faces, both of which may turn out to be false.
So, I mean, 1984 is not a book that scares me anymore. I mean, it's, again, I know that last
time I outrageously said that Herbert Marchesa was the Norman Vincent Peale of the 60s, and now,
this time, I've been forced to say that Arwell was an optimist, you know, a sort of my corollary
to his little cautionary tale. Well, in the face of all this, I think that the tribute I want to
pay to Habermas and what interested me about Habermas's work was to try to defend reason
in spite of all of these things that I've said. You may notice that I gave an account of cynical
reason, but I didn't give you an account of how I might stand vis-a-vis it, and I've said a lot of
cynical things. Well, what I admire in Habermas is the attempt, without being a complete idiot,
to try to develop an account of reason that runs against cynical reason. It does say to us,
we can speak to one another, we can have processes of enlightenment, we can learn to say what is
true to one another. Now, it is true that this is endangered in ways that he didn't discuss in
his early work, which he does in his later. His later work, especially a very large book called
Theories of Communicative Action, Habermas once again returns to the attempt of defending
this idea of communicative reason, and he adds many more problems to it.
First, he recognizes something that I've already pointed out, which I think he always
recognized, but he, again, in typically German intellectual fashion, he needed time to write
a 4,000 page book on it. In my book, when I gave an account of his book, I did it in 31 pages,
and people said, well, that's too short, and I went, no, his is too long. But he realizes,
by the time of his mature work, that money and power as abstract systems to start our
everyday life in the ways we talk, and that those systems will have to be, as it were,
harmonized before we'll be in a position within which it will really be possible
to speak to one another face to face, and I hate to be quasi-theological, but perhaps if we could
do that, then we wouldn't see through a glass darkly. Maybe then we would have a way to find our
way out of this dilemma, which I have called this terrible entwinement of enlightenment and terror,
barbarism, and myth. And if nothing else, Habermas' project offers us one powerful voice
that argues that such a possibility exists. And so for that, if nothing else,
I think he deserves a lot of credit. Thank you very much. That's Habermas in a nutshell, very short.
Thank you.
