Lecture 8 Fatal Strategies
In the final lecture on the Self Under Siege, we will discuss the work of Jean Baudrillard,
a French social theorist, actually that now is a misnomer since one of Baudrillard's
thesis is the disappearance of the social. Baudrillard is perhaps the most important
theorist that can be characterized as postmodern. And I have spent a lot of time, in fact, in
a previous lecture series discussing the postmodern. I'm going to give a very brief
characterization of it and then discuss Baudrillard's relationship to it. The self under siege
in modernity has always presumed that there was a self to be under siege. But in the view
of Baudrillard, society has reached a point at which it has literally been overcome by
its technology and the new and important issues aren't about things like the non-believer
or the non-offender, but about the non-person. In the world of Baudrillard, social relations
have disappeared between humans because humans have begun to disappear. In fact, Baudrillard
thinks that reality itself is in the process of disappearing, the real. What has been learned
and understood under the name of the real. All these outrageous things I've just said
are worked out in a brilliant series of books which draw a lot of their power from many
of the phenomenon we see around us. So one way to discuss Baudrillard is to run through
some of these phenomena. What Baudrillard is doing is basically to trace the symptoms
and tendencies of the trajectory of the postmodern. If we were really in a postmodern society,
we wouldn't still be discussing things like the self under siege or the real. They would
simply have disappeared. There we would be in a way transparently communicating one
with another, as in an earlier example when I talked about the stock market crashing due
to the computer rationality. Well, if we had really reached the postmodern in its fullest
sense the way Baudrillard uses it, it would be the computers unplugging us and not the
reverse. The postmodern is a blurring of the lines between human beings and machines, a
blurring of the line between reality and image. It is a society or I can't even really use
that word anymore. It is a world, if you will, a grouping of the world in which reality is
simply that which can be simulated, Xeroxed, copied. That is one of his first theses.
The book calls simulations. It is a very interesting thesis. Baudrillard argues that this process
is one of the central things that has changed us fundamentally and has helped to bring our
relations as humans to a close. In a way, Baudrillard sees himself as a post-apocalyptic
writer. For Baudrillard, the apocalypse has already occurred. It wasn't religious or anything.
It was not atomic bombs. At some point in the development of technology, human beings
cease to be the reason of things and things took on their own reasons, technological things.
Let me describe this concept of simulation just a little bit though. Baudrillard's definition
of the real itself is that which can be simulated, Xeroxed, and copied. Whether you are talking
about a human body where you can make a holograph of it, or you are talking about the Bible
which you can Xerox, or whether you are talking about the sexual act which can be simulated
either through repetitive pornographic films or in a very near future, it will be able
to be simulated with virtual reality where you will wear a full body suit and make love
to your ego ideal, thus making it pointless to search out all the Freudian implications.
You can just pick your ego ideal, punch it into the laser beam program, slip into the
virtual reality suit, thus rendering that relation, even that intimate relation, sexual
relation, technological, simulatable, reproducible to infinity. Now all this sounds wild, crazy,
and I don't want it to sound wild and crazy. I want it to sound the way that I think that
it really should sound. And that is as though we could place ourselves, and I have used
this analogy before but I will again, as though we could place ourselves in that era right
before the atomic energy and television, before we knew all the myriad changes that
they would make in the way that we were and the way we interact and so on. We are in a
period now where I have already mentioned, and these are the phenomena that Baudrillard
examines with the most care, in incredible information overloads, with information moving
at incredible speed. And even to the youngest children, I talked about how children used
to learn morality from their parents and now I think that Super Mario Brothers, they spend
much more time with Super Mario Brothers and are much more like emotionally involved
with Nintendo than they are with their aunts, their uncles, their mothers and their fathers.
I asked one of my children, why are you yelling at a machine when he began to bang his Nintendo
and he looked at me as though I were a being from another world. And because of that, there
is a postmodern trajectory. I am from another world. I'm still as it were caught in the
modern. He's not. Why not be emotional with a machine? His peers are machine like. We've
already discussed that. I mean, in fact, what he sees on the Nintendo screen is his thrill
of the day. That's the most active he's seen any simulated image that day. Now, simulation
in this society didn't just come from nowhere, the society of simulations and of spectacles.
Baudrillard actually builds his work on a foundation, again, that comes out of the Marxist tradition.
Gade the Board wrote a book in the sixties called The Society of the Spectacle. And what
it was about was about how when capitalism reached a certain level of accumulation, commodities
began to detach themselves and become images. And citizens who formerly had played roles
as political actors began to detach themselves from their own lives and become spectators.
So, for example, you could say, well, instead of like going to a family reunion now, we'll
just rent, you know, a Steve Martin father of the Bride movie. It's just as good and
so on. And you meet the same cookie characters that you actually know. Their behavior is
all simulatable. Another similar, and this is going to sound cynical, but I don't want
it to. I mean, Baudrillard has visited our country and we went to Disneyland and Epcot
Center in these various parks. He said, well, this is much better than Europe. The food's
better than Europe. It's a short walk between France and Germany land. You know, you don't
have to go through all those, deal with all those nasty waiters. Everyone's so polite.
The simulation has outrun the so-called reality. That concept in Baudrillard, he calls the
hyperreal. Hyperreality is more real than real. This is actually, if some of this sounds
like advertising slogans, good. Because in Baudrillard, the heritage of philosophy and
social theory has passed over into advertising and television. So if it sounds superficial,
good. Because the theory, the world that he looks at has become superficial and banal.
If it sounds hokey like a salesman's pitch, good. The world he describes is the world
of Jurassic Park, not of Dante. So that is all evidence on the side of Baudrillard if
you follow the argument deep enough and with enough clarity. Okay, let me explain the hyperreality.
This is an important concept in Baudrillard. In Baudrillard, we've already said reality
is simply that which can be simulated. Can't be simulated, not real. But more real than
real is a reality. And I guess I could give you, again, I hate to use these movie examples
if you haven't seen the movies, but in A Clockwork Orange, there's a great line that
anticipates the postmodern. When the character played by Malcolm McDowell says, it's funny
how blood isn't really blood until you vid it on the screen, until you see it on the
movie screen. In real life, it looks kind of brown and mucky. On the screen, it looks
more real than real blood. And this sense of the sort of hyperreality we get with cinema,
we get with television and so on, is another phenomenon Baudrillard wants to examine. And
I think that here we get, and I mean, I guess my politics are showing again, but here we
get the phenomenon of Reagan, the hyperreal president, more real than real. I mean, he's
better at being Harry Truman than Harry Truman. I mean, the distinction about what he is
is lost in the hyperreality of his smile, which like the Cheshire cats just gleams across
his face. And we get for the first time a phenomenon never known in polling, which is
the phenomenon of not liking a person, but of liking, liking a person. This is a sign
you're dealing with the hyperreal. Let me go over that again. Reagan's popularity was
popular. When you went through the various traits of Reagan and what Reagan stood for
and his policies and so on, vast numbers of people disliked all of them. What was popular
was his popularity. And I don't think that Reagan's alone in this show, business figures
have the same thing go on for years. I can't remember the last Michael Jackson song that
I even listened to, or my kids who also don't like Michael Jackson, but he's popular, but
not in the old sense. It is a hyper popularity, if you follow me. It is popular that he's
popular. Madonna has learned to live and create herself on the curve of the postmodern by
making it her goal to be more popular than popular. By having her popularity, the topic
of popularity. I mean, we've found out that she can't particularly act or sing. She's
not built well enough to be a true cybernetic sex symbol for this period, and yet she manages
because of her understanding of this situation that Baudrillard calls the hyperreal to stay
on this curve of popularity. Hyperreality, of course, affects us across many different
spectrums. And it's built on the real. It is not as though the hyperreal could get by
without injections of reality in it. It requires, and this is not a principle from Baudrillard,
but one that I have realized from watching a lot of television, you have to have injections
of reality in order to keep the images afloat occasionally. In fact, one of the new strategies
adopted by television, and it serves two functions. One is a cost function, are these reality shows.
They've realized that we've become, as it were, too intoxicated with hyperreality, with
you know, Kojak and super cops and so on. So now we just have shows like Cops. You just
go to Fort Worth and film a bunch of cops being cops. That serves a good intelligent economic
interest because you don't pay cops much just for being cops. It's not that lucrative.
And it injects, well, is it reality? Well, it is compared only to this scale of hyperreality
and only under the sign of being whatever can be simulated. We have just had our first
simulated trial. Not our first, but the first televised one that caused the riot, Rodney
King, where the events are videotaped, the trial is shown on television, the effects
are all televised, and how anyone can find themselves around in these new phenomenon
and pretend that nothing new has happened, that frustrates both Baudrillard and myself.
I mean, he's not right about everything, but clearly something's different when we're
in a world like that one, like this one. Clearly something significant has changed, and it
has affected the very nature of what selves are, what humans are, what subjects are. When
I talked about how my students had no dreams, I mean, what is there left to dream? When
I was a kid, I dreamed about dinosaurs. I had a little Walt Disney dinosaur book. Why would
I need to dream about dinosaurs now? Steven Spielberg has made them. He's filmed them.
They're more real than real dinosaurs. They're hyperreal. You would be disappointed if you
saw real Tyrannosaurus rex after the movie. You would be disappointed. It wouldn't be
as noisy, as scary, or as frightening. Same is true of Jaws. I've actually copped some
rather large sharks. I like to fish, you know, pier fish. So I've caught a few sharks. I'm
fairly good size. But those real experiences are so boring compared to Jaws. I mean, Jaws
is a hyperreal experience. And the only way, I mean, there's no systematic way to discuss
Baudrillard because these things are not systematic. These are the shifting contingent ways in
which cultures change, and the people who draw their meanings from them change as the
cultures change. So all we can do here is point to certain exemplary phenomena. So let
me pick out some more. We've discussed hyperreality and simulations. Let me move on.
Baudrillard wrote a wonderful piece about the Gulf War. The name of the piece was The
Enemy Has Disappeared. I don't want you to think that I believe what I'm about to say
is my own position. I'm just giving you Baudrillard's because I don't think the Gulf War was planned
as deeply as he does in the regards that he thought it was. Baudrillard was offered a
job by a French newspaper to cover the war. So of course he agreed on condition he not
go to the Gulf because he wanted to cover it on CNN where it would really happen. Follow
me. I mean, the war would really, who won or lost would be told to us on CNN. We won't
know who won or lost anywhere else. So he, to cover the war in the sense of hyperreality,
the way to cover it, is sitting in one's flat in Paris on CNN. That's how he covered the
war. His thesis runs as such. He took the Gulf War very seriously. Baudrillard states
that war is real if anything is. I think that's a powerful quote. If anything is real, war
is. I mean, it sounds pessimistic, but if there's something we can still attach reality and
meaning to it, it's not. War, one would wonder what it was because it is just an incredible
human event filled with passion, pain, suffering, madness and all that. If it's not real, what
is? If anything at all would be, it would be war. According to Baudrillard's reading
of the war, America, as for Baudrillard, the leading society culturally in the world, the
one that leads the cultural trajectory of the world through television, movies and so on,
the war that we fought in the Gulf was not directed against the enemy. I mean, as it
turned out, the enemy was left not much different than we found them. It was not directed against
any enemy at all. The enemy just appeared in the show business. The war was directed
against reality. The war was to show us that even war isn't real. The war was to kill the
Vietnam syndrome, a war that we remember as real is a real war. So the way to kill that
memory, according to Baudrillard, is to fight a hyper real war, complete with evening shots
of shrapnel falling into Israel, which it turned out a lot of the shrapnel was from the
Patriots that were fired up into the sky. The scuds were, after all, a bad Russian technology,
which isn't good technology, and the technology that we had sold them wasn't our best. To
the extent that there was some reality to the war, it was no more complex than the reason
that the British won a battle in the 12th century because their bow and arrows would
shoot further than the other guys so they could stand further back. The real part of
the war may have been along those dimensions, but the hyper real part was to watch the nightly
scud watch, the scud explosions on TV, and it's hard to even evoke that, the feeling
of togetherness the American people had in the glow of the television set, watching,
and I mean even the names are straight out of Steven Spielberg, Patriot missiles, blowing
up scuds. I mean the poetry of the hyper real is something, I mean Walt Disney wouldn't
do something that hokey, Patriots versus scuds. I mean that's worse than Darth Vader or something.
So the Patriots would blow up the scuds. Of course later we found out, according to the
Israeli military, that there were only one or two confirmed hits. CNN, of course, showed
those over and over and over again to us so that as we watched the war, since those hits
could be simulated, the hyper real feeling of continuing victory and success of our technology
was reinforced daily, capped off by the moral equivalent of a sportscaster's comment at
the end of a game every night when the military people would get out and roll out the scorecard
for the day. Very much like we do after the Bulls and Phoenix play and we come out and
sort of like the U.S. is Michael Jordan and the other side is Barclay and Michael scored
55 Patriot missile shots and the other side 28 and we won against the third best team
in the world, the third largest army. Well by the end of the article I was wondering
I was going, you know, that's just way too cynical even for me. I can't buy that argument.
And then I began to think about what the war looked like on TV and a comment then I just
had to start trying to find people who had been in the war. And sure enough I found someone
in Durham who had been, you know, a lot of North Carolina people go to the war. I found
a young pilot and he said, oh, no, it was very exciting. And then he went on to explain
to me how the sights that they used in order to, you know, fire their smart bombs were
just like the games in the arcade that he grew up with. He said, you know, no way in
the world could he have had better practice than he got in those arcades to fire his
smart bombs. I mean, it had passed him by that the real had happened even though he
was really there. I talked to a woman who had been on the ground in a jeep for most
of it. And she went, oh, the desert's so big and the cyan. She said, but I really didn't
get a feel for it till I got home and saw what my husband had typed. Why? Because the
little individual actors sink into insignificance compared to the damn spectacle of the thing,
the spectacle of it. I mean, when humans were less important than God, we could understand
because he built everything. When we're less important than a Nintendo, we get confused.
That's when we start thinking we're under siege. It's when Billy says, oh yes, you can
kill mom and dad, but leave the Nintendo. Then we're rightfully upset. The postmodern
trajectory leaves us in a situation where drawing the line between the real and the
unreal is no longer merely philosophical, but a practical day to day issue. See, this
is what I want to drive home. We're not off in some fairy land. This is a practical day
to day issue of figuring out what's the simulation and what's not. Is this guy really an insurance
salesman or is he here to rob me? I mean, this is no longer cartesian doubt that one
has to conjure up in a meditation. This is a wide radical doubt about the very ground
beneath our feet and the nature of whether it's real or not. Budriard says it's best
at this point to simply face it that what we are witnessing is the end of the world,
the end of human beings, and he thinks that there's no reason to be sad or upset or cynical
about it. In fact, Budriard calls it the ecstasy of communication. I mean, I tried to do this
in a kind of ironic way. I don't know how one presents this kind of material. I suggest
you read books by this person. I brought one called Fatal Strategies about things one might
do under such conditions. But anyway, he thinks that rather than just being occasioned for
some deep gloom, the ecstasy of communication means that we should go ahead and realize
that America has won the Cold War. America is utopia realized. This is the country everyone
dreamed of. It is, of course, with all that we know that goes along with it now, it turns
out to be like all utopias, sadly disappointing. But weren't they always, weren't they always
every utopia in some sense boring and sadly disappointing? Well, Budriard says, no, we
have to, in spite of this, we have to look upon the end of man, the world, and so on
as an opportunity. Because what were these concepts anyway, like man and world, except
concepts by which the world was regulated, policed, mapped and controlled, all four of
which are becoming more and more difficult to do under this situation of rapidly increasing
complexity, which I've mentioned many times, and I mean system complexity at every level,
increasing information technologies and invasions directly into the human body that interface
it with machines that goes all the way from plastic surgery to artificial hearts and implants
to virtual reality where we'll be able to make a person who can't walk feel as though
he can walk or she can walk. I mean this is not a technology I dreamed up. They're trying
now to develop cheap marketable versions of this, as I speak here right now. So Budriard
doesn't want us to go, oh it's the end of the world's apocalypse. No, it's too late
for that, it's already happened. If you wanted to moan, it was sort of like the moaning curve
is past now, and it's time to try to sort of readjust to the flows in some way. And
Budriard suggests a whole series of what he calls fatal strategies by which we might be
able to protect what he calls our fractal cells. If you know what fractals look like
in geometry, little reproduced pictures out like this is one way to think of it. Our fractals,
our fractal cells split reproducible. We have life changes now and they've become not changes
in our life. For example, to show you the distance that we've traveled. Not like Augustine's
conversion to Christianity when he hears, or thinks he hears the voice of God saying
Tolle, lege, take, read, and he reads the scripture and becomes a Christian, and then
he's a new man. He's born again. No, no, no, that's over now. Now we change, alright.
We change rapidly. We change, as I said, professions six or seven or eight times, and we change
who and what we are the way we used to change our clothes in our fashion. There are kids
now who get to college and there are six different people before their junior year. Two months
as a Bohemian, two months as a pre-med student, two months as a preppy, two months as a poet,
a month and a half as a journalist, a month and a half as an ecologist, and all the requisite
uniforms for it. None of it felt, none of it part of affect. A fad, a personality formed
as a fad, as a fashion, as an ornament. I mean, this really doesn't overstate the case
for me. Well, one of the sensations this produces is not the sensations of existentialism like
dread, despair, and those, but it produces new sensations. Ecstasy is one of them. I mean,
you go to see Jurassic Park or an Arnold Schwarzenegger movie for the ecstasy of communication.
By that I mean for the pure neural thrill. Wow, a T-rex, oh, a raptor, and it just runs
through you raptors T-rexes or Arnold just beats up people that, you know, you view as bad or coded
as bad by the society, and there's this visceral ecstatic feel like when you get your first facts.
I mean, this is, in the old days, your first facts, if you will permit me a slight vulgarity,
was when you lost your virginity. Now it still is, except now we mean facts, and you know,
coming out like this, and it's, people tell little secret stories about it, when did you
first facts? That's a different world. You know, if you're a facts virgin, you won't be,
you won't understand it. You haven't lived. Yeah, that's this common story. Faxing has
replaced a lot of things. Just fax it to me. No, anyway, so ecstasy is one emotion that's
produced by it, but don't think that it's the ecstasy of the sublime that Schiller talked about
when one sees either a beautiful landscape or of the other feeling of the sublime that one might
associate with standing before the pietà or the devide or something like that. It's not that kind
of ecstasy. It's more visceral. It's more direct. It's more like the ecstasy that your children feel
when they beat, you know, the worst monster at the highest level of Link 2, you know, one of those
new video games. They beat the big monster, and there's just a visceral, neural thrill of ecstasy.
What this may cause in some of the older generation like myself, I've already admitted that I'm still
modern. I'm just trying to trace out the postmodern trajectory and look at it. I mean, my kids will
have to live in more of it than I will ever see, so I'm trying to understand it and think about it
as much as I can. And a sense you get is one that resembles Vertigo. How many of you have seen
Vertigo, the Great Alfred Hitchcock movie? You know, that sort of sickly sense that you're twisting
above sort of abysmally too much of something. This seems to me a fine sort of mood characterization
for the postmodern trajectory. A sense of Vertigo before all this information.
Well, if DC is like the ones that I have just described that Baudrillard holes are true,
but of course the word true will no longer apply, because we'll be in a setting in which you won't
want the true, you'll want the truer than true. You won't even, the false won't even be a good
enough lie for you. You'll want the lie better than a lie. I mean, the truer than true explanation,
you won't just want Oliver Stone's film about JFK. You'll want the film about how Oliver Stone
himself participated in the plot to cover up the real assassins by making the film JFK.
He wants the truth about the truth, about the truth, and all the way down,
interminably Vertigo. That's the sense you get looking down that chain of bizarre stories.
And I think that the way people deal with this is interesting. They deal with it as a
form of complexity, a word I've used probably too many times. It makes them people caught in this
cusp between an old world and an old paradigm that is dying and a new one that it cannot really
yet be born, and we find ourselves in that space. And it draws us to people like Ross Perot who say
it's just that simple. It's just that simple. It's just that simple. That's the most powerful
political rhetoric in a world with a postmodern trajectory. God, how we would love it if someone
could tell us anything was just that simple. And then of course when you see a pie chart,
you know, oh, a pie chart. I mean, it has more religious meaning now than a crucifix to see
a pie chart. Because why is that so popular? Because it reduces complexity. The complexity
is very real, but his little sound bites, his little conversations with Larry King
helped to reduce that complexity. And they put another message in there. Now, I know it's real
complicated, but we can fix it. Americans have always fixed it. We can fix it. Well,
if Bodriard's right, we fixed it all right. We fixed it all the way up and down.
And I mean, you know, we see other people engaging in the same sort of attempting to reduce
complexity. I mean, the political parties to the extent that they existed all anymore is anything
other than fundraising devices, which I don't know. I don't think they have any ideologies,
because in a postmodern situation, who would have an ideology except just as a momentary thing,
like your week is a communist by Susie Saint Pierre at Duke. My week is a Trotskyist.
My week is a Buddhist. My two weeks as a follower of the cult of Elvis. I mean,
these are papers that you could legitimately expect people to write if they still read or wrote.
Not many people still do either read or write much. But in any case, reduction of complexity.
Let's look at the political parties for a moment. The Republicans with their great traditions have
come up with a slogan of incredible sophistication, no more than spent. Now, any of you who can
quack that one out could be a Republican. And I'm using that in the Orwellian sense of quack.
You don't need to engage higher brain functions. All you have to do is say,
don't take my money and don't spend it. Well, except on me and my friends, but don't access them.
Now, it's not the Democrats doing any better. I don't guess that's news. I mean,
Clinton is now less popular than Castro. If Castro ran against Clinton, Clinton would lose by a few
points. I mean, he wouldn't lose big, but he'd lose, you know, by a few points. I mean, especially
in a three-person race with Clinton, Castro, Perot, and Gaddafi. I mean, I don't know who would win.
In fact, given this postmodern world, any one of the four could emerge with the biggest one-fourth,
depending on how they ran the campaign. Probably it would depend on who could hire David Gergen.
You know, I mean, if Fidel got to Gergen first, he might win the damn thing. We don't know.
But the Democrats response this tax and spend is, no, we don't. Nah, nah, nah, nah, nah, invest.
This is political debate and a democracy. No, it's not. It's the simulation of politics.
Ross Perot is not leading a movement. It is a simulation of a movement. Follow me. This is not
a populist revolt. Ross Perot is not Teddy Roosevelt. This is a simulation. Now, am I putting it down?
No. In some ways, Ross Perot is paradigmatically more real than real. He is hyperreal. As opposed to
Reagan, he really was a businessman that made millions. You know, I mean, a whole bunch of
billions, I think, affair in Ross's case. And so on. I mean, so in a way, there is more reality to it.
In any case, the current political structures are way behind this curve. They don't understand it
well at all in spite of all the talk about the selling of the president. That's very old-fashioned.
We all have lived with advertising for years. What we haven't lived with are ads that have
more narrative structure and meaning than the programs. I'll mention a few of those,
because I think they're interesting. The current McDonald's ads that kind of tell a part of your
life story in like a two and a half minute ad. It's like, from when you get married,
when you have your grandkids, when you die, you get that two and a half minutes. And then there's
a McDonald's thing like, good, I was born, I had kids, I died. In the meantime, I got a Big Mac.
I mean, this is sort of gone with the wind condensed into a short version. It's fast,
it's hyperreal. And in the meantime, you at least got a Big Mac. And you never will have to be hungry
again, you know, reproduced to infinity over and over on videotape, change the laser disk.
You can watch Scarlett O'Hara say that a million times. If we had the technology right now to do
it, we could just have Scarlett back there screaming about terror while I'm doing this.
In any case, if Baudrillard is even onto something, what the postmodern trajectory means,
is that the self is not under siege. It's lost. It's just lost. And if that's true,
then all of the strategies by which ordinary people try to live decent good lives are lost
along with it. I'm not necessarily going to buy that right away. I'm really not. I do think that
the new technologies are going to call forth. I mean, this is why the title of this course
has been the self under siege. If I didn't think it was a real, virulent technological siege and
just some thought up philosopher's dream, this would not have interested me. I mean, I have no
interest in that. I mean, what I am interested in is what is changing the lives of my children and
your children and so on. What will shape culture and what we used to call society, culture and
history. That's what I am interested in. If it is the end of the world, I want to know so my kids
and I can enjoy the apocalypse together. If America is utopia realized and I maybe I'll just settle
back and go to Epcot Center and forget Switzerland. Just go on the Swiss ride. This may be what I'll
do. I doubt it. I don't like it. The war zone, in other words, may not be in defending the
self, may not be any one of the classical ones, like the working class versus the ruling class,
the slaves against the masters, oppressed women against patriarchal society,
blacks against whites, knows the struggle in the future may be
to maintain the real against the unreal or the hyper real or the irreal.
The desire for experience, and this is, I'm trying to kind of be upbeat about the situation
that we're in, the desire for experience is also the experience for, is also a desire for
kind of experience. What I mean by that is this, that even in these rather, you know,
the rather hopeless picture I painted of the young, there remains something like a curiosity
about what experience would be like if I could have one.
And there is an absolute extremism everywhere about how far people will go to try to have a
genuine experience. If I can still use the word genuine, you see, because again, the language
has been polluted by this very movement that I've been describing. Let's say genuine, you'll think
about a genuine beer or genuine boots or genuine, you know, cowboy hat or whatever. No, a genuine
experience, an authentic experience, a real experience. The battle lines may be between
anonymous forces that have been unleashed by a technology that grew out of capital
that will be controlled in the hands of not many people, perhaps, perhaps not. I mean,
we don't know. And people who still would like to have some experience. This wouldn't make them
archaic old buddy-duddies if they said, hey, look, honey, why not tonight? Why don't we really make
love, the two of us, instead of getting in our virtual reality sex machines? That may become
a revolutionary move in the near future. It may be. It may become interesting if a candidate
runs for an office and actually believes one thing. Well, that'd be an incredible new politics.
You know, everybody in America wants a new politics. We'll go out and find somebody that
believes one damn thing and running for something. You'll have a new politics. I mean, that's the
deficit of experience that hasn't been sucked into this system of images and so on. Now,
this sounds extreme, but think of how we're socialized. All of us continually bombarded with images
from magazines, TVs, newspapers, videotapes. I'm not unaware of where I am. I'm in
the circuit too now. By the way, for a moment, a fellow Baudrillard's advice, he wrote a very
cute book called Forget Baudrillard, which meant this stuff is not theoretical. It's happening
all around you, so forget Baudrillard. He also wrote a book called Forget Foucault, where he
talks about how it's the spectacle of the prison more than the prison that frightens us now. In
other words, it's rap music with it. I'm going to kill you stuff that really scares you. You very
seldom ever see a black person. We mostly stay away from them. So don't see many of them. So
they're sort of like their music that scares us by giving us a projection of street life itself
that parades as real, but actually it's more real than real. I've been in Compton. They don't have
a drive every two minutes. That's not true. Not that I could prove it, because we have these
images of hyper-reality. Well, this calls for fatal strategies. According to Baudrillard,
we have to adopt fatal strategies here, fatal strategies, extremes. We have to learn to live
with complexity, uncertainty, and a certain amount of vertigo. We just have to do that. We don't have
any choice. I mean, we only have the dinosaur choice. That's what you kind of wander off into the
ice caps and sort of fall away. And I also think that we have to be wary of the over-quick reduction
of complexity. If some of this lecture seemed a little weird or to go a little too far, it's
because I don't want to reduce quite all of this to slogans. On the other hand, I don't want it to
not be funny, because part of the postmodern trajectory itself is a rather humorous joke on
the human race, which labored for millennia to reduce working hours in order to produce leisure,
so we could enjoy this very leisure that then turns in a kind of vengeful act against us,
absorbing our leisure time, which was to be our living time, into time now spent in the service
of what can only be called this inhuman spectacle. I mean, it's a very bizarre and twisted fate to
which postmodernity has led us. So I would be wary of simple answers to this. One way to follow
it without, to follow some of these developments without reading Baudrillard is to follow cyberpunk
artifacts, movies like Blade Runner, and also places which you're likely to show up in anyway.
Look at the latest malls and how the tracks are designed in them. The little paths. I mean,
you can't walk just anywhere in a mall, now can you? No, I mean, they're little pathways, tracks.
Look at the, go to Atlanta and see a hotel that gleams like a glistening palace and all this.
Well, before I get too carried away with all these phenomena, which you can see around you every day,
you've got to remember that even in that hotel in Atlanta, in the winter, the poor still crawl in
the postmodern cracks and sleep at night. So I mean, it is not as though that turning the world as
it were hyperreal has somehow done anything other than make our situation more extreme vis-a-vis
those people who have fallen as it were out of the loop altogether. There is in this country now
the most alarming lack of sympathy for those people who've fallen off the boat, if you know what I mean.
People who've somehow slipped off the track. I mean, I'm not sure they want a lot of sympathy,
but if they did, there'd be an alarming short supply of it. And I think part of that is because
they add still further to the complexity. When I've talked about the postmodern in the way
Baudrillard does as a trajectory, I see it as an emergent aspect of our culture. Our culture is
still dominantly modernist, rationalized, capitalist, and so on. And to even make things more complex,
thirdly, there are residual elements in our culture left over from earlier periods, for example,
patriarchy, left over from a past as ancient, perhaps as the species. Well, I don't know how
much further we can go down this road, but in any case, the road according to Baudrillard is
an endless set of what will it be fatal strategies to use his new title. And all we can do is wait
and see what will happen. If nothing does, in the sense of the real, Baudrillard will have a kind
of confirmation. It's my hope that he will be disconfirmed on the simple grounds that wherever we
find power, even the power of the hyperreal, we find counterpower. And where we see an image
that reproduces us as inhuman, occasionally we see an image that somehow has the bizarre transcendent
power to make us slightly more human again. But it's along that terrain, I think, that the battles
and the struggles the self will fight with itself will be fought in the future. Thank you very much.
I'm Tom Rollins, president of The Teaching Company. We hope you've enjoyed the lectures on
these tapes. To order more courses or to receive a copy of our most recent catalog,
call 1-800-TEACH-1-2. That's 1-800-TEACH-1-2. Or visit us on the internet at www.teachco.com.
That's teachco.com. Thank you very much for listening.
