Good evening, everyone.
Thanks so much for joining us tonight.
My name is Serena Longo, and on behalf of Harvard Book Store,
the Harvard University Division of Science, the Cabot Science
Library, and Mass Humanities, I'm so
excited to welcome you to our program tonight
with Daniel L. Everett presenting his latest book,
How Language Began, The Story of Humanity's Greatest Invention.
In just a moment, I'll turn things over
to Professor Melissa Franklin, who
will be introducing the program tonight.
But first, I'd like to say a few words about the series
and how you can learn more about our spring season.
The Science Book Talk series features talks
throughout the academic year by authors
of recently published science-related literature.
Just next week, we're very excited to welcome renowned
physicist and Princeton professor Paul J. Steinhart
for his book, The Second Kind of Impossible.
And in April, we'll be joined by a biologist and best-selling
author, Neil Shubin, for his new book, Some Assembly Required.
If you'd like to stay up to date on the series
and our newly posted talks, we have a few options.
Nearly all of our events are filmed and recorded
for the public.
You can access them at the web address,
science.fas.harvard.edu, slash book talks, which I've written
here on the board.
And also, you can find out announcements
about our spring lineup at harvard.com slash science.
And lastly, you can learn about Harvard Bookstore's many other
non-science book talks, which take place nearly every day
and in and around Harvard Square by visiting us at harvard.com
and signing up for our weekly email newsletter.
Tonight's talk will be followed by some time for your questions,
after which we'll have a book signing and refreshments
in the Cabot Science Library.
If you haven't picked up one already,
we have copies of how language began for sale
at the back of the hall and in the Cabot Library as well.
And as always, a few thank yous.
Thanks to our partners here at Harvard who make this series
and, of course, the cheese, all important cheese,
possible at the reception.
And thank you to all of you for being here,
for purchasing books that support an independent bookstore
and for affirming that science matters.
And finally, just a quick reminder, of course,
to silence your cell phones before the talk begins.
And so now I'm so pleased to bring up
Melissa Franklin, Harvard Physics Professor,
and the first woman ever to receive tenure
in the Harvard Physics Department.
Woo!
[? Applause. ?]
Hi, I'm really excited about this talk.
You know, we have a lot of these science book talks,
but they're mostly physics.
I'm really excited to have something really, we're
branching out, and I'm very excited about tonight's talk.
And if any of you have any ideas about more talks
on this subject, I see people here I've never seen before.
So I think it's a different audience than the physics
talks, maybe.
Yes?
Yes, OK.
And so if anybody has any ideas, my name's Franklin at Physics,
just ideas for interesting books in your part of sciencey
things, please let me know.
I want to introduce Daniel Everett, who
has a really interesting past.
And in particular, he started his education
at the Moody Bible Institute in Chicago.
I spent years in Chicago, but I've never
seen the Moody Bible Institute.
It's at La Sal in West Chicago Street.
Nobody's from Chicago.
OK, well, anyway, that's kind of an interesting start.
And from there, he went to Brazil
and got his PhD at the University of Campinas, which
is called Las Campos.
And he did his research also in the South Amazon,
studying the praja in the Amazon basin.
And now, he taught at a lot of different places.
He taught in Pittsburgh at Manchester,
which I think is in England, not Manchester by the sea,
and at Unicamp, which is also in Brazil.
And he's had many, many interesting positions
of leadership.
In the meantime, he has written many books.
The one I like the best, of course,
is Dark Matter of the Mind, because I'm a physicist.
And that's why, initially, I thought
this would be a good talk in this series.
Dark Matter of the Mind, even though you're linguist,
you know what dark matter is.
Yes, of the mind in the culturally articulated
unconscious.
Another one I like is, don't sleep.
There are snakes, life and language
in the Amazonian jungle, or Amazonian jungle.
The one we're talking about today,
how language began, the story of humanity's greatest
invention, and the one that's coming.
I'm also really excited about American Aristotle,
the life and mind of Charles Sanders Pierce.
There are other books, so you're not going to run out.
I mean, if you start now, and you're under 50,
you could get there.
Just to say, if you don't have the length of attention
for books, there's a fantastic New Yorker profile
on Dr. Everett.
So I'm very excited, because I hear
that it's going to be exciting.
Lots of really questions which are probing and questions.
Good probing questions.
So I'm very, very, very excited to welcome Daniel Everett.
Oops.
OK.
So I'll walk around a bit.
I come to Harvard now about once a week, twice a week,
because I'm writing this biography of Charles Sanders
Pierce, who graduated from Harvard in 1859.
When he was going here as a student,
his home set where Seaver Hall currently sits.
Those of you who are familiar with Harvard Yard.
And the person who designed that hall,
H.R. Richardson, was a fellow student of Peirce's
in the 1859 class.
There were eight of them.
And Peirce wrote little summaries of each of them,
said Richardson wasn't very smart.
And he also talked about Strong Vincent, a great American
Civil War hero who died in Gettysburg,
saying that he was a bit flashy and also dull.
Peirce thought everybody was dull.
But he was the first summa cum laude in chemistry
from Harvard.
And he was a geophysicist for 31 years for the US government.
He was an astronomer at Harvard and is mainly
known as a mathematician, logician, and philosopher.
So that's very different from this work,
although you'll see that Peirce is implicated
in the evolution of human language.
So I want to thank several people.
And you can see their names.
So now we'll go to something else.
Not that grateful.
Language is a biocultural behavior.
So language is a biocultural complex.
And thus, research into its origins
is necessarily interdisciplinary.
And so if you're an archaeologist,
you're not going to find out by yourself how language came
about, and you're not going to do that if you're a linguist.
So it requires a lot of people working together.
And I started on this project by myself,
but have been working quite a bit with archaeologists,
in particular Larry Barham from the University of Liverpool,
whose specialty is Homo erectus.
There are also a lot of different ideas
about what language is.
I'll tell you the right one in a bit.
But language requires to understand
the evolution of language.
We need some archaeology, linguistics, and field
research on contemporary languages,
semiotics.
That's where Peirce comes in.
Comparative biology, philosophy, cognitive science,
paleo-neuroscience, neuroscience, evolutionary theory,
and genetics.
So it is quite a daunting task for anyone
to even try to summarize the research that's going on there.
So we could ask the first question we might ask is,
what is language?
What is it that we think evolved?
And one view is that language is a grammar,
is a set of sentences described by a recursive grammar.
That's a very popular definition of it among linguists.
And or the other idea, and the one
I'm going to urge upon you this evening,
is that language is the transfer of information by symbols.
So there is no firm cutoff between humans and other species.
Humans are better at communication by language
than other species are, but it's not
something that is found exclusively in humans.
But I'll try to make that clear.
Who has language?
Well, everything communicates.
If you follow Purse's work, the entire universe is a sign.
Everything is communication.
Minerals communicate.
The trees right now will start communicating
with the environment the shorter days
and start to grow their leaves back.
So everything communicates.
But not everything has language.
Only humans really appear to have language.
And when we talk about other species,
we have to be very careful about what we say about them.
Relative to humans, to get this right.
So communication, again, is the transfer of information
by signs, which I'll make clearer as we go along.
And language is the transfer of information by symbols.
Symbols that are open-ended and created by people.
Well, they could be created by anybody,
but they just happen to be created by people.
And so there are three types of signs
that are very important to the story.
And two of those are found throughout nature.
Icons and indexes.
An icon is something that resembles something else.
There's some sort of correspondence,
you know, a reflection in the water,
or a certain kind of feeling that you get
that corresponds to a particular musical event.
An index is a sign that's connected physically
to what it represents.
So smoke is connected physically to fire.
That's an index of fire.
A footprint is an index of the creature that made it.
Symbols are signs that refer to objects
by convention, habit, or rule.
And to simplify things, I'm simply
going to say that symbols are conventional signs.
They are things that don't have to mean what they mean.
There's no necessary connection to what they mean.
So dog refers to a canine in English, perro in Spanish,
and cachorro in Portuguese.
Neopai in Pideha, these are just conventional things.
They're just physical forms that are conventional
to refer to meanings that are significant in that culture.
So the threshold to productive symbols
was likely fairly sudden, but the evolution of the platforms
for language and symbols took evolutionary time
and are not limited to Homo sapiens.
They don't just get a creature that one day stands up
and starts talking.
We expect to see a lot of correspondence
and a lot of continuity between our species and other species
when we look at communication.
So we find that birds have particular song
dialects, depending on the geographical area they're
found, even in the same species that dolphins communicate,
that chimpanzees and gorillas have fairly interesting
communication systems.
They're not human language, but they're also not totally
unlike human language.
One view is that the view that language is primarily
a former grammar came about in our species and Homo sapiens
about 100,000 to 200,000 years ago.
The alternative view, which I will talk about tonight,
is that language has existed for about 60,000 generations
or more than a million years.
So another thing to clarify is that speech is secondary.
The sounds that are coming out of my mouth
are just one way to express language.
It can be expressed by color-coded shapes.
It can be expressed by hand signals.
It can be expressed by mouth signals, by sounds.
And you don't need a lot of speech to have language.
After all, think of the computer.
How many speech sounds does a computer
have, individual things that it can recognize?
Well, it has two, one and zero.
And everything that can be said can be said with ones and zeros.
Computers have better memories, in some respects, than we do.
So they can remember and distinguish longer sequences.
So we tend to have more than just two symbols.
Actually, you could have just one symbol and have a language.
Because you could have ah means tree, and ah means by the tree,
and ah means over there by the tree, or something like that.
But that's hard to remember.
So those systems don't tend to do too well.
In fact, I don't know of any languages like that.
The smallest system that I'm aware of
is Pidaha, which has eight consonants if you're a man,
seven consonants if you're a woman, and three vowels.
And it also has two tones, which is something
when we talk about the evolution of speech,
we sometimes forget that there are tone languages
and that people can distinguish words by tones,
rather than just by consonants and vowels.
There's some evidence, some people,
to come to Fitch, for example, as a biologist at the University
of Vienna, thinks that early species of humans
had full speech capabilities.
In fact, he argues that non-human species
have full speech capabilities.
The answer is it doesn't really matter that much
because language is not about speech,
it is about symbols and transfer of information by symbols.
However, so if you talk about the components
of all languages, so every language in the world
has the three vowels, i, a, u.
And I tell you that Pidaha only has three vowels.
If you're a linguist, you can guess that those vowels
are i, a, u, because every language has those vowels.
Those are called the quantal vowels.
They're just the easiest to hear.
In fact, they're so important that,
according to Phil Lieberman, who's son Daniel,
I believe, teaches here, has argued
that the entire evolution of the tongue in the human mouth
is to be able to produce those vowels.
They're that important and they help distinguish
the speech of all languages.
Did they come later?
Well, according to Fitch and others,
they didn't come later, but according to work
by Jeffrey Leitman and Phil Lieberman,
but especially Jeffrey Leitman's work,
there is a rapid evolution in the vocal apparatus
starting about the time of Homo erectus,
which would be explained if that's when language started.
They would need better speech to communicate with language,
although you don't have to make clear sounds to have language.
You can have garbled speech and it's still language.
It's like getting a Model T Ford.
Is that a car?
Yes, it is.
It's not a Ferrari, but it's a Model T.
So we didn't start off necessarily
with the full capabilities that we have today,
but we had enough speech to get by.
There are a lot of external conditions
on human speech evolution.
So work by Damian Blasey and Sean Rogers and Caleb Everett,
who not coincidentally shares my name,
all argue for exocentric factors
affecting the evolution of speech.
Anyway, our hero is Homo erectus.
I'm sure that he or she looked just like this.
I was very, I'm always intrigued to discover new findings
in the literature about the accomplishments
of Homo erectus because we tend
to really downgrade Homo erectus.
You know, if you remember, if you're old enough
to remember the American comedian Rodney Dangerfield,
you know his line is, I don't get no respect.
That's how I feel about Homo erectus at times.
Everybody's impressed with the latest artwork
from Neanderthals or Sapiens,
but erectus is really where it all started.
And in fact, in recent study published,
there's been some news about it in the last couple of days,
it was discovered that Homo sapiens,
modern Homo sapiens in Africa have DNA evidence
that shows that they interbred with a Homo species
that existed prior to the split of Neanderthals and Sapiens.
Well, that's Homo erectus.
They didn't mate with chimpanzees and gorillas,
as far as we know, they had to see a certain amount
of similarity between themselves and erectus,
almost certainly, and there would have done that.
Homo sapiens and erectus co-existed for many years together.
In fact, Homo erectus is the most successful species
in the history of our genus Homo.
So they existed from 1.8 million years ago
to about 140,000 years ago,
some would say even more recently.
They're far more successful than we are,
they existed well over a million years longer
than Homo sapiens has existed.
Their height was between 5'8 and 5'11,
so they weren't little Australopithecines,
they were big guys, they had big bones,
they could have pretty much taken
on any Homo sapiens walking around.
They were wide-ranging polymorphic species,
they had a lot of variation in skull size
and in physical strength,
and they arguably did possess a modern vocal apparatus,
from what we can tell from the,
it's very difficult to find the small little bones
that define a modern vocal apparatus,
but in recent work there has been discoveries
of what appear to be hyoid bones
that belong to Homo erectus,
which would have meant that they had
fairly modern speech capabilities.
They were ocean travelers,
magnificent tool makers,
they invented fire, they started communities.
Much of what we take for granted
as human accomplishments are human accomplishments,
they're just from a non-sapien species of human.
So there are gradualist versus saltationist views
of language origin, so did language come about gradually
or just pop into being?
I think it came about gradually,
just to set the groundwork.
Is language uniquely human or non-unique human set
of abilities shared with other animals?
Descartes, who was very good mathematician,
but an extremely poor philosopher,
Charles Sanders Purse in fact has all sorts of sections
about why Descartes was a bumbling idiot,
but of course Charles thought that about many people,
but he severely attacks all of Cartesian philosophy,
but one of the interesting distinctions of course
is that Descartes felt that only humans had cognition
and that other animals were basically meat machines.
They were just, you didn't need to be kind to animals
or worry about them because they had no consciousness,
they had no brains, they had brains but no minds
because dualism comes from Descartes in modern times.
So there's a very different view from Descartes.
This is the view that we are just continuous
in nature, humans are just animals like others,
shouldn't be a shock for people these days,
although it is a shock for many linguists
to think in those terms.
So the evolution of the brain,
how big was Homo erectus' brain and what does it matter?
Their average brain size was about 950 cc's
whereas Neanderthals brain was about 1,400 cc's
and a modern human's brain is about 1,250 to 1,300 cc's
although many modern European females
have brains in the size range of Homo erectus,
about 950 cc's and as people who study the brain
have come to realize size doesn't matter so much.
But you can find, you can see the ranges here,
the circle is where we find most of the Homo erectus'
brain sizes but you also find some sapiens in there
and Neanderthals and as you go out towards
the upper edges of the chart you do start to get
into fairly sapiens exclusive territory
but just remembering that we don't fully understand
the brain that's putting it mildly
and so the main thing that matters
is the organization of the brain
and that's extremely difficult to tell with fossils
how their brains were organized.
So human ancestry is represented in this chart
with erectus at the bottom, maybe Floresiensis
who was from the islands of Flores,
this sometimes called the hobbit little creature
who was over there, according to some linguists
there are still stories about them told
by the indigenous peoples, I don't think that's probably
right but they do have stories about little creatures
running around through the jungles.
But from erectus came all the other creatures
that are related to us, all the other 20 or so species
of Homo but erectus was the first.
Now where does Charles Sanders' purse come in?
He was by the way banned from Harvard
so it's really interesting that his papers
are here at Harvard then one has to come here
to study purse because Charles Elliot
who was president at the time didn't want him on campus
because he was seen coming out of a hotel
with a woman who wasn't his wife so he lost his job
at Johns Hopkins University and that was the only job
he ever had in academics and he was banned
from the Harvard campus even though his brother
was the dean of mathematics and his father
had been professor of mathematics for 50 years here anyway.
So he was the one who invented for the very first time,
first and second order logic.
That's credit is often given to Gottlieb Frege
but in fact, purse had it worked out in some ways
before Frege and independently about the same time.
He invented semiotics, the theory of science before Sosir.
He invented pragmatism from William James.
There's actually an interesting correspondence
between purse and James.
Purse was a member of the National Academy of Sciences
and he was explaining to James why he could not nominate him
for membership in the National Academy of Sciences
because most scientists took James.
He said, we consider you a literary man,
not a real scientist.
But James got famous for the idea of pragmatism
although the idea comes from purse.
At the time that he was alive,
he was considered America's greatest mathematician.
The German mathematician Ernest Schroeder wrote him
and said that your genius and your reputation
shall shine like the sun for eons into the future
which clearly was wrong but he was a brilliant
mathematician.
He made fundamental discoveries in mathematics.
He was the first person to link the absolute length
of a meter to a wavelength of light for measurements.
He took over 20 different places in the globe.
His only book he ever wrote was on the physical properties
of light, photometric researches and he's the first person
to notice that the Milky Way rotated,
all sorts of things he did in his spare time.
And as I will argue in the biography about purse,
he was the inventor of cognitive science
as we know it, sort of as we know it today.
Anyway, this is purse as a young man here.
He was an interesting guy.
I'm gonna skip this and go on to culture
because culture really is the important thing here.
You can't have a language unless you have a culture
and you can't have a culture unless you have a language.
They're symbiotically related.
Each determines or constrains and leads to the conditions
to develop the other.
So in my definition, culture is an abstract network,
shaping and connecting social roles,
hierarchically structured knowledge domains
and ranked values.
So ranked values are very important to culture.
So it's not enough to know that people
have the same values.
So for example, if you're French,
you might think that good food is very important
and that being in good shape is also very important.
And if you're from, say, Houston, Texas,
you may believe the same things.
But if you think that good food is more important
than being in shape, you'll look one way.
And if you think that being in shape is more important
than good food, you'll look another way.
So the value rankings are as important or more important
than the actual values themselves.
Culture is always shifting.
So universal grammar is a very popular term.
It was made popular in modern times by Noam Chomsky.
Although the term goes back to the 12th century,
grammarians known as the modesty.
And in the US, the first person to ever talk about universal
grammar was Charles Sanders Purse.
His view of grammar was both he and Chomsky, interestingly
enough, felt that recursion, I can
talk about recursion separately, but anyway, they thought
that recursion was the basis of grammar.
But for Purse, it was meaning, recursive meanings, not forms,
not the sentences.
But the way that, so for example, if I say bachelor,
I have to interpret that in terms of, say, unmarried man.
And I interpret unmarried in terms of other symbols.
And I interpret man in terms of other symbols
so that every symbol starts us to a recursive chain that
has no end.
Everything is connected.
And to understand one thing, we have to understand a great
deal of culture.
So the difference is for Purse universal grammar followed
from logical principles.
There was nothing necessarily genetic about it.
It simply followed from logical principles.
If you had symbols, they were subject to certain logical
constraints, and those would affect the form of the
language.
Whereas the second version of universal grammar, Chomsky's
is that not only is human biology responsible for
underwriting human linguistic capacity, but the genes are,
there are specific genes linked to language.
So those are very different views of universal grammar.
So now let's move on to tools.
Tools turn out to be a very important part of reasoning
about the origins of human language.
Tools are individual devices or processes that meet perceived
needs of individuals and communities, or a set of
devices, processes, and expertise used to harness the
properties of a particular material.
Full culturally constructed repertoire of knowledge,
conventions, devices, and processes.
Values are vital at each stage.
So tools are really complicated.
This is clearly a complicated tool.
But so is a shovel.
A shovel has a specific kind of function, and if you make a
shovel out of rubber, it won't work very well.
So there's a whole lot of things that have to go into a tool
as simple as a shovel or a knife to make it be what it is.
And it starts to take on meaning features that go
beyond its function.
Human technology enmeshes the material with the ideational.
We have ideas, and they're manifested materially.
Tools involve social constructivism.
Tools become symbols as they emerge from the values,
knowledge, structures, and social roles of a particular
culture.
Symbolism in erectus tools is therefore crucial evidence.
So that's one thing we really need to look for in addition
to the other accomplishments of erectus.
Now, it's true that other species have tools.
But other species' tools tend to be opportunistic.
And one of the interesting things, for example, about
erectus is that they took very good care of their tools.
They colored their tools.
They carried their tools with them over long distances.
They planned ahead.
No other species is known to do that.
Although it's a good Darwinian, I wouldn't want to say that
no other species could, you know, I wouldn't want to
predict what no other species could do.
Because every time somebody tries to do that, we find
that they can.
Learning of technical skills takes place using a
combination of language, gesture, imitation, and
guided intervention.
This applies to all erectus, neanderthal, ensus, and
sapiens tools.
And we'll be getting to that.
This is partially based on lab experiments with stone tool
users.
And my experience in the Amazon, I see this too.
So at the many archaeology departments, they have
napping labs, K, N, A, P, P, not N, A, P. And they learn to
make stone tools.
Graduate students learn to make stone tools.
And they bruise their hands.
They cut their hands.
It's really hard.
So the simplest form of stone tool is like the older one
tools, which we'll see a picture of.
Those take a couple of hundred hours very often for
students, PhD students, to learn to make accurately.
When we get into the more complex tools, it takes a
lot longer.
And what people have found in these labs is that even the
simplest tools, it's very hard to simply show by example how
to do it.
Language tends to be implicated in this skill
acquisition.
Now, this could simply be because they're sapiens, right?
And sapiens talk.
So why not avail yourself of the speech that you have?
In the Amazon, I have watched many men teach their sons
how to make tools like blowguns and bows and arrows.
And a lot of the time is in silence.
But then you'll often hear a question and an answer about
something that was very difficult to see or a movement
that was very quick.
So tools take explanation in many cases.
So once again, on a sign, a sign refers to an object.
So if I have a sign, if I say water, that's the object.
And the representation is W-A-T-E-R.
And the interpretation that you're going to make is
something to drink.
So icons, their physical resemblance, correspondence,
they don't tend to have much intentionality about them.
A reflection in the water is there, whether you intended
it to be there or not.
But they can last after a reflection.
But they can last after someone's not there.
So the smell of a footprint can last for quite a while.
All animals are able to interpret indexes.
In fact, when we talk about animals'
interpretation abilities, almost all the time in the
experiments when they're talking about animals' learning
symbols, in the Persian sense, they're not learning symbols.
They're learning indexes and icons, which are very
different levels of cognitive
accomplishment from symbols.
And so symbols are the final ones.
And these are the properties that are important for us.
No symbols, no language.
They involve displacement.
The thing that we're talking about doesn't actually have
to be there.
I can say water and hold this up, or I can say water
without it there.
And you still know what I'm talking about, that the
object doesn't actually have to be there.
Indexes last a long time.
These footprints are about 3.7 million years old, found by
Mary Leakey in, they're called the Laetoli footprints.
And if you follow them out, you can see that it's a large
Australopithesis probably, Australopithecus walking with
a small one, and they walk, and they turn and look at
something, and then they walk on.
And it rained after they had walked by, and this is volcanic
ash that hardened like concrete and left their
footprints there.
This is Australopithecus africanus.
And as far as we can tell, they're the first creature to
ever preserve an icon.
So they're starting to look at things and contemplate, I
don't think that's too strong a word,
contemplate the similarities.
So this stone, which is about 3 million years old, is called
the Makapansgat pebble.
It was found in a cave in South Africa, and it's unlike
the material that the other stones in the cave were from.
And if you look at it, it has an interesting characteristic.
It looks like a smiley face.
And this thing is about 3 inches by 2 inches, so it's too
big to have gotten caught between their toes and carried
up there coincidentally.
This seems to be something that Australopithecus and
Australopithecus found interesting and carried up to
the cave with no particular functional role other than it
looked like a face.
Australopithecines also made tools.
They're tools about 3.3 million years old, found in
different places.
They're the Oldowan tools discovered initially by the
Leakey family.
Icons are all over the place.
In addition to seeing icons in nature, we have them in
churches, and here are tools that have been actually made
into icons and symbols, both.
And from symbols to grammar, so how complex does a
grammar have to be?
Everybody will agree, every linguist will agree that you
can't have a language until you have a grammar.
But how complex does the grammar have to be?
Well, there are a couple of different possibilities.
And one of the points that I make in the book is that we
find all of these in the world today.
So one we could call a G1 grammar, which is just words
put in a linear order.
And that seems to be the case, for example, in Peta Ha and
Riau, which is a language of New Guinea, which is
John Saul Mary.
So there's no other structure, let's say, in a
language like this.
There's just those three words, John Saul Mary.
A G2 grammar would be like a G1 grammar, but have additional
hierarchy or structure into the phrases.
So the man you saw yesterday is here, where you saw
yesterday as a sentence hierarchically located inside
a larger sentence, or you could simply say the very big
ball rolled down the hill.
There you start to get more structure.
It's not simply linear order of words.
A G3 grammar has both recursion and hierarchy.
So what is recursion?
It's the ability to put one thing inside another of the
same type and just keep doing it.
So the man who is here said that Bill said that Mary said
that Peter said that John bought a house.
When you start to get structures like that so that
you can say there's no longer a sentence in a language, then
recursion is the best way to handle that.
And recursion is communicatively very useful.
You can pack a lot more information in a
sentence with recursion.
But I've argued that although recursion can be found in any
language, it's not a necessary component of all languages.
And in fact, there are good reasons why some
languages would avoid it.
So erectus had icons.
We know that they carry things around.
They didn't carry around smiley faces that we know of, but
they did carry around phallic symbols like this cuttlefish
bone that was found in Morocco about 450,000 years ago.
And erectus also started making quite complex tools.
So there are three grades of tools in the paleolithic,
especially in the lower paleolithic.
There are oldivon tools about 3 million years ago.
There are achulian tools made as recently as 200,000 years
ago.
And then finally, there are levelwa tools, which are the
most complex tools found in the paleolithic.
So these are refined, which means they've been thinned.
These take quite a bit of effort and skill to function.
And they have various parts to them.
You don't just start off banging two rocks together to
get one of those.
You have to have a plan.
There are certain things that have to be cut out of the tool.
It has to have a certain shape to be functional.
So when erectus started working on tools, they might
start with a large piece of rock.
And out of that, they had to break out the pieces that
they needed to get the kind of functional tool.
And they make them all pretty much the same to work for them.
Erectus was the first to come up with a controlled use of
fire.
The pre-shaping of stone tools, working them before they
actually started chiseling out the tools, they used wood and
bone tools as well.
And we think they might have also used hafted tools.
And hafted tools are quite important because that's when
you tie a handle on that shows a lot of functional
improvement over others.
And it shows a lot of foresight and planning.
So these tools had a great deal of complexity over
hundreds of thousands of years.
And in recent research in modern-day Ghana, Larry
Barham has discovered about 900,000-year-old tools that
seem to have been dyed with ochre.
That's a significant finding because dyeing tools shows
that that's not simply a functional aspect of toolmaking.
That is an aspect of toolmaking that shows thought
that goes above the mere function of the tool.
Hafting tools, combinatorial thinking, imagining the
future, and likely invented by erectus.
It's one of the most significant technological
breakthroughs in human toolmaking.
And ochre is also very important.
And we see things like hand axes.
They had a tool kit, not nearly as extensive as an
Neanderthal tool kit or as a Homo sapiens tool kit, but as
an extensive tool kit.
They had hand axes and cleavers.
They had picks.
And so we see different stages.
We should recall the simple stage of Oldowan tools that we
saw that Australopithecus had.
We see achulian tools.
These are already starting to get refined and showing a lot
more work.
And then we get to the Cadillac of the tools of
erectus-level-wa tools.
Not everyone agrees that erectus-made-level-wa tools.
Some are dated as early as 625,000 BC.
But not everyone agrees with those dates.
The dates that do have the widest agreement are about
300,000 years ago.
That would mean that they could have been used by
Neanderthals or sapiens or erectus.
So it's difficult to limit them exclusively to erectus.
However, a million years ago, we see larger tools that are
made with the same way that level-wa tools are made.
Level-wa tools require a lot of hammer work before the
final stage, which is lifting the core out of the larger
tool.
And that takes a lot of planning, a lot of discussion,
or a lot of skill.
And many of the people who study the tools, a fairly wide
consensus, is that level-wa tools can't be learned by
imitation alone.
There has to be linguistic instruction when we get to
this level of tool complexity.
And these tools were, in fact, found as early as a million
years ago tools that were made by the same process.
Not everyone would call them by the same name, but they
were made by the same process.
So every tool that was made had to have various
functional features.
So if we find tools that have nothing but functional
features, it's difficult to see anything symbolic in that.
We can say of any tool that it's an index of the task to
be performed, it's an icon of other tools.
You have one tool as a model to make another tool.
So it does represent a growth in signification.
But to get to the level of symbols, we need to see
things that aren't simply part of the function.
And we start to see some of this at the end of the
Acheulean age.
We see tools that are made a little bit more elaborately
than they need to be made.
They're painted, they're dyed.
And in fact, when Larry and I were working on some tools
that he had just brought back from Africa this past summer,
another expert on erectus tools walked into his lab at
Liverpool and said, oh, those are from East Africa.
Because apparently East African and West African erectus
designed their tools in different ways.
So the design of the tools was representative of the group
that they came from.
They indicated robustness.
One of the earliest ideas when they started to find these
non-functional aspects of erectus tools was that it was
men showing off for women, making the tools to show that
they were better tool makers.
But of course, we have no idea whether it was men who made
the tools or women who made the tools.
So we don't know.
There was somebody who was probably showing off, but we
don't know who was showing off.
But then we find really interesting things about
erectus that are difficult to explain.
And we find that, so this shell is 750,000 years old.
And the markings on this shell were done in Java by a
homo erectus using a shark tooth on this large shell.
And the marks were made without ever picking up the shark
tooth, their constant continuous representation.
And we start to see a lot of this kind of thing with
erectus, this kind of attempt to represent things such as
this rock.
We find these geometric shapes that erectus is starting to
carve into shells and into tools so that we realize that
erectus is starting to see things beyond their mere
functionality.
And then about 250,000 years ago, we find this Venus of
Barakat Ram, which is in the Israel Museum in Jerusalem,
which has got red ochre on it, partially formed by humans,
partially formed by nature.
But it's the first real artwork that we know about.
There are others about the same time.
And it does seem to have been made by erectus.
So erectus tools, they have symbolic and social components.
They go beyond the functionally necessary.
They go into style.
They represent one tradition over another.
They're beyond icons and indexes.
They're simultaneously indexes of task, icons of other
tools, and symbols of the values and labor of the
community.
Symbols in linear order simply turn out to be language.
As soon as you can start symbolizing things, you have
the ingredients that are necessary for language.
So if they had language, what other things did they do that
might have shown that they had language?
So the tools show us that they had the ability to symbolize
and this would have been a cognitive
breakthrough for language.
But is there any other evidence?
Well, it turns out that there are.
But let's talk about how you get to modern languages from
just a few symbols.
Most things are enhancements.
So we add things.
So you have language systems that decide what they're
going to represent.
What is it that you want to talk about?
So among the pita ha, for example, there are no numbers.
There are no color words.
They don't have the number one.
Does this mean that they're cognitively deficient?
Well, they also don't have golf clubs.
There are a lot of things they don't have and a lot of
things we don't have.
How many men in here know how to make a good bow and arrow?
They produce what their culture needs.
Their culture doesn't need numbers.
They don't have numbers.
And this has been verified with a lot of experiments over
the years.
So they also don't represent tense, but they don't have
past tense or present tense or future tense.
But they have a lot of ways of distinguishing different
perspectives on how an action takes place, whether it took
place at a certain height, whether it took place near
the river.
So they build into their verbs.
How many verb forms does English have?
It's pretty poor.
Five, sing, sing, sung, singing, sings.
That's it.
You've exhausted the entire word grammar of English with
those.
But if you go on to Spanish or Portuguese, you'll get 30 to
50 types of verbs.
But in Pida ha, since there are 16 suffixes possible, you
have two to the 16 possible verb forms, which is about
65,000 verb forms.
So their grammar is not like ours.
It has very complex verbs, but simple in other ways
compared to us.
It's what a culture decides to represent that starts to work
its way into the language.
Conceptual systems, how do we interpret these things?
Do we interpret these things strictly based on the symbols
we see?
Do we interpret them based on other cultural nuances?
And these all start to form part of the language and enter
the language in different ways.
Linguistic systems will have different rules, different
structures, different constraints.
So this shows that language has at least these major
components, the objects, the ways they're interpreted, and
the forms that we choose to represent them in.
And languages differ a lot.
So if I say yesterday, what did John give to Mary in the
library, there's intonation.
My pitch is modulated, depending on whether it's a
question or a statement.
And these are add-ons to make things clear.
It's not necessary to have this intuition to distinguish
questions from statements, but it is very, very useful.
In Piedah치, like many of the world's languages, probably
close to half of the world's languages, such as Chinese and
Korean and others, the language is tonal.
So the word for ear in Piedah치 is awe.
And the word for foreigner is awe.
And the word for skin is awe.
And the word for Brazilian shell is awe.
And the word for hand is awe.
So if I whistled it, and those are all very important in
Piedah치.
So you've got to be able to hear those tonal distinctions.
But obviously, tone's not necessary, because we don't
have it in English.
And although English may not be as attractive sounding as
Piedah치, it still seems to work.
So there are all sorts of things we can add.
Once we get symbols, there are all ways that we can embellish
them with sound structures and the kinds of syllables we use,
the way we organize things.
And then we start to think about how languages
represented in the brain.
And in the work of Evelina Fedorenko at MIT's Brain and
Cognitive Sciences Department, she's found that languages,
not at all, found in just one part of the brain, as people
thought for many years, but that it's distributed
throughout the brain in what she calls a language network.
And that this network is fairly similar across all languages
and across all people.
But it's a lot more complicated than simply saying it's in
Broca's area, if you've heard of that area, or
Vernike's area.
Actually, the interesting thing about Broca's patient is
the part of his brain that was damaged was not Broca's area.
But simplistic views of where language is found in the brain
are being challenged every day by more research.
So there are various ways that we enhance grammar in morphemes,
our little parts of words, like the 65,000 Piedoha word forms.
There are phrases, sentences, paragraphs, discourses,
conversations.
All of these are important, and they occur naturally over time.
The interesting thing about language, although it's very
complicated, once we start to look at a finished system, we
can see that its components are relatively simple and build up
over time, and that the core component to every aspect of
the language that's been built up is the symbol.
So what else did erectus do?
Well, just under two million years ago, they were spread
out across the world.
That we find them in Beijing, we find them in Iran, we find
them in various parts of the world.
We find erectus.
There were still many in Africa, and so they were traveling.
And we find a 790,000-year-old settlement in Israel,
Geshe Benoit Yaakov.
And in there, we find the controlled use of fire,
specialized spaces, various components that show, for
example, separate areas of the settlement are used for
processing meat, processing fish, processing plant, what
seem to be communal areas.
So erectus did seem to have the ability to have an
organized society.
There's evidence that their society was organized.
And this is found in this ongoing work in Israel and
other places.
This is found where the black dot is, is an erectus
settlement in Israel.
There are a lot of interesting archaic human sites in the
Middle East, in Israel, and other places.
Because if you're coming out of Africa at the time they were
coming out, because the Sahara Desert was actually a lush
green forest, you come out, turn right.
And it's all you can do.
You can't go straight, because that's the ocean.
Turn right, and you're in the Middle East.
And that's why we find those to be some of the
earliest settlements.
So here's the excavation in Israel, finding these
different aspects of it.
There's also good evidence that erectus traveled across
distances they could not see across in the ocean.
And there are several interesting
things to draw from this.
First of all, most marine archaeologists argue that you
can't have a viable human community without 20 to 40
people arriving roughly at the same time in an area.
So when we find evidence of viable human culture in
places like Flores in Indonesia, so if you look at
the island of Flores in Indonesia, the point where
erectus would have had to cross is about 28 miles.
So it's about the size of the English Channel.
You could think, well, people swim the English Channel, and
we know that other animals could swim across.
But Flores is split off from the rest of what would have
been at that time the mainland by the strongest ocean
current in the world.
It's called the Pacific Through Flow.
And it was the same current back then, 750,000 years ago,
as far as we can tell.
So it was too difficult for a human to swim
across that current.
In fact, if you just put a raft in the water or just put a
log in the water and start off, you're going to get
washed out to sea.
You're not going to make it to Flores.
The current is too strong.
So for humans who have gotten there, it's highly likely
that they had boat-building capability.
In fact, an archaeologist in Australia, Robert Bednarik,
has built boats using erectus tools, etchulian tools, and
level-wa tools, and shown that he can build boats that
can get there in that period of time.
The question is, could they have done that without language?
And there's an article by a moxplunk evolutionary
anthropologist, David Gill, called, how much grammar do
you need to build a boat?
And he argues that you actually don't need much grammar,
but you do need language to be able to build a boat.
And so the idea that they could sail, and this is a
controversial idea, most things said about the past are
controversial, because you can say they got there, and they
had to get there in a certain number.
But you can't show that they got several places.
The ideal thing would be to show them in places where we
know.
So some people have argued they got
across by tsunamis, right?
But that sort of defies the physics of tsunamis, which tend
to come towards the land.
Now there are cases of people who've been found out to see
there was a Japanese guy found floating on a roof, I think,
after the tsunami that hit Japan a couple of years ago.
So it does occasionally happen, but it doesn't seem to be a
very productive way of travel, sort of fortuitous.
And they did this a lot, even in places where we don't know
of tsunamis having hit.
So Kotra, the Russian archaeological team, found
evidence in Sokotra 1.4 million years ago, which is 150
miles from the closest land.
We start to see evidence of potential burial.
This stone on the right is called Excalibur.
It's a colored handaxe of the period, a Julian handaxe, and
it was found in a grave.
Does that mean it was buried on purpose with them?
We start to see evidence of that.
It's difficult to say convincingly that it was, but it
is interesting that it was a colored handaxe found.
Around the time that Neanderthal was starting to
appear, the erectus Neanderthal transition period, we
find wooden spears that were preserved for almost 400,000
years, according to some dating, which would have put them
back in the time of erectus.
So erectus, about 1.5 million years ago, they start making
extremely complicated tools.
They start traveling around the world.
They start an evolutionary process physical where they
start to get more articulate speech, the capacity for
more articulate speech.
They seem to be mastering boat travel.
The ocean was never a barrier to erectus.
Anytime there's an ocean barrier, you can expect to
find erectus on the other side.
They had organized settlements.
So all of these tasks imply the likelihood of language.
If we look at other species and we see species that are far
removed from humans that seem to approximate some sort of
linguistic ability, it's hardly surprising that what we
would see an even greater ability in these creatures
that were so much like us and had almost
modern-sized brains.
So if it's correct, there is evidence for language.
Nobody could say this case has been proven, but it is
highly likely.
Once we take off the burden of languages looking like
modern languages and we realize that a language is the
transfer of information by the discovery and use of
symbols and elaboration of those symbols over time, then
we see a gradual evolution of language and we see
evidence of erectus and no reason to withhold the
judgment that they had language to account for all the
different things that they were able to accomplish in
their long history.
They were preceded by these guys.
These are just the various species of Australopithecines.
Nature experimented a lot before it got to us.
That could mean that we're the best or it could mean that
it doesn't necessarily mean that we're the best.
And when we ask where erectus went, just look around.
We are erectus.
Erectus was the ancestor of Neanderthal, of sapiens, of
every other human creature that has existed.
They were the smartest creatures the world had ever seen.
They were the most widely traveled.
They sailed, they built fire, they had settlements.
They had strong evidence for symbolism in their tools.
It's very difficult to see why we would withhold the
judgment that they likely had language.
And what they had to have had was more than simply grunts
and squeals.
They had to have something that was able to communicate
actual content about the world around them, the kind of
thing that would have been essential and been
discovered and symboled.
So thank you very much.
We have time for a few questions.
If anyone wants to raise their hand, I can run this.
Hello.
Thank you for a nice talk.
To my knowledge, what is peculiar to Homo sapiens is
the use of actual, what we would today call, artwork,
such as was seen, of course, in the stone caves in France
and perhaps in Africa earlier.
Your talk is the first I've heard where you can say that
Homo erectus was actually doing, I don't know if you call it
art or not.
Of course, today we still don't know what is art and what
is not, but that's another matter.
But that is one thing that seems to have been peculiar.
Even that occurred relatively late in the lifetime of
Homo sapiens.
Also, I'd be interested to know if you think Homo erectus,
not only had learned how to use fire, but had actually
learned how to make it.
So thank you.
Yeah.
On fire, the archaeological evidence seems to be that,
yes, they could make it.
They had controlled use of fire.
We find it regularly in their settlements.
As far as artwork, this is a red herring that a lot of
archaeologists have thought to be somewhat important,
because we think of art as symbolic.
Actually, some art is symbolic, but a lot of art,
especially representational art, is simply iconic.
It's a lower level of cognitive
development than symbolism.
So art is a wonderful accomplishment, but it's not
crucial to the linguistic line.
It's a sort of red herring to think that if we find
painting, it's almost certain that if we find painting,
they could talk.
But there's no argument from that to that if we don't find
painting, they couldn't talk.
Painting is just a development.
Cultures develop over time.
And I know of many cultures that I've done research on in
the Amazon that have no art, but they certainly can talk.
They don't do anything that is more elaborate in some ways
than Homo erectus did.
Homo erectus was a hunter-gatherer ban.
And so we find many cultures today that live fairly
similarly.
They're a lot smarter.
They have bigger brains.
They can think of other things.
And if you take them out of the hunter-gatherer ban and raise
them in a city, they'll be unrecognizable for anybody else
who was raised in the city, which I doubt would be the case
for Homo erectus.
But at the same time, art doesn't.
We want to say that art represents language because
it's complicated cultural accomplishment.
And it can be symbolic, but it's often simply iconic.
So art seems to be a separate cultural development that is
off the line of language evolution.
And I don't find it convincing to say that art is either here
nor there when it comes to language evolution.
Tasty.
How would you describe the limitations of their language?
Of erectus?
Yes.
So I work with languages that have similar properties.
I mean, so in other words, if you think about what the
simplest grammar could be, just words in a linear order, I've
worked with languages like that.
And the fact is they can say anything we can say.
The complicated grammars that we have have very useful
communicative functions, but they are not necessary to
express modern thought or complicated thought.
So the fact that somebody, we can say they have a simple
grammar doesn't mean they have simple thought.
That's another thing that has happened in the history of
anthropology and linguistics to somehow think that language
is the mirror of thought.
And it doesn't have to be.
There are a lot of things.
For example, I work with hunter-gatherer groups that
have very few words for time.
Does this mean they don't know there was yesterday?
So the Piedohan, for example, have no word for yesterday and
no word for tomorrow.
And we often find that this or that culture doesn't have a
word for X, and so we drive all kinds of conclusions from it.
But I don't see any conclusions to draw from that.
They can think about those things.
Everybody knows they got up yesterday, and they're getting
up today, and they'll probably get up tomorrow.
But the fact that they choose not to talk about them is a
separate kind of cultural value.
So I don't find the simplicity of grammar connected very
tightly to the complexity of thought.
Yeah, if they had symbols, they probably didn't have many
limitations.
I mean, you could say maybe they had the intelligence of an
eight-year-old or a 10-year-old sapient's child.
No way to really know that, but let's say they did.
Eight-year-olds can talk a lot.
I'm curious if we know how easy or difficult it is to know
whether a tool that they used was made by them and not
created by nature.
How can we discern?
Well, it's always very hard when you're going back in time to
have dating methods that can link them to a species.
So if you find a tool that's 600,000 years old, they were
the only ones around.
Nobody else was around, so they made it.
But if you find a tool that was 150,000 years old, well,
there were a lot of species of humans around at that time.
So narrowing it down to Homo erectus becomes more
difficult, but you can guess based on the settlement
patterns.
But it's difficult to tell with precision once you start
getting into the area where other Homo species were
existing side by side.
Oh, that it was made.
Some of the older on tools could have just one rock fell on
another, and suddenly you get this.
But these Atulian tools, these more complex tools, there's
no way they came about by accident.
They had to have been designed, planned, and constructed
with a great deal of craftsmanship.
It takes hundreds of hours, at least 500 hours, from what I've
heard, for graduate student in archaeology to be able to make
an Atulian handaxe, not to make, that's how long it takes
to learn it.
They can make them faster after that.
I'm curious to know what led to the, I guess, eventual demise
of this species given your talk, how successful they have
been at traveling and establishing communities
all around the world.
So I'm just curious, what led to a global end
to such a successful run?
Yeah, that's a very good question.
We're the only ones left standing.
So did they die out?
Did they become us?
One answer is they didn't die.
We are them.
The other answer is that Homo sapiens is, they're smarter,
and one thing we've shown as a species throughout our history
is the ability to slaughter other people that look like us.
So the fact that the Homo sapiens might have killed them all
doesn't seem to have, that doesn't seem to be totally
outside the realm of possibility either.
So I don't know why they disappeared.
And I was asked a similar question
when I was giving a talk in Hungary,
and I probably should have been more careful.
But I said, the Hungarian Jews didn't disappear
because they didn't have language.
So there are all kinds of reasons that people disappear.
Hi.
You briefly said at the beginning
that the Homo erectus, there was one
that they found a hyoid bone in it,
so that you're speculating that then they have vocal cords
and they could then produce sounds.
So are you thinking the later species all had the hyoid bones
and could vocalize?
We don't really know.
Some people, to come to Fitch would believe
that we almost certainly had, Homo erectus
had this modern speech capability.
My point is that it really doesn't matter.
Evolving modern speech is a tremendous advantage,
but it's not a necessary condition,
nor is it a sufficient condition for having language.
We can look at other species that seem to have.
We listen to a parrot.
They can produce human speech sounds fairly well.
That's so it shows that it's not a sufficient condition
for language, and the fact that erectus might not have had it
would show that it's not a necessary condition
for language, because we have deaf people today
who talk with American sign language
and say anything we can say.
So language is looking for a physical medium
to be transmitted, and that usually, and most efficiently,
is human speech.
And with quantal vowels and modern speech,
we can communicate much more clearly,
but it's neither necessary nor sufficient to have language.
They could have produced sounds.
They might not have been very clear,
but the reason that chimpanzees don't talk
is not because they can't produce sounds.
They produce enough sounds.
My point about computers is that any creature that
can produce two sounds could talk in principle.
My dog makes a lot of sounds, and I understand a lot of them.
I'm trying to figure out if any of them are symbols,
but they're certainly, she's very articulate in letting
me know when it's time to do certain things.
So I have mastered a repertoire of her sounds,
and she uses them.
But that doesn't mean that she, I
don't expect her to give me advice about how
to find my grandmother in Ancestry.com or something
like that.
These are cultural accomplishments
that require a much greater set of symbols.
I think that is about all we have time for.
Give another hand to Daniel Everett.
Thanks, everybody.
Thank you.
