So let me just tell you briefly what assembly theory is,
because assembly theory is actually a kind of a cool way
of actually doing entropy, but without labeling.
And it's just about, as a chemist,
I realized years ago that there are molecules on Earth
that are just weird, right?
Weird molecules, like really complex.
And so let's just take a molecule
that is used a lot called taxol.
Taxol is made by the Pacific U tree.
It's a secondary metabolite,
which means it's made by protein,
interaction proteins in the cell.
And that molecule is really special
because it's very good at killing vascularization
of cancer tumors.
So people get that and they use it as an anti-cancer drug.
Now, to make this molecule,
it's like got 62 carbon atoms,
load of oxygen atoms with nitrogen and so on in this pattern.
And this molecule has a molecular weight of about 852.6.
Something like this.
Someone would go and check it now.
It's a real molecular weight.
So it's like, okay, I'll Google it whilst I'm saying,
but it's a big molecular weight and it's a fingerprint.
And the way that molecule works
is the way the combinatorial chemistry works.
That molecule is beautiful.
It's like a Rembrandt, right?
It's in its features.
But chemists can make loads of it.
So you can make literally 10 to the 23,
6.022 times 10 to the 23.
And that's one mole.
So you can have one mole of taxol.
So that's 10 to the 23 identical copies.
And that's made in biology on Earth.
Human beings can make it in the lab.
But if Brian and I did the math together
and we said, right, well, look at that molecule,
we'll work out what is the probability
that that molecule could form randomly
in a plasma in the universe?
It's basically one in a like countless,
in 10 to the 100, right?
Maybe more.
That's just for one molecule.
So if you find a detectable amount,
you're like, oh my God,
this is like the biggest coincidence ever.
So that's where assembly theory was born.
And I realized that there's lots of molecules on Earth
that pass the great filter.
They are made by biology.
And I realized they can make a detection system
that detects molecules that are above
that threshold of complexity.
And that when you do random milliori and random stuff,
get meteorites and look at the organic chemistry,
they're way below that filter.
They have an assembly number.
And what assembly theory does is it says like,
take your molecule, put it on a graph.
What is the shortest route you can get
from your atoms to that target?
The shortest possible route, how many steps, right?
So it's a bit like if you take the word abracadabra,
if you were to make, if you've got A, B, C, R, A,
how many steps would you need
to make the word abracadabra?
Well, you can do it in a much number,
the number of letters in the word,
because you can reuse some parts.
And so all my conjecture is assembly theory says,
it finds where there's memory or contingency in a chain.
So it looks for lossless compressibility.
That's kind of cool, right?
It's a bit like a information theory, compression,
Shannon, la, la, la.
But it's just like,
what is the shortest route to get there?
Because like Brian, as an experiment list,
the data is more important than my feelings.
That's right.
And so, you know, it's like, so I need to know.
Ben Shapiro, you just sounded like Ben Shapiro
for a second.
Yeah, I love Ben Shapiro.
And so it's really important that we understand that
because it's pervasive, right?
Where people just think that,
and chemists think that complex molecules,
this is where the chemists,
they're beginning to change their view.
And what I'm trying to say is that the chemists don't,
because they take it for granted,
that there's complex chemistry everywhere.
I'm saying, hey guys,
it's not just RNA that's important,
ATP is important, you know, all these things.
That's my joke, Lee, I say, you know,
and economics, you know,
past performance is no guarantee of future results.
It's like, we have past performance evidence here on earth,
but that's no guarantee.
So assembly theory, what it does,
it allows you, given a complex molecule,
you can work out the likelihood it formed by chance.
And that I think is fairly irrefutable.
Although publishing that paper last year,
took me six goes, right?
I sent it to nature.
Why do you think that is?
Well, because it took me,
I sent it to nature, it almost got in, right?
I sent it to nature, I got three reports back,
two said, wow, one said, can't be right.
So I wrote back and so they nature, what do we do?
And I said, well, we can ask the referee
why it can't be right.
So he said, oh, do that then.
And the referee, we said the referee,
why can't it be right?
And the referee said in the second round,
because it's impossible.
We're like, okay, and this is like a kitchen art, right?
Conversation we had with the editor.
I said, but here's the data.
Are you saying we fabricated the data?
And the referee just said, no, it's impossible.
And we went in this loop.
And what actually happened is one of the referees
fabricated a data from a paper
to assert that we couldn't be right.
That's how desperate they were.
I got the evidence, right?
I come back, they said in this paper,
it says that complexity is already present
in outer space, blah, blah, blah, blah.
And the editor read it, went, oh, reject again.
And when I pointed to the editor,
that the referee took the word complex mixtures
have been found in space
and changed it to complex molecules
because they were so believing
that complex molecules are a free lunch.
I then went to the fifth round to review.
And the editor by this point was like, just like, go away.
We're not publishing.
I said, no, I believe in the rule of peer review.
Answering all your points, this is important.
It's important to change people's views of complexity.
Because Brian is on a really good side.
We're saying, hey, I want the data.
I know that nothing is for free.
And the chemist in the middle is saying,
everything is for free.
Complexity happens.
And I'm in the middle saying,
no, I can count it and quantify it and here it is.
What actually happened?
He was rejected, right?
Because I won't go into, I don't want to complain.
I'm a very lucky scientist.
I love doing the science.
I just feel bad for the research group.
But I got it published.
I published it in Nature Communication.
And that paper was downloaded 27,000 times in five months.
Because we presented the theory, the mass spec,
and all the evidence.
We had a lot of meteorites.
We even got Scottish whiskey.
We proved that Scottish whiskey is evidence of life
because there's complexity in the peak, right?
We show it works.
So we know we can fingerprint life on Earth from molecules.
And so, but we realized something more
that assembly theory is about just something about molecules.
It's about every time you have a step on your path
on that you make a decision.
Let's say you go down a street
and you say, I'm going to go left today.
You go left and you say, right, I'm going to go left again.
Then I'm going to go right.
I'm going to go left and right.
And you find yourself in a very particular spot.
That contingency is put on your history, right?
There's a lot of mathematics on that.
And we find that this is the assembly theory
that we generate.
And I haven't spoken to Brian about it
because Sarah and I are just finishing the paper.
And oh my God, it works.
And what do I mean by that?
I mean that I can take a kilogram of sand
and calculate the assembly of that kilogram of sand.
And I can calculate, take a kilogram of E. coli
and calculate the assembly.
Assembly is a number like entropy.
An entropy tells you the causal power of the object.
And of course, the causal power of a kilogram of E. coli
is vastly higher than the kilogram of sand
because the sand can do nothing.
So what about the assembly of rule 38, Wolfram's rule?
And you'll hear about this in a few weeks, maybe.
But the problem with that is,
that is again a label system.
So rule 38 doesn't exist outside of a von Neumann machine
and graph paper and observer putting in the rules in.
So yeah, so the problem is,
and physicists get stuck with things that give complexity
that aren't really complexity,
it's just games with numbers.
And I think that I've got a little bit of work to do with that.
And I think the Wolfram's ideas here are pretty cool.
I think they're not,
the problem is with Wolfram,
he traps himself in a line of thought
and doesn't talk to anyone and thinks he's a lost genius,
bit like Eric actually, and no one will talk to him.
We'll talk to him.
In fact, he's got a lot of good ideas
that might actually be right.
But it's kind of like-
I've talked to him, I've had, not only have I talked to him,
and I've talked to Eric,
I've talked to him and Eric at the same time.
I'm the only podcast man.
Oh, cool, I'd love to take part in that conversation
if I maybe could bang their heads together.
But we digress.
Yeah, let's do it.
The theory tells you about causation.
It's now measurable.
And that's why I'm excited
because we're going to start to roll this out
in inanimate objects and it will help physics.
I think Newton screwed physics
because Newton, and there's a hell of a thing to say.
I'm British, right?
I love Newton.
There's a lot of coins and on our notes and everything.
But Leibniz understood assembly theory.
And I've been reading philosophy for the last few weeks.
If you read the monodology from Leibniz,
you'll see that he understood assembly theory
and that objects have souls.
This cup has a soul.
And you're like, it's legal on all pens.
I was like, no, no, the soul is not in the cup,
but it's in the causal structure of the person that made it,
who made it, who made it, who made it.
This cup is a fantastically improbable object
that cannot have existed out a long line of cup makers.
That's where the soul of the cup is.
Okay, let's let Brian respond to what you've said.
Well, I think it's unassailable to say
that complexity begets complexity.
And again, that Lee will take on intelligent designers
with one fist,
but he'll also take on chemists with the other
and say, look, we have to address as Roger Penrose calls
the mastodon in the room,
which is this surprising feature about the universe
that we can comprehend it.
We tend to impose consciousness upon it
and our definitions are contingent upon our causal history
and how we were assembled.
And I think the ultimate theory of everything
when it comes to what Lee's working on,
we'll have to involve the observer,
which will undoubtedly then finally force him
to get into fundamentals of quantum mechanics,
which I don't think he can call chemistry.
I'm okay with you calling entropy
and thermodynamics chemistry,
but I think the elementary foundations
of quantum mechanics has a stretch to come from.
I always wanted to be a physicist, it's okay.
Okay, me too, but I elapsed and became an astrophysicist.
But I think when we talk about how this can be used
to kind of, as I say, be quantitative,
how we can get something out of it,
deliver some value to the audience.
Certainly these are, and the more flexible we are,
I think the more can be understood,
but maybe to even narrow down
and come back to the original definition of things.
I think to have a taxonomy,
what is it that the name is not the thing?
There's some principle like that, right?
And so, yes, describing things that are complex
and have originators in a mind
that on the one hand is beautiful, it's elegant,
it's simple, and again, in a praiseworthy fashion,
not in a childless fashion.
On the other hand, I do think we have to then confront
the ultimate question of,
is there, does there have to be some mind at work
behind the cup, behind the 747, behind the DNA code?
And I think we've agreed not to really get into this notion,
but I think at some level,
we just get to this eventual chicken or egg
and this Mott and Bailey retreat.
And I guess, I think the ultimate benefit
of this approach is that it gives a plausible scenario
for life to arise from inanimate objects.
That's an ultimate, or it's a way to quantify
when something is animate, let's just say,
or was created by something animate.
And I think, to look at how we can do better
and maybe go further into which I think is really important,
is life abundant and technological?
I think Kurt's audience appreciates that.
And I think, we haven't spoken so much about that.
Maybe we can talk about that.
How and what could we glean from the search as a search?
And where are we going?
Cuovadas, where are we going with the search?
Is it important, is a good use of chemist time,
of physicist's time, et cetera,
to look at these reported unexplained phenomena?
Can that tell us something?
Is this something that interests you and me?
And maybe Kurt can lead us in that path
and kind of, yeah, really.
I mean, we're at a very interesting point in time
and a lot of it has to do with people
that Kurt's had on the show
and that I've tried to have on my podcast as well.
And I think that kind of the abiogenesis argument
is you've eloquently described it.
I think, if we look maybe as Kurt as an impartial observer,
maybe we could say like, where are you, Kurt,
in this discussion?
Because I think you're a proxy for your erudite audience.
How do we, how are you feeling about the prospects
of the ultimate question, life from non-life?
And then we can talk about universe from non-universe.
We can talk about consciousness from inanimate matter.
And then we can talk about technological matter
from conscious matter.
But where are you sitting right now, Kurt?
