While working at Control Data Corporation, computer designer Seymour Cray was once asked
his five and one year goals.
He said,
5 year goal, build the biggest computer in the world.
One year goal, one fifth of the above.
Seymour Cray literally only wanted one thing, and that was to take it to the limit.
In today's video we look back at a genius' lifelong quest to make the biggest supercomputers.
But first, this video is brought to you by the Asianometry Patreon.
Early access members get to see new videos first and selected references for those videos.
Early access really helps a lot and I appreciate every pledge.
Thank you, and on with the show.
Seymour Cray Jr. was born in the small town of Chippewa Falls, Wisconsin, in 1925.
The son of a civil engineer at the local power utility.
The elder Cray fostered in his son a love of science and engineering.
The son adored chemistry, did electrician work for his junior prom, and showed a talent for radio.
After serving in the army as an electrician, Cray went to university on the GI Bill and
graduated from the University of Minnesota with a bachelor's in electrical engineering
and a master's in applied math.
Then in 1950 he joined a small company called Engineering Research Associates,
or ERA, in St. Paul, Minnesota.
During World War II, the U.S. Navy employed a team of elite code breakers.
This division was known as the Communication Supplementary Activity Washington, or CESA,
and in secret they designed and built powerful machines to break access naval codes,
mostly to find German submarines.
At the war's end, people realized that the U.S. government still needed to break codes,
Soviet codes this time, but with budget cuts they cannot afford to keep their employees.
So the Navy worked with an investment banker named John Parker
to set up a for-profit company that would hire and employ the old team
at higher salaries.
This was ERA.
ERA's people worked largely in secret out of an old glider factory.
Their first products were code-breaking machines like before,
but the team quickly began moving towards useful general-purpose computers,
leveraging emerging technologies like magnetic drum memory.
One of the first such products was the ERA1101.
The computer was a commercialized version of a device sold to one of the precursors of the NSA.
You can say that Minnesota in the 1950s was Silicon Valley before Silicon Valley existed.
Thanks to the strong military presence, it was America's premier computing center.
Despite being just 25 years old, Cray showed himself to be a talented worker.
Cray was quiet, but had the unshakable confidence to speak up when something was wrong.
He had incredible focus and rigid discipline, and of course he was brilliant,
with a gift for understanding the world of binary numbers.
Thus, Cray was challenged to produce the control system for ERA's next computer,
the ERA1103.
The control system breaks down the software's instructions into execution steps.
Control system design required front-to-back knowledge of the computer's guts
because it had to coordinate all those resources to efficiently execute the program.
Cray did the work and quickly rose up the ranks to supervise the team.
Like another legend of the times on Wong of Wong Labs,
Seymour Cray's genius can make him sometimes difficult to work for.
Cray preferred to work alone, spending late nights in the workshop.
If someone wasn't doing it right or was taking too long,
he reassigned them and did it himself.
They called it being scrayed.
But despite being very quiet, Seymour treated his colleagues well
and was generally liked and respected.
Just a big eccentric and enigmatic, exactly as a genius computer designer should be.
In December 1951, President and original investor John Parker
sold ERA to the computer company, Remington Rand.
Parker didn't tell the employees that ERA about this
which in bird culture is considered a dick move.
And an angered key workers like William Norris
who joined early and rose to become VP of operations.
Remington Rand was a typewriter and shaver company.
Why computers?
Even more strangely, Rand had already bought a computer company earlier,
the Eckhart Mockley Computer Corporation.
Jay Presper Eckhart and John Mockley will forever be known for making ENIAC,
the first programmable digital computer.
And then EDVAC, pioneering the stored program computer design
that today underpins the von Neumann architecture.
Along the way, Eckhart also created the first course on electronic digital computers,
the Moore School Lectures, which helped popularize the von Neumann architecture.
No relation to Moore's law.
And then UNIVAC won, a computer that Garnard renowned for predicting
that some dude named Dwight Eisenhower would win the 1952 U.S. presidential election.
The world famous Eckhart and Mockley had serious computer credentials,
so the guys at ERA accepted the arrangement.
Eckhart Mockley would focus on the business computer marketplace
while ERA focused on scientific computing.
But tensions remained.
Today the computing needs of both business and science
can be handled by a general purpose computer,
but in those days the computers had to be more specific.
Computers for business did simple operations,
adding, subtracting, and multiplying, and with only two decimal points of accuracy.
However, this had to be done at large scale,
thousands of rows going in and out of the computer.
Scientific computing was different in that it required complex calculations
with up to 20 to 30 decimal points of accuracy.
Such a computer might munch on a problem for hours just to produce a single line of output.
The guys at Eckhart Mockley in Philadelphia
looked down on the Minnesota guys as mere quote-unquote farmers
who did not work on the state of the art,
and the Minnesota guys saw the Philadelphians as theoreticians
who only cared about making computers faster,
even if it meant them breaking down a lot.
Things got worse in 1955 when Rand merged with the Sperry Corporation to become Sperry Rand.
The merger forced together the two formerly independent units into one Unifact division.
The tensions really flared between ERA, Eckhart, and their new corporate overlords.
The aforementioned William Norris,
the division's new general manager, said to the Philadelphia guys,
you people run a laboratory, and ERA runs a business.
When Sperry took over its top management, including President Harry Vickers,
thought that they were buying a market leader. That was not the case.
Unifact had the potential to be what IBM eventually became,
but it needed the capital to get there. Not only in R&D to build the machines,
but also because computers were an equipment leasing business back then.
It was very capital intensive.
In 1957, enough was enough. Norris left Sperry Rand to found a new company,
Control Data Corporation, or CDC. A new company was a huge risk,
but Norris figured that if it did not work, then he and his family
could go back to their farm in Nebraska.
Norris invited a few of his ERA co-workers to come with him.
Cray was one of those who accepted, having seen the writing on the wall when he noticed
an accounting system categorize his project as 999, miscellaneous, and other.
CDC started in July 1957 with its employees, a vague idea to make computers and some money from
friends. No plant, no product, and little money. To get the company off the ground, CDC IPO'd.
Like literally, they stood on the street and sold shares to ordinary members of the public
for a dollar each. This is probably not possible today.
The company got its first splash of publicity from an unexpected spot.
Sid Hartman, a sports columnist at the Minneapolis Tribune and former part-time
general manager of the Minneapolis Lakers, what?
Mentioned the move at the end of one of his sports column.
Many prominent local investors declined an investment in CDC,
one saying that they, quote, didn't have a ghost of a chance, end quote, against IBM.
Decliners included a guy named Warren Buffett. Despite being William Norris' nephew by marriage,
he declined due to a lack of understanding, but he's poor now and deeply regrets that.
Years later, the $1 shares would be worth about many times that.
The early CDC IPO enriched the company's 300 initial investors and created a generation
of new wealth in the Minnesota area.
Craig was the most technical person at the new company and persuaded his co-founders to
build scientific computers rather than going to the commercial market. His reasoning was that
their clientele universities and nuclear weapons research labs cared less about marketing and
client service and they programmed their own software. What they wanted was compute, serious
compute. Due to treaty obligations, you can't just test fire a nuclear weapon and even discounting
the environmental issues cannot easily measure its workings. So to study a detonation, we needed
computers to simulate the bomb's chain reactions, stepping through all the equations every microsecond
after detonation. That means the biggest and fastest computers on the market.
Craig was convinced that he could build such a computer at a relatively bearable cost using
transistors. He went down to the local electronics shop and found that they were selling reject
bipolar transistors for radios for cheaper than what you can get from the factory.
These reject transistors suck outputting a weak signal. So Craig paired them up in what is called
a Darlington pair with the second transistor amplifying the output of the first. The experience
taught him that with the right design, you can use substandard components and still achieve the goal.
Over a year into the venture with money running low, Bill Norris strikes a deal with the US Navy
for what would be called the CDC-1604 computer in 1958. But now they have to build it at scale,
buying a factory and hiring more engineers. Norris and other managers cut their salaries
in half to save money. Engineers resorted to swiping transistor companies as free-sales
samples for their computer. The CDC-1604 first hit the market in 1960, carrying a price tag of
$990,000 or about $10.4 million today. At 0.2 MHz, it was the most powerful commercially available
computer of the time, a supercomputer. A supercomputer is a bit of a squishy term. It's about pushing
the envelope and computing, bringing out a computer that leads all others in its field.
Control data was not alone in the market of producing super-fast computers for niche customers.
Univac released the Livermore Automatic Reaction Calculator, LARC, in 1960, the same year as the
1604's release. It helped Edward Teller do simulations for the hydrogen bomb and was the most
powerful computer in the world from 1960 to 1961. The LARC scared IBM so much that they built the
IBM-7030 stretch supercomputer designed by the legendary Gene Amdahl. The 7030 took back the
crown of the world's most powerful supercomputer and retained it until 1964. But the LARC and
Stretch were basically made to order products. Univac only made two LARC units. Control data
turned the supercomputer into a category, a commercially successful one at that.
The 1604 sold to the University of Illinois, Lockheed, the State of Israel, and more.
The company began to turn a profit, challenging the old computer giants like Rand and IBM.
CDC stock went from $1 to $9, and now Norris had to keep the engineers from selling their stock
too early. After the 1604, Cray and CDC debated about how to proceed. Follow up on the 1604
and finally attack the lucrative business data processing market. This would mean iterating
on the 1604 architecture, making smaller computers like the CDC 160A a very good and successful
control applications computer. But Cray only wanted to build the fastest possible machine.
The scientific community had only started to realize a new form of computational modeling,
finite element analysis, which I mentioned in a prior video.
Finite element analysis involves splitting something down into millions of simpler elements
and running simulations based on how those elements might act. For instance, breaking a car down into
tiny shapes and using that to predict how it might survive a car crash. With finite element analysis,
the more steps you can break something down into, the better you can model and predict
complex systems like the weather or nuclear explosions. This basically implied an infinite
need for compute. Cray wanted to be the guy to feed that need for speed. He threatened to
leave the company over this issue, which caused Norris to eventually agree on splitting the two
teams. One CDC team would work on a 1604 follow up. Meanwhile, the 35 year old Cray and his team
were allowed to open their own lab in Cray's hometown of Chippewa Falls, Wisconsin. This new
lab was just a brief stroll from his house. There, Cray and his team worked on a machine
some 15 times faster than the 1604, named the 6600. When Cray and his team sat down to make
the CDC 6600, they started off with something like the 1604. The 1604 was built with ferrite
magnetic cores for main memory and magnetic tape for secondary storage. For compute, it had
germanium transistors. Everything was built inside air-cooled, pluggable building blocks.
But as they worked on the 6600, Cray changed many things. Critically, he saw silicon planar
transistors from Fairchild. They switched far faster than germanium transistors,
automatically granting a 5x speed boost. The rest of the 10-15x speed up goal, though,
had to come from somewhere else. Cray soon soured on the building block approach. Each
block had extensive back panel wiring, which not only caused noise issues but also limited input
output and increased how long it took to transmit data. So Cray threw it all out and switched to
using denser, more complex custom modules called cordwood modules. The shorter wires improved
speed but also made it difficult to repair and necessitated the replacement of air cooling
with freon gas cooling. Another concept they implemented was parallelism. Every system has
to do housekeeping functions or the such in addition to the main compute task. Why should the main
processor have to do that? Offloaded to something else. The 6600 contained 11 individual computers
that can execute programs separately from each other. They only shared a central memory.
10 of the computers handled secondary work like peripherals leaving the 11th computer free to
do nothing but high speed math. Additionally, the 6600 lived and breathed simplicity. A computer
CPU uses something called an instruction set architecture or ISA to define its basic operations
thus also defining how software can control it. The 6600 simplified its ISA ditching everything
unrelated to scientific computing like for instance instructions for handling large amounts of data
something more geared for commercial users. This simplified instruction set allowed the computer
to quote quote pipeline tasks breaking down a bigger job to smaller ones that can be assigned
to peripheral computers to work on simultaneously. CDC delivered its first 6600 to Lawrence Livermore
in 1964. The machine's incredible speed three times faster than the 7030 shocked IBM. Chairman
Thomas J. Watson Jr. wrote a scathing memo asking how quote 34 people including the janitor and quote
beat the biggest technology company in the world. The answer of course was that IBM's architects
could not bear to sacrifice compatibility for speed. The splitting of the teams within control
data prevented a blow up but discontent continued to faster. Norris and other managers continued
to build up the business. CDC began making its own peripherals and software to accompany the main
computer building a services business. Control data also purchased a consumer finance company
commercial credit intending to use their 3.4 billion dollars of working capital to fund its
computer leasing strategy. This strategy which seemed smart at the time eventually backfired
when commercial credit ran into difficulties. Over 100 CDC 6600s were sold to big customers
like the atomic energy commission but each cost 8 million dollars or about 23 million today.
As you might think it limited the market to about 50 total customers in the world.
But Seymour Cray felt this was a feature not a bug. He loved knowing the first names of each
of his customers. The control data's management was increasingly coming to the belief that
peripherals and services not hardware were the company's future. Control data followed up the
CDC 6600 with the 7600 and it was hailed as the world's fastest computer five times faster than
the 6600. But despite costing only twice as much of its predecessor it sold poorly in part due to
frequent breakdowns and a weak economy. Then after that we had the 8600. This supercomputer was made
with regular discrete transistors but Cray wanted a clock cycle time of 8 nanoseconds which meant
every wire had to be shorter than 2.5 meters squeezing those parts very close together.
Things got so dense that Cray couldn't figure out how to sufficiently cool them.
After many months he decided to throw everything out and start again from scratch. It was his style
the Cray way. But this was 1971 and control data was in the midst of an expensive antitrust lawsuit
against IBM. Cash flow was running low. Cray was asked to cut expenses by 10% unwilling to do that
he cut his own salary to minimum wage or $1.25 an hour. This did not solve the issue and in the
end Norris told Cray that a redo like before could not be done. They already pre-sold two 8600
systems and in 1972 Cray decided to leave and start his own shop Cray Research. Seymour Cray
founded Cray Research with $2.5 million, 20% of which was his own money and a bunch of bank loans.
The company's goal was to build the biggest computer one at a time like a master artisan.
It did not care for big revenues nor did it expect them. The focus was on research rather
than manufacture like Star Trek plumbing the outer limits of possibility. In a show of goodwill
Norris and control data arranged a luncheon to say goodbye and invested a quarter million dollars in
the new company. Norris called it heart money. For his first computer the Cray one Seymour Cray
wanted revolutionary performance to get it he decided to turn to a new concept vector processing.
Most CPUs of the time used scalar processing meaning the process single data items like integers
or floating point numbers one at a time. So imagine the job of adding one in one a scalar
CPU would load the first one into its register from memory load the second one add them and then
store the result into memory counted up this job used four instructions. So if we are summing up
two sets of 20 numbers that is 80 instructions that a scalar CPU has to handle a vector processing
machine shortcuts that by processing single dimension arrays of data vectors. So if we
have those two vectors containing 20 numbers each loading the two vectors into the register
adding them and storing the result vector into memory that only uses four instructions rather
than 80. Control data knew about vector processing too they had a small team working on a vector
computer called the star 100 but the star was tremendously complicated and failed to live
up to its promises. Control data shipped it four years late and sold only three of them.
Cray studied the star 100 and realized its flaws first its scalar processing was slow
bottlenecking the overall system performance and second the computer's vector processing
implementation had a hitch recall my example from before before you can run the addition
operation on the two vectors you first have to load them both into the register same with
sending results back to memory. The problem was that this was taking too long doesn't
matter how much faster vector processing is compared to scalar processing if handling the
vectors took forever. So Cray introduced vector registers very fast intermediate memory systems
that work like cache memory to improve speed. Seymour also decided to adopt integrated circuits
for the first time this allowed for more density and cut down on wiring allowing the Cray one to
be far smaller than its predecessors. By then ICs were roughly about 14 years old and quite mature
but reflects Cray's approach of choosing older technologies quote a decade behind end quote as
he'd like to say so that they are more reliable but when it came to memory Cray could not compromise
he broke his principle and bought bipolar semiconductor memory chips to replace the
old core memories it cost less had more density and eight less power. The computer's clock cycle
of 12.5 nanoseconds made it five times faster than the CDC 7600 so every wire in the machine had to
be less than four feet long and of course you can't forget its iconic look a circular shape to
accommodate the new cooling scheme but with an added bit of flair to differentiate from the
boring gray boxes of the era and it had cushions too. The Cray one made a huge stir upon its release
in 1976 with its flashy look and world-beating speed. A hundred Cray ones were sold to various
government and university lab customers like the National Center for Atmospheric Research
and the Department of Defense. It generated 150 revenue growth for Cray research from 1978 to 1979
with another 50 growth a year after that. The orders came in so fast one a month which is a lot
for eight million dollar product that a big backlog developed. IBM did not even try to compete
Cray's former employer control data found itself thrown off its feet they tried producing vector
computers like the cyber 205 but they had gotten bloated and complicated unable to keep up. The
company suffered large financial losses and eventually sold itself off in pieces by the
mid 1980s CDC's most profitable business was Ticketron a rival to the widely despised Ticketmaster.
As I said Seymour Cray wanted to build the fastest computer and to build it from a clean
piece of paper. Even as the Cray one was in the late stages of development Seymour started to shift
his gaze towards a machine even more ambitious the Cray two with a clock speed some three to six
times faster than its predecessor. Such a machine had obstacles with that clock speed no wire can
be longer than 40 centimeters again bringing back the same heating challenges Cray faced with the
8600 and to his dismay Seymour could not focus on solving these problems because his business needed
him to fund early development Cray research IPO did stock which brought on a whole load of new
responsibilities and a bit poetically the company's success caused new headaches since each Cray one
was hand-wired and custom-made like some limited edition supercar a process that took a year the
company had no choice but to staff up to deliver on his big backlog from 1978 to 1980 the company
grew from 300 to 500 people rapid growth and at its peak Cray research employed over 5000 people
in the tiny town of Chippewa Falls Wisconsin Seymour originally pursued scientific computing
because users wrote their own hardware it let him just focus on hardware but times had changed
customers no longer had the budget to rewrite their software every time they wanted portability
it is why the Unix operating system got to be so popular so Cray's customers were increasingly
interested in getting a better Cray one than a radically different Cray two which would require
them to redo all their software it was the story of control data in the 1604 all over again eventually
Cray research's management including CEO John Rohlwagen did the dual approach once more on one
side they extended the Cray one line with the 1s still a powerful computer but not radically different
like a Cray two might be meanwhile Seymour Cray stepped down as chairman in 1981 handing that
job over to the CEO Rohlwagen and became an independent contractor so that he could work on
the Cray two he moved to Boulder Colorado to work in peace once more the Cray two eventually did
come out in 1985 after three false starts on the cooling system famously had this massive liquid
immersion cooling system that caused the machine to resemble an aquarium even so memory latency
caused the system to underperform its full potential then to the surprise of many Seymour's Cray two
found itself upstaged by another computer produced by a separate team the Cray XMP supercomputer the
XMP team was led by a longtime Cray collaborator named Les Davis as well as a talented young
Taiwanese-American designer named Steve Chen where the Cray one had a single CPU the XMP
introduced parallel processing with four CPUs along with new solid state storage semiconductors
released in 1983 the XMP was the world's fastest supercomputer two to five times faster than the
1s without the radical design changes of the Cray two people were stunned it sold very well compared
to the Cray two by 1989 there were only 24 units of the Cray two sold as compared to the almost 200
units sold of the XMP and its immediate successor the YMP there were other changes in the 1970s Cray
had no competitors for its unique part of the market but throughout the 1980s new supercomputer
competitors started to emerge out of the woodwork first over in Japan where Fujitsu Hitachi and NEC
leveraged Japan's growing advantages in VLSI semiconductor production to make compelling
supercomputers Cray still dominated the market in 1988 they had 56 percent market share of
traditional supercomputers but the Japanese all together had 37 percent and were making ground
in a similar vein supercomputer startups like Thinking Machines and N-Cube began exploring
new approaches of supercomputing beyond just vector computing the most prominent of which are
massively parallel systems or MPPs these systems coordinate many commercial microprocessors to do
millions or even billions of floating point operations each second these microprocessors
being bought off the shelf meant far better price for performance this combined competition from the
startups the Japanese and even old friends like control data supercomputer spin-off ETA systems
put a lot of pressure on Cray to focus this approach and its product lineup
Cray researchers unexpected success with the XMP would come back to haunted designer Steve Chen
was featured as one of the company's young exciting rising talents the next Seymour Cray even
but unfortunately the aggressive vision that Chen and his team had for the MP line after the YMP
spiraled beyond what the company can financially support 64 processors custom integrated circuits
and maybe even optical interconnects in 1987 the company was already invested in developing
Seymour Cray's next machine the Cray 3 and the YMP in addition to three existing products that needed
money too they had no money for Chen's science fiction dream so that year Cray research scaled
back the MP line of computers in response the much heralded Steve Chen quit Cray research
and started his own company Supercomputer Systems Supercomputer Systems took 150 million
dollars of investment money from IBM and other investors like Ford and Boeing but went bankrupt
in 1993 in 1989 the company could no longer accommodate its former founder Seymour Cray
joined a spin-off called Cray Computer Corporation or CCC in Colorado to work on the future Cray 3
Cray research thusly would go onwards with the existing Cray XMP architecture building the ecosystem
the Cray 3 would have used gallium arsenide semiconductors for switching performance far
faster than what was possible with silicon it necessitated buying a lot of chip making equipment
the Cray 3 soon fell behind and in 1991 various customers started canceling their orders because
of cratering defense demand after the fall of the Soviet Union CCC would only sell one system
before filing for bankruptcy in 1995 and announced Cray 4 never materialized either Seymour Cray's
cherished approach of sitting down with a clean sheet of paper and building a big iron supercomputer
was no longer financially viable Seymour Cray formed a new company SRC computers to begin exploring
parallel designs but he then passed away in 1996 at the age of 71 due to injuries from a car accident
Cray research was eventually sold to Silicon Graphics and it bounced around for a while
but is now part of Hewlett Packard Enterprise as just Cray Inc.
Advancing semiconductor technologies have made the supercomputers of the past seem comically behind
in 2010 an electrical engineer named Chris Fenton did a project to emulate the Cray 1a
supercomputer using a Xilinx Spartan 3e 1600 development board he even put it into a cute
little Cray 1 package and it now sits in the computer history museum where it inspired this video
today's leading edge semiconductor makers now face the same issues as Cray did with his supercomputers
thermal problems interconnect problems slowdowns due to memory retrieval I am struck
by the similarities unfortunately the semiconductor industry cannot do as Seymour did
throw it all out and start anew with a fresh sheet of paper all right everyone that's it for
tonight thanks for watching subscribe to the channel sign up for the patreon and i'll see you guys next time
