Our goal in this lesson is to begin learning how to solve linear equations.
We could say that we want to find the solutions of a given linear equation.
That's the same way to say it.
What do I mean to find the solution of a linear equation?
Well, it's a great question, especially if we're supposed to be finding these things.
So let's start with a definition for the solution of a linear equation.
Basically, it's this.
The solution of a linear equation is the value of the variable that makes the equation true.
Let me show you a quick example of what this means.
I want to start by showing that x equals negative 2 is a solution of the equation 10x minus 14 equals negative 34.
Now, to show that negative 2 is a solution of this equation, we simply replace x by negative 2 or plug negative 2 in 4x
and simplify to see if the equation that we get is true.
So if I start with 10x minus 14 equals negative 34, I plug negative 2 in for x, and that gives me 10 times negative 2 minus 14 equals negative 34.
10 times negative 2 is negative 20.
So I have negative 20 minus 14 equals negative 34, which is the same as saying negative 34 equals negative 34.
And that, of course, is correct.
That's true.
And that means I really did have a solution.
Now, I'd like us to consider how we would actually find the solutions of linear equations.
I gave you the solution a few minutes ago when I told you negative 2 was a solution.
We're going to try to actually find these things.
And that's a tougher task than the one that I just showed you, but it's still very doable.
So let's start by finding the solutions of equations which are known as one-step equations.
Now, solving one-step equations is exactly what it sounds like.
It's going to take one step in order to solve these.
So let me show you a couple of examples.
Let's first solve x minus 9 equals negative 3.
Now, in order to solve this equation, we want to find a solution, which is just a number,
that I'm going to plug in for x that makes the equation true.
In order to do this, I want to get x by itself on the left-hand side of the equation.
And I want to do that in mathematical legal ways.
So I want to be able to add or subtract or multiply or divide.
I need to do something in order to get x by itself or to isolate the x.
Now, in this case, I could just erase the negative 9 from the left-hand side.
That would get x by itself, but that's not legal from a mathematical perspective.
The right thing to do to get x by itself is to add 9 to both sides of the equation.
So I could start with x minus 9 equals negative 3 and just add 9 to both sides of the equation.
It's sort of like adding 9 pounds to both sides of a seesaw.
If I add 9 pounds to one side and 9 on the other, then the seesaw stays level.
It stays balanced.
And as long as I add the same amount to both sides, I'm good to go.
So now I have x minus 9 equals negative 3.
I add 9 to both sides.
And the left-hand side just becomes x because minus 9 plus 9 is just 0.
And on the right-hand side, I have negative 3 plus 9 and that equals 6.
And so what I'm left with is x equals 6 and 6 is my solution.
Now I can check the solution by plugging 6 into the original equation for x and confirming
that the result is true.
So let's do that pretty quickly.
X minus 9 equals negative 3.
That was the original equation.
I'm going to plug in 6 for x and I'll have 6 minus 9 equals negative 3, which is the
same as just negative 3 equals negative 3.
And of course that's true.
And that confirms that I really did have the correct solution when I was done.
Now I want you to notice that this is called a one-step equation because we only needed
one step to complete it.
I basically added 9 to both sides of the equation.
That was the one step of work that I had to do.
So let's try another one-step equation and this time I want you to try it on your own.
Let's solve x plus 3 equals 8.
Now here's my question.
Did you get 5?
Well I hope so because of course 5 plus 3 does equal 8.
So 5 really is the solution to that problem.
Now let me show you another type of one-step equation which is actually pretty different
from the ones we just did.
So here we go.
Solve negative 7y equals 84.
Now just like in the previous examples, I want to get the variable in this case y alone.
I want to get it by itself.
This is always the goal when you're trying to solve linear equations.
So I've got to get rid of that negative 7 somehow.
And as I joked a moment ago, I could just take a pencil eraser and erase the thing,
but that wouldn't be mathematically correct.
So how do I get rid of that negative 7?
Well in this case it's not addition or subtraction.
So what would I do?
Well in this case I need to divide.
I need to divide both sides of the equation by negative 7.
And when I do that I'm going to have on the left hand side negative 7y divided by negative
7 and on the right hand side I'm going to have 84 divided by negative 7.
Again it's perfectly legal from a mathematical perspective to divide both sides of an equation
by the same number, in this case negative 7.
Now what happens?
Well on the left hand side of the equation the negative 7s will cancel one another and
you and I'll just have one y which is the same as y.
And that's excellent because we've now isolated that y.
We've gotten the y by itself.
But what happens on the right hand side?
Well, we have 84 divided by negative 7 and when you compute that or when you simplify
that you're going to get negative 12.
And so the original equation now becomes y equals negative 12.
And that's your solution.
If you wanted to check it you would plug negative 12 into the original equation and make sure
that it's true.
Now in this case I want you to try one of these kinds of one step equations.
So solve the following, 4y equals negative 36.
Now if you followed the way we worked on the previous example you should have come up with
negative 9 for an answer because you would have divided both sides by the 4.
Now that's two very special kinds of one step equations that we've looked at so far in this
lesson.
And now I'd like to look at some slightly more complicated equations.
Let's transition to talking about solving two step equations.
Things like 5x plus 4 equals negative 11.
Now before you start worrying about two step equations it turns out that they're not much
harder than one step equations.
Basically they're just two steps rather than one.
Just think of them like one step equations twice.
In order to get that variable x on the left hand side of something like 5x plus 4 to be
by itself I'm going to have to get rid of the 5 and I'm going to have to get rid of
the 4 and that's why we call these two step equations.
But they're really not too bad so let's look at how we would attack this problem.
First I'm going to get rid of the 4.
Now one very natural question that you might ask is why are you getting rid of the 4 and
not the 5?
Well believe it or not the answer to that question is wrapped up in order of operations
which we just saw in the previous lesson.
To isolate that x I have to undo the multiplication by 5 and the addition of the 4 in the opposite
order in reverse order.
And so I'm going to start getting x by itself by getting rid of that 4.
So to remove that 4 I'm going to subtract 4 from the left of the equation.
But if I subtract 4 from the left side of the equation I need to subtract 4 from the
right side of the equation.
Again, remember that seesaw idea I talked about earlier.
And so that means I'll have 5x plus 4 equals negative 11 and I'm going to subtract 4 from
both sides.
The left hand side will then just become 5x because 4 minus 4 is 0.
The right hand side becomes negative 11 minus 4 which is negative 15.
And so what I'm left with now is 5x equals negative 15 and something very very important
just happened.
I started with a two step equation I'm down now to a one step equation 5x equals negative
15.
It feels an awful lot like a couple of examples we just did.
So how do we get rid of that 5?
You know how we're going to divide both sides by 5.
And when I do that starting with 5x equals negative 15 and dividing both sides by 5 the
left hand side will just be 1x because the 5s will cancel and the right hand side will
be negative 15 divided by 5.
What is that when you simplify?
It's negative 3.
And therefore the solution is going to be x equals negative 3.
You and I just solved the two step equation, no trouble at all.
But let's check.
Let's make sure that negative 3 really is the solution.
So the original equation was 5x plus 4 equals negative 11.
Let's plug negative 3 in for x and let's see what we get.
5 times negative 3 is negative 15.
So the left hand side is negative 15 plus 4.
What is negative 15 plus 4?
It's negative 11.
And the right hand side was negative 11.
Well of course negative 11 equals negative 11, that's a true statement.
And therefore we know that we had the correct solution when we finished that problem.
Now I'd like you to try to solve a two step linear equation now.
Remember that you'll need to add or subtract first, maybe multiply or divide after that.
But let's try to work on this one and maybe you try it first and see how you do.
Let's try following, let's try solving this equation.
3x minus 7 equals 5.
Now if you worked through the two steps, adding the 7 to both sides, then dividing by 3, you
should have gotten 4 for your solution.
And if you did, you got it right.
Now we've seen a number of examples of solving a linear equation.
Now I'd like to look at some more complicated examples so that you feel comfortable with
some of the different ways that these problems can be presented to you.
Now you've already seen a number of examples and we've worked through the one step and
the two step equations.
Remember we're just going to be adding a few more steps.
It's not much more complicated as long as we learn the steps and we learn to do them
in the right order.
We're mastering those basics.
So let's look at the following example together.
I want us to solve 3 fourths x minus 2 fifths x equals 14.
Now first things first in these kinds of examples, I don't want you to worry about those fractions.
I see the fractions, you're probably worried about them, but we can handle them.
In fact, one very straightforward way to handle them is to find a common denominator
and then to add those fractions.
But I'm going to actually share a slightly different idea which is the same from the
mathematical side, but it gets rid of the fractions from the beginning.
I want us to start with the equation we had and multiply both sides of that equation by
20.
So you're going to have 20 times the left hand side or 20 times 3 fourths x minus 2 fifths
x.
And on the right hand side, you're going to have 20 times 14.
If you multiply by 20 on the left, then you must multiply by 20 on the right.
Again, it's like that seesaw we're keeping balanced.
Now why did I pick 20?
I could have picked something else.
Well 20 is the least common multiple of 4 and 5.
And it would be the least common denominator of the two fractions if we had gone the route
of trying to subtract the fractions.
So let's now distribute that 20 on the left hand side and simplify both sides of the equation.
When I do that, I'm going to have 20 times 3 fourths x minus 20 times 2 fifths x and
the right hand side 20 times 14 is 280.
And now if I work through the products, 20 times 3 fourths is 15 and 20 times 2 fifths
is 8.
And that's going to leave me 15x minus 8x equals 280.
Well 15x minus 8x is 7x because 15 minus 8 is 7.
And so I have the equation 7x equals 280.
Now that's a one step equation.
So what do I do?
I know how to finish this problem.
I divide both sides by 7 and I get x on the left hand side because 7 over 7 is 1.
And the right hand side is 280 divided by 7 and that's 40.
And I'm left with x equals 40.
And therefore the solution of the equation that we started with is just 40.
Now here's one for you to solve.
I want you to solve 1 third x minus 3 fourths x equals 10.
Now did you remember to multiply by 12 on both sides of that equation?
If you did, it would have canceled out all of those fractions for you and everything
would have just become whole number arithmetic.
And if you then work through the steps, the way I did in the previous example, you should
have obtained x equals negative 24 for an answer.
Now let's look at a different type of multi-step equation.
Just a little more of complication.
I want you to see as many different types of these linear equations as you can.
Let's do the following.
Solve negative 6 times the quantity b minus 4 equals 42.
Now remember the first thing I really want to try to do is to get that variable b by
itself.
I want to isolate that variable b.
Well how am I going to do that?
Well the first thing I want to do is to get rid of that negative 6 that's hanging out
in front.
That negative 6 is being multiplied by everything else on the left hand side.
The opposite of multiplication is division and so the first thing I'm going to start
to do is to divide both sides by negative 6.
On the left hand side that's going to give me negative 6 times the quantity b minus 4
divided by negative 6.
And on the right hand side I'm going to have 42 divided by negative 6.
Well the negative 6's on the left hand side cancel and I'm left with just b minus 4 on
the left.
And on the right side I have 42 divided by negative 6 and that's negative 7.
So the equation I now have has been cleaned up quite a bit.
It's b minus 4 equals negative 7.
Now just a quick reminder.
When you divide a negative number by another negative number the sign of the result is
going to be positive because the two signs you started with were the same.
In this case we took positive 42 and divided it by a negative number and so the answer
had to be negative.
And that's why we have a negative 7 on the right hand side.
So we have b minus 4 equals negative 7, well that's just a one step equation.
I just need to get rid of that negative 4 on the left hand side.
How do I do it?
I add 4 to both sides.
And if I do I'll have just b on the left because minus 4 plus 4 is 0, they go away.
And on the right hand side I have negative 7 plus 4 and that equals negative 3.
So it looks like my solution is b equals negative 3.
So for practice let's check that that really is the solution.
We started with the equation negative 6 times b minus 4 equals 42 and now let's plug in
that negative 3 and see if it really is the solution.
When I plug in negative 3 for b I'm going to have negative 6 times the quantity negative
3 minus 4 equals 42.
Now remember our order of operations, we have to do what's inside the parenthesis first.
So the negative 3 minus the 4 gives me a negative 7.
So the left hand side now becomes negative 6 times negative 7 equals 42.
And negative 6 times negative 7 is positive 42, 42 does equal 42, that works and therefore
I really did have the right solution.
Now I'd like to give you a chance to solve this kind of an equation.
So let's do the following, solve 3 times the quantity z minus 1 equals 18.
If you did everything in the right order and did it all correctly you got z equals 7 and
that's a great job.
Now let's transition to a new level of complexity with these problems.
One of the common ways to really complicate matters is to see variables on both sides
of a linear equation.
Did you notice that in all of the examples we've done up to this point there's only
been one variable on one side?
Well we could mess things up a bit by having an equation like negative x plus 3 equals
5x plus 63 and now you would have an x on one side and an x on the other.
How would we handle that?
Well it's really not a problem at all.
The ultimate goal is to get all of the variables on one side of the equation and all the numbers
or the constants on the other side of the equation.
You've already seen all the tools that you need to do this and by the way you don't have
to get the variables always on the left and the numbers always on the right.
You can put them on either side it's just that you have to get all the variables on
one side and all the numbers on the other.
So in this case let's start by getting the constants over to the right hand side.
I've already got a 63 over there so all I need to do is get that 3 that's on the left
side moved over to the right.
How do I get that 3 over to the right?
Well I subtract 3 from both sides.
Remember you've got to do it from both sides of the equation.
The left hand side then becomes just negative x because 3 minus 3 is just 0 and the right
hand side becomes 5x plus 63 minus 3, 63 minus 3 is 60 and so the new equation I have is
negative x equals 5x plus 60.
Next I want to get all those x's together and I'm going to get them over to the left
hand side.
I already have a negative x there I just have to get that 5x to move over there.
The way I do that I subtract 5x from both sides and now the left hand side becomes negative
x minus 5x which is negative 6x and the right hand side becomes well 5x minus 5x that's going
to cancel away and I'll just be left with 60 and therefore my new equation is negative
6x equals 60.
Remember when I did that arithmetic on the left hand side negative x is the same as negative
1x so what I was really doing there was negative 1x minus 5x and that's the same as negative
6x because negative 1 minus 5 is negative 6.
Now how do I get rid of that negative 6 and get it out of the way so that x is by itself?
I'm just going to divide by a negative 6 we've done this kind of thing already in this lesson.
So I now divide both sides of this equation by negative 6 and I've got negative 6x divided
by negative 6 equals 60 divided by negative 6.
Of course the negative 6 on the left they just cancel each other leaving me with an x
that's great and the right hand side is 60 divided by negative 6 which is negative 10.
So my solution is x equals negative 10 as long as we've done everything correctly I
say we check just to make sure that negative 10 really is the solution.
So I had as the original equation negative x plus 3 equals 5x plus 63.
I now need to plug that negative 10 into all the x's that I see I see one on the left I
see one on the right so I plug in a negative 10 in both of those spots and I have the negative
of negative 10 plus 3 equals 5 times negative 10 plus 63.
Negative of negative 10 is just positive 10 so the left hand side is 10 plus 3 which is
13 and on the right hand side 5 times negative 10 is negative 50 and negative 50 plus 63
is positive 13.
So I have 13 equals 13 that's true and that means I had the right solution which is fabulous.
Now I'd like to give you a chance again to solve a similar kind of equation so let me
give you one let's try solving 7x minus 4 equals 8 plus x go for it see how you do well
if you walked through the same sorts of steps that I just did you should have gotten x equals
2 that would be exactly right.
Now I'd like to remind you of two other types of equations and their solutions so let me
ask a really quick question have you ever noticed that all the linear equations we've
discussed up to this point have had exactly one solution when we've looked at a lot of
equations and every time we've had exactly one solution is that going to happen all
the time that's really a good question to ask so let me give you a hint it's not all
always going to happen that way let's look at the following example and see that other
things can happen.
Let's solve the following 3 times the quantity 7x minus 6 equals 21x plus 2 well I can actually
start by taking that 3 that's on the left hand side and distributing it into the parentheses
and when I do that I'm going to have 3 times 7x minus 3 times 6 equals 21x plus 2 and if
I just simplify that left hand side a bit I'm going to have 21x minus 18 equals 21x
plus 2.
Now if I wanted to get all those x's on the left hand side I would subtract the 21x on
the right hand side over to the left and remember if I subtract 21x from one side I've got to
subtract 21x from the other side and what happens when you do that well the 21x on the
left goes away because 21x minus 21x is 0 or 0x and on the right hand side the 21x will
also go away because 21x minus 21x is 0x which is 0 what does that leave me well the
left hand side still has a negative 18 so it's still there and the right hand side still
has a plus 2 so now I have the equation negative 18 equals 2 now I want you to stop and think
with me for just a second is negative 18 equal to 2 never it's never those are never equal
to one another so now you've got to wonder wait did we make a mistake no everything
we've done up to this point is correct and what does that mean how do we interpret that
how do we think about this critically well it means that the equation we started with
can't have any solutions because we could never have had negative 18 equals 2 and so
it's possible that some linear equations that you start with actually have no solutions
at all sometimes they have one solution sometimes they have none alright with that in mind let's
look at one more example solve the following equation 3 times 7x plus 14 equals 7 times
3x plus 6 well I'm going to start this example the way I started the previous example let's
distribute the 3 on the left into the parentheses and let's distribute that 7 on the right into
the parentheses as well what do I have then I'll have 3 times 7x plus 3 times 14 equals
7 times 3x plus 7 times 6 if you start to do some of the simplification there you'll
have 21x plus 42 equals 21x plus 42 now let's stop and think again for just a minute look
at the left hand side and look at the right hand side those two things are equal no matter
what you plug in for x in fact that means something very very special it means that
every number that we can possibly plug in for x is a solution that means every real
number no matter whether you want to plug in 1 or 17 or negative 103 it doesn't matter
every real number you plug in will be a solution and that's basically the opposite of what
we saw in the previous example and it leads us to another vocabulary word for this course
we're going to say that an equation that is true for every possible value of the variable
is called an identity so in that last example that we just finished the equation we started
with is actually called an identity because anything you plug in for x is a solution of
that equation and this leads us to a big picture comment that's extremely important for this
course every linear equation that you can write down falls into one of three categories
either the equation will have exactly one solution we saw that in a lot of examples already
or your equation will have no solutions at all or the equation is an identity those are
the only three options but all three of them can occur I've shown you examples of each
of those three in this lesson now I'd like to close the lesson with a quick word problem
so let's get right to it we have a rectangle and the length of the rectangle is 4 cm shorter
than the width of the rectangle the total perimeter of the rectangle is exactly 100 cm I'd like
us to find the length and the width of that rectangle well let's start by defining some
variables let's let x be the length of the rectangle and that means the width then is
x plus 4 because remember from the problem itself the width was larger than the length
by 4 cm and that means that the perimeter equation is given by 2x plus 2 times the quantity
x plus 4 equals 100 remember the full perimeter was supposed to be 100 cm now let's solve
this equation for x I'm going to start by distributing that 2 that's in front of the
x plus 4 into those parentheses and that's going to give me 2x plus 2x plus 8 equals
100 and that's the same as 4x plus 8 equals 100 if I subtract the 8 over to the right
hand side I'll have 4x equals 92 100 minus 8 is 92 and if I divide both sides by 4 I'll
have x on the left equals 92 divided by 4 which is 23 so the length of the rectangle
is 23 cm and that means the width of the rectangle is 27 cm because it was supposed to be 4 cm
longer I can confirm that if I'd like by adding 23 plus 27 plus 23 plus 27 which is 50 plus
50 which is 100 and that was exactly what I was supposed to get for my perimeter so with
that example I'm going to close this lesson on solving linear equations next time I want
to continue our discussion of solving linear equations but I want to mix things up a bit
we're going to add some absolute value symbols into the equations and we're going to see
how we solve those those absolute value symbols change things a lot but it's very straightforward
to do I look forward to talking with you about those in the next lesson.
