In the last several lessons, we've talked extensively about polynomial functions.
How to evaluate them, how to graph them, how to solve equations that have them in them.
I would like to transition now away from polynomials for the next several lessons.
And in today's lesson, I want to move on to roots and radical expressions.
In a very basic sense, nth roots are very closely connected to polynomials, but
they're not polynomials.
In fact, you can think of nth roots as doing the opposite of a polynomial.
I'll explain what I mean by this in just a moment.
But first, let's define an nth root.
For any real numbers, a and b, and any positive integer n,
if a raised to the n is equal to b, then a is called an nth root of b.
Now you're probably saying, that made no sense and it didn't help me at all.
Well, let's look at a few examples and hopefully you'll get the idea.
We know that 5 raised to the second power, or 5 squared, equals 25.
So that means that 5 is a second root of 25.
Or we might more often say that 5 is the square root of 25.
We also know that negative 2 raised to the 3 is equal to negative 8.
So we can say that negative 2 is a third root or a cube root of negative 8.
Do you see how this is working?
This is the idea behind these nth roots.
And do you see also how these roots are like the opposite of taking a number
to a positive whole number or raising it to a positive whole number?
Rather than starting with negative 2 and cubing it to get negative 8,
it's as if we started with the negative 8 and we're going backwards to get the negative 2.
That's going to be the focus of the next few lessons.
Now, for most of you, your most common experience with these kinds of roots
is going to be square roots.
And that's excellent.
We'll spend some time in the next few lessons talking about square roots.
But we also want to spend time talking about lots of other types of roots.
So let's just look at several examples of computing these roots and
performing some arithmetic on them.
As a first example, let's start with something that's probably pretty familiar,
a square root.
Let's simplify square root of 144.
Now, one of the issues that's very clear when we're trying to simplify roots like
this square root is that we need to know as many arithmetic facts as we can.
There's really no substitute for knowing how to add, subtract, multiply and
divide quickly.
And in the case of computing these roots,
it's important that we have some of the perfect square calculations set to memory.
In this case, I know that 144 is equal to 12 times 12.
So using the notation from our definition from a moment ago,
it means that 12 to the second is 144.
And therefore the square root of 144 equals 12.
Again, notice how I'm going backwards and forwards between the 12 and the 144.
Let's try a second example.
See if you can get this one on your own.
Let's simplify the fourth root of 81.
Okay, now I need a number which I can raise to the fourth power to get 81.
That is, I need to solve the equation A raised to the four equals 81.
Well, do you know a number that would satisfy that equation?
If we think about it for just a second, you'll see that three to the fourth,
which is three times three times three times three, does equal 81.
And since three to the fourth equals 81, it means that the fourth root of 81 equals three.
Now, here's another example I want you to try, but
be careful before you jump to an answer.
Simplify square root of negative 100.
Well, actually there's no real number that will satisfy the equation
A squared equals negative 100.
If you plug in a number, a real number for A and you square it,
you'll never get a negative number.
So this square root, the square root of negative 100 doesn't exist.
And by the way, in this lesson, and throughout our discussion of these roots,
we're only going to be interested in real number answers for these roots.
I'm not going to want to talk about complex numbers here.
So when we ask for the square root of negative 100,
we're going to say it doesn't exist because there is no real number,
which is equal to the square root of negative 100.
Now, one last example of this type where we're just sort of simplifying the roots.
How about this one?
You try it.
Find the third root of negative 125.
Okay, I need a number that I can cube or
raise to the power three to get negative 125.
Okay, what number is that?
Well, if you think for a moment, you realize that if you take negative five and
raise it to the third power, you'll have negative five times negative five times
negative five, and that really is negative 125.
So the third root of negative 125 is equal to negative five.
And now we need to make an extremely important point in this lesson.
In the real number system, we're always allowed to compute the nth
root of a negative number if n is odd, just like I did a moment ago
when I computed the third root of negative 125.
But if n is even, then we cannot take the nth root of a negative number.
And that's why square root of negative 100 is not doable because two is even.
And you might say, wait a minute, I don't see a two there.
Well, remember, square root is the same as the second root, if you will.
Just like we took a third root a moment ago.
Well, a square root is a second root.
And since two is even, I'm not allowed to do square root of negative 100.
Now, the next question we should ask now that we've done some simplification of
some of these roots is, what if we wanted to perform operations on these kinds of
roots or what some people call radical expressions?
Maybe I want to add some together.
I want to multiply them together and so on.
How would I simplify these kinds of expressions?
Well, let's do some examples of that.
I think it's very important.
And I'm actually going to start with the operation of multiplication,
because that's actually one of the easiest to do with these roots.
So let's just look before at a very important fact, and
then we'll jump to the examples.
Here's the fact or rule that we need to keep in mind.
If you want to take the nth root of a and the nth root of b and
multiply them together, as long as the nth root of a is a real number and
the nth root of b is a real number as well, that is, they both exist,
then the nth root of a times the nth root of b equals the nth root of a, b as a product.
Okay, so let's simplify an example.
Simplify the third root of negative 4 times the third root of 16.
Well, first of all, I have to ask myself if each of the two numbers that are in
play here exist on their own.
That would be the third root of negative 4 and the third root of 16.
Well, they are real numbers.
Even the third root of negative 4 is fine because the 3 is odd.
Remember, if the n in the nth root is odd,
then you are allowed to plug in a negative number like negative 4 and
see what you get.
So the two pieces exist, they're both well-defined, they're both real numbers.
And that means I can use this rule to combine them as one cube root.
So I want you to try that now.
Simplify the third root of negative 4 times the third root of 16 by putting the two
together.
Well, here's how we do it.
The third root of negative 4 times the third root of 16 is the same as the third
root of negative 4 times 16, which is the third root of negative 64.
And now if I ask myself, is there a number that I can multiply with itself three times
to get negative 64, I realize that the third root of negative 64 is negative 4.
Because negative 4 times negative 4 times negative 4 really is negative 64.
So the final answer in that example is just negative 4.
Let's try a different example.
This time I'm going to have a variable involved, and this is very important.
Let's assume, to make things a bit easier on ourselves, that when we see variables
in these kinds of problems, that they represent positive numbers.
Then I don't have to worry about whether the square roots really exist or not.
So when you see a variable like an x, just assume it's positive.
And that way, we'll know that the square roots all exist.
Simplify square root of 98 times x to the fifth times square root of 18x cubed.
Well, based on this assumption that the x is positive, I know that both of these now
exist, and so I'm going to work on them separately, see if I can simplify them that way, and then
I'm going to use that combining rule to bring them together at the end and see if they'll
simplify even more.
Let's start with the square root of 98x to the fifth.
That's the same as the square root of 2 times 49 times x to the fourth times the x.
And now I can sort of pull those guys apart, and I know that the square root of 98x to
the fifth is the same as square root of 2 times square root of 49 times square root
of x to the fourth times square root of x.
And some of those pieces will get even simpler.
Square root of 49 is 7, and the square root of x to the fourth is x squared, because x
squared times x squared is x to the fourth.
So this piece simplifies as 7x squared times the square root of 2x.
Now why don't we try simplifying the 18x cubed quickly, and let's see what you get for that
one.
Well, when you simplify that, since the 18x cubed is the same as 2 times 9 times x squared
times x, you know that square root of 18x cubed is square root of 2 times square root
of 9 times square root of x squared times square root of x.
And that's just 3x times the square root of 2x, the 3 coming from square root of 9,
and the x coming from the square root of x squared.
And now you can multiply these two pieces together and see if they'll simplify even more.
So the original problem actually becomes 7x squared times the square root of 2x times
3x times the square root of 2x.
And when you multiply all that together, you actually get 21x cubed times the square root
of 4x squared.
The 4x squared is coming from 2x times 2x, both of which were under square root symbols.
But the square root of 4x squared is just 2x.
And so this will simplify even further as 21 times x cubed times 2x, which is 42x to
the fourth.
So that really messy looking original problem is actually just 42x to the fourth.
Okay, we've talked about multiplication.
Now let's talk about division a bit, first by talking about taking roots of fractions.
In other words, what can we do when we divide two roots?
One root divided by another root, and see if that's related somehow to fractions.
Well, here's another rule we need to keep in mind.
If the nth root of a is a real number, and the nth root of b is a real number, in other
words, they both exist on their own, then the nth root of a divided by the nth root
of b is the same as the nth root of the fraction a over b.
In other words, we become one nth root instead of two separate ones.
So let's use this rule now in the following example.
I'd like you to try to do it first.
Divide the square root of the quantity 75t to the ninth divided by 12t cubed.
Okay, from this rule, I know that I can split the square root into a ratio of two square
roots and then simplify.
And that's going to tell me then that the original problem is the same as square root
of 75t to the ninth divided by square root of 12t cubed.
And now let's treat the numerator and the denominator separately, see if they'll clean
up just a bit, and then we'll bring them together and do any other simplification that we can.
The square root of 75t to the ninth is the same as square root of three times the square
root of 25 times the square root of t to the ninth.
And that's the same as five times the square root of three times the square root of t to
the ninth.
Well, that t to the ninth actually has a t to the eighth inside, and the square root
of t to the eighth is just t to the fourth.
And so this all will combine into five times t to the fourth times square root of three
times the square root of an extra t, which is the same as five t to the fourth times
square root of three t.
Now the denominator, square root of 12t cubed is the same as square root of three times
square root of four times the square root of t cubed, and that cleans up pretty quickly
as two t square root of three t.
Now I can take these two pieces that we've just found and bring them back as a ratio
to find the final answer.
So the square root of 75t to the ninth divided by 12t cubed is the same as five t to the
fourth times the square root of three t divided by two t times the square root of three t.
And the first thing you should see is that the square root of three t's will cancel,
leaving me with five t to the fourth over two t, or five t to the third power divided
by two.
That's the final answer.
Now let's look at a second example that involves this division, okay?
And now it'll just involve numbers.
I'll see if you can solve it first.
Simplify five times the fourth root of 243 divided by the fourth root of three.
Well, how did you do?
Just both the numerator and the denominator are well-defined.
We know from our rule that we can combine these two fourth roots into one fourth root,
and that means we're going to have the following.
The original problem is the same as five times the fourth root of the fraction 243 over three,
and that's the same as five times the fourth root of 81.
Just do the division, 243 over three, but I know the fourth root of 81.
That's just three, because three raised to the fourth is 81.
So my problem simplifies to just five times three, which is 15.
So what really looked like a complicated expression at the beginning of the problem really was
just the number 15 in disguise.
Now I'd like to mention one more topic related to fractions that involve radicals, and that's
sometimes called rationalizing the denominator.
Basically the idea is this.
At times we don't want to have any radical symbols or root symbols in the denominator
of a fraction.
Now I want to make it clear that it's not necessary that you get rid of these symbols
in the denominator.
Sometimes you hear people say that you have to get rid of them.
That's not true, but there are times when it is nice to remove all of the root symbols
or radical symbols from the denominator, and that removal, if you will, is called rationalizing
the denominator.
So let me show you an example of what I mean with the following.
Rationalize the denominator of the fraction square root of x cubed divided by square
root of 7xy.
Now to rationalize this denominator, I want to remove the square root symbol in the denominator,
and that means I'm going to multiply by an extra square root of 7xy.
Now if I multiply the denominator by that, then I must multiply the numerator by the
same amount so that everything stays equal to the original quantity.
And when I do that, I'm going to have the following.
Square root of x cubed times square root of 7xy divided by square root of 7xy times
the square root of 7xy.
The numerator will then become square root of 7x to the fourth times y, and the denominator
just becomes 7xy.
Square root of 7xy times square root of 7xy is 7xy.
And now I've rationalized the denominator.
There are no more square roots in the denominator, but I can clean up the numerator a bit because
the numerator becomes x squared times the square root of 7y, and then that's divided
by 7xy.
I can cancel a little with the x's, and I'll have x times the square root of 7y divided
by 7y.
Notice that that denominator doesn't have any more radical symbols in it.
That was the goal.
That's called rationalizing the denominator.
And notice also that things simplified just a little bit by the time I got to the final
answer.
Now that simplification was nice, but it wasn't my main purpose.
The main purpose was to get rid of the square root in the denominator.
Now multiplication and division with these radical symbols or these root symbols is actually
pretty straightforward.
But what about addition and subtraction?
Well the key to thinking about addition and subtraction is like terms.
In other words, 3 square root of 2 and 5 square root of 2 is sort of like three bananas and
five bananas, and if you put them all in one basket, you'd have eight bananas.
So I can write something like 3 times the square root of 2 plus 5 times the square root
of 2 equals 8 times the square root of 2, and I'd be right.
Well what if I tried 3 times the square root of 7 plus 4 times the square root of 2?
Well I can't do anything to simplify that expression.
Square root of 7 and square root of 2 are both square roots, but they're different square
roots.
It would be sort of like apples and oranges are both fruits, but I can't really do much
more than throw them in a basket together.
I can't really combine them in any way.
We also would not be able to combine square root of 7 and third root of 7 because those
are two very different quantities as well.
So I'm going to look at a few examples now of simplifying radical expressions or root
expressions that have addition and subtraction in them, and the key is to look for like terms.
Let's start with the following.
Now you might look at me and say, well, 4 through to 3 and 4 through to 48, they have
different numbers under the root symbol, so there's no like terms, so I quit.
There's nothing to do.
Well you're right in saying that 3 and 48 are very different, but we should try to simplify
each term first and just see if like terms pop out.
Look at that second piece, 4 through to 48.
It's the same as the 4th root of 16 times 3, and we know from our previous rules that
that's the same as the 4th root of 16 times the 4th root of 3 by splitting them up.
But the 4th root of 16 is just 2, so this is all equal to 2 times the 4th root of 3.
And you know what, I can now change the original problem so that it looks like 11 times the
4th root of 3 minus 2 times the 4th root of 3, and now I have like terms.
And since 11 minus 2 is 9, I know that my final answer is 9 times the 4th root of 3.
Okay, let's try another one, and I'm going to suggest you try this one first and see
how you do.
Simplify 13 times the square root of 5 minus 3 times the square root of 125 plus the square
root of 100.
Okay, we start by simplifying each of the square roots on their own as much as we can,
and then hope that we see like terms.
There's nothing to do with the square root of 5.
Leave that one alone.
Let's move on to the square root of 125.
That square root is the same as square root of 25 times 5, which is the same as square
root of 25 times the square root of 5, which is 5 times the square root of 5.
Now we've got that written, we're fine.
Well, first of all, let's look at the second term again.
It actually had a 3 in front, so 3 times the square root of 125 is the same as 3 times
5 times the square root of 5, which is now 15 times the square root of 5.
Now we're done with that.
Now let's look at the third term.
It was square root of 100, which is 10.
Well, that doesn't have a square root of 5 left in it.
That's okay.
It's still a 10, so just leave it as a 10.
And the original problem then becomes rewritten as 13 times the square root of 5 minus 15
times the square root of 5 plus 10.
And those first two terms now have like terms in them.
They can be combined as negative 2 times the square root of 5 plus 10.
That 10 is not like a square root of 5, so I can't simplify this answer any further.
And the final answer is just negative 2 times the square root of 5 plus 10.
Okay, let's keep going now with more of these simplification problems, and I'd like to
look at an example which really shows an error that is often made by some students.
So let me show you that example.
I want you to simplify square root of 3 plus square root of 5.
Now here's the pitfall that some students actually sort of fumble into, if you will,
as they go through a problem like this.
Some students will rewrite that original problem as the square root of 3 plus 5.
In other words, they'll write the 3 and the 5 both under the same square root symbol.
And then they'll just start simplifying and rewrite that as square root of 8, which is
square root of 4 times 2, which is 2 times the square root of 2.
Unfortunately, the first step in the logic there is wrong.
You cannot add across the square root symbols.
So it is not the case that the square root of 3 plus the square root of 5 is equal to
square root of 3 plus 5.
In fact, that problem I started you with is as simple as it gets.
You actually can't do anything to the square root of 3 plus the square root of 5.
There's nothing else to do.
You just leave it alone, actually, and you move on to your next problem.
OK?
Now, I know I can multiply across square root symbols like the square root of 3 times the
square root of 27 equals square root of 3 times 27.
And then I can simplify that.
That's square root of 81, which is 9.
That's fine.
But I can't add or subtract across square root symbols.
And I can't tell you how many times I've seen that error in my career.
So be careful not to make that error when you add or subtract radical symbols.
Now, let's mix in some addition, subtraction, multiplication, and see what you get by trying
to expand the following quantity.
Let's expand or multiply out the following.
2 times the square root of 7 plus the square root of 5 times square root of 7 minus the
square root of 5.
Now believe it or not, this is really an example of foiling, although it might not be so obvious
because all those square root symbols are floating around.
But in fact, if you just expand this by multiplying each term in the first set of parentheses,
by each term in the second set of parentheses, and then simplifying, you really are just foiling
and you can really simplify this.
So I'm going to ask you to try working this out.
Use the FOIL method to expand 2 times the square root of 7 plus the square root of 5
times square root of 7 minus square root of 5.
OK, let's work through it now.
When you do the foiling, you're going to end up with 2 times the square root of 7 times
the square root of 7 minus 2 times the square root of 7 times square root of 5, plus square
root of 7 times square root of 5, minus square root of 5 times square root of 5.
Now let's clean this up a bit.
The first piece of that is just two times seven
because the square root of seven times square root of seven
is seven.
And the middle, the second term is just two
times the square root of 35
and it has a minus sign in front of it.
Don't lose that minus sign.
Then the third term is just plus square root of 35
and the last one is minus five
because the square root of five times square root of five
is five.
And when you simplify a bit more,
you realize that you just have 14
minus the square root of 35
and that's just nine minus the square root of 35
and you're done.
So the final answer there is nine
minus the square root of 35.
Now, I'd like to look at a very special example
of this kind of foiling.
Believe it or not, the example we just did
is something that comes up often.
And so let's look at another example
where you have a sort of binomial,
both terms of which are square roots,
multiplied by another binomial, so to speak,
again, two terms multiplied with each other.
Let's expand square root of three
plus the square root of 11
times square root of three minus the square root of 11.
Now, I want you to notice that the two sets of parentheses,
if you will, look very similar.
The only difference is that one has a plus sign in it
and the other one has a minus sign.
Okay, so I have a square root of three in both,
I have a square root of 11.
All that's happening is that in one of them
they're added, in the other one, they're subtracted.
When you have two things like this,
where all that differs is the sign in the middle,
we call these things conjugates of one another.
So square root of three plus the square root of 11
is the conjugate of square root of three
minus the square root of 11 and vice versa, okay?
So we have these conjugates,
and now what I'd like to do is see what happens
when I actually multiply them together.
So here's what we get when we do that multiplication.
First of all, you're gonna have a square root of three
times the square root of three
minus square root of three times square root of 11
plus square root of three times square root of 11
minus the square root of 11 times the square root of 11.
Now, the first term, square root of three times square root
of three is just three,
and the last term is just a negative 11
for the same sort of reason.
But what happens in the middle?
Well, you have a minus square root of 33
plus a square root of 33.
What are those two going to do?
They're gonna cancel one another out,
and you're just left with three minus 11,
which is negative eight.
And do you see what just happened?
The square root symbols are actually gone
from the final answer.
Why?
Why did that happen?
Well, it's basically because we're really dealing
with a difference of two squares.
We've seen that in previous lessons.
And by squaring the square roots,
we got rid of the square roots up at the front
and at the very end.
So in the middle, the two square root symbols
canceled each other, and at the front and at the back,
they went away because we were squaring them
at the same time.
So this leads to a very important set of comments
for getting rid of square roots
in denominators of certain kinds of fractions.
Remember, we called this rationalizing the denominator
a few minutes ago.
Look at this example.
It's a really nifty way to rationalize the denominator
of certain types of fractions.
I want you to simplify five divided by
square root of two minus square root of three
by rationalizing the denominator.
So basically, I want you to get rid of the square root
symbols in the denominator.
Well, the idea, just to jump to the end,
is to multiply both top and bottom of the fraction
by the conjugate of the denominator.
And in this case, the conjugate of that denominator
would be square root of two plus square root of three.
So I multiply that in the top and in the bottom
so that everything is still evened out, so to speak.
I'm just multiplying by one in the process.
And when I do that multiplication,
I'm going to have the following.
The numerator will just be five times the quantity
square root of two plus the square root of three.
And the denominator will be square root of two
minus square root of three times square root of two
plus the square root of three.
Now, the numerator, you can't do anything with.
But when you multiply out the denominator,
you're going to have the following.
You'll basically just have two plus the square root of six
minus the square root of six minus three.
Because that's what happens when you do that foiling
and you do the simplification.
And now the denominator is just two minus three
because the middle terms cancel out
the same way they canceled out in the previous example
and the denominator is just negative one.
So I had that original fraction
and it's now simply equal to five
times the square root of two plus the square root of three.
Don't lose those.
All divided by negative one
and that's the same as the quantity
negative five times square root of two
plus square root of three.
Notice we've gotten rid of the denominator
having any sort of radical symbols.
In fact, we get rid of the denominator altogether.
That wasn't my ultimate goal.
But we did get rid of the square roots in the denominator
and that's what rationalizing the denominator is all about.
Well, in this lesson, we've spent a good bit of time
getting comfortable with radical expressions
and root expressions, not just square roots
but cube roots and others.
In the next lesson, we'll use what we've just learned
about simplifying these terms to talk about ways
to find solutions of equations
which have these kinds of root symbols in them.
