We've talked about the algebra of rational functions in the last couple lessons.
And in this lesson, I'd like to close out our discussion of rational functions by discussing
a very important topic known as partial fractions.
Now from the beginning, I have to tell you that partial fractions seems a bit backward,
a bit counterintuitive, because it does the opposite of what you've been taught to do
for a long time.
Let me try to explain what I mean before we actually get to the examples.
First off, the method of partial fractions involves splitting apart rational expressions
so that the denominators are separated from one another.
For example, it's true that if you take the fraction 1 over x times x minus 1, that's
actually equal to 1 over x minus 1 minus 1 over x.
You can actually check this yourself by getting a common denominator on the right-hand side
and then adding the two terms together and simplifying.
You would then get the left-hand side.
Did you notice what I did?
I started with one fraction with two linear factors that were in the denominator and multiplied
together, and I split it into two fractions each with only one of those linear factors
in the denominator.
Doing this kind of splitting is actually very helpful in lots of different areas of math.
In fact, I've personally used partial fractions in computing certain definite integrals in
calculus and in finding the sum of certain infinite series, which are known as telescoping
series.
Both of these topics show up in first-year calculus, so if you plan to complete such
a course one day, then partial fractions will be really, really handy.
I've actually even used partial fractions in my own research in combinatorics, so even
though it's a pretty elementary technique, it's very useful to lots of people who need
to solve mathematical problems.
But it really turns out to be something that many students find odd or unnecessary at first.
Why?
Well, go ahead and go back to that example that I showed you a moment ago.
1 over x times x minus 1 equals 1 over x minus 1 minus 1 over x.
In almost your whole mathematical career, you've probably never been asked to actually
split up a fraction like we did in that example, and to turn it into two fractions which are
either added or subtracted together with smaller denominators.
You've certainly been asked to do the opposite.
That is to take what's basically on the right-hand side and do the subtraction and glue everything
together to get back to that left-hand side.
So do you see what I'm talking about?
You and I just haven't spent that much time doing the problem from left to right, doing
the splitting.
But it's this splitting that I want us to do today, and it's what we call the method
of partial fractions.
So let's get started with an example, and I'm going to walk you through step-by-step
to show you how to do this splitting.
In other words, how to figure out what the two fractions really are in the following
example in order to accomplish the splitting.
I want you to perform partial fractions on the expression 4 divided by x times x plus
2.
Now, what we're being asked to do is split the fraction into the sum, or maybe difference,
of two fractions, and it's going to look like a over x plus b over x plus 2, where the a
and the b are constants.
By the way, any time the denominator is just one little linear term, like x or x plus 2,
then the numerator is always just going to be a constant, like a or b.
In a few minutes, I'm going to show you some examples where the denominators actually contain
quadratic terms that can't be factored.
And when you have a denominator like that, then the numerators are going to have to look
a little more complicated.
OK, so how do I find the a and the b?
In fact, that's the whole point now of partial fractions.
I have a over x plus b over x plus 2.
As soon as I can find that a and b, I'm done.
So what do I do?
Here's what I do.
I start by actually trying to combine these two fractions now with a common denominator.
OK, we know how to do that.
In this case, the common denominator is going to be x times x plus 2.
So when I have a over x plus b over x plus 2, that's the same as a times x plus 2 over
x times x plus 2 plus b times x over x times x plus 2.
In the first fraction, I needed to multiply top and bottom by x plus 2.
And in the second fraction, I needed to multiply top and bottom by x.
And now I have the same denominator, a common denominator, in both of those fractions so
I can add the numerators.
And I'm left with ax plus 2a plus bx over x times x plus 2.
By the way, where did the ax plus 2a come from?
It came from expanding the a times x plus 2, or using the distributive property, distributing
the a with the x and the a with the 2.
Now this new fraction, ax plus 2a plus bx divided by x times x plus 2, is equal to the
original expression 4 over x times x plus 2.
And now something very important happens.
Then you have two fractions that are equal.
And their denominators are also equal, and in this case, the two denominators are just
x times x plus 2.
Then you can conclude something very important, that the numerators are also equal to one
another for all values of x.
And so, since I know those two fractions are equal, and since they both have the same denominator,
x times x plus 2, I know that the numerators are equal, which means ax plus 2a plus bx.
Is equal to 4.
And that's the same as saying that a plus b times x plus the 2a equals 4.
Okay, now that's true for every value of x.
So what I want to do now is just find the a and the b.
Now we're going to make one more step, and it's a very important step, even though it
looks small.
That 4 on the right-hand side can be thought of as 0x plus 4.
So what I really have is a plus b times the x plus 2a equals 0x plus 4.
And now we look at the coefficients of the like terms and set them equal to each other.
Now if I do that with this equation, what I then have is the following.
The a plus b that's in front of the x on the left-hand side must equal the 0 that's
in front of the x on the right-hand side.
And the constant on the left-hand side, which is just 2a, that's the only piece that doesn't
have an x with it, has to equal the constant on the right-hand side, which is 4.
Well look, now I have a system of two equations with two unknowns.
I know how to solve that.
In fact, the second equation is just going to give me a equals 2 once I divide both
sides by 2.
And then the first equation becomes 2 plus b equals 0 because I already know a equals
2.
So I have 2 plus b equals 0, which means b equals negative 2.
Now I know a and I know b.
I can go back to what was my original partial fractions decomposition, a over x plus b over
x plus 2, and I can replace the a and the b by the values we just found.
And I now know that the original amount was the same as 2 over x plus negative 2 over x
plus 2, which of course can be written as 2 over x minus 2 over x plus 2.
Now what's really cool about this is that you can actually check your answer because
you can now take this difference of two fractions, get a common denominator, and actually do
the subtraction.
And once you've actually recombined, so to speak, you'll actually find that you get
back to the original fraction that we started with, which is really great.
OK, now with that example in mind, let's do another example.
Practice is going to help us tremendously with these kinds of problems.
So let's look at the following example and see if we can practice this technique of partial
fractions.
I want us to find the partial fractions decomposition of 2x plus 1 over x squared plus 2x minus
3.
Now, this example is very similar to the earlier one, even though it may not look like it at
first.
The first thing we need to do is factor the denominator as much as we can.
It's important to know what the denominator looks like.
And in this case, that denominator will factor as x minus 1 times x plus 3.
So the original expression is rewritable as 2x plus 1 over x minus 1 times x plus 3.
Good.
Now, I look at the denominator and I see that I have two linear factors in that denominator,
an x minus 1 and an x plus 3.
So I know I can split this thing now as a over x minus 1 plus b over x plus 3, where
a and b are some numbers.
Remember, when the denominators involve just a linear factor, then the numerator is just
a constant, like a or b.
It's very important.
Now I know that the original expression is the same as a over x minus 1 plus b over x
plus 3, and now my goal is to find a and b.
So the way I do that is I now recombine these two fractions, a over x minus 1 and the b
over x plus 3.
I add them together, getting a common denominator first, and then I march through just as I
did in the previous example.
So I have a over x minus 1 plus b over x plus 3 equals a times x plus 3 over x minus 1 times
x plus 3 plus b times x minus 1 over x minus 1 times x plus 3.
Do you see how I got that common denominator of x minus 1 times x plus 3?
And then I multiplied whatever I had to in both the numerator and denominator of each
fraction to give me that common denominator.
And now let's simplify.
The first fraction becomes ax plus 3a over x minus 1 times x plus 3, and then the second
fraction is bx minus b over x minus 1 times x plus 3, and now I can add the numerators
and I get ax plus the bx plus 3a minus b all divided by x minus 1 times x plus 3.
Now that quantity has to equal what we started with, which is 2x plus 1 over x minus 1 times
x plus 3.
So we have two equal fractions and they have the same denominators, and the only way that
can be true is if their numerators are also equal, which means ax plus bx plus 3a minus
b has to equal 2x plus 1, which was the numerator of the original expression.
Now I take the coefficients of x, those must be equal to each other.
Since the one side has ax plus bx in it, I know that the coefficient of x on that side
is a plus b, and since the other side has a 2x in it, the coefficient of x there is
a 2.
So a plus b equals 2.
If I then look at the constants on both sides, I know the constant on the one side is 3a minus
b, and the constant on the other side is just a plus 1.
So that gives me the equation 3a minus b equals 1.
And so now I have two equations with two unknowns.
The two equations I just gave you, the two unknowns are a and b.
Let's solve this system now.
This reminds us of the lesson in which we solved two equations with two unknowns.
So I know a plus b equals 2, and that means that b equals 2 minus a, and I can substitute
2 minus a in for b in the other equation, which was 3a minus b equals 1.
And when I do that, I have 3a minus the quantity 2 minus a equals 1.
Meaning that minus sign gives me 3a minus 2 plus a equals 1, or 4a minus 2 equals 1,
or 4a equals 3 when I add 2 to both sides.
So the a has to be 3 fourths.
OK, once I know a is 3 fourths, I can tell you what b is pretty quickly, because b was
equal to 2 minus a.
So b equals 2 minus 3 fourths, which means b equals 5 fourths.
And that was the goal.
The goal was to find a and b.
Now I know them, and therefore I can plug them back into the original split, the decomposition,
if you will, that we wrote down to start, and I now know the following.
The original expression 2x plus 1 divided by x squared plus 2x minus 3 is the same as
it's equal to 3 fourths over x minus 1 plus 5 fourths over x plus 3.
Again, we could check this.
We could actually do the sum on the right hand side now after we get a common denominator
just to make sure we get the left hand side, which is great.
Anytime you can check something in math, it's a wonderful thing.
I'm not going to do that today, because we have other things to do in this lesson.
But I'll leave that to you.
The fact that you can check though is something that's really helpful, and if you take the
time, you can do that yourself.
Now I'd like to start looking at some other types of examples that we see here with partial
fractions.
Just so you get a feel for the different ways this can change just a little bit as the denominators
get more complicated in the examples.
So let's look at the following.
Find the partial fractions decomposition of x plus 3 divided by x cubed minus 2x squared
plus x.
Now the first thing we've got to do is factor that denominator, because by factoring the
denominator, I'm going to know how to split the fraction.
The denominator, x cubed minus 2x squared plus x, has a common x everywhere.
So I factor out that x, leaving me x times x squared minus 2x plus 1.
And the x squared minus 2x plus 1 is just the same as x minus 1 times x minus 1.
So what I really have in that denominator is x times x minus 1 squared.
Now I want you to notice that this denominator actually factors as a whole bunch of linear
terms again, x with an x minus 1 with an x minus 1.
But notice that one of the linear terms is actually repeated.
The x minus 1 is there twice.
Now what are you going to do there?
Well, you have to do something slightly different than you have before, but it's actually not
that complicated.
When you have a repeated factor like the x minus 1 is in this problem, you simply give
each power of that repeated factor its own fraction in the decomposition, and you just
use the numerator, which is what you would have used if the factor had not been repeated.
Now that's a lot of words, and maybe it didn't make sense.
So let me just show you what the decomposition would look like.
X plus 3 over the x times x minus 1 squared, which is what we started with, would have
a decomposition that looks like a over x, that makes sense, plus b over just x minus
1 to the first power, plus c divided by the x minus 1 to the second power.
So notice how we had to use an x minus 1 as one denominator and then an x minus 1 squared
as another, but notice also that we just used a constant b over one of them and a constant
c over the other one.
Easy enough.
Now notice that we have three unknowns, a, b, and c, but that's not a problem.
It just means that our system of equations might get a little bit bigger, but you and
I have solved systems with three unknowns before in this course.
So I think we're fine.
Let's just keep moving forward.
We now have our decomposition, a over x plus b over x minus 1 plus c over x minus 1 squared.
Now I have to get a common denominator and try to combine all this.
Now what is the common denominator in this example?
Well you need an x and you need an x minus 1 squared.
So the common denominator is going to be x times x minus 1 squared and a little hint,
that's the way the original denominator in the original expression factored.
That's the denominator we want here.
So I'm going to try to get every one of these fractions to have a denominator of x times
x minus 1 squared.
The first fraction, a over x then, is going to need to be multiplied by an x minus 1 squared.
Okay?
That's good.
The second fraction will need to be multiplied by an x as well as one extra copy of x minus
1.
And so that second fraction is going to become b times x times x minus 1 divided by x times
x minus 1 squared.
The third fraction, c over x minus 1 squared, all it needs is an extra x in its denominator.
And so it's going to become c times x divided by x times x minus 1 squared.
So what I really have then is, after I combine everything, a times x minus 1 squared plus
b times x times x minus 1 plus c times x all divided by this common denominator x times
x minus 1 squared.
And if you now multiply out and combine everything that's in the numerator of that fraction,
you'll have ax squared minus 2ax plus a plus bx squared minus bx plus cx all divided by
x times x minus 1 squared.
Now this has to equal the original amount, which was x plus 3 over x times x minus 1
squared.
And forgive me for repeating myself over and over again.
Those two fractions are equal and their denominators are equal, so I can now set the numerators
equal to one another.
You see how this is happening the same way every time.
So this is why I want us to do these examples, because it allows us to get this pattern going,
this momentum, so to speak.
So once I set those numerators equal to each other, I will have ax squared minus 2ax plus
a plus bx squared minus bx plus cx equals x plus 3.
Now we really ought to rewrite that right hand side just a little bit to make it look
a little more user friendly.
I'm going to add in a 0x squared.
Did you see how some x squareds were floating around on the left?
I'm going to put a 0x squared in on the right, just so the x squareds have something to talk
to one another about on the two parts of the equation.
So the left hand side, when I combine some like terms, is going to look like a plus b
times the x squared, because there was an ax squared and a bx squared.
You have a plus b times x squared plus a negative 2a minus b plus c times x.
There were actually three x terms on that left hand side.
I've now combined those together.
There was only one constant term.
That was an a, a plus a, and that's all equal to 0x squared plus 1x plus 3.
And now I just equate the coefficients of the like terms on each side of the equation.
So the x squared coefficients were a plus b, that has to equal 0 on the right hand side.
The negative 2a minus b plus c has to equal the 1, because those were the coefficients
of the x terms, and the a has to equal 3.
Well, that's helpful.
That third equation already told me that a is 3.
And now I can use that information up in the first equation to tell me that b then must
be negative 3.
So I know a is 3, I know b is negative 3, now I just need to find c.
While I go back to the second equation, it was negative 2a minus b plus c equals 1.
And now I plug in a equals 3, and b equals negative 3, and I get negative 2 times 3 minus
a negative 3 plus the c equals 1, or negative 6 plus 3 plus c equals 1, or negative 3 plus
c equals 1, so c has to equal 4.
And guess what?
We needed the a, the b, and the c to put back up in the partial fractions decomposition
we started with, and now we know the following.
The original expression, x plus 3 divided by x cubed minus 2x squared plus x, which
is equal to a over x plus b over x minus 1 plus c over x minus 1 squared, has to equal
then 3 over x plus negative 3 over x minus 1 plus 4 over x minus 1 squared.
And you might want to write that middle term slightly differently, so if you wanted to finish
the problem by saying that this is all equal to 3 over x minus 3 over x minus 1 plus 4
over x minus 1 squared, then you'd be fine.
Now I've shown you some examples where the denominator factors down to a bunch of linear
terms.
Sometimes the linear terms are repeated, which was fine.
That's what we just saw in the previous example.
But I wonder, what would happen if the denominator didn't always factor down to a bunch of linear
terms, you know, x minus 1 times x plus 7 times x minus 5 or something like this?
What would happen if the denominator was more complicated?
Well, let's look at an example of that now and try to walk our way through what the partial
fractions decomposition has to look like.
And the partial fractions decomposition of 2 over x cubed plus x.
Now I'm going to start this problem just like I started all the other problems.
I'm going to factor the denominator.
And when I do, I realize that the denominator is the same as x times x squared plus 1.
Now unfortunately, unlike the other examples, we have a bit of a problem here because the
x squared plus 1 doesn't factor any further unless you want to go use complex numbers.
But I don't want to do that here.
So we're a bit stuck in that we have to use that x squared plus 1.
But is it a problem?
No, it's not a problem at all.
When you have one of these quadratic terms in the denominator, which will not factor
any further, then you can still do the partial fractions decomposition.
So what you're going to do is write one of the fractions in the decomposition with the
quadratic in the denominator.
And in the numerator, instead of just writing a constant like a or b or c, you're going
to actually give the numerator its own linear term.
So in this case, I could give the numerator something like b times x plus c, and then
the denominator would be x squared plus 1.
So here's what the partial fractions decomposition looks like for 2 over x cubed plus x.
It's going to look like a over x.
We needed something for that x term that was in the denominator, plus bx plus c over x
squared plus 1.
So again, notice I've included an x in that numerator on top of the fraction, on top of
the denominator that had the x squared term in it.
So it's not just a constant.
It's actually a little linear piece in that numerator.
And guess what?
The rest of the problem is exactly the same as it's been in the others.
You're now going to go back to this decomposition, recombine them with a common denominator,
set things equal to one another, and solve a system of equations to find a, b, and c.
So we know that the original fraction is equal to a over x plus bx plus c over x squared
plus 1.
Now I need a common denominator.
In this case, it's going to be x times x squared plus 1.
That's pretty obvious.
So the first fraction needs an x plus x squared plus 1 multiplied on top and bottom.
And the second fraction needs just an x multiplied on top and bottom.
And when I do that, I'll have my common denominator.
So I'm going to have a times x squared plus 1, all divided by x times x squared plus 1,
plus the bx plus c times the x over x times x squared plus 1.
And now I start to simplify.
The first fraction becomes ax squared plus a divided by x times x squared plus 1.
And the second fraction becomes bx squared plus cx over x times x squared plus 1.
And now because I have a common denominator, I can combine these together to give me ax
squared plus a plus bx squared plus cx all divided by x times x squared plus 1.
And now let's just do a little quick rewrite.
Notice that there are two x squared terms in the numerator.
So I can rewrite this as a plus b times the x squared plus cx plus a all divided by x
times x squared plus 1.
Now that equals the original fraction.
So when I set these equal to each other and I see that their denominators are equal,
it tells me that their numerators are equal.
So I can set their x squared coefficients equal to one another, their x coefficients
equal to one another, and their constants equal to one another.
But notice that the original fraction had 0x squared and 0x in it in the numerator.
It just had a 2 in the numerator.
And that means that when I go to set the x squared information equal to each other,
I'll just have a plus b equals 0.
When I set the x information equal to one another, I'll have c equals 0.
And then of course the constants are just a equals 2.
So now I know, well I knew c was 0 already, and I know a is 2.
That means from the first equation that b has to be negative 2.
And now I've found everything I need to know.
I know a, I know b, and I know c.
And therefore the original fraction 2 over xq plus x has to equal 2 over x,
because the a was 2, plus negative 2x plus 0 divided by x squared plus 1.
By the way, it's okay that one of the constants turned out to be a 0.
It doesn't mean we should have not put it there in the first place.
We should have put it there because that c value might have been something else.
In this case, it was just a 0.
And now if you clean this up just a little bit, you actually have 2 over x
minus 2x over x squared plus 1.
Now, we could do lots of other examples of this partial fractions decomposition.
And in fact, I would suggest we continue to do examples because
the practice is going to be extremely helpful.
But unfortunately, I don't have enough time to really share tons of examples with you.
So what I'd like to do is just suggest that you try more of the examples that
are in the course workbook and make sure you get comfortable with walking through
the steps.
If you've noticed in all of the examples we've done,
really it was the same steps every time.
Factor the denominator of the original expression,
do the splitting with constants and so on floating around.
That, of course, is the part that changes from time to time.
And then you just recombine, solve a system of equations, and you're done.
So it's actually the same pattern over and over.
But I would encourage you to do lots of examples just to get good at the process.
Now, honestly, in this lesson, we've finalized our discussion of rational
functions and expressions.
And we've shared several examples of this method of partial fractions.
You can see here how many different lessons we've already learned to come into play.
We've talked about simplifying rational expressions, adding, subtracting.
We've even talked about solving systems of linear equations again,
which is one of my favorites.
Now in the next lesson, we're going to shift focus once again.
And we're going to talk about a new family of functions called exponential functions
and their related family called logarithmic functions.
These are totally new families of functions which actually have lots of real world
usages.
So I look forward to studying those in our next lesson.
