In our last lesson, we introduced the conic sections and shared some history behind them.
We also discussed how one could cut a double cone with a vertically oriented plane to
obtain a hyperbola and then shift that cutting plane ever so slightly to get a parabola as
the conic section instead.
In this lesson, I'd like to discuss the other two conic sections, the circle and the ellipse.
In fact, I want to start with the ellipse because its equation looks very similar to
the equation of a hyperbola.
But before I get to the equation of the ellipse, let me remind you again of how one can obtain
an ellipse from the conic sections point of view, in other words the sort of geometric
point of view.
If you imagine that you have a cone and a cutting plane that is just a bit off from
horizontal, then you can see that the cross section that would be cut from the cone would
be a closed curve.
In fact, it would look a bit like a stretched out circle and that conic section is an ellipse.
So how can we define an ellipse without using this language of cutting a cone?
Well, there's a really good working definition that has a geometric flavor that feels a lot
like the definition we saw last time with the hyperbola.
Let me give you that definition of an ellipse here.
Start with two points which I'm going to call F1 and F2.
For the foci of the ellipse, each one by itself is called a focus of the ellipse.
Then the ellipse associated to those two points F1 and F2 is the set of all points in the
plane such that the sum of the distances from each of the points on the ellipse to the two
foci is a constant amount.
Now this should trigger something in your memory.
In the previous lesson, we saw that definition of a hyperbola and the definition of a hyperbola
is extremely similar to the definition of an ellipse.
In fact, they only differ by one word.
In the definition of hyperbola, that word was difference and now in the definition of
an ellipse, that word is sum.
So we need to pay attention to this sum of distances of the points from the ellipse to
the foci and that's where the geometric definition of an ellipse is really coming from.
It's amazing how that one word change changes the shape from this hyperbola with its two
branches going in opposite directions to this beautiful closed curve which is an ellipse.
Now let me share one more thought about an ellipse before we actually get to the algebra
of the equations.
It turns out that sketching an ellipse is actually a pretty easy thing to do.
Here's how you might do it.
Take a piece of flat cardboard or something like that and place two push pins or thumb
tax into the cardboard.
Those two push pins are going to serve like the foci of the ellipse.
Take a piece of string, tie it into a loop and put it around the push pins.
Now take something like a pencil and use it to push the string along until it's tight.
You're basically then making a triangle if you will but once you've pushed that pencil
in you're actually going to build a triangle now.
Now with the goal of keeping the string from getting loose you start moving the pencil
around on the cardboard making a mark on that cardboard and you move it around those two
push pins as much as you can.
What happens?
Well, the string makes your pencil draw out this elongated, it's like a circle that's
been stretched out so to speak.
That shape is not a circle but it is an ellipse and again those two push pins are playing
the role of the two foci.
That's pretty cool.
Okay, enough playing with this geometry.
I still like the geometry.
It's great but we're in an algebra course so let's try to look at some of the algebra
behind each ellipse now as we move forward with these quadratic equations.
The standard form of an ellipse or I should say the standard form of the equation of an
ellipse looks like this.
It's either x squared over a squared plus y squared over b squared equals one or x squared
over b squared plus y squared over a squared equals one where a and b are just some non-zero
real numbers.
We're going to assume throughout this conversation that the value of a is always greater than
the value of b.
When we look at the equation of an ellipse, a will always be bigger than b.
I want to point out neither a nor b can be zero because then you're going to be getting
division by zero.
The difference between these two equations is in those denominators.
In the first equation, the denominator under the x squared is larger because that's where
I put the a squared.
I put it under the x squared.
In the second equation, the denominator under the y squared is larger because I put the
a squared under the y squared.
When you're looking at the equation of an ellipse, you want to check to make sure you
can see which of the two denominators is larger.
The larger of the two denominators is going to tell you something very important about
the orientation of the ellipse, whether it's stretched out in the horizontal direction or
whether it's stretched out in the vertical direction.
Now notice before we go on that these equations look a lot like the equations of a hyperbola.
In fact, the only big difference between the two is the presence of a plus sign instead
of a minus sign.
That's a major key to knowing whether an equation has an ellipse as its graph or a hyperbola
as its graph.
If I just hand you any quadratic equation that's got an x squared and a y squared in it and
you can see that it's in standard form as we've been discussing, then the key you'll
want to look for is whether you have a plus between the x squared and the y squared or
a minus sign between that x squared and the y squared.
You might ask, what's the difference then between having a larger denominator under
the x squared term versus that larger denominator under the y squared term?
I already hinted that that's going to impact the orientation of the ellipse.
But now let me tell you a little bit more about what I mean with that.
If the a squared is under the x squared term, and remember the a squared is the larger of
the two denominators, then the ellipse will be elongated or stretched along the x axis.
But if the denominator under the y squared is the larger of the two, then that ellipse
is going to be stretched out vertically along the y axis.
The larger of the two denominators is telling you exactly the direction in which the ellipse
is actually stretched.
Okay, enough with all these variables and letters floating around and all this general
talk about these equations.
Let's jump into some specific examples.
I think that's going to help us nail down these ideas when we get some numbers in there
and we can really get our hands dirty with some of these graphs.
So let's look, for example, at the graph of x squared over 9 plus y squared over 4 equals
1.
Notice that that ellipse is elongated or stretched out along the x axis.
It's stretched in the horizontal direction.
That's because the larger denominator in the equation, which is 9, is underneath the x
squared term.
I want you to notice a few other facts though.
There are four very special points on this ellipse, and actually there are four special
points on every ellipse.
In this case, you've got 3, 0 and negative 3, 0, and those come from the fact that the
square root of 9 equals 3, and 9 was one of our denominators.
So those two points are important.
You also have the points 0, 2 and 0, negative 2, and those two points come from the fact
that the square root of 4 is equal to 2, and 4 was the other denominator in the equation.
These pairs of points act like end points of two very special line segments.
The longer line segment is called the major axis of the ellipse, and the shorter line
segment is called the minor axis of the ellipse.
So we have now these four points and these two axes inside the ellipse.
Also the end points of the major axis of the ellipse, in this case those are 3, 0 and negative
3, 0, has special names.
They are called the vertices of the ellipse.
So there's a lot going on with any one of these ellipses, and you really want to understand
this terminology because a lot of this vocabulary really comes up in a variety of math books
that are dealing with conic sections.
Now let's look at the graph of another equation.
This time I want to look at the equation x squared divided by 16 plus y squared divided
by 25 equals 1.
Now notice that that's got an x squared in it, it's got a y squared in it, and it has
a plus sign between the x squared and the y squared.
That tells me that the graph of this is going to be an ellipse, and in fact it's this very
ellipse that you're seeing right now.
Notice that this graph is actually stretched in the vertical direction along the y axis.
Why is that happening?
Well it's because the larger of the two denominators, in this case 25, is sitting under the y squared
term, and since the larger denominator is under the y squared term, the stretching if
you will happens along the y axis.
I want you to notice that the vertices of this ellipse are at the points 0 comma 5 and
0 comma negative 5, those are both on that y axis, and that the major axis of this ellipse
is the line segment that connects those two points.
Notice where the minor axis is located?
It's now in the horizontal direction on this ellipse, and it's the line segment that connects
negative 4 comma 0 to 4 comma 0.
Notice that in both the cases we just looked at, the vertical line test was violated.
In any ellipse that you draw, you can always draw a vertical line of some form that is
going to cross the ellipse in more than one point.
In fact it will cross the ellipse in either two points, or if you just use the vertical
line right on the edge it will only cross one point.
But the point here is the vertical line test is violated by every ellipse, and that means
that every ellipse fails to be the graph of a function.
So no matter what function you're studying, its graph can never be an ellipse.
But even so, the ellipse is a very important object, and we want to be studying it as much
as we can.
It has a bunch of interest in its own right.
Now let's look at several more examples of equations and graphs for ellipses just to
make sure we've got all the different nuances down for these equations.
So here's one I want us to look at.
Maybe you could try this one on your own before we look at it together.
Determine the graph of the equation x squared over 49 plus y squared over 81 equals 1.
Okay, let's talk through this for a moment.
Notice that this equation is already in standard form, and we're dealing with an ellipse.
I've got an x squared term, I've got a y squared term, they're added together both on the left
hand side of the equation, and the right hand side of the equation equals 1.
So this is definitely the equation of an ellipse, and the equation is already in standard form.
Next, what should you look at next?
You should look at where the denominator is larger, and in this example the larger denominator
is under the y squared term.
So this graph is going to be an ellipse which is stretched in the vertical direction along
the y-axis.
That means the vertices of the ellipse will be on the y-axis, and they'll be at the points
0, 9, and 0, negative 9.
Why are those coordinates 9's?
Because the denominator there was 81, and the square root of 81 is 9.
And remember, 0, 9, and 0, negative 9 are the end points of the major axis of this ellipse.
Where are the end points of the minor axis located?
Well, they're going to be located at 7, 0, and negative 7, 0 along the x-axis.
And notice that minor axis is shorter than the major axis.
Y7, 0, and negative 7, 0, because the denominator under the x-squared term is 49, and the square
root of 49 is exactly 7.
That's where those 7's come from.
In fact, if you think about it for just a second, if you plotted those four points,
the end points of the major axis and the end points of the minor axis, and just connected
the dots knowing that you're supposed to have an ellipse, you'd get the graph that you want,
and you'd see that immediately.
Now, before I move to the next example, we should talk about one more term that's related
to an ellipse, and it's a very important one because it tells us something about the shape
of the ellipse.
So let me give you that piece of terminology here.
It's called the eccentricity of an ellipse, and it's just defined to be the ratio of the
length of the minor axis divided by the length of the major axis.
So in the example we just did, the eccentricity would be 14 divided by 18, which of course
is the same as 7 divided by 9.
You see where the 7 and the 9 are coming from if you look at those end points of the minor
and the major axis.
Now, let's talk about this.
What is the eccentricity actually measuring?
What is it telling me?
That's 7 9ths.
Well, the eccentricity actually refers to the flatness or the roundness of the ellipse.
I want you to think for just a minute.
The eccentricity can never be bigger than 1 because it's the ratio of the minor axis
length divided by the major axis length, and the minor axis is always smaller than the
major axis.
So the eccentricity can never be bigger than 1.
But when the eccentricity is close to 1, like in the case of 7 9ths, that's pretty close
to 1, then the ellipse that's related to that is going to be relatively round.
It's going to be close to a circle.
It won't be a circle.
It'll still have some flatness to it, some stretchedness to it, but an eccentricity close
to 1 means that the ellipse is trying to be close to very round.
If the eccentricity is small and closer to 0, then the ellipse is going to be very flat.
It's going to be stretched out quite a bit so that its width really looks quite flat
in the process.
So eccentricity is trying to tell me something about the flatness or the roundness of an ellipse.
All right, let's look at another example now with this in mind.
I think you should try this one yourself, but remember, first you need to make sure
that the equation is in standard form before you can actually graph such an ellipse.
So here we go.
The equation I want us to look at is 2x squared plus 50y squared equals 200.
Let's graph that ellipse.
Okay, now the first thing you've got to do before you can graph that ellipse is get that
equation in standard form.
The thing that tells you it's not in standard form right now is definitely that 200 that's
on the right hand side.
So the way we can make that go away, go away, is by dividing both sides by 200.
Now notice that this thing is definitely going to be an ellipse even before I divide by the
200 because I have an x squared term and a y squared term on the left hand side and they're
both being added.
So I know it's an ellipse, but I don't know which ellipse it is yet because I don't have
the equation in standard form.
Let's divide both sides of it by 200 and let's see what we get.
The right hand side is simply going to be a 1, which is what we want if we want this
to be in standard form.
The left hand side after we simplify both of the fractions is going to be x squared divided
by 100 plus y squared divided by 4.
So my equation is going to be x squared over 100 plus y squared over 4 equals 1.
Now once you have that equation in standard form, you should ask yourself, where is this
ellipse going to be located or actually put more directly?
Is it going to be stretched in the x direction or is it going to be stretched in the y direction?
Well, which term has the larger denominator?
In this case, the x squared has the larger of the two denominators and so the ellipse
is going to be stretched in the horizontal direction or along the x axis since it's the
x squared term which has the larger denominator.
You also can tell them where the vertices are.
They're going to be at negative 10, 0 and at 10, 0, where are those 10s coming from?
Square root of 100, that's right.
100 is that denominator, square root of it is 10.
So the end points of the major axis are at negative 10, 0 and 10, 0.
Where are the end points of the minor axis?
Well, they're going to be on the y axis then and what are their locations?
Well, they're going to be at 0, 2 and 0, negative 2.
Where are the 2s coming from?
Square root of 4, the denominator under the y squared is a 4.
So your ellipse now can be drawn quickly and it's going to look like this.
Plot those four end points and just draw the ellipse in.
Now I want you to notice something, that ellipse once you've drawn it is actually pretty flat.
It doesn't look round, it doesn't look like it's trying to be a circle so much.
Why is it flat?
Well, let's look at that eccentricity that we talked about a moment ago.
Notice that the eccentricity here is going to be length of minor axis divided by length
of major axis.
That's going to be 4 divided by 20 or 2 divided by 10 if you want to use the 2 and the 10
which are coming out of those end points of the axes and 2 divided by 10 is 1 5th which
is 0.2.
That number 0.2 is closer to 0 than to 1 and that immediately tells me that the ellipse
here has to be pretty flat because the eccentricity is closer to 0 than to 1.
Okay, we've talked quite a bit today about ellipses.
I'd like to turn our attention just a moment to the last type of conic section that is
part of the four conic sections and that's the circle.
So let's change directions just a bit now away from ellipses and talk about circles.
First of all, how is the circle created as a conic section?
Let's just make sure we remind ourselves of this.
If you take the cone that Apollonius would have started with and you cut it with a truly
horizontal plane, so the plane needs to be purely horizontal, the cross section that
you would see is a circle.
Honestly, for me anyway, of the four conic sections, that's the one that makes the best
sense.
But there's actually another cool way to think about the circle given all the things we've
already talked about with an ellipse.
Now it's going to sound kind of theoretical, but just stay with me for just a second.
Picture in your mind an ellipse.
Remember, when I talked about drawing the ellipse on a piece of cardboard, there were
two pushpins that were holding the original string.
Those two points are the foci of the ellipse.
Now I want you to imagine that you could lift those foci and actually move them toward
one another.
Now what does that do to the ellipse?
Well one thing that it does is that it makes the ellipse less flat and more round.
The foci of a flat ellipse are actually quite a ways away from one another.
As you start to move those two foci towards one another, the ellipse becomes more round.
So you end up with those foci closer and the ellipse trying to act more like a circle.
In fact, if in theory, you could move the two foci so that they're one on top of the
other, basically so that there's only one focus, then the ellipse would actually become
a perfect circle.
So in some sense, a circle is really just a special kind of ellipse if you really only
allowed yourself one focus point.
I think that's pretty cool.
It's pretty theoretical, but it's pretty cool nonetheless.
Now enough of that theory, let's get right to the equations for a circle.
Well, there's really only one equation for a circle.
There aren't two.
And the standard form of the equation of a circle, which is centered at the origin in
the xy plane, is given by x squared plus y squared equals r squared, where r is the
radius of the circle.
So in fact, the conic section definition of a circle is that it's the set of all points
which are a specific distance from the special point that we normally call the center of
the circle.
And the given distance, that special distance, is the radius of the circle.
Now you might still not believe me that these circles are cousins of or relatives of ellipses.
So let me try to convince you in one more way.
Take the equation x squared plus y squared equals 36.
Now given what I just told you about equations of circles, that is the equation of a circle
centered at the origin and the radius is 6.
One error that some students make is that they might tell me the radius is 36.
Remember the radius is always the square root of that number on the right hand side.
Now that's a circle of radius 6.
What if I were to divide both sides of that equation by 36?
Then I would end up with x squared over 36 plus y squared over 36 equals 1.
Now if you look at that the right way it looks a lot like the standard form of the equation
of an ellipse.
But what's the difference?
Well the difference is that the two denominators of this equation are the same.
They're not different.
And that's what sets the circles apart.
And those two denominators are the same for both the x squared and the y squared and there's
a sum in between.
When those two denominators are the same you know you don't have an ellipse, you actually
have a circle.
So these guys are really closely related.
Their equations can be made to look very, very similar but they have a slight difference
between that circle and the ellipse.
Now let's do a few examples as we finish this lesson just to make sure we've got this circle
stuffed down.
First, try this one on your own.
Sketch the graph of the circle x squared plus y squared equals 49.
Okay, the graph of this equation is a circle.
It's got an x squared, it's got a y squared, they're being added.
It's a circle centered at 0, 0 and the radius is 7 because the square root of 49 is 7.
Remember the radius is not 49, the radius is the square root of 49.
So this means that points like 7, 0 and negative 7, 0 and even 0, 7 and 0, negative 7 are all
on the circle.
If you just plot those four points and just connect them in a nice way, you're actually
going to get the circle that you want.
Okay, let's look at another example pretty quickly.
Sketch the graph of the equation 4x squared equals 36 minus 4y squared.
Now that's actually a pretty tricky equation and there's a reason it's tricky because you
look at that minus sign and you might say to yourself, ah, this must be a hyperbola.
But the problem is that the equation is not in any sort of standard form.
Did you notice that all the standard forms had the x's and the y's all on the same side
together?
This equation that I've started you with doesn't have all the x squareds and the y squareds
on the same side.
So before you can decide whether you're dealing with a hyperbola or an ellipse or a circle
here, you've got to move all of the x squareds and the y squareds to the same side.
And I'm going to suggest we move them to the left side in this case.
When you move the x squareds and the y squareds to the left hand side, you get 4x squared
plus 4y squared equals 36.
And now you see a sum, not a difference.
And that's important because it tells us something about the graph.
Now let's finish this just briefly by dividing both sides by 4.
And when you do that, you'll have x squared plus y squared equals 9.
And now we've uncovered from this new version of the equation that the graph must be a circle.
It's definitely not a hyperbola because I don't have a minus sign.
And it's definitely not going to be an ellipse because the coefficient of the x squared and
the coefficient of the y squared are going to be the same.
They are the same.
And therefore, the graph of this is a circle, it's centered at 0, 0, and its radius is 3.
So you can draw that pretty quickly.
Now if you've been following along, you should have a pretty good idea by now of whether
a conic sections equation corresponds to a parabola, a hyperbola, an ellipse, or a circle
just by looking at the equation itself.
So as we close this lesson, I'd like to actually have you quiz yourself and see how you do
by matching some equations with their corresponding graphs.
So let me give you those equations and then give you a moment to match those.
Here we go.
The first equation is x squared over 16 minus y squared over 9 equals 1.
Next x squared over 9 plus y squared over 9 equals 1.
Then y equals x squared plus 4x plus 3.
And lastly, x squared over 16 plus y squared over 9 equals 1.
Now let's talk through which of these correspond to the graphs.
The first one, x squared over 16 minus y squared over 9 equals 1 is in standard form.
The x's and y's are together on the left-hand side.
Both x and y are squared, so that tells me I'm not dealing with a parabola, and there's
a minus sign between the two.
Which graph is that?
That's got to be the graph of the hyperbola.
So excellent if you found that, and that checks that one off.
Next, x squared over 9 plus y squared over 9 equals 1.
Okay, I've got an x squared and I've got a y squared and they're added together.
That means I'm either dealing with a circle or with an ellipse.
And notice that both the denominators are equal to each other.
They're both 9.
What does that tell you?
That tells you you're dealing with a circle.
So you should have matched that equation to the circle.
Next, y equals x squared plus 4x plus 3.
And notice something here.
You've got some x squareds and some x's.
That's fine.
You only have one y raised to the first power.
There are no y squareds in this equation.
That immediately tells you which type of graph you have.
You must have a parabola.
So that third equation must be matched to a parabola.
And lastly, x squared over 16 plus y squared over 9 equals 1.
x squareds and y squareds together on one side, they're being added together.
It's got to be a circle or an ellipse.
And since the denominators are different, 16 and 9, you know that this must be an ellipse.
And if you got those right, it's fabulous.
If not, you might want to review the graphing we've done in the last two lessons just to
make sure you're on track before we move on.
Well, we can do lots more of examples at this point with circles and with ellipses.
We could move the center, for example, of a lot of these.
But for now, I think we've done enough.
So I think we'll close here.
Today, we've finished the discussion of conic sections by talking about ellipses and circles.
Next time, we're going to shift gears pretty dramatically and move to a totally new topic,
talking about polynomials of degree greater than 2.
So we're going to go ahead and move on to the next topic, and then we'll move on to the
next topic.
So let's go ahead and move on to the next topic, and then we'll move on to the next
topic.
So let's go ahead and move on to the next topic, and then we'll move on to the next
topic, and then we'll move on to the next topic, and then we'll move on to the next topic,
