In our previous lesson, we spent a good bit of time discussing how algebra and combinatorics
are related by talking about the binomial theorem which helps us expand binomials and
its connection to Pascal's Triangle. We also developed a formula for the elements of Pascal's
Triangle that involved the factorial function. In this lesson, I want us to take this material
one step further to see how we can actually use this information to count things known
as permutations and combinations. So let's start with the idea of a permutation by looking
at its definition. A permutation is simply an arrangement of a set of items in a particular
order. Now that definition might not be that helpful or enlightening to you, so let me look
at a basic example to help solidify the idea of a permutation from a mathematical perspective.
Here's the example I want us to look at. Write down all the permutations of the letters A,
B and C. Now, what are we being asked to do? Well, we're asked to write down all the possible
arrangements of these three letters in a particular order. So the permutations of the letters A,
B and C are the following. A, B, C, that's one permutation, A, C, B, B, A, C, B, C, A,
C, A, B and C, B, A. Now that's all the ways that I could order those three letters. And
I want you to notice that the order matters with these permutations. The order in which
I place the A, the B and the C does matter whenever you're writing down permutations.
And that's going to be a pivotal fact as we continue talking in this lesson about permutations
and combinations. Now, how many permutations did we just find, by the way? Well, if you
count those sequences of letters that I just shared with you, there were six of them. And
now one question you and I should ask, which is actually a very good question, is where
did that six come from? I mean, admittedly, I could have just counted one, two, three,
four, five, six. But as I've already shared with you in the past, combinatorics is about
trying to think sort of intelligently about how to count so that we can see where the
six of these permutations actually came from. So think with me for just a moment about how
we built the permutations that we just created. Imagine before I wrote down any of those six
permutations that I simply wrote down three blank lines. And I imagine putting one of
the three letters in each of these blanks. Let's say we start with the first blank. We
need to put one of the letters A, B or C into that first blank. How many different choices
do I have for filling in that blank? Well, there are three, because I could have put
in the A, or I could have put in the B, or I could have put in the C to get this permutation
started. So I have three choices for that letter. Let's just pick one of them to start
filling in this permutation. Let's say I picked B. So I place the B in as the first letter
of this particular permutation. Next, I need to fill in the second blank. Now, an important
question comes up, which is, how many choices do I have for filling in that second blank?
Well, the answer is not three, because I no longer have three letters to choose from.
The B in this example has already been used. So in fact, to fill in the second blank, I
only have two choices. I either have to use the A or the C if you're following along
with this one example. So the B is no longer used, and so this second blank has two choices
for what to put into it. And now let's say for fun, we just put the C into that second
blank. Now, once I've done that, I need to fill in the third blank to complete the permutation.
Well, how many choices do I have? Well, I have one choice, if you want to think of it
that way. I have to use the A. I know that for some folks, the idea of a choice here
is a little bit forced. In other words, I have to put the A in so I really don't have
any choice. That's what some people like to say. But in fact, that's not the way to think
of it. You should imagine what we're really doing is asking, how many different letters
could I put into that blank? And then the answer is just one, because we have to use
that letter A. Now, once I've done that permutation building, in this case I built B, C, A, we
can step back now and ask ourselves, how many ways could I have built different permutations?
At the first stage, which was filling in the first blank, I had three choices for what
letter to put in as the starting letter. And then at the second stage, I had two choices
for the letter to put into the second position. And then I had only one choice for what the
last letter could be. And now, you have to ask this question, well, what do you do with
this three, this two, and this one? And with that question comes a very important mathematical
principle in combinatorics. It's known as the multiplication principle. And I'm going
to refer to this principle often, both in this lesson and in the next lesson. So let
me share it with you and then try to make sure it makes sense. The multiplication principle
says this, suppose you have a procedure that can be broken into M successive stages. And
the first stage has N1 different possibilities for it, and the second stage has N2 possibilities,
and so on, until the last stage has what we might call N sub M different possibilities
for that last stage. If the number of possibilities at each stage is independent of the choices
made in the previous stages, and if all the final outcomes are different from one another,
then the total number of outcomes for completing the whole procedure is exactly the product
N1 times N2 times dot dot dot N sub M. So the point is this, if you're doing a full
procedure that has several little stages in it, as long as the stages are basically independent
of one another, and you know how many ways to complete each stage, then the total number
of ways to do everything is just the product of the number of ways to handle each stage.
And that's why it's called the multiplication principle, because you're just taking a product
at the very end. So when we build these permutations in stages, we started with blank one and then
the second blank and then the third blank. It turns out that by the multiplication principle,
the total number of different permutations that I could build was exactly 3 times 2 times
1, which is equal to 6. And that's where that 6 came from in terms of trying to find all
the permutations of the letters A, B and C. Now, if you think back to the previous lesson
for just a second, something else should strike you as a relationship between what we're
talking about here and what we talked about there. Namely, by this multiplication principle,
in this example, 3 times 2 times 1 is the same as 3 factorial. So the number of 3 letter
permutations is exactly 3 factorial. Now, is it a coincidence that the number of 3 letter
permutations is exactly 3 factorial? I think not. It's exactly going to be that kind of
formula every time we try to build these kinds of permutations. If you think about it, the
blank filling procedure that I had you do would always give you a factorial. Try 4 letters
just for a moment. Take A, B, C and D. And now write down all the permutations you can
write down. Well, you know this is going to get kind of tedious after a while to write
them all down and then count them 1, 2, 3, 4 and so on. So let's just think about the
procedure for building the 4 letter permutations first and maybe we can actually get the formula
to pop out. So start with 4 blanks. How many ways can you fill in the first blank? Well,
it's 4 because you've got 4 letters to start with. Then, once you pick one of those letters
and place it in the first blank, how many choices do you have for filling in the second
blank? Well, it's 3 because you have 3 letters still in your hands, if you will, that you
haven't put down in the blanks yet. So the number of ways to fill in the second blank
is 3. Then the next blank has 2 possibilities and the last blank has 1 possibility. Whatever
letter is left has to go in the last blank. So by the multiplication principle, the total
number of ways to complete this step-by-step process of building 4 letter permutations
is 4 times 3 times 2 times 1, which is just 4 factorial. And so there are 4 factorial permutations
of 4 letters, which is the same as saying there are 24 permutations with 4 letters.
And we could keep doing this, we won't, but we could keep doing this with more and more
letters and more and more blanks if we wished. But the point is, we now see the pattern.
And here's the fact about permutations. The number of permutations which use n letters
equals n factorial, and we've seen this factorial function in the previous lesson. So even if
you had a really big number of letters, like you had 10 letters and you wanted to build
all the permutations out of those 10 letters, you know how many you would have to build.
It would be 10 factorial, which by the way is 3,628,800. No matter who you are, you have
to admit that's a lot of permutations. And I definitely would not want to have to write
all of those down and then count them one at a time to figure out how many I had. It's
more than 3 million permutations. So this formula that you use n factorial to count
the number of n letter permutations is extremely helpful. Now let's turn a corner and talk
about permutations where you don't use all of the letters. So let me tell you what I
mean by this. Let's look at the following example. Let's say you have five contestants
in a competition, and you're going to give a first place, a second place, and a third
place trophy to these contestants. How many different outcomes are possible for this competition?
Now the first thing I want you to notice is that the order definitely matters in this
problem. Let's say for example that Ann, Bill, and Kathy are the top three people out of
the five contestants. Notice that Ann would probably be happier if she won first place
than if she won third place. And that fact that Ann would rather be in first place than
in third place is enough to convince me that order definitely matters in this problem. And
because order matters, it tells me that I'm definitely dealing with permutations. But
I'm not interested in permutations using all five of the people. We only want permutations
of three letters taken out of the five letters. In other words, not to be mean, but the fourth
and fifth persons don't matter because we're only going to give three trophies. So for example,
if the people were named A, B, C, D, and E, then I would want permutations like A, E,
D, which would mean A was first place, E was second place, D was third place, and B and
C don't get any trophy at all. So here's the question. How many of these kinds of outcomes,
these kinds of three-letter permutations taken from five letters can we build? Well, guess
what? It's the same principle and the same procedure. Let's go back to this blank-filling
idea. Now I want three blanks. One's going to be first place, one will stand for second
place, and one will stand for third place. And I want to be able to fill in these three
blanks using my five letters, A, B, C, D, and E. So I'm really only going to use three
letters at a time. How many ways can I fill in these blanks? Well, it's a step-by-step
procedure again. Let's start with how many ways we could fill in the first blank. Well,
the answer is not three. The answer for how many ways you could fill in the first blank
is actually five, because you have five letters to choose from for that first blank. So the
first stage of this permutation building operation is going to have five choices, okay? Now let's
just say for fun that we put the letter A in that first blank. Now, how many choices do I have to
fill in the second blank? Well, there are four letters left, or four people left, however you
want to think of the example. So the second blank would have four choices for what to place into
that blank. Then how many ways can I complete or fill in the last blank? Well, the answer is three.
We're assuming here that no one gets to be both first place and second place. We're going to give
one trophy to one person and another trophy to another person. So the first blank had five
choices, the second blank had four choices, and the third blank had three choices. So by the
multiplication principle, the total number of ways to determine the first, second, and third place
winners in this contest is five times four times three, which is 60. Now, before we go past this
too quickly, let me point out something. Five times four times three should remind you of five
times four times three times two times one, which is five factorial, except as I like to say it,
the tail has been cut off, so to speak. You're missing the two times one. But that's actually a
hint that you might still be working with factorials. Let me just mention it in this way. Think of
five times four times three as the same as five times four times three times two times one, all
divided by two times one. In other words, the two and the one are going to cancel one another. But
that's the same as five factorial over two factorial, which oh, by the way, is the same as five
factorial divided by five minus three factorial. Remember in this example, five was the number of
people we started with, and three was the number of people that we were actually putting into these
blanks. And this gives us the motivation then for the following mathematical fact. Let p of n, r be
the number of permutations that you can build using r letters out of a total set of n letters. In my
earlier example, r was three and n was five. Then p of n comma r, which is trying to count this
number of permutations, is exactly n factorial divided by n minus r factorial. So in this previous
example we were doing n was five and r was three. So what we just calculated was p of five comma three,
which is five factorial over five minus three factorial, or five factorial over two factorial,
which is five times four times three, which is 60. So this example proves to be a really motivating
example for trying to find permutations in general. And what I'd like to do now is move us to another
example to look at permutations and how to use this formula to count them. So here's the example I
want us to look at. How many different seven digit phone numbers can we write down where all of the
digits are different? And I'm going to make this comment where the phone number is even allowed to
start with a zero. I realize that in most cases that would be silly, but it'll make our problem a
little easier as we try to use it to help us learn about permutations. So I really want to know how
many seven digit numbers we can write down so that all of the digits are different and we're even
allowing zero to be at the front. Now notice that the order definitely matters. If these are really
phone numbers, then you definitely have to worry about the order. I mean how many of us have
accidentally switched a couple digits when you're dialing a phone and you get the wrong number. That
tells me immediately that the order matters. And since the digits all have to be different, we know
that we can only use each digit at most once. Okay, so we're definitely talking about permutations
just like we were in the previous examples. We have 10 digits to work with, the numbers from zero
to nine, there are 10 different numbers there, and we want to build seven digit numbers because
we're trying to build these phone numbers that are seven digits long. So it's like we're filling in
seven blanks with 10 different numbers available to us. And that means once we've thought through
that, that the answer to this question of how many different phone numbers we can build is exactly P
of 10, 7. 10 being the size of the big set from which we're pulling the digits, and 7 being the
size or the number of digits that we want to write down. It's that simple. But what is P of 10, 7?
Well, according to our formula, P of 10, 7 is the same as 10 factorial divided by 10 minus 7
factorial, which is 10 factorial over 3 factorial. And now if you write it all out and do some
cancellation, you'll see that's the same as 10 times 9 times 8 times 7 times 6 times 5 times 4.
And if you multiply all that out, you get 604,800. So there are that many phone numbers, again,
allowing zero to be the first digit if you want, where all of the numbers are different. Now let's
look at another example. Again, trying to get the feeling for how these permutations work out. How
many different ways can a Little League baseball coach place the kids in the nine positions on the
field if there are 11 players on his team? Now, one of the questions you have to ask with these
kinds of examples is, does the order matter? And imagine we're working with very young children
at this point, just to help us with the example. Well, I would contend that the order in which the
children are placed on the field and the positions that they're given really does matter, that that
order matters. Think about it. I've actually coached Little League baseball in the past. If there's a
child having trouble catching the ball, then making that child play the role of the catcher behind
home plate is not a good choice. So we're going to need to be wise about the order in which we put
the children on the field. And that means I'm looking at permutations again. Now, if I put the
nine positions on the field as the nine blanks, maybe pitcher and catcher and first base and second
base and so on, and I write those nine blanks there, and I imagine now that I'm going to put names
in those blanks for where the children are going to play, then I see that this is a permutation
problem. And the first blank is an 11 has 11 choices. And the second blank has 10 choices and then
nine choices and eight choices and so on. And the answer then is going to equal p of 11 comma
nine. And p of 11 comma nine is the same as 11 factorial over two factorial. And now if again
you multiply all of that out 11 times 10 times nine times eight times seven times six times five times
four times three times two times one and divide it by two times one, you'll see that the final answer
is 19,958,400. That's a lot of different lineups. And for those of you who've either ever played
baseball or been a coach for a team, you probably didn't realize that there could be that many
different lineups that could be written down based on the positions that each child plays.
Now, I'd like to transition a bit and talk about a different kind of counting problem. Now,
we've just done a few examples on permutations where the order mattered in terms of how we placed
the choices that we had. But sometimes order doesn't matter when you're choosing the items.
For example, if we just need to choose three captains for our football team, and they're all
going to be the same sort of captain, if you will, then choosing A and then B and then C is the same
as choosing C and then B and then A because they're all going to be given the same sort of captain's
role. So in this kind of problem, we do not want to count permutations because we don't care about
the order in which we count them. So if, in fact, you did count permutations, you would be counting
too many possibilities because choosing child A first and then child B is identical to choosing
child B first and then child A in this example of picking three different captains who have the
same role to play. So this kind of an example is not an example of permutations. It's something
that we like to call combinations. And now let me give you the definition of a combination.
A combination is a selection of a set of items in which order does not matter.
So for example, how many ways could we pick three captains from a 10-player team? Well,
the answer can be found with the following fact. Let C of N, R be the number of combinations
that we can build using R letters taken out of a set of N letters or N items. Then C of N, R
is equal to N factorial divided by R factorial times N minus R factorial. So let's say you go back
to a sports team and it has 10 players on it and you want to choose three of those players to be the
captains. And again, they're all playing the same role as captains, same idea. Then the number of
ways to do that is C of 10, 3, which equals 10 factorial over 3 factorial times 7 factorial,
which is the same as 10 times 9 times 8 times a 7 factorial divided by the 3 factorial times 7
factorial. And once you cancel those 7 factorials, you're left with 10 times 9 times 8 in the numerator
divided by a 6, which is coming from the 3 factorial and simplifying all of that, you get 120.
And now if you think back to our previous lesson for just a moment, you'll hopefully remember
that this C N, R is exactly the C N, R that we talked about in that lesson for the elements
of Pascal's triangle. It was exactly that same formula, N factorial divided by R factorial
times N minus R factorial. So what does that mean? Well, this is an amazing fact. The numbers that
are in Pascal's triangle are exactly what we need to count combinations. That's exactly what those
numbers are used for. In fact, in some sense, that's what Pascal was trying to count when he built
that triangle was these kinds of combinations. So this is a really nice connection now between
the binomial theorem and Pascal's triangle, and now these really nice counting questions,
which we call combinations. Now, I'd like to suggest that we move forward with another example then
and use this formula for C of N, R to do this example. We have a set of six books that I want
to read during my summer vacation, but I only am going to have time to read four of them. So my
question is, how many different ways can I choose the four books out of the six books that I have
to take on my trip? Now, notice something, and again, I was saying this earlier, you have to
ask this question. Does the order matter? If the order does matter, you're dealing with permutations.
If the order does not matter, you're dealing with combinations. Now, think of this. I have six books
in front of me. I just need to pick four of them. It doesn't matter to me in which order I pick them.
I'm not worried about which one I read first and which one I read last. I simply want to pick four
of them that I'm then going to put in my car to take on my summer vacation. So the order does not
matter in this problem. And that means I have a combination's problem, not a permutations problem.
And so the total number of different ways I can select these four books out of my total of six
books is exactly C of six comma four, which is six factorial over four factorial times two factorial.
And if you simplify that again with the factorials, you're going to see that the numerator just becomes
six times five, all divided by a two. That's if you peel off a six and a five from the six
factorial and then let the four factorials cancel with one another. The point is the final result
for C of six comma four is 15. So let's now interpret that number. That's telling me that
there are 15 different collections of four books that I can choose out of my six books
in order to take on my summer vacation and read. And again, I don't care what order I picked them
from or the order in which I picked them, I only wanted to select them. So 15 is the total number
of different ways to take those four books onto my trip. Now, you might be saying, hey, that sounded
a lot like a permutation problem to me, actually. And it's not a combination's problem. Well,
let me make a couple of comments. First of all, a lot of students who are dealing with permutations
and combinations for the first time say the same sort of thing. It takes a while, it takes some
practice to be able to see the difference between the two. Now, in this particular example, let
me just say a couple of things. First, when I throw those four books into, let's say, my book bag
or my suitcase or something like that, do I care about the order in which I actually throw them
into that bag or gently place them into that bag? I don't want to break my books or ruin them.
Of course, I don't care about the order in which they sit in my suitcase. And that is a hint
that this is a combinations question and not a permutations question. Now, there's another comment
I can make about the example. And that is, I actually could turn the problem into a permutations
problem. And maybe I'll share that with you now, because then maybe you can see the difference
between combinations and permutations a little better. Here's a permutations version of the same
problem. So now I would care about the order. If you had six books and you wanted to put four of
those books on a bookshelf in order on the shelf, how many different ways could you arrange those
four books on to the shelf in your room? Well, that question, because it's asking for arrangements
of the books on a shelf, would be a permutations problem, because the order that the books are
on the shelf does matter. Different orders are going to give you different permutations. And at
that point then, the answer to the question would have been P of 6,4, not C of 6,4. And by the way,
P of 6,4 is much larger. It's 360 rather than C of 6,4, which is only 15. Now, let me move to
one last quick example as we try to look at this difference between permutations and combinations,
and then we'll close out our lesson. For summer camp, you're allowed to choose four or five
cabin mates from a list of 12 other campers. How many ways can you do this? Well, this problem
actually needs to be broken into two smaller problems. First, what if you wanted only four
cabin mates? Well, does the order matter in which you actually pick these cabin mates?
That's an important question that you need to ask. Does the order of the four cabin mates you choose
matter? Well, the answer is no, because you're just going to get thrown into the cabin together.
So it's not like you're worried about any sort of ordering. And that means this is a combinations
question. And the number of ways to choose four people out of 12 is just C of 12,4. But what
if you wanted to have five cabin mates instead? Remember the question asked if you wanted to
have four or five? Well, if you go back and start from scratch and choose five people out of the
12, then the number of ways of doing that is C of 12,5. Now, in this case, you're not doing things
in stages with the multiplication principle. You're actually thinking of two totally different
problems. What if I wanted four cabin mates or what if I wanted five cabin mates? And that means
that the answer to this question is actually C of 12,4 plus C of 12,5. And when you take that sum,
that will give you the total number of ways to choose those cabin mates. C of 12,4 plus C of
12,5 turns out to be 1,287 different possible sets of cabin mates that you could have.
Well, we've spent a good bit of this lesson now talking about permutations
and combinations and how they work with the multiplication principle. In our next lesson,
we're going to take what we've learned now about counting intelligently with permutations and
combinations, and we're going to start talking about probability. But before I close this lesson,
let me just mention this. If you find this information on permutations and combinations
interesting, let me suggest to you that you continue studying this topic
further. There's a lot you can find on this kind of thing. And one of the things you can find is a
course by Art Benjamin for the teaching company called Discrete Mathematics. You might want to
actually look that course up. Art's a wonderful colleague of mine and a fabulous teacher.
I'll see you next time as we talk about probability.
