In this lesson, I'd like to introduce you to logarithmic functions.
So as we get started, let me remind you of the exponential function f of x equals 2 to
the x, which we studied in the previous lesson. The graph of that function looks something
like this. Now, here's an interesting thought. I want to add to that graph the graph of the
line y equals x. So I throw that into the mix as well on the same set of axes. And now
here's my question to you. Where would the graph of the inverse function of 2 to the
x live on that same set of axes? Is it easy to see where it would be? And remember, the
graph of an inverse function has to be the mirror image of the graph of the original
function about the line y equals x. And that's exactly why I drew that line y equals x into
this graph. Now, that's where the inverse would have to be, but where would it be in
this particular example? Well, to draw this inverse function of the graph of 2 to the
x, we would have to start down by the bottom of the y-axis and draw a curve which stays
in the fourth quadrant and stays pretty close to the y-axis until it crosses the x-axis.
And then it would have to turn away from the line y equals x and travel through the first
quadrant in a somewhat flat looking way. And now it turns out that that graph that we just
drew is pretty straightforward to understand if you know what a logarithm is. So in this
lesson, I'm going to define what logarithmic functions are. I'm going to study some of
their properties and we'll look at their graphs. In fact, this last graph we just drew would
be the graph of a logarithmic function. So to get us started with some of the mathematics,
let's look at the definition of a logarithm. The logarithm to the base b of a positive
number y is denoted by log subscript by and is defined this way. If y is b to the x power,
then the log base b of y equals x. So for example, since I know that 3 to the power
2 equals 9, I also know that log base 3 of 9 equals 2. Do you see how the input and output
values sort of change roles? When I look at something like 3 to the second, I'm thinking
of 3 to the x and plugging 2 in and getting 9 back. But if I have this function now, log
base 3 of x and I plug 9 in, I get the 2 to come out. So the idea here is that the inputs
and the outputs have changed roles. Now, I have to tell you that exactly what we just
did between this 3 to the 2 and the log base 3 is exactly what you do when you define inverse
functions. So this idea of switching back and forth between b to the x and log base b is
exactly what we understand when we talk about these inverse functions. In some sense, the
logarithmic functions undo what the exponential functions do and vice versa. And that's why
we call them inverses of one another. So for example, log base 2 of 8 equals 3. And the
reason that's true is because 2 to the 3 equals 8. And that's exactly how you want to count
something like log base 2 of 8. You have to think backwards about the function 2 to the
x and ask yourself what number x would I plug in to get 8 back? And that's where the 3 comes
from because 2 to the 3 is equal to 8. So this backwards thinking, so to speak, between
exponential functions and logarithmic functions has to come natural to us now. We have to
get used to doing this sort of thing so that we can find these values of logarithms. Now,
I'd like us to then think about evaluating one of these logarithms ourselves by looking
at the following example. Evaluate log base 3 of 81. In other words, I want you to tell
me what the number log base 3 of 81 equals. Well, this question is really asking us to
find a value, I'll call it x, so that 3 to the x equals 81. And honestly, I think you
should always translate these kinds of logarithm problems into a new exponential problem like
I just did. So I'm now looking at 3 to the x equals 81, and I'm asking what number should
I plug in for x to make that true? Well, the answer is 3 to the 4, right? I should plug
in a 4 because 3 to the 4 is 3 times 3 times 3 times 3, and that's 81. So that 4 is what
I need to solve the original log problem. In other words, log base 3 of 81 equals 4.
So the final answer there is actually 4. Now, just to get a bit of practice, let's do another
one of these. Now, these numbers don't always work out perfectly. In fact, they often work
out to be a bit messy. But let's try another example where the number doesn't work out amazingly
well, but it works out pretty well. Evaluate log base 4 of 32. Now, just like the example
I just did with you earlier, I want us to ask ourselves this question, what value of
x do I need so that 4 to the x power gives me 32? Well, I don't know about you, but I
can't quickly do that. I don't know of a specific whole number to plug in for x so that 4 to
the x equals 32. But I know how to manipulate that equation enough to get the value of x.
Here's how. Start with 4 to the x equals 32 and rewrite it as 2 to the 2 to the x equals
32. And of course 32 is 2 to the 5th. So what you really have is 2 to the 2 to the x equals
2 to the 5th. Now, 2 to the 2 to the x can also be written as 2 to the 2x. That's one
of the laws of exponents. So what you really have is 2 to the 2x equals 2 to the 5th. Now,
here's an important fact that we've used before in these kinds of exponential problems. If
you have two quantities that are equal, like we have here, 2 to the 2x equals 2 to the 5th,
and the bases are equal, notice that we have 2s on both sides as the bases, then the exponents
have to be the same. And that means I can conclude then that the 2x, which is the exponent
on the left, has to equal the 5, which is the exponent on the right. Well, 2x equals 5,
you and I could solve that pretty much in our sleep probably because now we just divide
by 2 and we have x equals 5 halves. So my original problem, finding log base 4 of 32, I now know
the answer. That's equal to 5 halves. Alright, with these examples done, let's move forward
to thinking about logarithmic functions at this point and think about a little bit related
to their graphs, for example. Notice that the two examples we just did were not functions
because there were no variables floating around. When I said find log base 3 of 81, there were
no x's there. So now I want to think of these things as functions, though, and see where
we go from there. First off, from the graph I showed you at the beginning of this lesson,
we know that we need to think carefully about the domain of a logarithmic function. Did
you notice that that last graph we drew, the one that started way down at the bottom of
the y-axis and worked its way across the first quadrant, that graph was completely on the
right hand side of the y-axis. There was no part of that graph that was on the left side
of the y-axis. Now there's a reason for that and it goes back to the domain. The domain
of a logarithmic function of the form y equals log base b of x is always just the set of
positive real numbers 0 to infinity. And I want to make a very important point here.
The 0 is not included in that domain. So the domain of a logarithmic function, log base
b of x, is always just the set of positive real numbers. Now why? Why is that true?
Well think about it for just a second. If you wanted to plug in a negative value into
a logarithmic function, let's say you had the function log base 2 of x and you plugged
in negative 64. So you were asking me now to find the log base 2 of negative 64. You
would be saying that you were asking me to find a value y so that 2 to the y equals negative
64. But no matter what you plug in for y, you're never going to get 2 to the y to be
negative. It will always be some positive number. It might be some very large positive
number or it might be some very small positive number. But 2 to the y, no matter what you
plug in for y, will be positive. So you simply can't plug negative 64 into a logarithmic
function like log base 2 of x. Okay, so the domain of any of these logarithmic functions
has to be just the set of positive real numbers. What about the range of one of these functions?
Well that's a good question to ask. It's pretty clear, again just from that picture that I
showed you at the beginning of the lesson, that the range must go down to minus infinity.
So when you're looking in the y direction to talk about the range, the downward path of
that graph tells me it's going to go to negative infinity. By the way, the graph of y equals
log base b of x never touches that y axis. And it never touches the y axis for the reason
that its corresponding exponential function never touches the x axis. Remember, these
two graphs, the exponential function graph and the logarithmic function graph, need to
mirror images of one another. So this log base b of x graph never touches that y axis.
But what about the other part of the range, the part that seems to come up into that first
quadrant? What's happening there? Does it flatten out and lie underneath a horizontal
asymptote? Or does it grow forever even if it's slow? Well the answer is that it does grow
forever and it keeps growing up, up, up, up, but it does it very slowly. So the range of
one of these graphs is actually the set of all real numbers. They go down as far as you
want and they go up as far as you want as well. Now, so what do the graphs really look
like? Especially if you start changing the base of the logarithmic function, the log base
b, what does that graph look like as b changes from say 2, 3, 4 and so on? The best way for
us to answer these kinds of questions is to sketch the graphs of these functions, plot
some points, connect the dots and see what we get. So let's walk through an example of
doing this sort of thing and see if we can really get a feeling for why these logarithmic
functions have graphs with these shapes. Let's sketch the graph of f of x equals log base
3 of x. Well, let's be really honest. There are going to be some nice values of x to plug
in and there are going to be some really not so nice values of x to plug in. And as I've
said to you in previous lessons, when we do this kind of activity, we should choose some
intelligent values of x to plug in so that the functions y values are easy to find. In
this case, the smart values of x that you and I should plug in are the powers of 3 and
we're going to choose powers of 3 because the base of this logarithmic function is 3.
So I'm going to plug in things like 1, 3, 9, 27 and 81 because I can find the log base
3 of those values quickly. So let's do that now. f of 1, which would be log base 3 of 1,
would be the number that we would raise 3, 2 to get 1. So what do you have to raise 3,
2 in order to get 1? Well, that answer is 0. Since 3 to the 0 is 1, I know that the log
base 3 of 1 is 0. Remember, you have to kind of think backwards between the logarithmic
function and the exponential function. So f of 1 is 0. What about f of 3, log base 3 of
3? Okay, that's the number that you would raise 3, 2 to get 3 back. Well, that answer
then is 1 because 3 to the 1 is 3. So f of 3 is 1. Similarly, f of 9, which is the log
base 3 of 9, would equal 2 because 3 to the 2 equals 9. You get in the hang of this? This
is the idea behind how to find logarithmic values. What's f of 27? Well, it's log base
3 of 27, and that would be 3 because 3 to the 3rd power gives me 27. And lastly, f of
81 would be 4 because log base 3 of 81 is 4 because 3 to the 4th is 81. Now, you could
plot these points and you could start to sketch out the graph. And let me make a few comments
about that graph as we go from here. First of all, notice that you know the x-intercept
thanks to the information we found. The x-intercept is at 1, 0. You also notice, if you sketch
a few more points and work your way through, that you'll have a vertical asymptote at the
line x equals 0. Now, to see that, you would have had to plug in some other values of x,
maybe some smaller ones that are still positive, like 1 3rd, 1 9th, 1 27th, 1 over 81, and
so on, again choosing those denominators to be powers of 3. You might also notice that
this graph, log base 3 of x, has the same shape as the graph of log base 2 of x, which
is the one that I had us graph at the very beginning of the lesson. So, the next question
we really should ask is, how do these graphs compare? Well, let's plot them on the same
set of axes along with something like y equals log base 7 of x, let's say, just to see if
we can see some of those differences between the graphs. Well, what do you see? Well, first
of all, in that little region between x equals 0 and x equals 1, the logarithmic function
which is above the others is the one with the larger base, in other words, the log base 7
of x in this example. But once x gets bigger than 1, that function takes on the role of
being the smallest compared to the others. In other words, log base 7 of x, once x is
bigger than 1, is actually the one that's the lowest or the smallest. And in that part
of the domain from x greater than 1, the function which is actually the highest is the log base
2 of x. Now, this could be kind of counterintuitive at first because you want the one with the
larger number to be the larger function. In this case, though, log base 2, which actually
has the smallest base in the example, is actually above or larger log base 7 of x, which has
a larger base. So, you may have to work your way through some of that possibly confusing
information as you're working through which graph is above and which graph is below.
Now, just as with other kinds of graphs that we've seen in the past, we can play the usual
games of shifting them upwards or downwards, left and right. I'm going to pass on that
for now because we have lots of other things to talk about today with logarithms. But you
may want to get used to thinking about how you would shift the graphs of these basic
logarithmic functions, either left and right or up or down. Now, let's transition to a
discussion of some properties of logarithms now, which really do cause some students a
bit of trouble. So, you're going to want to really put these to memory and remember them
bit by bit and remember them exactly because it's easy to mess them up to confuse them.
So, we're going to talk now about these properties of logarithms and there are three main ones.
So, let me quote them to you here. We're going to let capital M, capital N and B be positive
numbers and B is not going to be 1 and we're going to let x be any real number. Then here
are the three properties of logarithms that you want to keep in mind. First, log base B
of M times N equals log base B of M plus log base B of N. So, you go from a multiplication
on the inside of the logarithm function M times N to two separate logarithms which are
combined by an addition. Can you see why some folks get confused with these properties? So,
that's the first property. The second property is that log base B of M divided by N is
the same as log base B of M minus log base B of N and the third property says that if
you take the log base B of M raised to the x power, so you've plugged M to the x into
the function, it's the same as x times log base B of M. In other words, that nice exponent
that's on the M that's inside the function is actually allowed to come out in front and
become a multiplier next to the log. So, log base B of M to the x equals x times log base
B of M. If I put numbers in, for example, I might be saying that log base B of three
squared is the same as two times log base B of three. Now, these properties are really
useful when you're trying to simplify expressions that involve logarithms. So, I'd like to spend
a few moments looking at some examples where we combine values of logarithms using these
properties. So, let's look at this one together. Write the log base three of 162 minus the log
base three of 18 as one logarithm and simplify as much as you can. So, the idea here is to
take that difference of two logs and actually try to write it as one logarithm. Well, if
you look at the second property I quoted a moment ago, the right hand side of that property
has log of something minus log of something else and that property is the one we're going
to want to use here. So, log base three of 162 minus log base three of 18 is the same
as log base three of 162 divided by 18. So, that's the second property I shared with you
earlier and now I can simplify 162 divided by 18. That's just nine if you just do some
long division or however you want to work through that actually and log base three of nine,
we can simplify that even further because I know that three to the second power equals
nine. So, the log base three of nine is equal to two. So, that really unenjoyable looking
expression we started with log base three of 162 minus log base three of 18 is actually
just a really fancy way of writing the number two. Now, let's try another example and you
might want to try this one on your own first just to see if the laws of logarithms or these
properties of logarithms, if you will, are making sense as you try to do this example.
Write two times log base five of x plus log base five of y minus three times the log base
five of z as a single logarithm and just as a hint, you're actually going to need all
three properties I mentioned earlier in order to do this and those were log base b of m
times n equals log base b of m plus log base b of n and log base b of m over n equals log
base b of m minus log base b of n and lastly log base b of m to the x equals x times the
log base b of m. Now, as we walk through this example, I do need to stress one important
thing. Notice that all the terms that we started with are log base five. Did you see how they
were all log base five of something? If those bases were different, let's say the first term
had a log base five and the other one had a log base six in it, then none of this would
work. So the fact that those are all log base fives is crucial to finishing this example.
Now, as you look at the first term, which was two log base five of x, that's two times
the log base five of x, we're reminded of the third property which says that I can rewrite
that as log base five of x squared. You see how that two, which was in the exponent of
that x squared, can be brought out in front. It can also be pulled back inside, if you
will. So two times the log base five of x is the same as log base five of x squared and
so now I can walk my way through that third term that has a three in front and I can actually
rewrite that as well instead of three log base five of z, it's the same as log base five of z
to the third power. So now let's use these properties and finish this up. The first two
terms now are log base five of x squared plus log base five of y, those can be combined using
the first property to give me log base five of x squared times y and now I have log base
five of x squared times y minus log base five of z cubed. Remember, I pulled that three
back up into the exponent inside the z and now the second property says I know how to
combine when I have a minus sign between the two and when I have a minus sign that log base
five of x squared y minus log base five of z cubed becomes log base five of x squared
times y divided by z cubed and notice the x squared and the y divided by the z cubed
are now all inside the log base five function. Well, that was my goal, was to write that
complicated looking expression as one logarithm so we accomplished that and that's very well
done. But believe it or not, the big reason to actually use these logarithms is usually
not to put a whole bunch of logarithms back together, it's actually to split one complicated
looking logarithm apart into smaller pieces. That's actually why logarithms were developed
in the first place. So let's do another example where I try to show you how you can take the
log of a very large number and split it into smaller pieces with the goal of finding the
log of the big number. Given that log base four of two equals one half and log base four
of three is about point seven nine two five, I want us to determine the value of log base
four of sixty million four hundred sixty six thousand one hundred seventy six. Now,
I'm going to start out in being really honest with you, I'm willing to admit that I carefully
selected that sixty million four hundred sixty six thousand one hundred seventy six but I
really want to illustrate this point so that number is carefully selected but it will still
make the point I think. Let's start factoring sixty million four hundred sixty six thousand
one hundred seventy six realizing that a lot of twos and a lot of threes are going to come
out as I start to factor. As you do that and you keep pulling twos and threes out of that
number, you'll find after a while that that number sixty million and so on is just six
raised to the tenth power. So what I've really asked you for then is a logarithm of six to
the ten but now that reminds me of the third property of logarithms when I have an exponent
I'm allowed to actually pull that exponent out. So let's keep going now as we work through
steps of finding this logarithm. So this log which was log base four of sixty million four
hundred sixty six thousand one hundred seventy six is actually just equal to log base four
of six to the tenth power. Now that's in some sense the hard part of the problem to realize
that the number inside those parentheses was just six to the tenth but now I can attack this
with the properties of logarithms. First of all the ten can be pulled out in front and
all of a sudden I have ten times log base four of six. Can I point something out here?
We've just converted this problem from looking at log base four of sixty million four hundred
sixty six thousand one hundred seventy six to just finding the log base four of six and
then multiplying by ten and this is the power of these logarithms that you can whittle a
big problem down to a much smaller one. Now that's the same as ten times the log base four
of two times three and we have one property that tells me how to split when I have a two
times three like that so that this becomes ten times log base four of two plus log base four
of three. Notice that that ten needs to sit out in front it's going to have to be distributed
later on if that's the way we want to do it. And now I gave you what log base four of two
is. It's point five and I also gave you an approximation of log base four of three. It's
point seven nine two five. So our number becomes ten times point five plus point seven nine
two five which is ten times one point two nine two five and of course ten times that is just
twelve point nine two five. Now that's pretty nice. I think it's a really cool example to
show us how these logarithms have these great properties that allow the calculations of very
large values for logarithms to be whittled down to a problem that we can really really handle.
And it really was for these kinds of calculations where we would want logarithms of very large
numbers to be whittled down to logarithms of very small ones. It was this reason that really
motivated the definition of and the development of logarithms many many years ago. Now let's
practice with one more of these kind of expand type problems and then we'll go ahead and close
out our lesson for now. I want to expand and simplify log base eight of eight times the
square root of seven c to the fifth. Now there's a lot here actually so let's just walk our way
through a little bit of the problem one step at a time and see how this works. First of
all log base eight of eight times the square root of seven c to the fifth is the same as
log base eight of eight plus log base eight of square root of seven c to the fifth. So I've
split this up now just a little bit and I notice first of all that I can do the log base eight
of eight pretty quickly that's just equal to one because eight to the one equals eight. So I'm
now down to one plus log base eight of the square root of seven c to the fifth. Now that's the
same as one plus log base eight of seven c to the fifth raised to the one half power. That's
what the square root means and now that I have that power of one half the third property allows
me to pull that one half and place it out in front and that means I now have one plus one
half times the log base eight of seven c to the fifth. Now let's keep going. The seven c to the
fifth can also be split up because it's a product and I'll have one plus one half times the log base
eight of seven plus log base eight of c to the fifth and that one half has to be in multiply
with both of those terms and now I can clean this up just a little bit more distribute that one
half out and I'll have one plus one half log base eight of seven plus five halves log base eight of c
because that c to the fifth allows the five to come out in front. It multiplies with the one half
and I get a five halves and that's the final answer. So I split up what looked like one very
complicated log into three terms all of which look pretty straightforward. Well we've completed a
pretty quick introduction to logarithmic functions today as well as some exponential function
material in the previous lesson. To be honest it would take many more lessons to really do justice
to exponential and logarithmic functions. We're going to cover them once more in the next lesson as
we solve problems involving these types of functions but I would strongly recommend that you study them
further especially as you look to taking precalculus or calculus courses in the future.
