In the previous lesson, I tried to make the case for using special kinds of factoring tools
to help find the roots of polynomial equations or the values of x where the polynomial equation
equals zero. Those were fun to talk about, but one thing is clear from that discussion.
Those tools are very specialized. They don't work on all types of polynomials, and that
leaves us with a bit of a concern. In contrast, think of the quadratic formula. For any quadratic
equation you write down, the quadratic formula can and will give you the roots. But unfortunately,
there isn't an all-in-one tool to find the roots of every polynomial equation, especially
if the degree of the polynomial gets large. Even so, I'd like to share with you some of
the tools that are out there to help us try to zero in on where those roots might be.
In this lesson, I want to focus on where the rational roots or the fractional roots can
be. Now, just a quick reminder. What are the rational numbers? They're the numbers of the
form a divided by b, where a and b are integers and b is not equal to zero. We're looking
in this lesson primarily for roots of polynomial equations which look like fractions. Now,
this includes those roots or solutions which have a denominator of b equal to 1. The root
really just looks like a over 1 or just a. So, whole number solutions will also be part
of this rational number set that we're going to look for. So, let me try to motivate the
main idea about finding rational roots by looking at a relatively obvious example. Here's the
example. Find the roots of the polynomial equation 6x squared plus 11x minus 7 equals
zero. Okay, we can try to use the quadratic formula if we wanted, but it turns out that
this polynomial on the left hand side factors pretty quickly and it's just 2x minus 1 times
3x plus 7. Now, you should check to make sure that's true by foiling and expanding that
polynomial if you'd like, but that really is the factorization. Now, what are the roots
then of that equation once I know the factorization? Well, they occur when each part is equal to
zero. That would be when 2x minus 1 equals zero and when 3x plus 7 equals zero. So, what
are the roots? Well, if you take 2x minus 1 equals zero, add 1 to both sides and divide
by 2, you'll have the value x equals one half. So, one of the roots is at one half.
And if you take 3x plus 7 equals zero and you subtract the 7 to the other side and then
divide by 3, you'll have the other root x equals negative 7 thirds. Now, notice that
both of the roots that we just found are rational numbers. They're fractions, one whole number
divided by the other. And notice also, and really more importantly, that the numerators
of both of those roots are factors of the 7 or the constant term that was in the original
polynomial. And the denominators of both the roots are factors of the 6, which was the
leading coefficient of the polynomial. That's not a coincidence and it's why I chose this
example to get us started. It leads us to a very important mathematical fact that's
called the rational roots theorem. Sounds kind of lofty, but it's not that hard to understand.
It gives us a tool for trying to pin down where the rational roots of any polynomial equation
might be and I stress might be. So, let me state the rational roots theorem for you at
this time. The only possible rational roots of the polynomial equation a n times x to
the n plus a sub n minus 1 times x to the n minus 1 plus dot dot dot plus a 1 x plus
a sub 0 equals 0 are of the form p over q, where p over q is already in reduced form.
p is a factor of that constant a sub 0 that was on the end of the polynomial and q is
a factor of the leading coefficient a sub n. Now, I can hear some of you right now saying,
whoa, there's no way I'm ever going to remember that. He just lost me really big time with
all that notation. But don't get bogged down in that notation. Just follow through a couple
of examples and I think you'll see the pattern pretty quickly. Here's an example that should
make that notation more understandable. Go back and look at 6x squared plus 11x minus
7 equals 0. In this example, the a sub 0 is the negative 7 that's on the end of the left
hand side and the a sub n, so to speak, is just the leading coefficient, which is 6.
So according to this rational roots theorem, in this example, every rational root would
have to be of the form p over q, where p is some factor of 7, that's the constant term
in the equation, and q is some factor of 6, which is the leading coefficient on the left
hand side. If you look back at the example, we found that the roots were one half and
negative seven thirds. Notice again, those numerators one and seven, those are factors
of 7, and the denominators two and three are factors of 6, and that's basically what
the rational roots theorem is trying to tell us. Now, this is really interesting because
if the a sub 0 and the a sub n terms, the constant term and the leading coefficient are relatively
small numbers, then the possibilities for the number of rational roots are also very small.
So a set is going to be a really small set of potential rational roots. Also, notice
that the theorem tells us that we don't need to focus any attention on the other coefficients
of the polynomial, if you will, the coefficients that are in the middle of the polynomial.
If we want to look for rational roots, we can completely ignore all of those coefficients
in the middle. We only have to worry about the leading coefficient and the constant coefficient,
if you will, that's at the very end of the polynomial once it's been written in standard
form. So this is a really nice theorem because it allows us to focus attention on two very
specific pieces of information. Okay, so let me look at a few more examples where we use
this rational roots theorem to our advantage. Let's start with this one and maybe you might
want to work on this one alone first and then check back in with me to see if you've done
it right. Find the rational roots of the equation x cubed minus 3x squared plus x minus 3 equals
zero. Okay, according to the rational roots theorem, the only possible rational roots
and I have to stress possible here, the only possible rational roots have to occur at fractions
of the form p over q, where p is a divisor of 3 and q is a divisor of 1. Well, since the
only divisors of 3 are 3 and 1, and the only divisor of 1 is 1, then the only possible rational
roots are 1 over 1, negative 1 over 1, 3 over 1, and negative 3 over 1. So technically,
you've got to remember to look at the negative values as well as the positive values. Something
like negative 3 is also a divisor of 3, so technically I have to look at the sort of plus
or minus cases as I'm using the rational roots theorem. Now, guess what? I only wrote down
four possible rational numbers that could be roots of this equation. They were 1, negative
1, 3, and negative 3 once I simplify those four fractions. That's it. There are no other
possible rational roots. So if you came up to me and said, well, why don't we try one
half or why don't we try two thirds, I would immediately tell you that we do not have to
worry about those thanks to the rational roots theorem. So we only have four possible rational
roots. Now, I don't know that all of them are roots, but I know that where I need to
look is just those four numbers, 1, negative 1, 3, and negative 3. Now, let's check to
see which of those four numbers, if any of them, really is a root of that original equation.
How do I do that? Well, it's actually pretty straightforward. Plug each one in for x in
the original equation and see if the equation is true. It's that simple. Let me suggest
that you try it and let me give you a hint. Only one of these in this example turns out
to be a root. So which one is it? Test for yourself to see if 1, negative 1, 3, or negative
3 is a root of x cubed minus 3x squared plus x minus 3 equals 0. Okay, so which one did
you find? Well, let's see. Let's try plugging one into the equation and seeing what we get.
We'll have 1 cubed minus 3 times 1 squared plus 1 minus 3 equals 0, which is the same
as 1 minus 3 plus 1 minus 3 equals 0. And if you simplify that left-hand side, you're
going to have negative 4 equals 0. Well, that's false. Since that's false, we know that the
number 1 which we tried to plug into the equation is not a root, so we know that that's not
a solution. Okay, let's keep going. Let's try plugging in negative 1. When you do that,
you'll have negative 1 cubed minus 3 times negative 1 squared plus negative 1 minus 3
equals 0. And that simplifies to minus 1 minus 3 minus 1 minus 3 equals 0, which is the same
as negative 8 equals 0, and that's false. So negative 1 is also not a rational root
of the equation. Okay, let's try 3. That was in our list. Let's plug 3 in. You have 3 cubed
minus 3 times 3 squared plus 3 minus 3 equals 0. And that simplifies to 27 minus 27 plus
3 minus 3 equals 0. And if you simplify the left-hand side even more, you just get 0 equals
0. That's a true statement. And so we can conclude that 3 is a rational root of the
original equation. Now, I told you there was only one rational root, but you know, we're
so close to checking all of these numbers to see if they're roots. Let's just make sure
that the other one is not. The other number that was in our list was negative 3. So when
we plug that in, we'll have negative 3 cubed minus 3 times negative 3 squared plus negative
3 minus 3 equals 0. And when you simplify all that, you're going to have negative 27
minus 27 minus 3 minus 3 on the left, which is the same as negative 60. And that definitely
doesn't equal 0, not even close. So x equals negative 3 is not a rational root. And I can
now conclude, thanks to the rational roots theorem, that there's exactly one rational
root for this equation, and it's the number x equals 3. Now, before I move to our next
example, I need to make a quick comment about what we just did. In the example we just finished,
I said that x equals 3 is the only rational root. Let me make this very clear now. That
does not mean that there aren't other roots out there. Let me say it again. It does not
mean that there aren't other roots for that equation. There might actually be. All I can
conclude at this point is that if we only wanted rational roots, a whole number divided
by another number, to give me a rational number, then there is just one of those. We'd have
to do more work to see if there were other non-rational roots for this equation. And
I'll talk about that more later on. Now, I suggest we try another example just for practice.
Don't forget, you always have to check for both the negative and positive rationals
that pop up from the rational roots theorem. So here's an example that I might suggest
you try. List all the possible rational roots for the equation x cubed minus 5x squared
plus 8x plus 14 equals 0. Okay, the polynomial is already in standard form on the left-hand
side of that equation. You've got all the powers on the terms going downward as you
read from left to right, starting at a cube and working their way down. So we know that
if there's a rational root, it must be a fraction of the form p over q, where p is a divisor
of that 14, and q is a divisor of 1. Remember, the 1 is at the front. It's the leading coefficient.
You have 1x cubed there. And that means, of course, that the denominator, q, has to be
1, because the only divisor of 1 that's positive anyway, is 1. So there's only eight possible
rational roots for this equation. Let's see if we can list them. You might have 1 over
negative 1 over 1, 2 over 1, or negative 2 over 1, 7 over 1, or negative 7 over 1, and
14 over 1, or negative 14 over 1. Now, of course, all those fractions have denominators
of 1, so you can actually rewrite them as whole numbers, and your list is just 1, negative
1, 2, negative 2, 7, negative 7, 14, and negative 14. Is that the list you got? If it is, you
know it's fabulous. Now, you're probably thinking, that's a lot of numbers to check. Eight numbers
I have to plug in. Well, okay, maybe, although to be honest with you, I would disagree. It's
not a lot of numbers to check. But notice what's true. Thanks to this rational roots
theorem, I don't have to check any other numbers than the eight that we just listed. I don't
have to plug in 13. I don't have to plug in 5 halves, 93 over 7, negative 14 over 103,
or any other fraction that's out there, and there are infinitely many of them out there,
by the way. All we know from this rational roots theorem is that there are only eight
real candidates for rational roots here. And that means we've gone from an infinite set
of numbers to only eight to check. And that's a huge workload reduction. So let me suggest
this. Let's check a few of these eight, and I'll leave the rest to you. So why don't we
start by checking to see if one is a rational root. One was in our list. Let's see if it's
a root. I'm going to plug the one in for x, and when I do, I'll have one cubed minus
five times one squared plus eight times one plus 14 equals zero. And if you simplify that
left-hand side, you're just going to have 18 equals zero, and that means one is not
a rational root. Okay, let's try negative one. When you plug in negative one, you'll
have negative one cubed minus five times negative one squared plus eight times negative
one plus 14 equals zero. And if you simplify that left-hand side, you'll get zero, and
that means you have a true statement, that zero equals zero. And therefore, x equals
negative one is a rational root, so we should definitely keep that in mind as we move forward.
Let's try one more for now, and then I'll let you check the rest. Let's plug in x equals
two. When you do that, you'll have two cubed minus five times two squared plus eight times
two plus 14 equals zero, and simplifying that left-hand side will give you 18 equals zero,
and that means that two is not a rational root. Now, I probably shouldn't tell you this,
but it turns out that none of the other numbers that were in our list are actually rational
roots of the original equation. After all, I'm the one who built that equation. I know
what the roots are, but I'm going to leave it to you to check those others by plugging
them in and just making sure that you don't get true equations at the end. Now, in fact,
I can tell you that there aren't any other real roots either, but to do that means I
need to share with you another very important fact from this lesson, and it's called the
factor theorem. So let me explain this one to you quickly. The factor theorem says this.
The expression x minus a is a linear factor of a polynomial function if and only if the
value a that's in that linear factor is a zero of the polynomial function. Okay, so
what in the world does that mean? Well, go back to our example. We showed that negative
one is a zero of the polynomial x cubed minus five x squared plus eight x plus 14. That
means the value of a here from the factor theorem is negative one, and it means that
x minus negative one, which is the same as x plus one, is a factor of x cubed minus five
x squared plus eight x plus 14. In fact, if you just use some long division, you can show
that x cubed minus five x squared plus eight x plus 14 equals that x plus one that we were
talking about times x squared minus six x plus 14. And that's pretty cool. So now we've
actually factored that equation or at least the polynomial on the left hand side. And
now I'm claiming we can tell where all of the roots are, not just the rational roots.
So let me restate the problem just a bit. Let's now use the rational roots theorem and
the factor theorem to find all of the real roots, whether they're rational, nice fractions,
or maybe not rational. And let's find all the roots for the polynomial equation x cubed
minus six x squared plus five x plus six equals zero. Now, let's start by seeing if there
are any rational roots to this equation using both the rational roots theorem and the factor
theorem. Well, what would they look like? Well, why don't you write down all the possibilities
quickly for the rational roots of this equation? Okay, so what did you get? Well, you should
have gotten one over one, negative one over one, two over one, negative two over one,
three over one, negative three over one, six over one, and negative six over one. And again,
thanks to all those denominators of one, you know that you can rewrite this list as one,
negative one, two, negative two, three, negative three, six, and negative six. Now, those are
all the possible potential rational roots. Let's check to see if we can notice if any
of those really are roots. So why don't you check the first three of those candidates,
one, negative one, and two, and see if any of those are roots, and then we'll come back
together. Okay, let's check them ourselves now. If you plug in x equals one, and you
simplify, you should have come to six equals zero after you did all the simplification,
and that, of course, is false. So one is not a root. If you plug in the negative one, you
should have simplified the left-hand side to get negative six, and of course, that's not equal to
zero. So negative one is also not a rational root. And if you plug in two, the left-hand side would
have been eight minus 24 plus 10 plus six. The right-hand side, of course, is still zero,
and the left-hand side is also equal to zero after you do the arithmetic. So that means that you
have a true equation there. So x equals two is a rational root of the original equation. Now,
let's bring in the factor theorem. The factor theorem now tells me that x minus that two is a
linear factor of the left-hand side of the original equation. So if you now divide x minus two out
of the x cubed minus 6x squared plus 5x plus 6 using long division, you should be able to see how
to factor the left-hand side. So why don't you do that division now? Check by long division what
you get, and we'll come back together. Okay, you should have found that you got no remainder when
you did that long division. And when you compute x cubed minus 6x squared plus 5x plus 6 divided by
the x minus 2, you should get x squared minus 4x minus 3. And because of that, I can rewrite my new
equation as x minus 2 times x squared minus 4x minus 3 equals zero. That's just a rewriting of the
original equation. So now, if I can just find the roots of this equation, I'll be good to go. So I
already know that 2 is going to be a root from the x minus 2 portion. I really just need to check
whether the x squared minus 4x minus 3 is going to produce any other real numbers which are zeros.
Well, x squared minus 4x minus 3. It doesn't factor, but I've got the quadratic formula. Notice how
we can pull all these tools out of our mathematical toolbox and use them on the problem. It's fabulous.
So let's use the quadratic formula on x squared minus 4x minus 3 equals zero. And when I do, I'm going
to have x equals the negative of negative 4 plus or minus square root of 16 minus 4 times 1 times
negative 3, all divided by 2 times 1, which is just 2. And when I simplify this a bit, I'm going to have
x equals 4, just positive 4, plus or minus square root of 28 divided by 2. Now, 28 is 4 times 7. So I can
split that square root up a bit and rewrite this x as 4 plus or minus 2 times the square root of 7
divided by 2 since the square root of 4 is 2. And now I can factor a 2 out of the numerator and cancel it with the 2
in the denominator. And if I do that carefully, I should have x equals 2 plus or minus square root of 7.
Well, guess what? I now have all three roots of the original equation. One of them is rational. It's the number 2.
We found that a few moments ago. And the other two roots are 2 plus the square root of 7 and 2 minus the square root of 7.
We got those thanks to the quadratic formula. So I had one rational root, and I had two other real roots, but they're not
rational. And they're not rational because the square root of 7 cannot be written as a nice fraction p over q, if you
will, where p and q are both integers. So we've used the rational roots theorem, we used the factor theorem, and we used the
quadratic formula to finish that problem. Now, let's look at another example along these same lines. I want us just to find
all the rational roots of the equation 2x to the fourth plus 5x cubed minus 2x minus 5 equals 0. So let's just find the
rational roots of this equation. Well, let's start by hunting for those rational roots thanks to the rational roots theorem.
So why don't you start by listing all the possible rational roots thanks to that rational roots theorem?
OK, so what did you come up with? Well, the possible roots have to look like p over q where the numerator divides that constant term
and the denominator divides the leading coefficient. Now, this time, I gave us a little bit of extra work because the leading
coefficient is not 1. We probably were falling into a bit of a rut by seeing a 1 as that leading coefficient all the time. In this
case, the leading coefficient is 2. So the rational roots theorem tells me that the only possible rational roots here are 1 over 1
and negative 1 over 1, 1 over 2 and negative 1 over 2, 5 over 1, negative 5 over 1, and then 5 over 2 and negative 5 over 2.
Those are the only possible rational roots for this equation. Now, I want to check some of these together. I might not check them all because it would
take some time, but you can check any of those that we don't check together here. Let's try plugging in x equals 1. It's a good way to start.
And when you do that, you'll have 2 times 1 to the fourth plus 5 times 1 cubed minus 2 times 1 minus 5 equals 0. And simplifying that left hand side
a bit, you'll just have 2 plus 5 minus 2 minus 5 equals 0. That's just 0 equals 0, and that's a true statement. That means that x equals 1 is a
root, a rational root of this equation, which is great. And thanks to the factor theorem, I know that x minus 1 is then a factor of the original
polynomial on the left hand side of this equation. Now, let's check a few more of these possible rational roots. How about negative 1? That was on our list.
You would have, when you plugged in negative 1, 2 times negative 1 to the fourth plus 5 times negative 1 cubed minus 2 times negative 1 minus 5 equals 0.
Be careful with all those negatives being raised to even and odd powers like 4 and 3. When you do the left hand side, when you simplify the left hand side, you'll have 2 minus 5 plus 2 minus 5 equals 0 on the right hand side, and that's saying that negative 6 equals 0.
That's false. And therefore, that's not a root. Negative 1 is not a root. All right, let's try x equals 1 half, just for fun. You plug in the 1 half for x, and your left hand side is going to become 2 times 1 half to the fourth plus 5 times 1 half cubed minus 2 times a half minus 5.
And that all has to equal 0. And that's equal to, if you do a little more simplification, 2 times 1 over 16 plus 5 eighths minus 1 minus 5, and of course that equals 0. And doing just a little more simplification, you'll have 2 times 1 over 16 plus 5 eighths minus 6 equals 0.
Now, let me just make a quick comment about critical thinking for just a second. I don't really need to know exactly what that left hand side is unless it's equal to 0, of course. If it's equal to 0, then I have a root.
But here I have negative 6 on the left hand side being added to 5 eighths and basically 2 over 16, which is like 1 over 8. Well, negative 6 is much bigger than 5 eighths plus 2 sixteenths. There's no way that the 2 over 16 and the 5 eighths are going to cancel the negative 6 to give me 0 when I do the addition and subtraction.
And that means the left hand side, no matter what it is, is not equal to 0. It's going to be some negative number instead. And therefore, I need not go any further with that. I just know that x equals 1 half is not a root.
Now, similarly, if I plug in x equals negative 1 half, it's not a root. I'll let you check that one. The same sort of arithmetic is going to occur. I'd like to move to one more, though. Let's try x equals 5.
If you plug in 5 and you do some of the arithmetic, you're going to have 2 times 625 plus 5 times 125 minus 10 minus 5 equals 0.
Again, look at that for just a second. The left hand side has two very large, or at least relatively large, positive numbers at the beginning, 2 times 625 and 5 times 125. Those are both larger than 500.
And now those two are being added together, and then I'm just subtracting a paltry 15 from them, and I want to know if that equals 0. No way will that left hand side equal 0. It'll be a very large, positive number.
And therefore, x equals 5 is also not a root. And similarly, you can check whether x equals negative 5 is a root or not. It turns out that it's not either.
I'm going to let you check x equals 5 halves, because again, you're going to be able to compare the positive parts to the negative parts, and you'll be able to see pretty quickly that x equals 5 halves is also not a root of this equation as you move forward.
And now we've checked several of these values. We know that at least one of them is a root, but we want to keep going forward and check x equals negative 5 halves.
Now, actually, maybe I'll let you check that one for me. Go ahead and do it quickly and see what you get.
Okay, what did you get? Well, when you plug in negative 5 halves and you do the arithmetic, believe it or not, it actually works. The left hand side really is 0, and therefore you have 0 equals 0.
So x equals negative 5 halves is a rational root, and several moments ago we showed that x equals 1 is a rational root as well.
We've checked all the other possible rational roots that the rational roots theorem gave us, and we've found that there were exactly two of them that were rational roots.
Well, in this lesson we've looked at two of the most important facts in algebra that deal with finding roots of polynomial equations, the rational roots theorem, and the factor theorem.
You're going to want to put these to memory because they're tools that we're going to use over and over again in future lessons.
Next time, we'll talk a bit more about roots of polynomial equations, and that lesson will close out our main discussion about polynomials. I look forward to talking with you then.
Thank you.
