We've spoken in the course so far about information and communications technologies and the role
that nanotechnology has to play in advancing those.
We've spoken of biology, biomolecules, and how nanobiosciences and nanobiotechnology have
a real opportunity to play there as well.
If you think about some of the big challenges facing the world today, another one that comes
immediately to mind is the field of energy.
How do we find ways to capture energy, store energy?
How do we find ways to capture energy in a way that's renewable, that's sustainable,
and that's clean?
And so for the first lecture in this series on energy, we're going to talk about solar
energy in particular.
How do we harness it?
How do we turn it efficiently into electricity?
And what role does nanotechnology have to play in that?
First let's spend a minute on the sun and its properties.
We need to understand the sun and its spectrum in order to think about solar energy properly.
First on the spectrum, the sun is very, very hot as you're well aware.
And that accounts for the fact that the peak of its intensity, the peak of its emission
lies within the visible spectrum.
We were speaking earlier about thermal imaging and how you can see a warm person against
a colder background.
Well their wavelengths of emission are much, much, much, much longer than the sun's, but
it's all based on the same physics called black body emission.
In the sun's case, because it's so hot, about 5,000 or 6,000 degrees centigrade, the sun
peaks its luminescence, its intensity, right in the visible wavelength spectrum.
And as we also discussed earlier, that's why our eyes have adapted to see in what we call
the visible wavelengths.
An important thing to know about the sun though is that in addition, it has a very significant
spectral signature in the infrared.
And not the very long wavelength low-energy infrared, there's a major portion of sun energy
right up against the visible in what we call the near-infrared wavelengths.
In fact, fully half of the sun's energy lies in the infrared.
And so a lot of the opportunity for making more efficient solar cells is going to be
to make full use of the sun's broad spectrum.
Another important thing to think about with the sun is we think about making a good solar
cell is the breadth of that spectrum.
It's kind of the opposite of a laser.
In fact, if the sun were a laser, which it's not, it's not going to be, but if the sun
were a laser, we'd have an easier time making solar cells because we could tailor our converters
of light energy into electrical energy.
We could tailor them to one specific wavelength.
We could customize them.
But inevitably, this is the source of energy that we have, and we have to make good use
of all of its spectral components in order to make an efficient solar cell.
So this will be one of our challenges, and I'll call it the broad-band challenge.
Instead of having a narrow spectrum, we have a broad range of colors, a broad set of bandwidths
that we need to deal with.
Let's start by asking kind of the economic question, though, the practical question on
planet Earth.
Far enough from the sun, is there actually enough energy to meet a significant portion
of our energy needs?
And if you were to look today at the way in which we meet our energy needs and you look
at fossil fuels and look at sources such as coal, look at nuclear, look at hydroelectric,
and then you were to look at the proportion of energy that's met using solar energy, you'd
find that a very, very small percent, much less than a percent of our total energy needs,
are met today using renewables.
And you might then ask the question, well, is there some fundamental reason for that?
Is there a lack of sufficient gift of solar energy reaching the planet Earth?
And the answer to that is very much not.
A couple of statistics there.
One is if you were to look at the total amount of energy reaching the Earth every hour from
the sun, there's enough energy there to meet all of the world's energy needs for a year.
Another way to look at this is if we were to cover the Earth with only a small fraction
of the area of Nevada with good solar cells, not perfect, which is good solar cells, we
could meet all the world's energy needs.
So scaling by time or scaling by area, the same message is given that the solar resource
is abundant.
And the reason why today we're not making fuller use of it relates to the fact that we haven't
yet found ways to make solar cells that are simultaneously high in their efficiency and
also low in their cost.
And that's what we'll talk about much during this pair of lectures, is how nanotechnology
is enabling us to seek to break compromises between cost and efficiency in solar cells.
One more thing just to think about, about the sun before we move into the technology
of solar cells is how it's distributed.
Obviously at the equator there's both a little bit more intensity of sunlight, and then it's
also better distributed throughout the year, and in some locations at the equator we're
also doing better in terms of cloud coverage.
But the point I want to make with this map of insulation, which is the amount of energy
per day or per year reaching different regions of the Earth, is that even if you live where
I do in Canada, there's actually an abundance of solar energy.
And if you were to compare us with the amount of solar energy reaching, say, right at the
peak in Saudi Arabia or right near the other locations, right near the equator, it turns
out that we have maybe 60% as much solar energy as they do at the peak.
And given that there's this huge overabundance of available solar power, that's a lot.
Even those of us who live well into the Northern Hemisphere have an abundance of solar energy
available to us, and the challenge is to find the ways to harvest it efficiently and cost
effectively.
And so on that point about harvesting it cost effectively, this is where there's been some
real advances through nanotechnology in recent years.
Take a look at this picture of a physically flexible solar cell.
You can see that it's bent, it's actually on a plastic substrate.
And one of the great things about this new emerging area of solar cells that aren't rigid,
they're not made on panes of glass, but instead they're printed onto flexible backings, is
that we're able to make them a bit the way you'd print a newspaper.
We're able to use roll-to-roll processing in order to make these flexible solar cells
in a manner that's very cost effective.
Instead of being a sequential serial process like the semiconductor industry, we've talked
about these semiconductor wafers that go through lithographic fabrication stepwise.
Instead it's a serial process, a continuous process.
And these flexible solar cells are offering promise of significant cost reductions as
a result of their ease of fabrication.
The other great thing about being physically flexible is that their ease of deployment
is enhanced as well.
A significant part of the cost of getting a solar cell system installed isn't actually
in the manufacturing of the solar cell or the module that you put onto your roof, it's
in putting it onto your roof.
These heavy materials, sometimes there's a need to reinforce the roof as a consequence
of trying to install these heavy materials on top of them.
So lightweight flexible solar cells that can be readily integrated into a building in cases
even integrated into the building materials themselves offer great promise for reducing
this other half of the cost of the solar system, which is often referred to as the balance
of systems cost.
Let's take a look at another slice at the kind of Moore's Law concept that we spent
lots of time in on technological roadmaps.
Silicon based solar cells actually have their own Moore's Law as well, a rate of improvement
in the efficiency to cost ratio in these solar cells.
The challenge though is that if one projects this law, this empirical observation for the
rate of improvement of power versus cost in these solar cells, one would predict that
it would be many, many decades until we will have, based on conventional existing solar
technologies, until we actually have these turn into compellingly cost effective technologies.
So this is where many in the field call for a breakthrough.
They call for a need for something that will take us off the just extrapolative improvement
in solar cell efficiency and that will take us into a new regime.
And so here people talk about generations of solar cell.
A first generation such as the silicon solar cells that we will talk about together during
this lecture that have offered improvements in efficiency over time and reductions in
cost but not a disruptive change, not a step change.
A second generation of solar cells that have been these flexible solar cells that have
led to the emergence of the much lower cost approach but where the efficiencies have not
represented improvement over what silicon can give us.
And then the vision, and this is much of the vision for the present work ongoing today,
is for a third generation of solar cells which doesn't have a compromise anymore but which
instead achieves lower cost and higher efficiency.
And it's quite easy to see why this point about efficiency is so important.
You might, until you think about these so-called balance of systems considerations, you might
say surely if I can just make my solar cells cheap enough, it's not particularly important
that I harvest every photon from the sun efficiently, the photons from the sun are free.
But when you then think about the fact that the cost of installing and maintaining solar
cells, if you like the cost of ownership and the cost of installation, these scale with
the area of space that you're filling them into, then ultimately you need very much to
think about efficiency because if you don't achieve reasonably high efficiencies from
solar cells, you may be able to overcome the cost of the cells themselves but you're
not able to overcome these fixed costs associated with the installation and maintenance of the
solar cells.
And this is the reason why this third generation of solar cells is envisioned to be an area
of very big opportunity for the energy sector.
And so to be specific about the challenge that we're posing for the solar energy field,
it's the following.
It's that using existing technologies which we'll dive into now, we've achieved certain
efficiency improvements but there are fundamental upper bounds, physical boundaries that we'll
describe on how efficient you can ever get a solar cell based on a single semiconductor
junction to be.
And we're starting to get reasonably close to those bounds.
And so with the incumbent technologies, there are limits to our capacity for further improvement.
The opportunity for the third generation solar cells is to take us beyond those limits,
is to make such better use of the sun's broad spectrum that we overcome the traditional
limitations on solar cells based on a single semiconductor junction.
So let's now dive in and let's talk about the basics of solar cells, how they work,
how they relate to some of the materials that we've spoken about in the course together,
and then ultimately how we're going to make them better using nanotechnology.
So let's now talk about the semiconductors themselves.
We've referred to semiconductors throughout the course.
We've spoken of their different spectral absorption characteristics.
We've spoken about how there are photon energies that are too small to be absorbed within a
semiconductor and others that are sufficiently energetic that they do get absorbed.
Let's put a little bit more formalism or vocabulary around these ideas of absorption
inside a semiconductor.
And I'd actually like to start back at where we began.
I'd like to start with atoms, the atoms that make up the semiconductor.
When the elements, let's take a silicon atom, for example, exist in isolation.
They're not part of a semiconductor, but when an atom exists in isolation, it has these
shells that we talked about, these shells that correspond to the energetic levels that
electrons fill up that account for silicon's particular membership and a particular column
of the periodic table.
These are what we call discrete energy levels.
They're very well-defined.
They're distinct.
Only certain transitions, energetic transitions, are available, say, to a silicon atom.
And in fact, those discrete transitions are much of the basis for how we're able to detect
certain chemical elements.
It's based on these very specific transitions, optical energetic transitions that are available
inside atoms.
But in a semiconductor material, what matters is not just the behavior of the constituent
atoms.
What matters is what happens when they come together.
And when these atoms come together, electrons, which as we know are delocalized, they have
some extent.
They start to merge and they start to participate in existing over many atoms.
That inside a semiconductor is very advantageous.
It accounts for the good electronic transport in semiconductors.
The fact that as we discussed earlier in the electronics context, these electrons can set
up waves that have extent, that can propagate along a semiconductor.
This is the basis for very good electronic transport inside semiconductors.
What it also leads to is the establishment of what are called energy bands.
So instead of having these discrete, defined steps, now there are ranges, entire ranges
of energy where electrons are allowed to exist, they're allowed to propagate freely.
And instead of having these original big chasms of energy in which no energetic states existed,
now we have in between these bands what's called a band gap.
And this too is a chasm, but it's not a chasm between just a pair of discrete states, it's
a chasm between a band and another band.
And so now there is a range of energies, less than this energy gap or this band gap, for
which photons are not able to excite an electron from a lower band to an upper band.
And in this case, there's no optical absorption.
The material is transparent.
In fact, even this concept exists in things we don't think of traditionally as semiconductors.
So diamond, for example, also has a band gap.
It just happens to have a very large band gap, which is why it's transparent to our eyes.
Whereas if you were to look at a piece of silicon to our eyes, it looks opaque.
That's because it's absorbing all of the light across the visible wavelength spectrum.
Its band gap lies out in the infrared.
So you can see through silicon when you look in the infrared, but you can't if you look
inside the visible.
Well, how does this idea of band gap then relate to how we build a solar cell?
Well, we need to match the band gap of our semiconductor to the spectral properties of
sun reaching the earth, to the sun spectrum.
And so certain semiconductors such as silicon have a band gap that's actually very well
matched to the emission properties of the sun, or in particular, the sun spectrum that
reaches the earth.
In the case of silicon, it's actually just about the perfect choice.
It was not something that we made a conscious choice to make silicon's band gap this way.
This is a property of silicon atoms themselves.
But it's a reason why we use silicon as a very appropriate semiconductor for making a
device, for making a junction that's able to absorb the sunlight and turn it into electrical
power.
In fact, on that, it's worth pausing for just a moment and thinking about the relationship
between the sensors, the light sensors that we spoke about earlier, and solar cells, where
they have quite a bit in common.
Each is responsible for absorbing light.
Each typically, in the case of silicon, covers the visible and a little bit into the near-infrared
wavelengths.
But in the case of the sun, there's a preordained spectrum that we have to work with, and there's
a preordained intensity.
In fact, researchers working in the field don't even speak, usually when they speak
of the sun, they don't even speak in terms of the absolute formal units.
They talk about one sun.
One sun is the unit of intensity to describe how bright the sun is.
It's such a universal phenomenon that everybody having to deal with solar energy is conversant
in.
In the case of light sensors, typically the intensities that are being dealt with are
much, much lower.
They're both doing this optical to electronic conversion, but typically in different ranges
of light intensity, many factors of 10 different light intensity.
The other thing is that in the case of sensors, we are converting information about the physical
world into an electronic representation.
That means that if we need to apply a little bit of a voltage bias, we need to put a little
bit of potential across our photo detector, that's perfectly fine because we don't want
expending a little bit of power to run our sensor-integrated circuit.
The name of the game in solar energy is in harvesting energy.
When our goal is to harvest energy, we're looking for this device to take the sun's
power, its photons, and to deliver them to us in the form of an electrical current, which
can be driven across a load, so there's some voltage as well.
The mode of operation of photovoltaic devices of solar cells is different as a result of
that need to transfer power from the sun into some either system where we want to charge
our car, or to some means of storage, such as the case of a battery or a fuel cell, topics
that I'll talk about a little bit later when we get to the field of storage.
Let's dive in now and look at the heart of a solar cell a little bit.
This is called a PN junction solar cell, and some of the details of the nomenclature aren't
important, but what's key is to understand that when we build really any solar cell,
we bring together two materials, typically having the same semiconductor properties,
the same semiconductor band gap, but that are dissimilar in their affinity for electrons.
One of these materials will be rich in electrons.
We will achieve that richness of electrons by introducing selectively a certain number
of impurities that add electrons to the lattice, that donate electrons to participate in conduction.
On the other side of this junction, we will utilize a material that is depleted of electrons,
and so now we have a structure which is electron rich on one side, electron poor on the other,
and we've created the potential for a cascade.
When we excite charge on one side of this junction, we now have a propensity for the
electrons to want to go from one side to the other as a result of this built-in cascade,
this built-in potential, as it's called, and that asymmetry is one of the crucial conceptual
building blocks of any solar cell.
The reason is that we're not going to be applying an external electrical bias.
We don't get to have an applied potential on this device because we're trying to harvest
energy.
Instead, we've built a device that likes to absorb light and then funnel the energy that's
extracted from that light in a specific direction towards a circuit.
The other point that we need to think about when we think about solar cells and their
use of the spectrum and the limits on their efficiency is that as we've discussed, because
of this concept of a semiconductor band gap, there will be certain photon energies below
which there's no absorption, so these colors of light simply pass through our solar cell,
and there will be others that just barely cross the band gap, that just barely cross
this chasm, these will lead to absorption, and in fact, this is a very efficient region
of the spectrum for these solar cells because all of the energy in the photon that impinged
upon the semiconductor is utilized ideally, is extracted from this.
However, a sun spectrum is broad, and there are photons at much shorter wavelengths corresponding
to much higher energies where there's an overabundance of energy in each photon.
Now, if we could take that entire photon energy and harvest it, we'd be in great shape, but
the way semiconductors work is that if you excite an electron well into a band, then
extremely rapidly it trickles down right to the band edge.
We say that these states that rise from silicon atoms coming together and forming these bands,
we say that these states within a given band are very well coupled to each other, and so
very rapidly at room temperature, we get a loss of energy, and it's just converted into
thermal energy, not something that we harvest inside a photovoltaic device.
Now, this idea of loss within a band, loss of energy from a given photon, is very important
in understanding the limits on solar cell efficiency, because you might say from this
loss consideration, well, okay, let's go find a semiconductor having a larger band gap.
They're available, and then we won't throw away as much energy, we'll be able to deliver
more voltage to our device, ultimately we'll be able to extract more power.
However, if we were to do that, we would also absorb fewer photons, because we would have
made a larger band gap, and there would be more photons in the sun spectrum that we're
not able to breach that band gap.
So this leads essentially to a trade-off.
It leads to our choosing a semiconductor band gap that is small enough that we harvest
many of the suns, a good fraction of the sun's photons, but large enough that we don't
do too much throwing away of energy from the juiciest, from the most energetic of these
photons that come in.
But it is a trade-off, and as a result, when one works with a semiconductor device, a photovoltaic
device that is based on a single band gap, a single type of semiconductor, one is limited
not to 100 or 97 or 95% overall power conversion efficiency, but instead the upper bound on
the efficiency with which one can extract energy from one sun intensity, from the amount of
intensity reaching the Earth's surface, is closer to 30%.
It turns out that at the right price, that's not a bad efficiency either, but it's important
to think about the limitations of solar cells based on a single choice of semiconductor and
how they arise from making this choice to work with a material that has a fixed band
gap and that leads to some loss of energy through this thermalization process within
the bands.
The final introductory concept that I'd like to spend a moment on with respect to solar
cells is how do we think about this efficiency in terms of a current delivered and in terms
of a voltage?
It turns out that the power, the electrical power that can be delivered, say, to your
car for charging or to a fuel cell or to a battery, the power of this is given by the
product, multiplied together, the product of the current and the voltage, and so it's
very important in solar cells to get as much current as possible and to get as much voltage
as possible, and it's really managing this trade between those two through the choice
of band gap that leads to the optimal band gap device and leads to the best management
of this trade-off.
So I'd now like to start in and talk about some nano concepts that allow us to make solar
cells more efficient, and the first one of these I'd like to talk about relates to the
management of light, to the management of photons.
In fact, these concepts are already being utilized in solar cells that can be purchased
today that are available, and one of these concepts is actually quite simple to think
about in terms of fabrication.
It involves trying to make a rough surface, trying to make a textured solar cell, and
the reason for doing this is the following.
Within silicon, and we talked about this in the context of photo detectors, a silicon
is a reasonably good absorber, it's actually a very good absorber of blue photons, of the
more energetic visible photons, but it gets much weaker in its absorption of light as
we go to longer wavelengths, even those above its band gap.
The name for this phenomenon is that silicon's an indirect band gap semiconductor.
Now when we try to make an efficient solar cell, clearly we're trying to absorb all of
the light across the sun's spectral region that we are absorbing at all, anything that's
above the band gap, and it turns out to be necessary in silicon in particular to make
a very thick wafer, a thick wafer of semiconductor in order to absorb all of the light in the
infrared because of this weak optical absorption that occurs in the infrared wavelengths.
That is one of the things that's driven up the cost of silicon solar cells historically,
is the need for a very thick quantity, a very, very pure, very, very high temperature fabricated
material.
What happens when we roughen the surface of a silicon solar cell is that instead of light
simply passing into the cell, and then if it sees a mirror bouncing back out, we instead
create the opportunity for multiple passes through this device.
So light is able to pass in, and then it sees this roughened surface, if you like it sees
a rough mirror, and instead of turning right back around and bouncing back out of our solar
cell and losing its chance for absorption, it's typically reflected or scattered off
in a different direction, and so instead of just leveraging the thickness of the device
for absorption, if we can couple in and then couple sideways, we're able to increase the
interaction length. We're able to overcome this weakness in the rate of absorption that
occurs within silicon by using a textured substrate.
It turns out that the exact shape that you want to do this with is actually very important.
You want to think about the angles and even the sharpness of the angles that are used
for scattering of light. In fact, this phenomenon where we get light into one of these semiconductor
materials, and then we get it trapped in there and we get it given multiple opportunities
to bounce around, it's called exactly that. It's called light trapping. And many interesting
techniques have been devised in order to achieve this. Of course, if you had to make these
spiky structures, everyone exactly perfectly the same as all the others, that would be
a challenging and probably a costly semiconductor patterning and etching process. It would start
to look like what we do in microelectronics and nanoelectronics. But for solar cells,
we're trying to make things that are big. We're trying to make things that can be spread
across a roof and do so in low cost. And fortunately, a number of techniques have been discovered
to make structured silicon surfaces without having to go in and actively pattern every
little spike, every little valley in order to make one of these light trapping structures.
And the technique actually uses a chemical etching where a silicon has these particular
directions. Like all crystals, a silicon has these particular directions known as facets.
These are like the facets of a diamond that you can see. And when you introduce a chemical
etchant, they can chemically etch in a particular direction. They can etch along a particular
facet. And so they're naturally prone to taking a planar surface and starting to carve it
into these triangles, into these hills and valleys or spiky mountain tops and valleys.
And as a result, there are now very low cost and convenient methods to make nanostructured
silicon surfaces that are very prone to want to trap light.
So we've covered the basics of solar cells. We've covered the huge opportunity that solar
energy harvesting represents. We've talked about the underlying principles of matching
the behavior of a semiconductor used to capture light with the broad solar spectrum. And we've
just started to touch in on how nanotechnology can be our friend in enabling the efficient
capture of energy from the sun.
In our next lecture, we're going to dive in further and really spend time on how we're
able to take advantage of the nanoworld, control over the coupling of photons to electrons inside
semiconductors to make solar cells that break the historic compromise between cost and performance.
