We've spoken about capturing energy from the sun.
And capturing is the right word for this.
Sometimes we talk of energy production, but really we're just harvesting what's being
given to us from the sun.
But there's another key part of managing energy, especially renewable energy, and that's
storing it.
In this lecture, we'll talk about how nanotechnology is enabling us to advance and enhance the
storage of energy.
We'll speak about using nanomaterials to improve the density measured either by weight or volume
or both by which we can store energy.
We will also talk about novel concepts, ways of using viruses, for example, to assemble
new styles of batteries for us.
But first, I'd like to speak just a bit about the balance between harvesting energy and
storing it.
We anticipate in the future a much larger fraction of our energy budget coming from
renewable energies.
Solar energy is an example, wind is another good one.
And so many attractive things about these, abundant, clean, pollution free.
But one of the challenges that renewable energy forms present is that we don't turn them
on and off.
They're not what we call dispatchable sources, the way, say, a coal generating station would
be, where we can turn up and turn down the amount of energy production at our will.
In the case of renewables, solar, for example, a cloud comes by and the amount of solar energy
available to us at that moment changes.
Now that doesn't necessarily map perfectly onto our energy needs.
In fact, if you look at the time of day cycles, if you look at the way solar sun rises in
the morning and then right at midday we get a great deal of energy and towards the end
of the day less so and overnight, none.
This also mandates the need to buffer, kind of hedge these temporal variations in the
available amounts of energy.
That's kind of a time of day variation perspective.
We have some cycles throughout the day where our energy needs vary kind of along the lines
with the sun.
So for example, an air conditioner is typically needed more at the peak of the day when the
sun is up.
And so that's a good alignment.
But there are many other reasons why it would be attractive to be able to play back energy
at a different time from when it's made available.
In fact, a new concept has emerged recently in the management of energy known as the smart
grid.
The smart grid recognizes that the traditional power distribution network is based kind of
on unidirectional flow of energy.
It's based on the idea that we have a small number of large centralized power generating
stations that spread energy out towards the customer.
But with renewables, now the customer for energy, you or I, is also producing energy,
say on our own rooftop.
In fact, we may produce sometimes more energy than we need.
We may wish to sell our energy to our neighbor or to somebody in another state, another part
of the continent.
And so now the grid needs to become two dimensional.
We need to be able to buy and sell energy from many, many local points.
And one of the key elements in building a better smart grid that's two-dimensional, two-directional,
and that allows the flow of energy in a managed fashion without losing control, without leading
to blackouts or brownouts, one of the key elements is energy storage.
So what that means is that our challenges on the energy storage front occur on in many
different scales.
There's a familiar one, say the battery inside your mobile device or inside your laptop.
These are obviously crucially important for a variety of reasons.
They enable us to go anywhere, go everywhere with energy, computation, and communications.
We've marveled in our discussions of nano-electronics at the rapidity with which mobile companies
are computing has become available.
We've marveled at how nanostructured materials, nanoscale transistors have allowed us to communicate
at remarkable rates anywhere.
But until now, we haven't marveled at the fact that we're able to take the power with
us that we need anywhere.
In fact, people often remark at how the computing power that you have in your laptop is vastly,
vastly greater than the power in some of the computers that used to fill a room.
Well, the same could be said from the power standpoint.
We're able to take this power with us anywhere we go, have our battery packs last for 10
hours, enable continued use and enjoyment.
So the mobility that batteries and related devices enable is tremendous.
But this can also be scaled up.
And in the context of the overall energy system, our desire to take large quantities
of renewables, say solar energy for a community or on a solar farm, and store that.
And that's where batteries can play a role.
But fuel cells, which we'll speak about a little bit today, provide another strategy
for storing energy.
And what they do is they decouple the playback of the energy from the storage of the energy.
In a battery, which we'll talk about in a second, the means of energy storage and replay
are kind of integrated with one another.
But in a fuel cell, we have the fuel, such as hydrogen or ethanol.
And separate from that, we have the cell, which takes in that fuel and which spits out
energy.
And so depending on the scale we're interested in, depending on the cost, depending on whether
portability is a requirement, or whether you're just looking for a stationary and very cost-effective
method of energy storage and playback, we're interested in different systems.
In fact, there's another exciting technology that we'll also speak about today and that's
benefiting from nanotechnology called supercapacitors.
And what supercapacitors do is they function kind of like batteries.
They're closed systems.
They're also self-contained.
But they allow us to charge them up much more rapidly and then also play back their energy
in much bigger spikes and more rapid spikes.
So one of the example areas in which supercapacitors are expected to have a use is in automobiles
where when we start it up, we need a real burst of energy.
Typically, that's challenging for a battery to supply.
And when we use the brakes and we want to store the energy from in some kind of electrical
device, a storage device inside our electric vehicle, supercapacitors are able to receive
that energy very rapidly and very efficiently.
So let's dive into batteries now.
These of course are familiar and they've been around for a while.
And the building blocks of batteries go back a couple of centuries.
And so these have not always been consciously devices in which we're using nanomaterials.
But we'll talk today about how nanomaterials are enabling better energy densities inside
batteries.
To do that, to talk about how nanomaterials are helping us, we need to talk just a little
bit about the basic principles of a battery.
In a battery, there are two electrodes such as in any electrical device or any electrical
circuit needs two electrodes to complete the circuit.
And in a charged up battery, we have chemical energy stored typically in the form of some
kind of anion, a lithium is a famous example and of course we're very familiar with lithium
ion batteries.
We have energy stored in the form of lithium all being kind of piled up.
We use the word intercalated to mean this anion, this ion is interpenetrated into this electrode.
And graphite is an example of a typical electrode that's traditionally been used to store this
energy.
The form of playing back that energy and turning it into current involves the ionic flow through
what's called an electrolyte of these ions towards the opposite electrode.
And then in the case of non-rechargeable batteries, that's it, we've expended the available energy
that was, you can think of it as kind of having been uphill and the energy, the anions flow
downhill to release their energy, provide a voltage to a circuit to a device.
In the case of rechargeable batteries, we're able to reverse that reaction and drive them
back to be stored at their original electrode.
And we can do this back and forth and back and forth many times.
Now as you know, even rechargeable batteries have finite lifetimes and the various electrodes
that we use to build batteries can be degraded over time after we discharge and recharge them
many times.
And so it's very important to look at new electrode technologies especially that can
enable batteries that have longer usable lifetimes, more charges and discharges.
Just thinking back to our periodic table, why is lithium a particularly logical metal,
a particularly logical element to be using?
Well lithium is what we call the most electropositive metal available to us in the periodic table.
That means that it gives us the opportunity to develop the largest potential, the largest
voltage, which is going to translate directly into energy.
Now it's also the lightest metal, the least massive per anion.
And as a consequence of that, those two things combine, this large amount of potential that
every ion can store, combined with the low mass of each of the ions, means that the density
in terms of energy per gram or energy per kilogram can be very high with lithium.
So it's an extremely good choice from this point of view.
Now where do the nanomaterials come in?
Well I mentioned that the graphite electrode is where we store the lithium in the traditional
lithium ion batteries.
And graphite has a reasonable capacity for storing these ions.
It turns out though that silicon, so familiar from our discussions of nanoelectronics and
also of light guiding, that silicon has another remarkable property on top of all of its attractiveness.
It has attractive electrical properties.
And that's that it's extremely good at storing lithium ions.
And by good, I mean that it can store a huge density of these ions.
In fact if you look at a picture of the silicon lattice, it's got kind of a crucible right
inside the lattice where the silicon crystal is ready to receive a very high density of
lithium ions.
So this is very appealing.
But if you look at this lattice, you'll also realize that this lithium ion doesn't penetrate
into the lattice without disrupting that lattice, without changing it.
In fact if you were to exploit the full energy capacity for storage of lithium within silicon,
which is about 10 times the capacity per unit mass that you can store within graphite, if
you were to exploit that full capacity, you'd also expand the volume of the silicon electrode
by about 400%.
And as a result, if you just do this straightforwardly, if you take a bulk piece of silicon or a
non-crystalline piece of silicon like amorphous silicon, what you'll find is you can stuff
it full of lithium atoms, you can get an incredible energy density in there, and then after a
couple of cycles, it will crumble, it will collapse because of all this expansion and
contraction and expansion and contraction.
Just like the thermal wear on parts or on, you know, parts of your house where it gets
cold and hot and cold and hot, and the joints start to wear out.
The joints also start to wear out within silicon if we change its volume back and forth too
many times.
But this is where the opportunity for nano comes in.
There's been some really exciting work going on at Stanford that takes advantage of nano
materials to overcome these limitations, to allow us to exploit the incredible energy
density of silicon for the storage of lithium without suffering these challenges related
to the volume expansion.
The way this works is that the researchers have built these long, very, very skinny nanowires,
and so their surfaces are now accessible for lithium ion intercalation, for the penetration
of the lithium ions into the silicon.
But now the nanowires can expand and contract and expand and contract rather than a single
bulk solid which would suffer these catastrophic fractures, these small nanowire diameters
enable these silicon-based materials to accommodate without fracture these significant changes
in volume.
Another great thing about the silicon nanowires is they're functioning now as wires, as electrical
wires, and so they're able to directly electrically connect to the metallic collector of current.
As a result, we don't have isolated materials which can't be collected electrically or where
their electrons aren't efficiently collected.
In contrast, we're able to make very good use of every one of the nanowires.
All of the silicon is active.
There's no islanding effects.
And finally, it's a direct path.
It's a straight line path.
We get a direct connection between the silicon nanowire and the electrodes that we seek to
connect it to.
Now looking a little bit further out into the distance into some conceptually disruptive
or transformative techniques to try to build batteries has been some very exciting, very
creative work that's gone on at MIT in which viruses have been utilized to try to assemble
new classes of batteries.
And one of the stars of this show, it's been actually an amazing example of teamwork.
One of the teams is Angela Belcher, who's distinguished herself over the last decades
as somebody who's able to work with viruses and use genetic engineering to create families
of viruses that have particular properties that dovetail with material science that allow
us to use bio entities such as viruses to build materials for us.
And she's been collaborating with a researcher, yet Ming Cheng, who's distinguished himself
for a long period in the field of energy storage, in the field of batteries.
And they've brought their work together to form a very creative collaboration that's
completely breaking all the rules of traditional disciplinary boundaries.
You don't traditionally see genetic engineering in viruses combined with the kind of electrical,
mechanical, chemical engineering of energy storage.
And Angela Belcher herself has this fascinating story.
She really distinguished herself a little over a decade ago in understanding how living
beings build hard, inorganic materials.
So the abalone shell is a great example of this.
And of course, we've been familiar with the fact that you can get these organic entities,
you know, animals and vegetables, that as well as forming soft or malleable materials,
which is more what we're familiar with in the biological world, that they can also form
hard shells, like the shells on seashells.
And Dr. Belcher looked at understanding exactly at a molecular, at a nano level how this occurred.
And what she discovered was the mechanisms by which proteins were being expressed by
these organisms that were able to capture out of the sea particular elements such as
metals that were used to build up, say, calcium carbonate.
So capture the calcium component to build these shells up.
And then another class of proteins were able to promote the formation of the complementary,
let's say, the oxide or the carbonate.
And so they were able to build up layer by layer by layer by layer these very hard shells.
Essentially they were utilizing organic materials, biomaterials, proteins to build hard inorganic
materials.
And she saw this as a real inspiration for her own work.
After she did, she kind of did the science of it.
She understood how these biological entities were building these hard, very structured
inorganic materials using their proteins.
She thought, well, maybe we can exploit this.
Maybe we can engineer with this.
Now in order to try to engineer with these things, she needed to have some kind of capability
to select.
She needed to be able to tailor viruses in a direction that she desired.
And the approach that she took here, which is taken from the world of phage display,
and the idea is that a virus can have various genetic options injected into it.
These various families or classes of viruses can grow up.
And then we can use selection approaches to only preserve the ones and then amplify the
ones that we desire.
Well, what would be a selection algorithm?
Say you wanted to build a material that was based on, say, cobalt.
Well you could coat some kind of sieve effectively with cobalt, introduce your various viruses
into it.
And only those viruses that happen to have a gene that let a protein to be expressed
that would strongly bind cobalt would stick to the walls of your sieve.
And everything else would fall through.
In fact, people refer to this as panning or biopanning, an analogy with panning for gold,
where what you're looking for, the viruses that you desire to select in favor of, remain
inside your container and everything else goes out.
You then have these viruses stuck to the wall of your container.
You elute them, which means you bring them back out into the solution.
And then you can amplify them.
You can have them reproduce and have families.
And as a consequence, you can get more and more of the ones that you desire.
And so you run this essentially biological selection and a rapid evolution within the
laboratory where you prefer the evolution of certain viruses that have certain functions.
People had been using this concept in genetics for a long time.
But using it in the context of building up inorganic materials, selecting viruses that
could do the work of building, say, a battery for you, this was a very novel concept.
So Dr. Belcher and Dr. Cheng working together were particularly interested in building cobalt
oxide.
Cobalt oxide is a very interesting electrode for new battery technologies.
It's been found to have particular promise, also enabling the dense and reliable storage
of a great deal of energy.
And there were really two stages to building a virus that was coated with cobalt oxide
nanoparticles and that it could then be useful in conduction.
So the first was to put these cobalt oxide particles on the surface.
And the second was to make the material more conductive.
So for the first one, the researchers searched for, used their selection techniques to find
viruses that were particularly prone to attract cobalt and to grow cobalt oxide on their surfaces.
And they were able to show using transmission electron microscopy that they could generate
viruses that had a very rich coating of cobalt oxide nanoparticles on their surface and that
these particles were very similar to one another.
So they were quite consistent in their size.
In fact, some of the power of transmission electron microscopy is that it goes beyond
just our ability to look in what we call real space, to actually look at the image itself.
And we can also focus the electron beam onto individual particles and see how the crystals
that the electron beams impinge upon spread the energy out, cause it to diffract.
The way in which these diffract gives us a clue is to the composition, to the structure
of our crystals.
And these researchers were able to show that they had indeed built viruses that were able
specifically to grow cobalt oxide single crystals on the surface of their viruses.
Now, this was one of the building blocks that they needed.
The other building block that they needed was something to make these more conductive.
And so the researchers found a way to put an additional peptide, so an additional protein
on the surfaces of their viruses, to make a kind of, they called it a bifunctional virus.
Something that could enable them both to grow the cobalt oxide nanoparticles, which were
crucial to the battery function, but also be able to grow gold nanoparticles that led
to a dramatic improvement in the conductivity of these devices.
And so the viruses, as a result, had these coats that consisted of two classes of particles,
one the cobalt oxide, another the gold.
And the researchers were able to show that they were able to generate these hybrid or
bifunctional viruses that allowed them to achieve their purposes in making a battery
in this manner.
Now, of course, making a battery is more than just making one wire, which these viruses
effectively had become.
They needed to put them down onto a substrate.
They needed to make a practical device out of them.
And they found the conditions under which they were able to coat onto just a flexible
piece of plastic effectively, their viruses.
And by managing the charge on the viral particles, they were able to ensure that the viruses
assembled into nice, smooth, what are called lamellar structures.
There were these kind of stripey patterns of viruses with their coatings of nanoparticles
of cobalt oxide and of gold on top of them.
That's a discussion of one very important storage technology and how nanotechnology is
enabling us to make better batteries that allow for greater capacity.
Or in the case of this very intriguing work on viruses, allow us to do the synthesis under
very environmentally benign conditions.
We consume very small amounts of energy in building the batteries this way.
It's a very friendly approach to building storage devices.
But another area where there's a real need to build devices with greater performance
and also with the kind of flexibility that you can sometimes get by using nanomaterials
to make devices is in the area of supercapacitors.
And I was mentioning earlier as I introduced energy storage generally that supercapacitors
are another paradigm in storing energy.
Their advantage is that they allow you to store, accept energy very quickly, charge
up very quickly, and play back very quickly as well.
And it's worth defining just the idea of a capacitor.
Capacitors are actually traditionally the domain of electrical engineers.
Capacitors are one of the building block circuit elements that allow us to store charge.
We usually think in electrical engineering of having two plates separated by an insulator.
And on one of the plates, we can put a positive charge.
And by putting that positive charge there, a negative charge is induced on the opposite
plate.
As a result, there's an electric field, and we have the potential to then release this
charge in the form of a current with the presentation of a voltage in order to then drive a device.
So they're storage devices, but not typically in the electrochemical sense that's used in
batteries where we're actually moving lithium anions uphill for storage and subsequent replay.
Instead, these are typically based simply on the storage of electrical charges themselves
of electrons.
Now in supercapacitors, the name of the game is to try to achieve the greatest possible
energy density while also achieving a very good lifetime.
This is one of the great things about supercapacitors is that as a result of not moving more massive
ions around and imparting true chemical changes, but instead of principally moving electrons
around, we're able to achieve devices that can go through many more cycles.
So if you think of something, say an electric vehicle, that needs to happen many, many times.
How many times do you apply the brakes, for example, in your car?
If it needs to go through 100,000 or more cycles, then often supercapacitors can supply
the solution.
Some of the exciting work that happened also at Stanford was figuring out how to make a
wearable supercapacitor.
In fact, the field of wearable electronics has attracted a lot of people's attention
and excitement.
The idea would be that as well as perhaps making a flexible solar cell that you could
go around wearing, you could also store that energy.
You could later use it to charge up a mobile device.
In fact, people even think of the devices themselves as being wearable.
Of course, there's the emerging wearable electronic glasses that can have cameras and processors
embedded in them, any number of things that you can imagine doing.
But what we'll need to do this is to have flexible fabrics that are also electronic
materials.
The Stanford group under Yi Chui figured out how to build fabrics, really right on top
of traditional cotton in such a way that they were able to store a great deal of charge
in them.
The way they did this is they started with a millimeter or two thickness of just a fluffy
cotton sheet, and then they dipped it into single-walled nanotube ink, so basically a
solution containing many nanotubes and the nanotubes instead of being of the multi-walled
site sort, which contain rings and rings, kind of a coaxial set of nanotubes.
Instead they focused on single-walled nanotubes, which have better defined and more straightforward
and controllable properties.
They dipped their sheet of cotton in a couple of times, dried it at 120 degrees C to remove
the water from it, and essentially had a foldable textile that was now a conductor.
As well as being a conductor, they were able to synthesize and modify the properties of
their single-walled carbon nanotubes, where there's a lot of control over the surface
properties to build two properties into it.
First of all, they were able to make it what we call hydrophilic.
Hydrophilic means that it's friendly to water, and water likes it, and so water was able
to adsorb on these electrodes.
That was important because the electrolyte that they were using to make their supercapacitor
was water-based.
They wanted to keep everything simple, environmentally friendly, not use solvents that people might
wonder about whether they should be wearing on their clothes, and so they used a water-based
electrolyte, but that meant they needed to convert their carbon nanotubes over to being
hydrophilic.
They succeeded in doing that, and they also used the structure, the nanostructure, the
area of these carbon nanotubes as their means to enhance the capacity of their devices to
store charge.
They proved the idea that they were able to enhance both the density of storage, but also
the lifetime of their devices, their ability to play back, charge, play back their devices.
Many, many tens of thousands of cycles, even though they were making an electronic device
that was on a piece of cotton, that was on a piece of textile, fabric.
We've talked in today's lecture about a few strategies for energy storage and how nanotechnology
through the large area of nanostructures, through the ability to process nanostructures
from the solution phase, and through the ability to use biological organisms like viruses
now to build inorganic materials.
Now nanotechnology is giving us new ways to make storage elements that are denser, lighter
in weight, or cheaper in cost, or integrated with flexible fabrics.
We're going to continue this discussion in the next lecture and talk about additional
energy storage strategies, and then more broadly about how we can use nanomaterials to control
the flow, the playback of energy, and also how we can use nanotechnology to implement
desirable chemical reactions with high efficiency through a process known as catalysis.
