We've talked so far about capturing the sun's abundant energy, turning it into electricity.
We've also talked separately about storing that energy that's been turned into electricity.
Well, do we have to think of these things as separate, as disjoint?
Is there some precedent, perhaps, in nature for this?
Well, of course, there's a very familiar precedent.
What do trees do? What do plants do?
They take energy from the sun, and they convert that energy into a stored form.
They convert it into a fuel.
You may not necessarily think of the food that you eat as being a fuel, but that's exactly what it is.
So there's a dream, and a dream that's made vast progress in recent years.
A lot of it relying on nanomaterials and nanotechnology that involves mimicking all of the good qualities of photosynthesis.
It's called artificial photosynthesis, and the idea is that we could use sunlight to directly generate fuels, such as direct production of hydrogen.
So let's start off by taking a bit of a look at photosynthesis and how that works.
We'll find that nature is, as we already know from this course, very much a nanotechnologist in the way it engineers materials to a particular purpose.
Photosynthesis is the conversion of carbon dioxide, taken out of the air, into organic carbons.
That's from the carbon dioxide that the photosynthetic reaction takes the carbon as a source.
And with this, it produces sugars, which, as I said, are fuels.
Now, we know that it occurs in plants. It also occurs in algae and lots of different species of bacteria.
Now, there's a nice word to describe these organisms that are capable of harvesting energy and creating their own food.
We call them phototrophs, and this references the fact that they're self-sufficient.
They're really capable of building their own nutrition rather than relying on others, as we humans do, to be our sources of food.
If you like, they eat photons.
And so, attractively, they consume carbon dioxide and water, and they release oxygen as their waste product.
It sounds very clean as waste products go.
Now, we talked earlier when we were talking about solar energy of how we could readily, in terms of the amount of solar energy that's available reaching the Earth,
we could readily meet the world's energy needs 10,000 times over using solar energy, using solar electricity.
Well, of course, plants and algae and bacteria that perform photosynthesis are already harvesting a huge amount of solar energy.
In fact, if you look across the globe, around the globe, at all of the energy-harvesting activity that's happening right now, there's about 100 terawatts.
This translates into about 6 times more power than human civilization is consuming.
So, it just reinforces the idea that there is this vast source of power and that the key is to find cost-effective ways of harvesting it.
What's a cost-effective way?
Well, the brilliance of plants is unlike these solar cells that we've been talking about earlier in the course where we have to go engineer them,
we have to invest energy, we have to purify materials to make them.
The plants, of course, are ultimately using the energy from the sun to build themselves, and so they're self-sustaining, they're self-constructed, they're self-assembled.
And so it's wonderful to dream in the context of this notion of artificial photosynthesis, ultimately, of the photosynthetic apparatus that we engineer to build our fuels,
having it build itself, rather than having consciously to engineer it ourselves.
We'll finish this lecture with some progress in that direction as well.
But back into what happens at the heart of the organism during the photosynthetic process.
In fact, the chlorophylls that are used in the absorption of light and that capture that energy from photons turn them into energetic electrons which are then available to participate in reactions.
They're actually part of a membrane tightly folded into these cylindrical sheets called thylakoids, they're bunched up together.
And these structures are used to fill up the interior of a cell, ultimately giving the membrane a very large surface area.
I want to emphasize this because it's so resonant with many of the themes of the course so far where we are trying to maximize surface area
by folding, by creating richly textured surfaces on the nanoscale.
Well, we may think we're smart, but bacteria had already thought of this.
This kind of strategy is already widely used throughout nature.
So when light absorption occurs in these proteins, they're called photosynthetic reaction centers.
And here the photosynthesis is really at work.
Light is coming in and then reactions are occurring relating to chemical synthesis.
We're actually building fuels within leaves.
It's right at the chlorophyll that is the heart of this and it's the chlorophyll that gives leaves their green color.
I mentioned when we were talking earlier about solar energy that the sun finds its peak right in the visible spectrum.
And the green is right in the center of the visible wavelength spectrum.
And so this is a very abundant source of energy coming from the sun.
That aligns nicely with the fact that the energy required to drive forward these photosynthetic reactions is less than what we can get out of the energies available in the photons coming from the sun.
So we have sufficient energy within each photon, within each of these quantum particles to perform the chemical synthesis that we need to do to turn carbon dioxide into organic compounds.
So it's this chlorophyll that's giving these plants their green tinge.
It's this pigment really.
It's like a dye, something that's used to dye clothes.
It's very persistent, hence grass stains and pants.
And these pigments are embedded in plants and algae in what we call antenna proteins.
And this is where some fascinating physics occurs.
The process that's occurring inside these reaction centers is known as energy transfer.
Now, when we think of energy transfer occurring using light, what we would often think of is light being emitted and then being absorbed somewhere else.
So for example, if I wanted to convey some energy from here across the room, I could construct a laser here and I could drive it with electrical energy, convert that into a beam,
try to focus that beam onto, say, a photovoltaic cell across the room.
That would be energy transfer within the optical domain.
But inside the antenna proteins within the reaction centers that make up plants, we have what we call a virtual photon emission event.
We have the capability for energy to funnel itself downhill, to roll downhill through a series of centers without actually ever going from being an excited electron to being a photon to being another excited electron.
But with this downward cascade, we're able to direct the flow of energy.
When we spoke in the lecture about nanomotifs, about nanoparticles that were being engineered to have different sizes, and that therefore had different energy levels,
and where we were able to concentrate all of the energy from an outer ring of nanoparticles onto a central receptor,
what we're really doing there is we're being inspired by the photosynthetic reaction center that occurs inside plants within the photosynthetic reaction apparatus, as it's called.
What kinds of efficiencies do plants have in their energy conversion?
Well, this too raises an interesting point.
It turns out that the range is typically 3-6%.
How does that compare to the best solar cells that we could make?
That's actually considerably worse than the best solar cells.
The best solar cells, the records are in the 40% solar conversion efficiency range, and there are commercial solar cells that are a little bit under 20%.
And so this incredibly successful predominant source of energy harvesting, which is the photosynthetic approach rather than our artificial solar electric approach,
the one that's less efficient, the one that's 3-6%, the photosynthetic one, is the one that really has caught on and dominates our global use of energy.
Why is that?
Well, think back to the solar lecture where we were thinking about both the cost of making the solar cells in panels, but we were also thinking about what we call the balance of systems costs.
We were thinking about installing solar panels, the maintenance of those solar panels.
Well, the brilliance of the way in which life and biology manage photosynthesis is in part this self-assembling process that we described.
The balance of system costs. In fact, we enjoy having plants and trees around.
It's not a cost, it's a benefit to have photosynthesis at work. The production of oxygen is a benefit for us.
And so this aspect wherein the self-assembly of these devices, as an engineer might think of them, these trees and plants, is one of their many very attractive features.
And it's a reason why perfection in terms of energy conversion isn't required. After all, there's so much more solar energy than we need.
We don't need to be absolute perfectionists in the efficiency in which we convert a certain photon having a certain energy into a stored chemical such as a sugar inside a plant.
And so our analogy in building a device that will mimic photosynthesis looks kind of like this.
We also will have photons coming in. Here we imagine having a large area device available to receive a lot of sun.
There will be an input into the reaction, and in this case it will be water.
And the output of the reaction will be to split that water into two essentially innocuous things.
One of them oxygen, a byproduct of the reaction, just as a byproduct of the photosynthetic reaction is oxygen.
The other, our stored fuel, in much of this work will be hydrogen.
And so here again we will think about fuel cells as a very attractive means of replaying that stored energy.
And what's nice about these reactions, of course, is that they evolve gases, and so we'll be simply responsible for collecting the hydrogen gas out of this cell
and storing it or playing it back directly.
But storing it for future use is one of the ways we can ensure that we have the desirable buffering characteristics
that we're very interested in in our energy storage lecture when we were discussing things previously.
Another way to picture one of these artificial photosynthesis devices is that it's kind of a fuel cell turned around.
Into a fuel cell we input hydrogen, we evolve water, and there we generate electricity.
And in one of these artificial photosynthesis devices we take in our solar fuel, we take in photons coming from the sun,
and we also input water, and then we split it and generate our storable fuel in the form of hydrogen.
Now the idea that we discussed in the context of photosynthesis of having an abundance of surface area,
well this is a theme of course that we've used throughout this course, and it will definitely come up here in the context of artificial photosynthesis.
Here the field of nanowires has been extremely important in making progress towards this vision of artificial photosynthesis.
For again, they have these properties that we've now seen a number of times.
They're capable of conveying in a directional fashion electricity, so their electrical connectivity is very good.
They have an abundance of surface area, we can even put catalysts on the surface of these materials
in order to ensure that our reactions move forward in the desired direction and with a high efficiency.
And one of the leaders in this field is a really remarkable person, his name is Paidong Yang, he's at Lawrence Berkeley Labs.
And actually Paidong also manifests some of the qualities that make him such a successful nanotechnologist.
One of those is that people going through their graduate training these days or doing their post-doctoral fellowships becoming profs,
they can go around to a number of different labs and collect knowledge, depth, methods of research from these different labs.
So Paidong was in a group that was one of the leaders in the development of nanowires
and he personally as a graduate student led a lot of the most exciting work in the nanowire field for its own sake
even before they were being thought of for artificial photosynthesis,
then joined a group that was leading in the area of making these nanostructured materials for energy storage and catalysis and conversion.
And so when he then went on his own and started his own Berkeley group as an assistant professor,
he had this set of skills in engineering nanomaterials and thinking about their use in catalysis and energy and electrochemistry
that very few other individuals around the world did.
And it's this confluence of skills how people are able to go accumulating a number of different sets of capabilities from different traditional disciplines
that allows a lot of the innovations to occur within nanotechnology.
Often it's not even so much a single brilliant idea, although that happens too, there's certainly breakthrough insights,
but it's sometimes bringing up an individual who has a set of competences or capabilities that no other individual in the world has.
And that's certainly the case in some of this work.
Some of the most exciting stuff that's happened recently coming out of this group, the Berkeley group,
has involved the use of nanocrystals as well as part of the catalytic process in order to pave the way towards artificial photosynthesis.
One of the great things about nanoparticles is that they're not always just spherical like some of the ones that we've seen, these quantum dots.
But instead, researchers are able to synthesize things like nanocubes, and here the facets that are available are different.
So maybe when you picture a little cube of salt, you can picture the fact that potentially if you were to, instead of having it as be a cube,
if you were to slice off one of the corners, you'd see a different atomic arrangement of sodium and chlorine atoms.
Well, it's the same with these nanocubes that are used in the synthesis of artificial fuels, the artificial photosynthesis,
that by controlling which facets are presented, we're able to achieve shape-controlled and also size-controlled metal oxides
that have particular promise in achieving some of these interesting devices.
In fact, one of the exciting recent discoveries that came out of Dr. Yang's group was the realization that one could put together a stack of materials
where different layers within the stack carried out sequentially different reactions.
So it's a bit analogous to, in the photosynthetic reaction case, where there's a cascade, there's a number of steps that each need to occur in sequence.
They were able to first make a cerium oxide to platinum interface, so a first metal oxide to metal interface to catalyze a first reaction,
which is to catalyze methanol to produce carbon monoxide and hydrogen, and then a second reaction was catalyzed at a second interface
but very nearby, a platinum to silica interface, where the first product of that first reaction was then used as an input to the second reaction.
So it's this kind of cascade or sequence of reactions that we can engineer when we make multi-material stacks.
And there's some techniques that are now extensively used in building up multi-material stacks.
One of these techniques is called Langmuir Blodgett assembly.
And in this technique, people talk of using a Langmuir Blodgett trough, and essentially one has a bath, a solution, filled with molecules.
Often the molecules have a propensity to stick one way down on a particular surface and stick their tail up in the air,
so they have a head and a tail, and the head has an affinity for a substrate or a surface that one will work on.
And one can dip the substrate into this trough and gradually withdraw to the appropriate angle and the appropriate rate,
and produce layers of molecules that are very, very consistent.
In fact, one can even come along using atomic force microscope or other kinds of scanning tunneling microscopes,
and one can even see these dense forests of individual molecules that pack themselves.
They're made like crystals, but two-dimensional crystals, and not based on the traditional inorganic picture of crystals,
but based on organic molecules that pack themselves into certain regions.
Well, Peidong's group used the same technique, but now to deposit layers of nanocubes of platinum and cerium oxide on top of a silicon dioxide substrate.
He made these nanocubes each on this scale of about 10 nanometers, and then made these two distinct interfaces that I spoke about.
And these sequentially catalyzed the reactions.
And so in the vertical dimension, he was able to build up a more complex stack,
not just a single monolayer or a set of layers of the same thing, but a complex stack of materials.
He called this a bilayer structure.
And here the analogy is a bit with those tandem solar cells that we spoke about in the context of solar energy harvesting.
Then we were thinking of how to first harvest the visible photons, the energetic photons as efficiently as possible,
and subsequently harvest the infrared photons and achieve a total energy output from the solar cell that was the sum of the energies of these two inputs.
Well, here the Berkeley group was able to stack these two reaction systems on top of each other and achieve this series process,
a tandem cell for catalysis, as distinct from the tandem photon cells that we were talking about earlier.
Carbon nanotubes have also played an important role in some of the progress that's been made in artificial photosynthesis.
One of the key components of making these devices work is to achieve an oxygen-evolving anode, as it's called.
So with oxygen being the product here, there's a lot of focus on making the electrodes that will lead to the production of oxygen,
one of the outputs of these.
In fact, this is really part of the broader dream.
It's to make the device where the catalytic splitting of water ultimately gives rise to this production of oxygen and to the production of the hydrogen fuel.
Hydrogen is the byproduct from the splitting of water.
Hydrogen is the desired fuel that we're trying to generate.
And researchers in Italy collaborating with an Austrian group were able to demonstrate that with the aid of multi-walled carbon nanotubes,
really a conductive bed of these nanotubes, that they were able to make a particular style of oxygen-evolving anode.
It was also a multi-layered stack, but in this case it wasn't just a planar device, but instead they were able to functionalize the surface of their carbon nanotubes,
wrap a variety of organic molecules around them.
And these organic molecules kind of had fingers that reached out from being along the tubes.
They reached out into solution and were able to grab the constituents that were needed to participate in the reaction.
So instead of building a sort of a planar sandwich up vertically, they built an analog of that sandwich, but they built it out radially.
And you can see that through this approach there's obviously more surface area, more opportunity for interaction as well.
Some of the images of the materials that they produce this way are really spectacular, and they showcase how much we can see now at the nanoscale.
We've seen lots of transmission electron micrographs throughout this course in which we looked at structure, where we looked at how,
even where the individual atoms were placed in quantum dots, we could see the crystallinity.
But we haven't looked at too many so far in which people were actually looking at the elemental composition.
So not just asking and answering the question, is there an atom present, but which atom is it?
But using the best TEM techniques that we have available to ourselves now, we can do spectroscopy on the constituents, what we're looking at.
So we can actually see, this is based on the electron orbitals that we discussed, the basis of the periodic table,
but we can see spectral signatures in the loss of electrons as they propagate within these transmission electron micrograph systems.
We can see spectral signatures through their energy loss of what is present.
We can even look for the atoms that should be abundant, but we can also look for those that are present at a low concentration.
In the context of our semiconductor discussions, we call these dopants.
They were available at very low concentrations, but they were used to influence the electronic properties of our semiconductors.
They would donate an electron to the lattice, or they would create a semiconductor that was depleted in its density of electrons.
Well, with these remarkable advances in microscopy, we're able to actually see the elemental constituents that build up, in this case,
on the surface of these multi-walled carbon nanotubes.
So the nanotubes themselves played a couple of different roles in this work on making these oxygen-producing anodes.
One of them was they provided a basis for control over the material morphology.
The researchers were able to control the surface, control the binding to that surface, and therefore build the structure that they desired.
As we've seen many times now, it was a strategy that successfully increased the surface area,
which gave them more opportunities per unit volume to achieve a particular reaction that was desired.
And finally, through these tubes, through their conductive properties, they were able to funnel this sequential electron transfer to the electrode.
So again, they were using kind of the orientation, the fact that they hadn't just made a nanoparticle that was essentially the same in all three dimensions,
but instead a tube that was engineered to convey energy in a particular direction and to drive reactions in the perpendicular directions,
in the radial directions in that manner.
Well, as you might have guessed with the analogy with biology, the inspiration from the photosynthetic reactions,
from our desire to see whether we could make self-assembled materials or devices for water splitting.
It's, of course, tempting to ask what Angela Belcher has been up to because her work on engineering viruses that we discussed in the previous lecture for batteries,
it seems logical that, especially if you're trying to build a system or a system inspired by living organisms that can achieve these photosynthetic reactions,
but produce a different fuel, one such as hydrogen that might be preferable for many purposes, that the engineering of viruses towards this function might be attractive.
And indeed, the Belcher group at MIT has worked on exactly that.
And again, it's using this concept of biological templating because that research group is so capable in engineering a library of viruses
and then identifying the few within that library that are inclined to stick to a particular surface.
Say one that's particularly prone to achieving a desirable synthesis reaction such as in order to achieve artificial photosynthesis,
they were able to use the same set of techniques to engineer a virus scaffold that could allow them to assemble a virus that had two key components on it.
So one of these was the photosensitizer, was the material that was responsible for absorbing the light and producing the excited electron,
so converting the energy from the photonic domain, from the optical domain from the sun, into the form of an excited electron ready to participate in a reaction.
And they were also able to engineer their viruses such that they attracted a particular metal oxide, an iridium oxide cluster that served as the catalyst.
And so they were able to build these kind of integrated devices.
And here again, the analogy is with the antennas that are so important in the photosynthetic reaction center.
Here the group was able to make these elongated viruses from a shape and overall structural standpoint.
They had something in common with the carbon nanotubes. They had this one-dimensional linear character.
And here they were able to use the actual peptides or proteins that were displayed on the surfaces of these viruses to grow their nanoparticles,
to put in place the porphyrins, so essentially the light absorbing dyes that were required for initial energy harvesting from the sun.
And then also to put in place the catalyst that they required.
This discussion wraps up our conversation about the opportunities to use nanotechnology for efficient energy harvesting and also for storage of that energy,
and then also for its integrated harvesting and storage.
We've touched on quite a number of themes. In fact, in a way we've had the opportunity to integrate a whole bunch of the concepts that nanotechnology embodies.
In fact, one of the broadest ones of those is simply that it's an intrinsically interdisciplinary science and technology.
In order to, especially for this last lecture, in order to build an artificial photosynthesis system,
one needs researchers, professors, graduate students who understand how photosynthesis works in the first place.
So they have some biology who understand the inner physics and chemistry of the reactions that occur then,
who understand it so well that they can come up with new materials and new strategies that can implement these same broad concepts,
but implement them in the case of hydrogen production.
One needs materials, scientists and materials engineers who have the capability to put together new material sets in very reproducible and reliable ways.
One needs people who are capable in the analysis of these materials, these transmission electron micrographs.
They're now available. Everybody can do it. I mean, every university has the capacity to take these images,
but it takes a special person with the finesse and the delicacy to take these kinds of images.
And so often you'll find that the efforts that go on in these fields now, they involve people who have the breadth to be able to think across disciplines,
but they also involve quite big teams.
These efforts are so ambitious. I mean, think of trying to create devices that mimic what trees and plants took millions and millions of years to figure out how to do.
And they're trying to do something much more rapidly than that. Our energy challenges are urgent.
We don't have millions of years. We maybe have a decade or two to come up with some new solutions on the energy front.
And so these teams of very brilliant people are working together very collaboratively, very much across disciplines.
And as the approaches take and get more interdisciplinary, these teams grow into quite large groups of people working very, very closely together.
I think that energy represents one of the most important societal challenges that we have in front of us,
but it also represents one of the most exciting opportunities to integrate some of the many, many concepts from across the science and across the technology of the nano world.
