In this our final lecture on nanotechnology, I'd like to begin with a discussion of some
exciting topics, some of which are a little less explored as those that we've covered
throughout the course, and then I'd like to see how we can pull it all together.
We can look at the history of nanotechnology till today and think about the future going
forward.
Let me start in on the first of one of a number of exciting topics that we haven't gotten
to spend too much time on.
In a way what I'm going to describe is kind of an integration problem.
The idea, it's sometimes called smart dust, and the idea is one where sensors could be
everywhere, sensors that we desire to measure properties of our environment, to monitor
a vulnerable environmental enclave.
There are military applications in which we would like to be able to send tetherless
sensors into an environment to monitor what's going on there.
The reason I call this an integration problem is because we have all of the building blocks
in place already for this.
We've talked in this course about methods of sensing, like optical detection, our ability
to make cameras that are incredibly small, lightweight, low in cost, low in their power
consumption.
We've also talked in Shayna's discussions about biosensors.
We're able to detect biomolecules or chemicals in the environment.
This is very relevant to industrial sensing or to learning information about our biological
environment.
We know that we're able to communicate information at vast information rates using the transceivers
that are inside our cell phones, and we're able to do so in a very manageable way.
Building these sensor networks based on ubiquitous small sensing devices that are so low in cost,
you can imagine just kind of letting a powder puff of them into the air and having them
land in the environment is something that in principle we should be able to do.
Now, there's that integration problem of putting together the storage of energy.
In fact, we're going to want to harvest energy from our environment.
We may do so photovoltaically.
There's also ways to scavenge mechanical energy, vibrations, or thermal energy, changes in
temperature from one region to another.
And to use these to scavenge a little bit of energy from our environment, store it up,
and use it in powering our remote sensor, sometimes called a moat.
The communications, as I said, is something we can take care of, but how about the networking
side of it?
When we launch a bunch of these little sensors into a region that we're interested in monitoring,
how are we going to ensure that they can all communicate back to us to some kind of base
station?
Well, one of the ideas is the formation of what are called ad hoc networks, spontaneous
networks, where wherever these little bits of smart dust land, they're able to talk with
one another.
Because they're close to each other, the amount of power they need to communicate with each
other is very small, and then they can gradually relay the information back to a central point.
So these are also smart network or intelligent networks that can figure out how to form and
propagate information in the most energy efficient manner.
Here's a couple of pictures of some of the early prototypes.
They're kind of millimeters in size, and they're very compact as a result, and there's a whole
lot of functions that can now be integrated into them.
The applications I mentioned already were some military applications, respectively.
Espionage, you can easily imagine.
Electrical sensing.
But there's another application area that's a very interesting one for these sensors,
and we touched on it just a little bit when we were talking about power and energy.
We were talking about the smart grid.
There we were talking about how when we bring renewables such as solar energy, wind energy,
online, that we can be pushing energy in either direction from the direction of production
to consumption, or now vice versa, that each of us can become an energy producer.
But one of the key components of a smart electrical grid, one which is robust, which can accommodate
renewables, which doesn't have to throw away some sources of energy simply because they
can't be accommodated, which negotiates across the grid.
One of the components of this will be effective sensing of the electrical properties of power
that's conveyed or delivered to that grid, and then kind of a synchronization of management
across that grid of the waves of energy that are being conveyed.
And so here, again, these sensors that are very low in cost, ubiquitous, robust, very
good at communicating, and where when we introduce somebody new onto the grid, they can rapidly
become part of that network, kind of an ad hoc version of network formation.
All of these concepts apply as well there in the realization of one of these intelligent
energy grids.
Another topic that's seen great attention, really captures people's imagination, is
referred to as cloaks of invisibility.
And in fact, cloaks of invisibility are just an example of one of the exciting application
areas for new materials that are referred to as metamaterials.
And when we shrink them down, they become nanomaterials.
But they're interesting not just to the nanoscale, but also at larger length scales.
Let's talk a bit about these metamaterials and how they relate to cloaks of invisibility.
Here's the idea that we can wrap an object that we wish to cloak in a material that essentially
ensures that electromagnetic waves, such as light or also microwaves, will pass around
it, and then recombine as if the object was not there.
So normally, if you were to have an object and it would see a light impinging upon it,
or say a microwave frequency radiation impinging upon it, then that object would alter both
at the source, so in the reflection, and also in transmission on the far side of the object,
that object would alter what happened to those wave fronts.
They would become, instead of being planar and flat, they would become rippled.
It would be like how in an ocean with waves lapping up on shore, if you were to stick
a boy there, the boy would alter how the waves formed in the longitudinal direction.
Waves therefore, when they're interfered with in this fashion, render the objects that interfere
with them detectable.
This is, of course, how we experience light and how it's transmitted or not transmitted
through objects and how we see objects in our way.
The idea with these metamaterials is that instead, we're able to surround an object with
a cloak that ensures that the waves pass around it and then recombine as if the object was
not there.
Now to make something truly invisible, what are you actually going to want to do?
Well, first of all, if you're thinking in the optical wavelengths that we see with our
own eyes, clearly all the colors of the spectrum, you're going to want them all to manifest
this property of being not disrupted by the object.
Another is that you're going to want to ensure that not only does the shape of the waves,
the optical waves that makes it around this object combine and keep its structure and
not be perturbed, we're also going to want to ensure there's no absorption.
Metamaterials have made a progress in this direction.
By metamaterials, what we mean is artificial materials, entities where instead of just
using a pure phase of one crystal or one metal or one semiconductor or one dielectric,
a transparent material, we combine these together, often in a periodic structure or a partially
periodic structure, and the ways in which electromagnetic waves propagate around them
have their dispersion influenced, and by dispersion, a concept we talked about when we were discussing
fiber optic communications, we mean how the behavior of this light depends on its frequency.
So these metamaterials had initially been implemented at microwave frequencies.
There's now been recent progress in building them and implementing them and utilizing them
at optical length scales, but there are two challenges that remain not fully resolved.
The first of these is that the way these dispersion properties are engineered, the way the frequency
dependence of these behaviors are engineered, ensures that we can mostly do this essentially
at a single frequency.
So for example, if you're interested in flying a plane through some airspace and you know
what people may be looking at, what frequencies they may be using to look at you, if you
can predict that they'll use a particular frequency of the electromagnetic spectrum,
then you may be able to cloak relative to that frequency.
But if, as when you think of visible wave-length applications in using our own eyes, if you're
interested in being able to cloak something across the full visible spectrum, that's going
to be much more challenging because these metamaterials are actually using dispersive
properties which are inherently narrowband in order to guide light around their edges
and have it recombine as if it were not disturbed.
The other component that makes this metamaterials field and cloaking still challenging is the
fact that there still is some loss, some absorption of light that occurs within these materials.
And for the moment then, these remain detectable, that perhaps the shapes of the waves are kept
as they were on the front side of the object, but the amplitude of the waves is not perfectly
retained.
And so there still is a means of detection, it's subtle, but there's a means of detection.
So these challenges of bandwidth and loss will need to be addressed and these are exactly
the kinds of questions that researchers are continuing to work on.
I wanted to talk about another very exciting area for the world of nanomaterials that has
made great progress, but has yet to be fully drawn to a complete conclusion, commercial
products generated and things like that.
And I'll call this conformable and deformable nanomaterials.
Let me describe a bit what I'm talking about.
We've talked in this course about how semiconductors such as silicon are so capable in electronics.
We've talked about how gallium arsenide is such a good material for light emission.
In fact, it happens also to be an extremely good material for making a solar cell out
of.
We've discussed single-walled and multi-walled carbon nanotubes, which can be coded onto
things.
We talked about quantum dots.
But often we're interested in integrating multiple functions.
We're interested in putting down an electronic device on silicon, combining it with, say,
an energy harvesting device such as one based on gallium arsenide, perhaps making a photo
detector out of a third material, putting them all on the same substrate.
Well, traditionally, semiconductor processing and growth have worked based on the process
known as epitaxy, which we described in the solar lecture, where we were talking about
triple junction devices, about growing perfectly lattice-matched crystals on top of one another.
But now this panoply of materials I just described don't even necessarily all have lattices.
Some of them could be amorphous.
Some of them could be crystalline.
Some of them are of shapes that are even non-planar.
So it's not obvious at all how to use our traditional stacking of crystals on top of
each other to build stacked hetero structures or hetero materials.
This is where a professor at University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, John Rogers,
has made incredible strides and has really captured the world's imagination.
Professor Rogers has come up with a number of ways to take really a diverse array of
materials and first put them down onto a first template and then use a transfer printing
process in order to transfer this layer onto another substrate.
And he's able to do this many, many times.
He's able to use repeated application of this additive process that use these soft stamps
and these donor substrates that donate their materials that we've coded onto them and integrate
them onto a stack to make a three-dimensionally structured heterogeneously integrated material.
He's able to combine in this way both rigid and flexible materials and devices.
That combination is very powerful.
In fact, it's caused a lot of people to question whether the need for nanomaterials for their
flexibility alone is required because what John Rogers has managed to do is integrate
rigid materials onto flexible substrates, singulate them appropriately, and have them
flex.
And so he's shown that there's more than one way to build a flexible material if one
uses some flexible thinking in assembling the entire stack of materials.
This has a whole diversity of potential application.
So one of the things that allows us to do is to combine together devices that look in
incredibly different frequency regimes, who are able to take the building blocks of radio
frequency electronics, the basis for our cell phones, also the basis for some gigahertz
imaging or microwave imaging, and we're able to combine it now with materials that are
much better suited to imaging in the optical domain or perhaps in the terahertz domain.
It allows us to combine things like carbon nanotubes and carbon nanotube arrays, which
have had diverse applications ranging from catalysis as we discussed together, energy
harvesting, but also biological sensing.
It's enabling some interesting devices that allow cardiac mapping by integrating electronics
and biological materials together.
It's potentially leading to some implantable materials, implantable electronic materials
that can also be used in medical applications.
And so it really is changing the way we think about a world divided into the rigid and the
flexible, but instead this strategy finds ways to integrate those things that are traditionally
made on rigid substrates and puts them onto flexible substrates.
In fact, the concept is potentially also very useful in solar energy harvesting because
some of the most promising materials from an efficiency standpoint in solar energy
harvesting are based on these more exotic compound semiconductors grown on a costly
compound semiconductor substrate.
But there's recent indications that we can slough off the upper layer of that compound
semiconductor substrate that we've grown towards our photovoltaic purpose and transfer
it to a much less expensive substrate and then reuse the costly substrate to grow the
next layer, to grow the next device.
Now these conformable or flexible materials, in a way they're just one example of materials
that have shape that's changeable.
And one of the more interesting concepts is to have materials having these shapes that
are alterable, but where the materials also have a memory.
In fact, these shape memory materials such as shape memory polymers are able to retain
two or three shapes in their memory.
And then we can switch them.
We can tune them using temperature or an electric or a magnetic field or even light in order
to alter their shape.
There's a very practical example of where one would want to do this, such as in the introduction
of cardiovascular stents.
Here the stent needs to be small, kind of in its condensed phase as we insert it along
a vein or an artery, but then we want to expand it to prop it open and to leave it in place
at the appropriate location inside the patient.
And so in this case, the concept of using shape memory materials is very attractive,
or it allows us to alter from the shape suitable to insertion to the shape which we will want
to install within the patient.
We spend a lot of time in this course talking about technology, talking about its potential,
talking about applications or anticipated applications of nanotechnology.
But it's very important, including in a field like this that's filled with excitement and
optimism, to think about the risks, to think about the downside.
And there certainly are researchers looking at the environmental implications of nanomaterials.
They ask things like, what if there were an unintentional release of certain nanomaterials
into the environment?
What would their fate be?
There's also people who look at questions in ethics of nanotechnology and nanomaterials.
Questions such as, how far will our power extend to work at the nanoscale?
What new properties might we be able to endow nature with?
How do we ensure that we don't cross the boundaries of what's societally appropriate to work with
nanotechnology?
On the nanomaterials questions, there's been a lot of work looking at the fate of nanoparticles
in the environment.
Again, what if either deliberately or accidentally certain nanomaterials were introduced into
the environment?
And the answer is that there are many answers.
It depends on the nanomaterials.
There are certain nanomaterials that essentially get broken down into the environment the way
any number of organic molecules would.
There's others that are retained for longer and longer within the environment.
And those, of course, are the ones that have the potential to be taken up as part of an
ecosystem and do damage.
So there have been studies, for example, on how carbon nanotubes at very elevated concentrations
can be dangerous to the health of certain fish and small mammals that have been studied
in the context of this research.
My own opinion on this work is twofold first, that it's extremely important for all of us
in the field to be participants in these investigations into the fate of nanomaterials in the environment.
For those of us who work more on advancing the technology for its own sake towards a
particular application, it's tempting to put all our energy just into those questions.
But in fact, we will be part, we need to be part of shaping how the community, the regulatory
agencies respond to the emergence of new classes of materials with new properties.
I think my other thought is that fundamentally the issues that are presented from a regulatory
and environmental standpoint through nanotechnology, through nanomaterials, the issues are not
qualitatively different from the issues that exist across process chemistry from the creation
of new molecules and materials.
Like the all fields involved in the synthesis of new materials, new molecules, new structures,
it's important for nanotechnology to be part of the regulatory process, to be aware of
the health implications of the materials that it's generating, and it needs to participate
in that dialogue, but that the fundamental nature of the questions that emerge from nanomaterials
from a regulatory standpoint, the fundamental nature is not different, but the details are
likely to be different, and so we need to be part of that conversation, and we need to
look at it early.
We can't wait until something is just ready to go into the market in mass production.
Now is the time to be participating in that conversation.
I'd like to close our course with a couple of reflections back onto the history of the
field of nanotechnology, including the early history, and then also think a bit about the
directions in which this field can go in the future.
And to do this, I'd like to recall a speech that Richard Feynman, a professor from Caltech,
gave in 1959.
The speech was called There's Plenty of Room at the Bottom, an invitation to enter a new
field of physics.
In this speech, Dr. Feynman, who wasn't explicitly working in this field, he was a more fundamental
theoretical physicist, but he went into some very intriguing speculations about the possibility
of working in the scale of the very small.
Let me just touch on a couple of things that he mentioned.
One was that he felt that going into the regime of the very, very small, where he talks about
the bottom, where there's an abundance of room, it's not going to illuminate fundamental
physics.
In fact, that this fundamental physics, even by that time, was becoming extremely well-known.
Feynman himself was diving deeper and deeper into the strange particles that make up matter
that constitute the protons and neutrons that constitute matter.
So it was in the subatomic world.
But he did say that perhaps there's an analogy with solid state physics, and solid state
physics then was relatively young.
And in that it wasn't so much that it would be illuminating the fundamental new concepts
of how matter is constituted, but instead that it would provoke great interest into what
happens when you combine phenomena in complex fashions.
And I think that insight is very real, and in a way, one could consider nanotechnology
simply to be the quantitative improvement in our dexterity in manipulating matter and
turning it into more and more complex structures.
But Dr. Feynman also remarked that even though he didn't give too many details of this, which
is itself interesting, but he said that he felt that gaining dexterity on the scale
of the very small would have a huge number of technological applications.
And that, I think, is hard to argue with.
And I think one of the areas in which Dr. Feynman was broadly right, that there would
be huge numbers of applications, but one of the areas that it was so hard to foresee
is what those applications would be.
He spoke specifically about manipulating and controlling things on a very small scale.
And he called out, he predicted that in the year 2000, again this was 41 years before
the year 2000, he said in the year 2000 when they look back at the sage, people will wonder
why it was not until about 1960 that anybody began seriously to move in this direction.
And that itself is an interesting point that they were, as Dr. Feynman noted at the time,
there were a number of capabilities that were just emerging that allowed people to start
exploring, manipulating matter at the nanoscale.
The transmission electron microscope was already well in place and people were able
to image down to the length scales that we've been looking at together.
But primarily they were imaging a natural material, things that had already been made.
And one of Dr. Feynman's insights was to say, how can we turn this around and start to engineer
on the length scales ourselves?
And specifically to that point, he said, why can we not write the entire 24 volumes of
the Encyclopedia Britannica on the head of a pin?
It sounds like a crazy thing to do, but he did the math and worked out that essentially
it would be necessary to reduce the font size by a factor of 25,000.
And so those little dots that made up the fine halftone reproductions of images in the
Encyclopedia Britannica that were about 1 1⁄150 of an inch across, by the time you
scaled them down 25,000 fold, they would become about 8 nanometers in diameter.
The word nanometer was available then, he used 80 angstroms, which was a more conventional
unit for people to use, especially then before people explicitly started talking of nanotechnology.
He pointed out that this would be 32 atoms across in a typical material or a metal.
And so the dot, if you took its square of that area, would be of the order of about
1,000 atoms.
And then he said, well, this is not beyond our capabilities to imagine doing.
It hadn't been done yet.
People hadn't started writing on this kind of length scale at the time.
But he imagined how it could be done.
And he essentially said, let's take our electron microscopes and let's turn them into writers
rather than just readers.
Let's orient our atomic beams and let's carve matter.
Let's change the properties of a material using these electron beams.
Let's modify it that way.
And as a result, we can focus down using the much smaller wavelength of electrons than
photons have, and we're able to write.
And then, of course, we can essentially use the same instrument in a different mode to
read.
Well, what's interesting about that remark is that that's precisely how one of the major
forms of crafting matter at the nanoscale did emerge.
Electron beam lithography, which is one of the ways in which we get beyond the limits
of photolithography, the resolution that's available there, the optical resolution, and
to the electron resolution scale, that is achieved essentially by reversing the operation
of an electron microscope into write mode instead of read mode.
Dr. Feynman also talked about the role of DNA, the fact that when we get down to these
length scales, and it seems so surprising that one could put all 24 volumes of the encyclopedia
Britannica on the head of a pin, but he then pointed out that DNA already was known to
do the same thing.
But the amount of information communicated there is very efficient from the point of
view of utilization of atoms.
So for one bit, one binary piece of information, one only requires about 50 atoms, whereas
his modest proposal relied on 1,000 atoms per bit of information.
So in that sense, he also anticipated that nanotechnology, as it evolved, would be getting
inspiration from what the biological had done, and that many of our checks or many of
our reference points as to the potential of what we were doing would come from the world
around us, that there would be proof points through the biological as to what one can
do, what kind of control and resolution one can have.
Another interesting point that he made is that a lot of the materials that were being
worked on then in solid state physics, they were based on very perfect crystals, they
were based on moving towards purity, and so one could achieve control and delocalization
of electrons as is achieved in silicon and other semiconductors.
But he noted that at the time they weren't making checkerboards where you might have
one material and then a second one and then the first and the second in various complex
arrays.
Instead, the focus was kind of on to purity rather than on to controlled impurities.
But in fact, that notion of a checkerboard is really a description of the way metamaterials
work.
It involves combining at least two sets of materials, creating what researchers have
called binary superlattices, which has now become very much something that researchers
focus on in making new functional materials.
It's interesting to ask what was not present, what was missing from this view.
Well, I would say that Dr. Feynman's view certainly did start, if you like, from the
top.
He said there's plenty of room at the bottom, but he was starting from the macroscopic and
wondering how we could take the Encyclopedia Britannica and write it on the length scale
of the nanometer.
And while he did certainly touch on DNA, an emergent phenomena, material where the synthesis
occurs starting at the nanometer scale rather than starting at the macroscopic scale, his
focus was more on the top down.
And that leads to another interesting point that he didn't explicitly anticipate because
of course the field of electronics was in its early days.
In 1959, we didn't have these complex integrated circuits or even precursors to them.
We were still at the age of perfecting the discrete transistors that would then be connected
together to form electronic integrated circuits.
And he didn't explicitly anticipate the way in which the field of circuits, the field
of electronics would play such a crucial role that in a way the field of photolithography
would be writing the Encyclopedia Britannica with almost the resolutions that he anticipated
today down to the sort of tens of nanometers length scale that we're now able to write
at.
In fact, I think you would have been surprised that we're still using light, shorter and
shorter wavelengths of light, but we're still using light to write our smaller and smaller
electronic circuits.
And this has often been called the surprisingly long longevity of photolithography and how
it's extended forward so much.
Also, I think interestingly, Feynman didn't explicitly anticipate how the rules of the
game would change, that he was entirely aware of quantum effects occurring at the short
length scales.
This was the area in which he was very much an expert.
But I think one of the most exciting things about nanotechnology today is the way in which
the rules of physics that we work with, the playground, the grammar in which we build
new materials, the rules of the game are altered when we get to these shorter length scales.
And finally, I think perhaps the broadest comment, which again, he got right, which
was that there would be huge technological implications, but what exactly would they
be?
That is so hard to anticipate.
And so much of what we talked about today has been medical in nature.
So much of it has been related to energy.
And perhaps this comes in part because, of course, one hadn't explored the nanoworld
in all of its details, but also that societal needs, what people think are important, what
politicians think is important, what funding agencies, what peers within the research community
decide is important.
These are things that influence where the focus is.
And so so much investment has been made into nanotechnology focused on energy because society
has such urgent needs in these regards.
Well, with that, I'd like to thank you for your interest in this field, as you can tell.
It's one that I'm incredibly excited about.
It's one where I think we're full of potential.
I think we haven't explored that full potential.
And I think just as Feynman wasn't able to anticipate all the areas of application,
I don't think we've even scratched the surface of all the implications and applications of
working with materials at the nanoscale.
I hope that with this introduction, you'll stay tuned, you'll participate, you'll learn
as the field evolves because it's an exciting one.
I'm hoping to be along for the ride for quite a while into the future.
And I hope that you'll get to partake in it as well.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
