Welcome. In this lecture, I want to talk about time. Now, I'm not going to talk about time
from a physics point of view, getting into the questions of what time is. I mean, is
it continuous or is it made of discrete blocks? Can time ever flow backwards? What does it
mean that time is a fourth dimension? Are there really particles like tachyons that
can go faster than the speed of light? And why is it that something unpleasant and unbearable
seems to last forever while something wonderful and pleasant goes by in a flash? I mean, these
are all important and interesting questions that show our continued fascination with
time. However, time is the foundation of geology. Geologic time, deep time, the whole process
of Earth's creation and evolution occurs on time scales that are unimaginable to us, just
vast and enormous. Now, it doesn't mean that things happen slowly. There are many things
that I'm going to talk about in this course that happen incredibly quickly and catastrophically,
but they happen over an enormous expanse of time. Now, all the sciences have aspects to
them that make them hard to comprehend. For astronomy, it's the enormous vastness of space.
For physics, it's the incredibly high energies involved. For chemistry, it's the structure
of atoms. And I'm going to talk about all of these. All of these will play a role here
in this course. But for this lecture, I want to focus on the aspect of time. Now, it's
hard for us to even comprehend the enormous scales of time that the Earth works by. Our
time scales are so short in comparison. For instance, think about the scales of time that
you live by. Hours, what are you going to have for dinner tonight? Days, what are you
doing this weekend? Weeks, do you have a party that you're going to? Maybe months, are you
going on vacation soon? Years, where will you be next summer? Decades, will you be retired?
Will you be alive? Already, at that scale, we're beyond the scale of most of our thoughts.
And that's just one power of ten, ten to the first, ten years in time, which is insignificant
when you remember that the Earth's age is nine powers of ten. Let me give you an example
of this going back in time. Ten years ago, ten to the first, where did you live? Where
were you working? Were you still in school? Let's go back and multiply that by ten. Ten
squared, the power of two, a hundred years. Okay, odds are you weren't even alive yet.
At this point, the very first cars were in production. Let's go back ten to the third,
a thousand years. Okay, things are really different back then. People actually believe
that the sun and all the planets were orbiting around the Earth back in the Middle Ages. Let's
multiply by another ten, ten to the fourth, ten thousand years. This was the very start
of civilization. The earliest cities were just being constructed. Ten to the fifth, a hundred
thousand years ago, this was early on in the existence of Homo sapiens. There were other
humans around like Neanderthals that we were competing with. Go back another power of ten,
ten to the sixth. We're now at a million years. Early hominids like Australopithecus,
our early ancestors, were really hairy. Go back one more power of ten, ten million years.
At this point, our ancestors weren't even walking on two feet. They were swinging in
trees. This was the age of the mammals. After the period when the dinosaurs had died, go
back another power of ten, ten to the eighth. We're now at a hundred million years. This
was the time the dinosaurs were ruling the surface of the Earth. Go back another power
of ten, multiply by ten again, one billion years, ten to the ninth. At this point, life
existed but only as single-celled organisms. There weren't even worms around yet. You have
to go back again almost another power of ten to four point five six seven billion years
to the beginning of the Earth. These are scales that really take a lot of practice to get
used to understanding and comprehending. Again, humans evolved about two hundred thousand
years ago and this is zero point zero zero four of one percent of the age of the Earth.
One part in twenty-three thousand. Our planet is twenty-three thousand times older than
our race of Homo sapiens. It's really hard for us to comprehend. It's interesting as
a writer, John McPhee, who used an excellent analogy. He described the length of an arm
as the age and history of the Earth. If you consider your shoulder as being the start
of the Earth and you consider the end of your finger as being modern day, if you were to
take a nail file and very lightly wipe it across the end of your fingertip, you would
erase all of human civilization. That's how small a part of Earth's time we've occupied.
Now, people have long been fascinated with time and the question of how old our planet
is. It's formed a central part of philosophies and religions from their very inception. And
there's been a lot of difference in views as to how time operates. For instance, if
you look at many eastern philosophies and religions, Hinduism and Buddhism, time occurs
in a cyclic manner. You go to the end of a period sometimes with a catastrophic destruction
as in Hinduism, the end of the period of yugas, long eras, and the world is reborn again
from that and starts all over again. Interestingly, in many versions of Hinduism, we're actually
at the end of that fourth yuga, the Kali yuga, and our world is about to come to an end.
But it will be reborn. However, in contrast to that, you have a more linear way of thinking,
like the whole Judeo-Christian Islamic tradition of a Genesis and an Armageddon, a distinct
beginning and an end. And this conflict between a cyclic and a linear view of time actually
played a huge role in geology in the 18th century. Because it turned out at that point,
we had no way of actually determining the ages of rocks, the age of the Earth, and there
was a huge debate within the community as to whether geology occurred along this cyclical
pattern, repeating itself over and over, a school known as uniformitarianism, or whether
it occurred in a set of catastrophic events, with a bang at the beginning and a bang at
the end. Now interesting, this conflict spread throughout the countries, throughout the
scientific community. One of the leaders of it was a German educator by the name of Abraham
Werner, and he formed a school called Neptunism. And in his view, all of the layers of the
rock of the Earth formed in a relatively short amount of time, settling out of a giant, world-encompassing
ocean. And this view was actually adopted favorably by the church because they viewed
this giant ocean as being all the water that existed during Noah's flood. One of the biggest
advocates of this theory known as catastrophism was a very esteemed French scientist by the
name of Georges Cuvier, who lived from 1769 to 1832. He was very powerful and very influential,
and he was a very accomplished paleontologist who noticed that animals seemed to die off
in sudden catastrophic events. And he really took a very strong view that things occurred
catastrophically and actually was strongly resistant to any ideas of evolution. The tide
in how we view the Earth really changed, however, with a Scottish geologist named James Hutton,
who's largely considered to be the father of modern geology. Now Hutton had lived earlier.
He was born in 1726 and died in 1797, and was brilliant, came up with many wonderful
ideas. He was one of the first people, for instance, to view the Earth as being very hot
inside a theory he called Plutonism, which described Earth's surface as being subjected
as a result of this heat to many repeating cycles of the erosion of rock, the deposition
of sediment, and the lithification, the reforming of new rock, creating layers upon layers of
rock. He essentially described the rock cycle, which I'll talk about quite a bit later on
this course. But he came up with this idea of uniformitarianism, that the Earth must
be very old. There was one big problem. Hutton was a lousy writer. His book, in which many
of these ideas appeared, was called An Investigation of the Principles of Knowledge and of the
Progress of Reason from Sense to Science and Philosophy, and it was long and pedantic and
boring and 2,138 pages, and nobody read it. However, Hutton had a champion, another Scottish
geologist named Charles Lyell, who was actually born the same year that Hutton died. Lyell,
who was a good geologist in his own right, was a wonderful educator and a brilliant writer.
His textbooks, Principles of Geology, which he wrote in 1830, and Elements of Geology,
which he wrote in 1838, formed the foundation of modern geology, and they were filled with
the thoughts and philosophies and ideas of Hutton. Hutton had said, we find no vestige
of a beginning, no prospect of an end. He introduced this idea of deep geologic time,
and Lyell added to this, the present is the key to the past, the idea that the geologic
processes we see operating today really control the geologic processes that have operated
over enormous amounts of time going back into the past. After Lyell's teachings, uniformitarianism
really won out, at least among the scientific community, and paved the way for whole new
fields such as biologic evolution to develop, giving us the sense that there was an enormous
amount of time for earth and life to evolve within.
Interestingly, with the discovery of the impact that killed off the dinosaurs 65 million
years ago, history has taken a slightly different view of catastrophism and the works of people
like Cuvier. For a while they were scorned and somewhat denigrated, but now we realize
that of course neither of these philosophies had it all right, and neither were all wrong.
The truth, the reality exists somewhere between these two end members, and all of geology
exists along a spectrum between things happening slowly and continuously day after day, and
things happening catastrophically. For instance, I'm going to go through this course and give
you many examples of different aspects of geology that operate along this principle.
It's a really important theme. Take the impact of meteoroids. Yes, there are impacts like
the one that hit the Yucatan Peninsula 65 million years ago, and we think was responsible
for the extinction of the dinosaurs, but our atmosphere is being bombarded by tiny meteoroids
all the time. We sweep up about three tons of cosmic debris every day as we travel in
our orbit. Earthquakes, the largest earthquakes like the 2004 Sumatra earthquake that killed
over 200,000 people, are devastating and release unfathomable amounts of energy, but there are
more than 200,000 earthquakes that are located every year. They're happening all the time
constantly. Volcanoes are another example. There is lava pouring out onto the surface
of our planet right now, constantly all the time, in many places all around the surface
of the earth, but it's the big volcanoes, it's the Krakatoa's or the Yellowstone super
volcanoes that do tremendous amount of change over very rapid timescales. Streams and flooding
is another good example. Rivers are constantly carrying sediment towards the ocean, a vital
part of the whole rock cycle. The Mississippi River carries 500 million tons of rock every
year, washing off the surface of North America, dumping it into the Gulf of Mexico, but the
times where there are enormous floods are often times that the greatest amount of erosion
occurs and huge amounts of rock gets washed off the surface and carried out to the sea.
This spectrum is going to greatly affect how we view time and how we view the earth, and
the key to this that's a little bit uncomfortable is that people like to see things as being
black and white, and that's not really how things work. Things are always somewhere in
between. People often ask me what the earthquake hazards might be in a certain region. Well,
I usually tell them if you live near a large fault, the risk is probably less than the
media has plated out to be, but if you live in an area far from a big fault, the risk
is probably larger than you think it might be. Things are always somewhere in between.
Let me get back to the age of the earth, which is a really interesting question and bothered
people for a long time. Now, for thousands of years, people have been trying to compute
how old the earth is. The first documented case of this that I have found is Herodotus,
back in 450 BCE, who actually had Egyptians dig trenches along the Nile River because
the Nile deposits a layer of sediment every year, and so he went in and counted these
layers and was able to identify 5,000 different layers and figured out therefore that the
earth was at least 5,000 years old. People in the Middle Ages often used sacred texts
like the Bible in order to compute using things like the ages of the prophets in the
Old Testament how old earth was. There were many people involved in this. The most famous
is the work of the Irish Bishop Usher, who computed based on the events in the Old Testament
that the earth formed on October 23, 4004 BC at 9 a.m., and that's Mesopotamian time.
Obviously, it couldn't be daylight savings time, the sun wasn't created until the fourth
day. In the 18th and 19th centuries, scientists used a variety of techniques. They looked
at the salinity of the oceans, the rates of sedimentation, models of the cooling of different
materials in order to try to figure out how old the earth was. A famous one in 1779, the
Comte de Buffon in France looked at the cooling of iron and figured out that the earth was
probably 75,000 years old. He was obviously wrong. I don't want to take anything from
Buffon. He was a brilliant scientist who actually was one of the first people to figure out
that changes in climate were the cause of changes in the appearance of organisms over
time and actually led to the ideas of natural selection and evolution that Darwin espoused.
Emmanuel Comte got involved. Philosophers were involved with this. Comte looked at the
sun and modeled it as a gas lamp and figured out that the sun must be from the fact that
it's still burning a thousand years old, which wasn't very helpful. The most significant
calculation of this time, however, was by William Thompson, who became known as Lord
Kelvin. It's the classic example of bad results coming from good science. Thompson was the
smartest man in the world of his day. He had Newton's seat at the Royal Astronomical Observatory
in London. He was esteemed as the most brilliant physicist in Europe and probably the whole
world. And he did a very thorough calculation, starting with a molten earth, including heat
from gravitational contraction, cooling from the inside out. He included heat from the
sun, tidal friction, heat flow. And in 1862, he came up with an earth that was 98 million
years old. 35 years later, he redid that calculation and computed that the age of the earth was
somewhere between 20 and 40 million years. Now, he was dramatically wrong. And the problem
was this created a really difficult time for biologists and geologists. In fact, Darwin,
in some of his last writings, said he would die an unhappy man because if Thompson was
right, then all of his work in evolution was wrong, because there just simply wasn't enough
time for life to evolve in 20 to 40 million years. And geologists had a rough time, because
again, the amount of time that you have to create the earth, you know, 40 million years
just isn't enough. Well, up until then, what had geologists done? If they couldn't actually
figure out the ages of rocks, they had to use techniques called relative dating. And
this used the principle that sedimentary layers formed in certain ways that you could use to
determine the relative ages of rock in one location and another location. They determined,
and actually much of this work was due to some of the writings of Nicholas Steno in the
mid 1600s. It sounds obvious to us now, but at the time it was actually quite revolutionary.
He said sedimentary rocks like sandstone and shale are deposited as horizontal layers,
and they are deposited with older ones in the bottom and younger ones on top. And these layers
continue across. So if you find the rock of a certain type in one county, you go to the next
county, you're going to find that same layer. And he came up also with a principle of crosscutting,
and that is if something breaks across those layers, like an earthquake fault, it must have
happened after those layers were deposited. A fundamental part of this process of relative
dating is the existence of unconformities. And these are time gaps in the rock record, places
where the rock has eroded away, and we're actually missing rock. We don't have any evidence from
that time, so you may have layers going up to some point, and then there's a gap in time,
and then continuing on again. One of the best places for me to show you as an example of this
is the Grand Canyon. The Grand Canyon, if you've ever hiked down into it or seen pictures,
consists of lots of horizontal layers going all the way down. Now, it may only take you a
couple hours to hike from the top of the Grand Canyon down to the Colorado River,
but in the process, you will be passing through about two billion years worth of time. Most of
these rocks are marine sediments. They formed in oceans and compacted, and it's interesting if you
go through the Grand Canyon, there are principally just three major types of these sedimentary rocks,
and I'm going to talk about them later in the course, but let me just demonstrate. They're
sandstone, limestone, and shale. Let me give you examples. This is a vial of sand,
that you'd find along the beach. If you take this sand and you compact it and put more sediment on
top, over time it becomes sandstone. This is a very common sedimentary rock that we find. Another
common type of rock is a limestone, and if you look at this rock, you see it contains within it
enormous amounts of formerly organic materials, plants, shells, clams. This material gets compacted
together and forms a rock called limestone. The third principle type of sedimentary rock is a
shale. Shale is a flaky rock. It forms layers. In fact, when we metamorphose this rock later on,
it's going to become slate, which we use for our roof tiles, but shale begins as mud. You take mud
offshore, compact it, and it begins to form shale over time. If you look at the layers of the Grand
Canyon, you see these rocks repeated over and over. Now, I'll use the words. I'm going to talk
about the different layers of the Grand Canyon. I'll use the term formation. Formation is a
continuous group of layers, sometimes combinations of sandstone, limestone, and shale, that we see
at different locations continuing, again, great distances horizontally. So what happens if you
go down through the Grand Canyon, down towards the Colorado River? Well, at the top, you have
Kaibob Limestone, which is about 250 million years old. Beneath that, continuously going down in time,
we get to the Toraweep Formation, which is mostly limestone, 255 million years old. Beneath that is
a sandstone, the Cocokino Sandstone, that's about 260 million years old. It's pure quartz sand.
Actually, this didn't form underwater. These are petrified sand dunes. Beneath that, older is a
layer of shale, the hermit shale, that's 265 million years old. It's soft, easily crumbled.
All of these layers are found over broad regions of the western U.S. You can go to places like
Bryce and Zion Canyon in Utah and find them there as well. Beneath that, we have the Supi
Formation, 285 million years old on average. Shale intermixed with limestones and sandstones,
which probably formed at a fossilized muddy river delta that fed into an ancient sea at one point.
Beneath that, we have an unconformity. Here, at some point, the sea level must have dropped,
the land was above water, it eroded, and we're missing a gap of time.
Extending onward, down we have the Red Wall Limestone, 335 million years old, ocean limestones.
Beneath that, the Temple Butte Limestone, 350 million years old, that was a freshwater limestone.
We have another unconformity, about 150 million years of missing time. Beneath that, the Muav
Limestone, 515 million years old. We're back half a billion years in time now. Going down beneath
that, the Bright Angel Shale, 530 million years old on average. Mudstone Shale, mixed with thin
layers of sandstone and sandy limestone. Beneath that, we have the Tepete Sandstone, 545 million
years old. There are ripple marks in the sandstone, so it suggests to us it formed in very shallow
seas. Beneath that, we have what's called the Great Unconformity, a huge gap in time, about 300
million years. Beneath that, we're in the Chuar Group, 825 to 1,000 million years old. That's
one billion years in age. Mixers of sandstone, limestone, and shale. Beneath that, the Nankawit
formation, about 1,050 million years old, more than a billion years. These are coarse-grained
sandstones. Beneath that, the Unkar Group, 1.1 to 1.25 billion years old. Beneath that,
there's a large Unconformity. There's a gap from 1.25 to 1.7 billion years. We have no record here
of that period in time. Beneath that, we get to very old deformed rocks like the Vishnu Shist,
the Zoroaster Granite, 1.7 to 2 billion years old. The Vishnu Shist used to be sandstone,
limestone, and shale, but it's been altered through time, and temperature, and pressure has
become a whole new rock. This process occurred back when it was the root of some ancient mountain
range that was probably taller than the Rockies. Now, how did we determine the relative ages,
a combination of the layering, and the presence of these things, fossils? Because it was found that
fossils of all the animals that lived in the past didn't live for very long. Most species,
more than 99% of all the species that have ever lived, are now extinct. And if you find
this fossil of this particular age, about 500 million years old, in one location,
and you find that same fossil in another location, you know that it has the same relative date.
Now, putting all this together, what did geologists come up with? They came up with a
geologic timescale, a representation of the ages, which they broke up into different categories.
The longest time periods they called eons. The eons were broken up into eras, the eras were
broken into periods, and then into epics. For most of geologic time that people were exposed to,
there were three principal eras, the Paleozoic, the Mesozoic, and the Senozoic.
These three together form what we call the Phanerozoic eon. It's the period where life was
visible, that's what Phanerozoic means. The Paleozoic from 542 million years to 251 million years
which showed the initial development of life, the evolution from fish to reptiles to amphibians
that I'll talk about later in the course. The Mesozoic from 251 to 65 million years contained,
those rocks contained fossils of the dinosaurs, the Triassic, the Jurassic, and the Cretaceous.
This was the period where dinosaurs were the dominant species on the surface of the land.
The last era is the Senozoic, the last 65 million years, and we are still in the Senozoic
currently. Everything before this period of time was initially just called the Precambrian,
because we didn't have fossils from them. Why? There weren't multicellular organisms living
back then, and so we didn't have the means of identifying these different layers.
Now, the different names of the different layers, by the way, are often given from the places where
these rocks are found. The Jurassic from Jurassic Park is named after the Jura Mountains in Switzerland
where rock was first found of that age. This fossil that I showed you is actually a rock from my
town of St. Louis. It's a Decora limestone. It's 455 million years old, and it formed in the late
Ordovician period, and the Ordovician that in word is taken from the name of a Welsh tribe
because the first rocks of this age were found in Wales. Now, I give you numbers for these
periods of time. I said that the Senozoic began 65 million years ago. Well, where did those numbers
come from? They came from radioactivity, and radioactivity is going to play a huge
role in the rest of this course for a number of reasons. First of all, it's radioactivity that
provides the heat that keeps our planet going. In other words, you owe your very existence
to the radioactive decay of three elements, uranium, thorium, and potassium. If it were
not for the radioactive decay of these elements, we wouldn't exist. Life wouldn't be here. Our
planet would be a dead cinder floating in space, no oceans, no atmospheres, no life, no plate tectonics,
no continents. All of that exists because the slow decay of radioactivity provides this heat
that keeps our whole planet cooking simmering on a slow basis. I'll talk quite a bit more about
this later on. But radioactivity, and incidentally, that was the reason why Thompson was wrong.
His calculations were good. He just didn't know about radioactivity. Well, it turns out that
radioactivity also gives us the means of dating the ages of rocks. The reason is, even though the
radioactive decay of any single atom, some atom of uranium that decays to lead, is entirely
unpredictable, over lots of atoms with lots of decay going on, the rate is very predictable.
And you can look at the relative amounts of uranium and lead and figure out how old a rock is.
It's the statistics of large numbers. In other words, if I have a coin and I flip that coin,
I'm not going to be able to predict whether it's heads or tails. But I can guarantee that if I flip
a million coins, on average, half a million are going to come up heads and half a million are
going to come up tails. Radioactivity gives us that method of determining the ages of rocks.
And what we have found is that our planet is very old, 4.567 billion years old. So Darwin can rest
easy in his grave. There was plenty of time for evolution to occur. And actually, I want to show
you one last rock here. This is the oldest thing I have ever held. This is a meteorite,
that's 4.567 billion years old. Now, it's interesting. It turns out that the oldest rocks on earth
are not earth rocks. The violent geology in our planet, in its first half a billion years,
destroyed any rock that initially formed. But our whole solar system formed at the same time.
And the meteorites formed very quickly, early on, when all the planets were forming. And some of
them still land on our planet. And this is through rocks like this meteorite that we've actually
been able to come up with a final answer for how old our planet is. 4.5 billion years is a lot of
time. It's an amount of time that's almost inconceivable. I've been working with this stuff
continuously for 25 years now, and I'm still just gradually becoming comfortable with it.
However, earth is also very big, 6,371 kilometers down from the surface to the center.
So in the next lecture, I'm going to give an overview of the overall structure of our planet,
crust to core.
