Welcome. Up till now I've described the geology and the physics of our planet Earth. In other
words, I've talked about the when and the why, but I haven't gotten to the what, and
before we can talk about what happens on Earth and all the cycles so that take rock through
from the surface down into the interior and back again, I need to talk about what it is
that's moving around. So I've talked about physics, I've talked about geology, I haven't
talked about chemistry yet, and so that's what I want to do here. I want to talk about
the material that our planet is made of, because after all, planets and rocks are made of atoms,
first I need to make atoms and find out where they came from. Now, let me ask you a question.
How old are you? No, I don't mean your age, and I certainly don't mean at the point at which
you became alive. I'll let the biologists and the politicians and the theologians wrangle over
that one. But you, your body, the material, how old are you? Well, this is a tricky question,
right? Because atoms are constantly cycling through your body some less than a day. And
obviously, you're a lot bigger now than when you were born. So most of the atoms that you have now
weren't in your body when you were born. I don't even mean that. I mean, the stuff that you're
made of, your atoms, how old are they? Well, I have some very bad news for you. You are very,
very old. In fact, since your body is about two thirds water, and water is two thirds hydrogen,
it turns out that most of your body is actually 13.7 billion years old. And everything else is
about 4.6 billion years old. Let me explain. The matter that our planet is made from has only
two real sources. The hydrogen and the helium of our universe were made right at the start of our
universe, right at the time of the Big Bang. And everything else, the carbon, the oxygen,
silicon, magnesium, iron, all the rest of these elements were made actually much later in a very
dramatic process called a supernova, the dying last stage of a star. So I guess in a sense,
this is sort of liberating, right? When I look at myself in the mirror in the morning, and I think
how old I am, 13.7 billion years, I guess I don't look so bad taking that into consideration.
For our Earth, it's the same situation as us. The rock that our planet is made from has actually
changed very little since those early times. Now, it has actually changed slightly because of radio
activity, which we talked about earlier. In other words, some elements can naturally deteriorate and
decay into other elements. This happens continuously within our planet to a very small degree. And,
of course, we've tinkered with this a little bit as well with nuclear fission and nuclear fusion,
altering one atom into another. But really, for most of our planet, it was all there
when our planet formed. So let's talk about this. Well, let's try to go back to the Big Bang.
Before the Big Bang, we don't have any sense of what went on because our physics only apply in
the three dimensions of our space. And before the Big Bang, there were no dimensions. According
to the theory of Big Bang, all our universe actually existed at a single point, dimensionless.
That meant also there was no time, of course, so you wouldn't have had to wait for the Big
Bang to happen because there wasn't any time. See, already we're talking about questions that are
very hard to understand. Right at the Big Bang, though, we have some sense of what went on.
The universe formed at a single point and expanded outward at the speed of light.
And in the process, the intense energy of that moment expanded pulling the universe along with
it. Now, the universe began as pure energy, but as it expanded and cooled, it began to convert
into matter, the matter that we see that we're made of and our planet is made of. It did this
according to a very simple relationship. It's Einstein's E equals mc squared, which is that
energy is mass times the speed of light squared. Now, if you look at this equation, you get a sense
of how much energy is involved in this process because if you take the energy is equal to the mass
times the speed of light squared, well, the speed of light is 300 million meters per second.
And if you square that, it's an even bigger number. So you really only need a tiny bit of mass
to create a tremendous amount of energy, which is why nuclear powers is so incredibly intense.
Going in reverse, it took a tremendous amount of energy to make a small amount of mass,
but we had an enormous amount of energy right at the beginning. Now, the support for the Big
Bang theory comes from three primary arguments. First of all, we know now, as I mentioned previously,
that our universe is expanding. We also know that the deep reaches of space everywhere in our
universe is filled with a certain background radiation in the microwave spectrum. It's called
the cosmic microwave background radiation. And lastly, most relevant to us, the composition of
the universe right at the time of the Big Bang would have been primarily hydrogen and helium.
Let me talk about the expansion of the universe briefly. Edwin Hubble discovered this back in
1929, and he did it actually from a very interesting technique. He did it through the red shift of
stars. This is a form of the Doppler shift of waves. Let me give you an example using an everyday
experience. Suppose you're standing by the side of the road and a car goes by. What do you hear?
Okay, try to picture yourself there. You hear something that goes like this.
What happens as that car goes past you? Well, the pitch drops. Now, does the car emit a different
sound as it's coming towards you and moving away from you? No, not at all. But as the car is coming
towards you, it's emitting more sound from a closer location each time. And all those sound waves
arrive stacked up on top of each other, and that makes a smaller wavelength, and a smaller wavelength
gives you a higher pitch. As the car goes past you, however, every time it emits sound, it's
farther away, and that causes the waves to be spread out as they arrive to you, and that causes a
lower pitch. And that drop is what we call the Doppler shift. Well, the same thing happens for
stars, and this is what Edwin Hubble observed. If stars are moving towards you, then every time
they emit more light, they're a little bit closer. So all those light waves arrive stacked up, and
that shifts the light into a higher frequency, which we see as a different color. We would call
that a blue shift. If the stars are moving away from us, the light waves are spread out. That goes
to a longer wavelength of light and a lower, a different color, and that more into the red
spectrum, we call that a red shift. Edwin Hubble noticed that galaxies all around us in all directions,
or the stars within them, were redshifted, and that meant that all the galaxies were in general
moving away from each other. Now, of course, locally, galaxies do move towards each other. In
fact, galaxies collide all the time. That's local effects of gravity, but on a big picture,
our whole universe was expanding. Now, interesting, our universe, something else that Hubble and
others have noticed, doesn't seem to be expanding from any one single point. It actually seems to be
expanding outward everywhere. And the example that my physicist friends have shown me that's
commonly used is to take a balloon. Imagine that the surface of this balloon was our universe,
okay, and I can't do it, but imagine that I could start my balloon at one single point,
and then I could begin to blow it outward. What would you notice?
Okay, what's going on here? Well, all of my little galaxies in my universe are all moving away from
each other, but my universe is curved around in itself. There's no boundary, and so everything
is moving away from everything else. Now, we can't understand that in our three-dimensional
universe. Of course, I can do it on a balloon because it's a two-dimensional surface in three-
dimensional space. For us, we need to imagine our three-dimensional universe curved in four
dimensions, and that's actually a very hard thing to do. But nonetheless, like our balloon,
it turns out that our universe has no particular center, or another way to look at it is every
point in our universe is also the center of the universe, you included. So that's another reason
to feel good about yourself when you look at the mirror in the morning. Of course, everyone else is
also the center of the universe, but that's okay. The second piece of evidence for the Big Bang is
this background microwave radiation that's everywhere in the universe, and that's very
interesting. If you go out into the depths of space far away from any stars or galaxies,
space isn't empty. It has this low-level reverberation, this hum that corresponds actually to a
temperature of about 2.7 degrees above absolute zero. In other words, if you were to take a
microwave antenna and you were to point it out into space in any direction, you would see this
background cosmic background microwave radiation. Now, it's very interesting how you might get this
background radiation from the Big Bang, but the best way to think of it is if you strike a bell.
So in other words, if you took a very large bell, a really big bell, and you hit it, it's going to
have an initial loud bang, but it's going to reverberate for a while. Well, the cosmic background
microwave radiation is like that reverberation left over from the Big Bang. Only here's the
interesting thing. Suppose I could take my bell and I could stretch it as part of my universe
as the universe was expanding, okay, only now actually make the bell be our universe as it's
expanding. Well, as bigger bells have lower pitches, and so as our universe, our bell expands
continuously, that pitch continues to drop lower and lower and lower, and that's what happened to
the radiation. The radiation from the Big Bang didn't start out at just 2.7 degrees above absolute
zero, way down in the microwave spectrum. It started out intense at very high frequencies and energies,
but as the universe expanded and stretched, that radiation got stretched as well. It's actually
a wonderful story. One of the best stories in physics, how this microwave radiation was discovered,
it turned out in 1963 in Bell Labs in Holmdel, New Jersey, there were two scientists, Arno
Penzos and Robert Wilson, who were trying to build a radio astronomy telescope. They wanted to look
at galaxies and stars, and they wanted to use radio waves to do this. So they set up their
telescope there in New Jersey, and they had this hum, this background hum of noise that they couldn't
get out. It's like if you set up your stereo at home, and there was this hiss that you couldn't get
rid of. They tried everything. They thought maybe because New York City was so close that that was
affecting it, so they turned their antenna towards the west, made no difference. They actually thought
maybe it was the pigeons that were roosting up and top on the roof, so they went up there and
hosed down all the antennas, and that made no difference either. It turned out 15 years previously
in a physics journal. Another set of physicists had already described and predicted this
background hum as the result of the Big Bang, and Penzos and Wilson had proved it inadvertently.
So I hear actually that if you look at a television that's not turned on to any particular station,
and you just have this static on the screen, that some of that static is actually the background
microwave radiation left over from the Big Bang. So if you stare at that static, you're actually
looking back in time 13.7 billion years. Now the last bit of evidence that is most relevant
to making the earth is the fact that when the Big Bang happened, you took all of this energy
and it began to convert it into matter. It only created fairly small particles before they were
cooled and spread out enough that they were no longer interacting. And the theory of the Big
Bang predicted that our universe would be about 75% hydrogen and about 25% helium,
and that's what our universe is made of. If you look at stars, if you look at interstellar space,
if you look at galaxies, if you look at the material with telescopes, it's 3 fourths hydrogen
and one fourth helium, and all the rest of us, everything else, is an insignificant amount of
the universe, and that's exactly what we would have expected. Now we'd like to know what happened
at the Big Bang, and actually physicists have been able to use high-energy experiments to go back
almost to the moment of the Big Bang. Of course we can't actually get there, we can't go before,
but we've been able to go back to within 10 to the minus 43 seconds after the Big Bang. Now
in scientific notation, 10 to the minus 43 is a decimal point with 42 zeros between the point
and the one, so this is an incredibly small amount of time, much, much, much less than one second.
And physicists think that at that time when the Big Bang first occurred, all our four forces that
I've already been talking about, gravity, electromagnetism, the strong nuclear force,
and the weak nuclear force, all those four forces were actually unified in one force.
It's an area of physics called the grand unification theory, and that the moment the
universe expanded, that single unified force splintered and shattered and broke into four
separate forces, and we probably began with many more dimensions than the three spatial dimensions
that we see, but as the universe cooled and expanded, it crystallized out into just three dimensions.
If you go, if you look at physics experiments and go just a little bit later in time, so 10 to the
minus 34 seconds, our universe entered into a very unusual period called inflationary expansion.
We don't know why this happened, but it has very important significance because it means
that there are large portions of our universe that we will never see. They're forever invisible to us.
Because we expanded faster than the speed of light, the light from those parts of the universe
can never catch up to us, and we'll never be able to see them. We're still expanding that,
you know, ahead of the light from that part of the universe. At this point in time,
there were no particles, there was no matter, no substance, there was only intensely hot energy.
But by a fraction of a second later, by 10 to the minus 32 seconds, the first subatomic particles
that would make matter were forming. At this point, the universe was about a foot in diameter,
and the temperature was on the order of 10 to the 26th degrees. Okay, this is one with 26 zeros
after it. In other words, 100 trillion trillion trillion degrees. Fraction of a second later,
10 to the minus 11th, those four fundamental forces had entirely separated. The last two to go were
the split of the electromagnetic and the weak nuclear forces. At this point, the temperature
is about two quadrillion degrees. Go to 10 to the minus fifth second, so now we're 0.0001 second
after the Big Bang. Finally, now we're getting the material of atoms, protons and neutrons
forming. It's still far too hot for stable atoms to form, but our universe at this point
is already about 100 times the distance between the earth and the sun. The temperature is rapidly
dropping. It's down to about 10 trillion degrees by this point. A second after the Big Bang,
electrons begin forming. At this point, the universe is about three light years in size,
and the temperature is down to about 10 billion degrees. Three minutes after the Big Bang,
we have our first real atoms forming. Hydrogen atoms now with protons and neutrons and electrons
able to stay together in one stable atom. At this point, the universe is about 50 light years in
diameter, and the temperature has now dropped to about 1 billion degrees. 10,000 years later,
we're at a point where matter is now dominating over radiation. So the radiation energy is now
converting into matter. The temperature is down to about 30,000 degrees, and the size of the universe
is now about two million light years. In other words, the distance that light would travel at two
million years. By a billion years after the Big Bang, galaxies and stars had already begun to form.
Our universe at that point was 10 billion light years in size, and the temperature had dropped
down to a very chilly 10 degrees above absolute zero. And now, 13.7 billion years after the Big
Bang, we're in a situation where those galaxies and stars are still expanding out. The visible
universe is about 40 billion light years, and the temperature is about 2.7 degrees above absolute zero.
What happens to that matter once it's made, once it's thrown apart? Well, we come back to gravity
again. Gravity is the force that acts over large spaces and large distances. So it was,
we had these hydrogen atoms blown apart after the Big Bang, but gravity began to pull them
together. And really about 100 million years after the Big Bang, they began to come together as
stars and galaxies. Galaxies are just large accumulations of stars, anywhere between 10
million and a trillion stars per galaxy. Most of the mass, most of the stars are near the center
of the galaxy. Very few are out at the far edges, and this will actually come in to be very important
in the last lecture when I talk about how a planet like Earth could have come about. But it's
important, what's important is these early galaxies that formed had nothing but hydrogen
helium in them, okay? So where does everything else come from? Where does the material that
makes the rocks of our planet come from? Well, that's really important because otherwise,
our universe would be pretty dull, right? With nothing but hydrogen and helium. Well,
turns out that it's in the last stages of a star at the very intense core of a star where
the pressures are greatest, where this process occurs. Stars are atom factories where nuclear
fusion smashes the nuclei of atoms together to make larger atoms. Now, during most of the lifetime
of a star, what happens is you have hydrogen, essentially the protons, slammed together
to make helium, and that takes up almost the entire life of the star. In the process,
incidentally, a small amount of mass is destroyed, that mass gets converted into energy via E equals
mc squared, and we see that energy as light. Near the very end of a star's life, however,
the fusion begins to expand out from the core out towards the outer layers of the star. At that
point, the star expands dramatically in size, becoming a red giant or a super giant. And finally,
after this stage, you essentially run out of hydrogen. You're done burning hydrogen,
and the helium then begins to fuse to make all elements larger than helium. Now, this process,
this life cycle of a star is actually entirely dependent upon the size of the star. For low
mass stars smaller than the sun, this process can take tens of billions of years. In other words,
there are huge numbers of stars that still haven't ever reached the end of their life cycle. There
are small stars that are still happily burning hydrogen into helium, and have been doing so for
13 billion years. These small stars eventually become red giants, and then planetary nebulae,
which are some of the beautiful structures that you see in the Hubble Space Telescope images,
and then will collapse at the end of their life into white or black dwarves. As that star is dying,
that small star, it goes through a process called stellar nucleus synthesis. That's the name of the
process where helium makes larger atoms through multiple collisions. This occurs in a runaway
process because as more and more helium combines to make larger atoms, the pressure becomes more
intense. Things squeeze together more tightly inside the core of the star, and you get a faster
runaway process where these collisions become more and more frequent until eventually you create
atoms up into the size of iron. This material gets released into space by the planetary nebula,
and also solar wind, material simply blown off the surface of the star. For high mass stars,
however, what we see is a much more dramatic process. So in other words, stars much larger than the sun
go through a faster cycle because the pressure is so much more intense. In fact, for very large stars,
they can die out in hundreds to thousands of years. They go through a phase where they expand to an
enormous red supergiant and then will explode in a dramatic event called the supernova that
lasts for only weeks. Afterwards, they'll collapse back down either into a neutron star or a black
hole. But this process is important because it makes all the elements larger than iron. It's a
process called explosive nucleus synthesis. And it eventually involves all these free neutrons flying
around within the core of the star that get added in to new atom, to atomic nuclei creating much
larger and larger atoms. This material gets dramatically blown out into space during that
supernova explosion. Now, our own sun is a fairly moderate sized star, and it's about halfway
through its life. Our sun's about middle age. It'll probably live for another four to five
billion years before it expands into a red giant, perhaps as far as Earth's orbit,
and essentially fries everything in the inner solar system, including us in the process.
But it won't ever become a supernova. It will then collapse into a white dwarf process.
But here's the important thing. During nucleus synthesis, when all of these atomic
nuclei are being smashed together, not all elements are made in the same proportions.
If you look around our planet, our primary materials are things like iron, magnesium,
oxygen, silicon. There's a lot more of that than titanium or boron or lanthium,
and there is a particular reason for this. If you take the two hydrogen atoms and you
fuse them together to make helium, and then you take the two heliums and fuse those together,
you get beryllium that has four protons and four neutrons. But those beryllium atoms are
going to fuse with other helium and other beryllium. So, a beryllium and a helium atom
makes carbon. Two berylliums smashed together make oxygen. Take carbon and oxygen nuclei,
you get silicon. Take three beryllium atoms, you make magnesium. So, the most abundant products
of nucleus synthesis, like silicon and oxygen and magnesium and iron, are all multiples of those
hydrogen and those helium and beryllium atoms smashed together dramatically in the final moments
of the universe. So, this is really a remarkable thing here. For us to have existed, for our
planet to be here, there must have been a previous star that went through its full life cycle and
exploded and died. We wouldn't be here if a whole other previous star hadn't destroyed,
sacrificed itself. Sacrifice is a huge theme in human culture. This is sacrificed on a grand scale.
A whole star had to die for the material of our planet to form. Now, it's very interesting if you
look at the four forces of our universe. I'm going to come back to this a little bit in the last class.
But if the ratios of gravity and electromagnetism and the strong and weak forces were slightly
different, we'd have ended up with no atoms or no molecules or no planets and stars. It's
quite remarkable. Our universe seems to be fairly finely tuned to create these elements
out of which we exist. For instance, if the ratio of the strong nuclear force to the electromagnetic
force was slightly smaller, the strong nuclear force couldn't ever overcome the electromagnetic
repulsion between protons. You couldn't make atomic nuclei, they wouldn't form. There would be no big
atoms, nothing other than a universe of hydrogen. On the other side, if the ratio were slightly
larger, the strong nuclear force would overcome the electromagnetic repulsion between electrons and
protons. It would pull all matter together. So fusion would happen easily, stars would burn out
immediately. You'd never have time to make a planet. If gravity were slightly stronger than it is,
then galaxies would collapse instantaneously into massive black holes. You'd never get stars spread
apart from each other. If gravity were slightly weaker than it is, then stars and galaxies could
never form. You'd just have a diffuse cloud of hydrogen and helium, the products of the Big Bang,
just drifting out into space separate. So it's quite remarkable that the four forces of our universe
actually need to be very close to the exact values that they have. This is known as the
anthropic principle or the Goldilocks effect. And people have puzzled for a long time as to why
this is. And I'll come back to this at the end of the course. The last thing I want to say
is that it's sometimes said that there's no free lunch in our universe. And actually, if you look
at how the Big Bang occurred, this isn't really true. There may have been one really, really big
free lunch, and that was the Big Bang itself. It's sort of a matter of semantics, but it's possible
that you could look at the Big Bang as having the positive energy of all this radiation that formed
equal to the negative gravitational potential energy that formed at that same instant,
and that they would both add up to zero. Let me explain. Suppose I take my coffee cup here,
and I lift it up, okay, and I begin to rise, raise it up over the table. I'm giving it energy,
I'm giving it gravitational potential energy. My muscles have to do work to supply this energy,
okay? Now, if I could lift it forever, all the way off the surface of the planet, out into space,
I'd give it infinite energy, okay? But that doesn't really make any sense, because at that point,
the cup would be so far from Earth, it wouldn't feel Earth's gravitational attraction. There'd
be no force of gravity from the planet there. So let's define it slightly differently. Let's say
that when my coffee cup is infinitely far away from the Earth, it has zero gravitational potential
energy. If it falls towards Earth, then it gets negative gravitational potential energy, okay?
That makes sense, because as it falls, it loses that potential energy. So it goes from zero,
and if you subtract from zero, you get negative numbers. Well, if we do this, and we start with
all of the mass of the universe together at one place, it would have had nearly infinite negative
gravitational potential energy, which when you add to the nearly infinite positive energy of all the
radiation would add to zero. So if you look at it this way, the Big Bang was really the ultimate
free lunch in the universe, getting everything that we have from nothing. And in the next lecture,
I'm going to talk about how that everything from nothing evolved into our planet Earth,
and then into rocks and minerals, and everything that we see around us.
