Mr.
Welcome. In this lecture, I'm going to talk about rheology, which is how rocks behave.
No, I'm not talking about whether or not they have an attitude. I mean, what happens to
them once you make them? Do they bend? Do they break? Do they flow? Because I've talked
about how igneous rocks and even sedimentary rocks and metamorphic rocks are made, but
I haven't talked about what happens to them once they come to Earth's surface. And really,
there are two things that can happen. They can erode and wash back to the ocean or they
can deform. And that's what I'm going to talk about here. Because remember, rocks are solid,
but they still flow. This is the foundation of mantle convection, which is therefore the
foundation of plate tectonics. And this topic is really important enough to have a whole
lecture dedicated to it because it's so fundamental to our science, but it's so hard to understand
because even though the processes that involve rock flowing and bending over hundreds or
thousands of kilometers in scale, even though that happens on huge scales, the processes
actually occur atom by atom at a sub-rock level. And so we really need to get down
to the atomic level to understand what's going on. Now, let me start with an observation
that sort of gives you some sense of the relevance of this. Canada's on the rise. Now, I'm not
talking about politics or anything. I mean, literally, the country of Canada is rising
up. Now, how do we know this? Remember, I talked about we can put out these GPS sensors
in order to determine the motions of the plates. Well, these networks of GPS sensors can actually
give you vertical motions as well. Now, again, these are very similar to the GPS units that
you might have handheld or in a car, but, you know, they rely upon the same satellite
network in order to give exact locations. But when you put them out together as a network,
they give incredibly accurate measurements, motions on the order of a millimeter or year
or less. And what this gives us is an indication of not only whether the Earth is moving about
horizontally, but if it's moving vertically and almost the entire continent of Canada
is rising up. Well, why is this? Well, only about 10,000 years ago, almost all of Canada
was covered with kilometers of ice, and that ice melted very quickly. And Canada is rebounding
up in the process. But what's happening underneath? Why is it taking so slow, such a long time?
Why is Canada still coming up? Because the esthenosphere rock that's underneath Canada
got pushed out of the way when that ice got piled on. And now that the ice is removed,
that esthenosphere rock is flowing back underneath. It's sort of like sitting up off of a waterbed
that's made of some really, really gooey substance. Imagine a waterbed made of molasses, okay?
You sit up from it, and it's going to take a while for that waterbed to rise back up.
And that's what Canada is doing. So this rock is behaving over the scale of years in a fluid
manner. Now, rocks undergo a couple different types of deformation when forces are applied
to them. And we have a name in geology for these deformations. We call them strains.
And they result from forces that are applied, and we call these stresses. So you take a
rock, and you stress it, and it strains. But that strain can happen in several different
ways. First of all, it can happen elastically, or it can happen plastically. We also call
that ductile deformation, or it can happen in a brittle manner. Now, I can demonstrate
elastic behavior with a super ball. When I bounce a super ball, it returns back to its
original location. Now, oh, this isn't a super ball. This is silly putty. Actually, this
is one of our best teaching tools in the classroom. Turns out silly putty is also really good
at demonstrating ductile behavior. So this is very interesting. If I take my silly putty
and I bounce it fast, it behaves in an elastic manner. But if I pull on it slowly, it stretches
out and behaves in a plastic manner. And what's more, if I take it and I pull it very
fast, it actually snaps and looks like it's been cut with a knife. So interestingly, the
same material can behave in an elastic, plastic, or brittle manner, depending in this case,
simply on the time involved with how that material was stressed. Now, elastic deformation
really is best demonstrated with a super ball. And what happens is, at an atomic level, all
of the different atoms, the bonds behave like small springs. And when I bounce that ball,
the springs get compressed and then they bounce right back. And so after the deformation occurs,
my ball is unchanged. And that's what happens with elastic deformation. Your material gets
deformed, but the internal strength of the material causes it to bounce right back to
its original position. This happens when material is very stiff or if the stresses are small
or if the time involved, the time in this case with the impact of the super ball, is
very, very short. Now, it turns out that this is very important for seismic waves because
as seismic waves travel through rock from an earthquake, that rock gets compressed for
just a fraction of a second and then the waves pass on. Now, this is a different type of force
than we've been used to. Previously, I've used force to talk about the force of gravity,
F equals MA, where A stands for the acceleration of gravity. But here I'm talking about force
is equal to some constant of a spring multiplied by the distance that that spring is compressed.
And that's exactly what happens for any sort of a scale, such as a bathroom scale, or
in this case, a small postal scale. Now, it's interesting, you can't actually get these
spring scales anymore. If you go to a store to get a scale that are all digital, I had
to get an antique one to demonstrate this. But what happens when you put something on
a scale? Well, there's a force of gravity that's pulling down on this. And as I put
it on the scale, the scale drops. And the further that spring is compressed, the greater
the force is until it drops to just the right level that the force of gravity is balanced
by the force of that spring. That's what happens when you step on a bathroom scale.
You have a certain force, that's your weight, and when you stand on that bathroom scale,
you compress the spring until the force of compression of that spring equals the force
of your weight. The moment you stand up, it bounces right back up and the scale returns
to zero. Now, this happens not only in the Earth for seismic waves, it actually happens
for whole plates as well. I give you the example of glaciers pushing down Canada. But if you
were to suddenly remove that glacial ice, some of Canada would bounce back immediately.
That would have been the elastic response. It turns out within the Earth, deformation
often is a combination of elastic and plastic and brittle, just the way this silly putty
had all three happening with the same material. Another great example is Hawaii. Take an ocean
plate that's made from a mid-ocean ridge and suddenly plop an island on it by putting
a lot of lava pouring out of a volcano. Well, it turns out, as I mentioned, the island of
Hawaii is about a hundred kilometers wide. But it turns out it creates an indentation
in the Pacific plate that's about a thousand kilometers wide because you suddenly put Hawaii
on top of this lithosphere and the whole Pacific plate has bent down a little bit from the
weight of Hawaii. If you were to suddenly remove that island, that plate would bounce
back up quite a bit. Now, things are never perfectly elastic within the Earth or any
object. You can see that with the fact that if I were to bounce this ball and keep bouncing
it over and over, it doesn't bounce forever. What happened? Why didn't this keep bouncing?
Where did the energy go? Well, in any situation where you have elastic behavior, you lose
your energy gradually to friction and heat. This ball is now a little bit warmer than
when I first started bouncing it. That initial potential energy from gravity that I gave
the ball when I lifted it up and dropped it has now all gone into the heat of the ball
and the table where it bounced. This is a very interesting property that we see as what's
called seismic attenuation and I'll talk about this later. The waves from an earthquake
don't keep reverberating around the Earth forever. They damp out eventually because
the rock isn't really elastic. It really involves some deformation as well. Now, the next type
of deformation is plastic deformation and this happens where material begins to deform
elastically but you reach some strength of the material and soon it is permanently
deformed. Let me pull back the copper wire that I used previously when I talked about
the bonds between metal objects. I talked about how this copper wire could be bent easily.
Now if I were to take this wire and bend it just a little bit, it'll bounce back a little
bit. It has a little bit of an elastic response but when I pass some level it gets permanently
bent and this is a form of plastic deformation. This happens within the Earth where either
materials are too weak or where the stresses are very large involved or in particular where
you have a lot of time and that happens in the Earth where we're working with tens of
millions and even billions of years. So rock that might behave in a very elastic manner
over the time scales of seismic waves traveling through them in seconds will flow and deform
just like this copper wire when you apply that same level of stress but over a scale
of thousands or millions to billions of years. And the third type of deformation that I talked
about is brittle deformation. This happens when you have deformation that happens either
too fast or the material is too stiff and in this case you don't give the rock time
to deform and flow and your stresses are too large for it to be able to respond elastically
and it will actually break. So in other words if I take this pencil I can bend it a little
bit and it will snap back. That's an elastic response and if I were to bend it over thousands
of years it would probably stay this way but if I bend it too far and too fast it snaps.
That snap is an earthquake and that's what happens within the ground when rock gets
stressed to too high a level it can't deform, it can't bounce back and it permanently breaks.
This happens within the earth primarily within the lithosphere because the lithosphere is
very stiff compared to the rock underneath it. There are large tectonic forces from plate
collisions either plates colliding and coming together or plates pulling apart and this
exceeds the strength of the rock and it will break. Now it turns out there are a lot of
different factors that will affect the way this rock deforms and I've touched upon a
couple of them but let me give you a small summary of them. They include temperature,
the pressure, the composition of the material, the grain size of the minerals and the amount
of water that it contains. Now temperature is a very obvious one and let me use one of
my favorite teaching props and that's chocolate. Remember that snap for that pencil. Well suppose
I take this chocolate bar here and I bend it. What's going to happen? It had a snap
involved. Why? Because I just pulled this chocolate bar out of the freezer. It's cold
and stiff and this is like our lithosphere within the earth. However, let me take another
chocolate bar. I'm going to take one that's actually been sitting under the light for
a while and if I take this chocolate bar and I hold it, what's happening to this chocolate
bar over time? This is what happens to layers of rock within the earth when they are bent
over very long time scales but this is what happens within the asthenosphere on a regular
basis. The asthenosphere is hot. It's more like this warm, soft chocolate bar. The rock
is close to its melting point and so the rock in the asthenosphere just flows easily. It
doesn't snap no matter how hard that you may stress that material. Now the temperature is
very important obviously but it turns out that pressure is an equally important factor
in determining whether the rock will break or not. We see this in one very obvious observation.
If you look at where earthquakes occur within the earth, they occur shallowly. They don't
occur deep within the earth. The only place where you get deep earthquakes occurring is
actually where the ocean sea floor is sinking deep down into the earth and in fact it's
only because you have cold, stiff ocean sea floor down deep into the mantle that you get
earthquakes there. Anywhere else within the earth's mantle, you just don't get earthquakes
generally deeper than about 50 kilometers. Why does this happen? Well, it happens because
of the internal friction of rock and you can demonstrate this yourself with your hands.
Take your two hands and put them against each other and put them together very gently and
then move one hand up. It's going to slide without any trouble. Now take your two hands
and push them together really hard. Now try to move your hand up. It's not so easy. Why
is that? You've increased the friction across the two sides of in this case your earthquake
fault. You've made it very hard and you have to build up the stress very high in order
to get in this case your rock to break and slip. So what happens is deep within the earth
the rock is squeezed and compressed together so tightly it can't break. The internal friction
is too great. Now it also turns out that composition is very important and so whether you're talking
about rock as your granite or rock as your salt for example makes a tremendous difference.
Let me give you an example. I talked previously about in certain environments you may get
layers of salt deposited and this would happen in an ocean basin where you might have water
evaporate and you'd develop a layer of salt. This happened in the Gulf of Mexico many times
in the past and there are actually many layers of salt there that are now covered with layers
of sand that's come out the Mississippi River. Well which is heavier sand or salt? Sand obviously
is, quartz is heavier than salt. So you take this layer of salt and you put quartz sand
on top of it and eventually the salt is going to want to rise up and because the salt flows
so easily it actually forms these bubbles, these domes of salt that rise right up through
the other sedimentary layers. Turns out this is very important because the oil companies
often find oil around the edges of these salt domes because the layers of rock underneath
lap right onto the salt domes and petroleum ponds right around the edges of these contacts.
Now if you've had a rock like granite however granite is too hard and stiff it's not going
to flow in the same manner that salt does. Another factor that turns out to be surprisingly
important is actually the size of the grains of the rock. It turns out that and we'll see
later on when deformation occurs it often occurs at atom at a time and the atoms can
actually move easily along grain boundaries. So the more grain boundaries there are in
other words the smaller the mineral grains within the rock the easier time the atoms
have for moving within that rock. Another way to think of this would be suppose you
have a bucket of sand and a bucket of boulders which is going to flow more easily. Well this
sand obviously is. The smaller the grains are the more it can behave like a liquid as
it flows. So rocks like granite that have very large grain size tend to have a very hard
time flowing whereas a similar composition like a rhyolite down within the earth that
had smaller grains would actually have an easier time flowing. Another factor that's
tremendously important in determining how easily the rock flows is how much water is
within it. And remarkably it doesn't take a lot of water even a tiny amount will allow
that rock to flow more easily. The rock the water just makes the rock softer largely by
separating those silica tetrahedra that I talked about previously. The silica tetrahedra
silicon and oxygen pyramids are very strongly bonded with these strong covalent bonds but
if you isolate them and separate them apart with water molecules then it's sort of like
having sand flowing out of a bucket. The sand grains themselves are really tough but if
they're weakly connected they're just going to flow as well. Water also allows individual
atoms to move through the rock more easily and we'll talk about this later in terms of
how rocks deform. Now I talked about how all of this deformation occurs at an atomic level
and this is really demonstrated with what happens deep within the earth through a process
of creep. If you have solid rock deep within the earth and you squeeze it and you compress
it and you share it and you bend it and twist it that rock will flow over time. But the
rock isn't just some continuous material the way we sort of think of silly putty as being.
That rock is made of separate atoms at atomic level so is the silly putty but it's maybe
easier to think of in terms of with rock. And that process of deformation we call creep
and creep happens in two different ways. It happens through diffusion and it happens
through dislocation. Let me explain. Suppose I took a rock and I squeezed down on it very
very hard on the top. Well I've created a region of high pressure at the top of the rock
but low pressure on the sides. Given enough time my atoms will actually leave the top
and bottom of the rock will flow through the rock and go towards the sides. In other words
this rock will flatten out over time but it can happen with diffusion by having atoms
one at a time leave those areas of high pressure and actually flow through the rock towards
areas of low pressure. Now this is totally different from the process of dislocation
creep. In dislocation creep you have this lattice structure of your minerals and you
break the bonds at one from one moment to the next and you allow the whole rock to sort
of slide internally and so the deformation occurs with the same result but instead of
moving individual atoms I sort of slide the whole material internally. Let me give you
an example using checkers. I'm going to use the checkers as if they were a set of atoms
and I'm going to actually move them and show you how I can have my material deforming from
one region to another through this process of both dislocation creep and diffusion creep.
This is a mineral and each of these checkers represents an atom and what I'm going to do
is I'm going to squeeze this atom from the top and the bottom and I'm going to change
its shape over time but I'm going to do it in both ways using both diffusion and dislocation.
Now if I squeeze this rock tightly the top and the bottom atoms here are going to be
under pressure and they're going to leave those locations but they're going to do it
one atom at a time so as I continue to squeeze these atoms are going to leave the high pressure
regions and they're going to go to the low pressure regions one atom at a time and they
will continue to flow until my rock now has an entirely different shape.
My rock is now flattened out and the atoms moved by actually traveling diffusion right
through the structure of my mineral. Now again remember that's not too hard because all the
dimensions of rock and people and everything is mostly empty space the atoms are actually
very large distances apart held apart by these electromagnetic forces so it's actually not
too hard for the atoms to diffuse in between them and go to other locations. Now let me show
you the other example though the other example where I have dislocation well in this case
I'm not going to move my atoms individually I'm going to move them as a block actually
I'll need to use a little bit of diffusion to get everything to end up right but imagine
I take this whole block of atoms here and I actually slide them down and move them as
along a fault a microscopic fault within my mineral. Now I need to have a few atoms
diffuse here to get my rock to look the same but look what happened here I ended up with
the same result but instead of moving atoms one at a time I actually had them slide as
a block breaking bonds one at a time and that's dislocation creep. It turns out that rock
within the earth happens in both ways it depends entirely on the geologic conditions the temperature
the pressure and the composition of the material whether it happens through diffusion
or dislocation. Now I already talked about the process of metamorphism and it turns out that
metamorphism and this process of creep is really one in the same it occurs simultaneously.
Metamorphism specifically refers to the creation of a new rock out of a former rock but because
what happens is when these atoms flow away from a high pressure region they'll often
form a whole new mineral they don't necessarily have to rearrange themselves according to the
same mineral especially if that mineral is no longer stable at these new temperatures
and pressures so once these atoms begin to diffuse through the mineral structure they
often may move to a location and form an entirely new mineral and that's the process of
metamorphism. Now it turns out that for the surface of the earth where we have these sedimentary
layers that form often alternating sandstone limestone and shale when they bend they form
large folding of layers and this is very important for geology for a number of reasons. Now we
can see this very well in something like a stack of paper. Suppose this stack of paper were to
represent sedimentary layers of rock at earth's surface alternate layers of sandstone and shale
and limestone and then I were to squeeze this rock and what usually causes folding at earth's
surface is the collision between plates so let's say this is trapped between two plates that are
now squeezing this area and pushing it together well that rock has to go somewhere and if I do it
slowly enough then it will bend if I do it too fast it's going to snap that rock will break
and form earthquakes and faults but if I do it slowly which is what happens for the earth these
plates are moving again you know the rate that your hair grows centimeters a year I form folds
now a fold that sticks up like this we call an anticline and this turns out later on we'll see
to be very important for oil because when petroleum forms underground it rises up and will
actually be trapped underneath resistant layers of rock that are folded in this direction. Now the
fold can also happen the opposite direction and we call that a synclime. Now what happens usually
is you actually get multiple layers forming over and over alternating anticlines and
synclines as that rock is compressed and you can actually have tremendous amount of shortening
of these layers by factors of more than five or so where you may start out with a certain length
of rock and it ends up much smaller than that after it's all been folded out. Now another way to
demonstrate this is actually using clay and the reason that clay is good is that I can also use a
knife to pretend to be erosion so in other words let's say I have a situation where these are my
sedimentary layers and I begin to bend them over time and so I make an anticline out of this
point. Well at some point later in time I may take this same anticline and I may tectonically
bend it down in this direction where it might be plunging down by the way the line that runs
right down the middle of the fold we call the axis and the amount that it's dipping and we
measure that axis relative to north in degrees we call that the strike and the amount that that
axis was bent downward from horizontal we call that the dip. Well suppose that this fold gets bent
downward over time and then after some amount of time erosion comes and actually removes away
part of that rock. Well what do you get at the surface? What you get is a set of V shapes and in fact
if you fly over many parts of the country you'll often see these V shaped folds of rock at the
surface. They're not because the rock is vertical and been folded in that same direction it's usually
because the rock is only gently folded but slightly dipping and then when you erosion cuts away at the
surface of it what you get is a set of these folds that result. In fact I often fly from St.
Louis to Washington DC and I fly across the Appalachian Mountains and many places like West
Virginia and Pennsylvania you'll see these zigzagging V's that are going back and forth and these are
hard to see from the ground but they're very evident from the air and what's happened is this is the
remnants of the folding from the Appalachian Mountains the collision with Africa that created this
large set of folding and the rock is tilted in places. These folds are plunging and erosion has
cut them away to form this large set of V's. Now folding does all sorts of other things as well.
We can have situations where you can form a dome, you can actually have stresses that push up from
underneath and then you create a small mountain but over time if erosion cuts that away then and continues
to wear away at that rock what will be exposed at time is a strange situation where you actually have
circular patterns of rock at the surface. What happened when you have these? Well you actually have older
rock exposed in the middle and that's because you had a dome that got pushed up with something.
Either it might have been a hotspot type material or an artifact of the folding and erosion has
leveled that off creating sometimes strange bullseye looking layers of rock and of course this folding
is limited only by our creativity because what you actually see often in the cores of mountains is just
tremendous deformation. Whole mountain ranges are totally sometimes overturned. If you were to look for
instance at the Alps here you have cases where the rock is so deformed the folds are actually turned over
on top of each themselves so that the layers of rock defy the law of superposition. You actually go to older
rocks as you go up through the rock sequence because the folds have been turned right upside down.
And the point I want to make with all of this is we have tremendous deformation that affects our surface
not only places like Canada where we have whole continents rising up but places like the Appalachians
where collisions of continents have caused the rock to be tremendously distorted and deformed.
But it's all happened a single atom at a time so these processes that have appearances on the scales of
thousands of kilometers are occurring at the atomic level.
