Welcome.
In this lecture, I'm going to talk about subduction zones.
Now, interestingly, if you go to the San Francisco area, like I talked about in the last lecture,
you can see lots of evidence of transform faults.
The San Andreas, the Hayward, the Calaveras faults.
However, you can also see evidence that the geologic action here wasn't always like this.
In fact, not too long ago, geologically speaking, all of California was a subduction zone.
And you can see evidence of this if you take a drive around the area.
For instance, go up Mount Tamalpias, just north of the Golden Gate Bridge.
And what you see is you get near the top is a whole large amount of green rock.
This rock, Serpentonite, is rock that used to be part of the ocean sea floor.
It got scraped off of the sinking pherilon plate when that large piece of the Pacific Ocean sea floor
was sinking down beneath North America.
Now, I already talked about the process of making ocean sea floor at mid-ocean ridges.
These are factories where the ocean sea floor is made.
But because Earth isn't expanding in size, the same amount of sea floor that's made every year
at ridges has to be destroyed at subduction zones.
And that turns out to be about three cubic kilometers of rock every year.
Now, I've talked quite a bit about subduction zones already.
They are the most tectonically active places on Earth.
It's where most of the volcanoes and large earthquakes that we see,
the mountain-building processes that are active today, this is where they're occurring.
Subduction zones, I've also mentioned, because of the volcanism, create new land.
And they create the air of our atmosphere and the water of our oceans
through the continual process of recycling of gases and water through the whole subduction zone region.
And interestingly, as I'll talk about later on in the course in lecture 42,
subduction zones also end up being factories for concentrating mineral and metal or natural resources.
In other words, we'd have a heck of a time trying to build anything like a building or a city,
anything that involves metal or minerals and large concentrations.
For instance, if it weren't for the existence of subduction zones,
and I can demonstrate this with a very simple question,
where have the gold rushes been in America?
St. Louis, Chicago?
No, they've been in California and the Yukon, both of these former subduction zones.
And we'll talk quite a bit more later on about how subduction zones have been absolutely vital
to our ability to create modern society.
However, we've only seen a half of what goes on.
In other words, we've talked about the plates moving apart
and we've shown where the plates go down into the mantle at oceanic trenches.
But it turns out that there's a fascinating story of what happens to that subducted ocean lithosphere
after it sinks down into an ocean trench, after it subducts and leaves the surface.
And I'll talk about that a little bit more as well.
Now, let me recap.
A subduction zone is a collisional boundary where at least one of the plates contains oceanic lithosphere.
That ocean lithosphere gets dense and heavy over time, becomes unstable,
heavier than the rock underneath it, and it sinks down into the mantle.
Now, subduction zones have two flavors.
They can either be a collision between an ocean and a continent,
or collision between two ocean plates.
In both cases, it's the water that's brought down into the mantle.
The water that exists both in the ocean sediment says actually soaked into the ocean crust
and actually was part of that basaltic magma when it first initially formed.
That water goes down into the mantle, is released as the rock heats up,
and it's that water that creates the magma that causes the chains of volcanoes
that I talked about back in lecture 10.
And this is a vital part of subduction zones because the whole subduction zone
is usually dotted with chains of volcanoes.
They are stratovolcanoes, composite cone volcanoes,
made from a complex combination of ash and lava,
which we already talked about in the process of volcanism.
Now, it's interesting if you look at a map, these chains of volcanoes often form curved arcs.
In fact, we call them volcanic arcs.
When you have a set of islands, they call it an island arc, island arc volcanism.
Well, the reason is not very complicated.
It's simply because Earth's surface is curved.
If you have a stiff slab of ocean lithosphere that then sinks down,
when it bends, it creates a curved arc.
One way you could demonstrate this is by taking a table tennis ball
and making an indentation in it.
And you can see as you pushed that piece of the surface down, it would create a curve.
Another way is simply to take a sphere and cut into it.
In fact, let me demonstrate that with an orange and a knife.
If I take my orange as the Earth and I take my knife as subducting ocean lithosphere,
if I take that slab and I cut it in at an angle, notice that as it cuts in, what I get is a curve.
In other words, what I have is a situation where I have a straight piece of ocean lithosphere
that is cutting down into my Earth and making a curved volcanic arc.
Now, as I mentioned, that volcanic arc can take two forms
because you have two types of volcanoes.
You can have two types of subduction zones.
You can have an ocean subducting beneath another ocean.
There you have island arc volcanoes.
And in the case where you have an ocean subducting beneath a continent,
you can get a continental volcanic arc.
In both cases, they're curved.
Now, with the ocean ocean subduction, you have a very unusual situation
because you have two slabs, two pieces of oceanic lithosphere,
and either one of them could subduct.
But it's usually the case that the older ocean lithosphere is the one that sinks
because, after all, it's colder, it's denser, it has sunk lower down onto the sea floor
as it's moved away from the mid-ocean ridge.
And when it comes in contact with the other ocean plate, it's the one that's going to go down.
Now, we have lots of examples of this if you look around the globe.
The western edge of the Aleutian Islands, all on the western part of Alaska,
is actually a case where you have the Pacific plates sinking beneath a region of Pacific,
of oceanic crust.
In Indonesia, Sumatra, Java, Bali, all these regions are cases of ocean-ocean subduction
where the Indian plate is subducting beneath part of the plates just to the north of it.
The Mariana Trench is a good case of ocean-ocean subduction,
and here you have the Pacific plate sinking beneath the Philippine plate.
And even just south of America, the Antilles arc exists where part of the north Atlantic ocean
is sinking beneath the Caribbean, again creating an arc of volcanoes.
Now, it's interesting for relatively new subduction zones like the Antilles,
where there hasn't been a lot of volcanic activity,
you end up with separate volcanic islands, distinct islands dotting up above the ocean sea level.
However, for very mature subduction zones where the subduction has occurred for a long time,
enormous amounts of volcanic rock has come to the surface,
and these individual volcanoes have now all merged together into large islands.
So Java and Sumatra and the Philippines all began as single individual volcanic islands,
but are now simply large masses of volcanoes all connected together, forming very large islands.
Now, in the case of an ocean and a continent, of course, it's the ocean that always subducts.
Again, the continental rock is too light and buoyant to ever be able to sink,
so in any contact between a continental part of a plate and an oceanic plate,
it's always the ocean that subducts.
And we have examples all around the globe, most notably around the Pacific,
the American Pacific Northwest, the West Coast of Mexico, Central America, South America,
and then going all the way around the Aleutians, and Japan, and Philippines, and Tonga.
This ring of fire exists because the Pacific Ocean, as I mentioned previously, is closing up.
The continents are moving towards each other, and the oceanic crust of the Pacific Ocean
is sinking down beneath continent all the way around the rim of the Pacific Ocean.
Now, another thing I already talked about was that when you have volcanoes over subduction zones,
they have the capacity to be very big and explosive.
And I still have some very good stories to tell about this later on in the course,
but it's an important thing to remember that subduction zones are not only geologically important,
they are tremendously hazardous, and people who live all the way around the rim of fire,
the ring of fire, the rim of the Pacific, constantly live under the threat of these large volcanoes.
Now, it's important also to realize that the Earth is so dynamic,
its systems are always changing, that it doesn't make a lot of sense to describe a subduction zone
as possibly an ocean-ocean subduction zone or an ocean-continent subduction zone,
because actually the two change back and forth between each other.
They're actually quite related.
For instance, imagine a situation where you have one piece of oceanic plate subducting beneath another,
and that subduction is occurring and you're creating an oceanic island arc of volcanism,
and then all of a sudden a small piece of continent gets dragged into the trench.
At that point, it can no longer subduct.
That continent, which is too buoyant to sink, has clogged up the subduction zone.
So what happens?
Well, if the region is still under compression, the subduction, which had been going this way,
will stop, and then subduction of the ocean under the continental fragment will begin the other way.
In other words, compression will still occur, the ocean will still close up,
but subduction will switch direction, and you'll go from having ocean-ocean subduction now to ocean-continent subduction.
And it turns out this is very important in the whole process by which oceans go through that life cycle,
where they end up closing up before opening up again,
because indeed if they stopped at that point, the ocean would never get any smaller.
Now, if you look at the structure of a subduction zone that results
where that ocean plate is coming beneath either continent or ocean,
you see often a tremendous complexity and diversity of geology.
It turns out that the boundaries at subduction zones, the plate boundaries, are tremendously wide and very diffuse.
I mentioned the idea of a diffuse plate boundary early on in the course.
This is where the plate boundary is not a simple line on a map,
but actually involves deformation of the crust on a broader scale.
One of the classic examples of this would be the Andes.
If you go to the Andes, you have what seems to be a fairly simple subduction zone.
You have the South American continent, and you have the Nazca plate, part of the Pacific Ocean, sinking down beneath it.
But it turns out that the Nazca plate is actually subducting quite shallowly,
and in the process it's causing the entire Andes, the whole Andes mountain range, to be compressed
over a range of about a thousand kilometers.
So the plate boundary there is not just the ocean trench,
it's a thousand kilometer wide swath of the Andes,
because that's the region that's being compressed with the rock being pushed up
as that plate slides underneath and North America slides over.
Another classic example is, of course, the Himalayas, where India is crashing into China.
This collision has created a tremendously wide range of mountains.
I've talked about mountains sometimes being narrow chains, linear chains of mountains.
In the case of the Himalayas, you have an incredibly wide range of mountains due to this complex collision zone.
In fact, it turns out about 15% of Earth's whole surface is actually plate boundary.
Most of this occurs at subduction zones,
and so you could see subduction zones are not always the nice, simple line that you would see in a textbook or in a simple description.
Now, subduction zones are also notable because they have not only the most destructive earthquakes,
but the largest numbers of earthquakes and the greatest diversity in styles and types of earthquakes.
Some of them occur before the ocean plate even gets into the subduction zone.
Think about this. You have a stiff sheet of rock that's about 60 miles thick and you start to bend it.
Well, if you bend a sheet of rock 60 miles thick, it's going to start to crack and break,
and so there are earthquakes that happen out oceanward of the subduction zone as that plate is just beginning to crack.
Then you bring that ocean plate down into the subduction zone, but it doesn't stay curled.
It straightens back out again, and so you get more earthquakes when the plate unbends and straightens out.
On the overlying plate that's riding on top of the plate that's subducting, you get either compression from the collision
or sometimes you get stretching due to the slab suction force.
So you get earthquakes within the overlying plate due to the various forces associated with that plate sinking down beneath the edge.
You also get a very perplexing set of deep earthquakes that occur way down deep in the earth.
And again, remember I talked about how these deep earthquakes shouldn't happen.
Remember the example that I gave of my hands, if you have rock that's squeezed tightly, it's very hard to slip it.
Well, these deep earthquakes occur in subduction zones down to depths of about 700 kilometers.
It's the only place on earth where we get earthquakes occurring deep.
Now, partly this is going to be possible because the core, the interior parts of these ocean slabs stay really cold and stiff for a long time.
Remember, it takes heat, a tremendous amount of time to conduct slowly through rock.
You know, that's why you use something like a coffee cup in order to, you know, the ceramic mug to hold a hot liquid like coffee.
You want to have that heat conducting across as slowly as possible.
Well, when that slab extends deep down into the earth, it remains cold and stiff for an enormous amount of time.
It's like taking a really cold slab of chocolate and putting it into warm oatmeal.
It's going to stay stiff for a while.
So what is it that causes the deep earthquakes?
Well, one possibility is that there's a mineral phase change that occurs within the rock in a sudden catastrophic manner.
Remember, when I talked about minerals, I said they changed their phase as you went down into the earth.
They rearranged into new minerals.
Well, it could be that sometimes these mineral phase changes occur catastrophically, and these could be what give rise to the earthquakes.
But this is still a region of tremendous debate.
Now, the largest earthquakes, the giant earthquakes, occur on the frictional boundaries between the two plates.
And these earthquakes are enormous because they have very large fault slip areas.
Remember, in the last lecture, I talked about how the size of an earthquake is related to the area of the fault.
I said, with a transform fault, even if it's long, it's not very deep.
And so it's like a thin ribbon, like the San Andreas.
Well, with a subduction zone, you have not only a wide fault zone, but it can extend a great distance down into the subduction zone.
You can get an enormous large area.
And all of the big earthquakes we've ever recorded have been subduction zone earthquakes.
The magnitude 9.5 that occurred beneath Chile in 1960.
The magnitude 9.4 that occurred beneath Alaska in 1964.
And the magnitude 9.3 that devastated the Indian Ocean from the Sumatra earthquake in 2004.
And it's also interesting that in each of these cases, these huge earthquakes occurred because the slab in these cases was dipping quite shallowly.
In other words, the angle at which the slab sinks into the earth can actually vary.
Sometimes it can turn and head straight down like it does in the case of the Mariana.
Well, in the case of places like South America for the 1960 Chile earthquake, the slab extends very shallowly.
So there's a very broad area of contact between the oceanic plate and the continental plate.
Now, one of the most hard hit regions by earthquakes has traditionally been Japan.
And this is made more complicated by the fact that Japan actually exists at the intersection of four separate plates.
Remember I said early on that the North American plate actually includes the North Island of Japan.
Well, you also have flanking on either side, the Pacific plate, the Eurasian plate, and then at the bottom, the Philippine plate.
All four of these plates are colliding with each other in a quite complex set of convergences and the earthquakes can be devastating.
In 1995 and January, the Kobe earthquake destroyed the world's third largest port, did a few hundred billion dollars worth of damage.
And one of the most devastating earthquakes ever in terms of loss of human life happened in 1923, the Kanto earthquake, which destroyed Yokohama and much of Tokyo.
The tragedy here was that the fire ruptured gas lines and about 140,000 people died in an enormous firestorm that consumed Tokyo.
In fact, there's a really tragic story of two seismologists at the time.
There was an elder seismologist by the name of Omori who had dismissed the warnings of a younger seismologist named Ima Mora,
who decades earlier had predicted that a large earthquake could possibly one day create terrible fires and kill more than 100,000 people, which it did.
Now, Omori had criticized the younger seismologists for alarming the public.
And because the Japanese scientific system was so hierarchical, Ima Mora's warnings never got heard.
Well, the story goes that Omori was at a meeting in a geophysics meeting in Riverside, Australia, where there's a seismometer.
And he was down in the seismic vault examining the seismometer when large waves suddenly began to arrive.
And he looked at the seismograms and he computed the distance and the direction and he realized that indeed these waves came from the area of Japan.
It turned out to be a huge blow to Omori, not only professionally, but personally.
He was so devastated that he got sick on his return to Japan and actually died soon after.
It's hard for me to imagine how he as the leading seismologist of Japan at the time must have felt making such a catastrophic failure that had such horrible consequences.
But it's a reminder for me that scientists don't work in a vacuum.
Our work often has enormous and immense consequences and is very intimately tied in with the whole course of human civilization.
Now, from a geological perspective, subduction is absolutely vital for playing a key role in the rock cycle.
And this happens not only through the rock that gets brought into the subduction zone, but because of the rock that doesn't make it into the subduction zone.
At the front edge of subduction zones, you often find what are called accretionary wedges.
And these are triangular shaped millages of smashed sediments that have been scraped off of the subducting plate.
The overlying continent sort of acts like a bulldozer.
And as the subducting sea floor goes down, those sediments are scraped off and piled up.
Now, it turns out that actually most of the ocean sediment that piles up on the sea floor doesn't go down into the subduction zone.
It becomes reattached to the edges of continents, causing the continents to grow in size.
So the process of having a subduction zone not only adds rock through volcanism, it adds rock by taking former continental rock that's been eroded, draped on the ocean sea floor,
and it takes that rock and sticks it back onto the edge of a continent.
So what it's done is essentially as an unusual part of the rock cycle, it's taken rock off the top of the continents and stuck it onto the sides
through the process of erosion, deposition, sedimentation, and then scraping off at these accretionary wedges.
And at the top of this lecture, I talked about this green serpentinite rock that you find just north of San Francisco on Mount Tammelpius.
Well, that rock is part of an accretionary wedge.
It used to be ocean sea floor sediment, but it got scraped off and stuck onto western North America to form the western part of California during that period of subduction back in the past.
Now, for ocean-ocean subduction, if there's a large amount of sediment, that accretionary wedge actually can make a new island.
In fact, that's what Barbados is.
There's so much sediment that's washed off of the South America through the Amazon and Orinoco rivers,
and all that enormous amount of sediment coming out of the Brazilian tropical rainforest gets dumped on the Atlantic Ocean sea floor,
which then gets carried into the subduction zone beneath the Caribbean and scraped off.
And Barbados, as an island, is not a volcano like most ocean islands are, but it's actually an island of sediment scraped off.
Now, ocean plates, it turns out, have a tremendously interesting history once they subduct.
I've talked previously about how olivine and peroxine, the minerals that make up the upper mantle, convert to perovskite as you go deep down into the earth as they go down into the lower mantle.
Well, it turns out that this conversion of olivine and perovskite to the denser, heavier perovskite is a real barrier to subduction.
It doesn't prevent it, but it makes the passage of the subducted ocean lithosphere into the lower mantle quite difficult.
And here's the ironic thing.
It turns out that the cold slab has to heat up before it can subduct into the lower mantle.
OK, this sounds totally backwards, right?
Because after all, the ocean slab is sinking because it's cold and heavy.
However, if it's cold, it is not able to make the chemical transition to perovskite.
Chemical reactions are often enhanced and allowed to occur at a faster rate by increased temperatures.
And that phase change is actually enhanced by a transition to warmer temperatures.
So ironically, the slab is cold, but because the ocean seafloor is so cold, it can't convert into perovskite.
And it often sits and lies horizontally, draped at the boundary between the upper and lower mantles, about 660 kilometers down.
After a while, however, that slab begins to warm.
And even though the warming makes it want to sink a little bit less, because it becomes a little bit buoyant,
that allows the chemical phase change to perovskite to occur.
And at that point, the ocean slab, which is now draped at this boundary between the upper and lower mantles,
is both cold and the heavier perovskite mineral.
And it turns the corner and plunges down dramatically.
We call these events mantle avalanches.
And it's where the former ocean seafloor is now able to plunge down across the lower mantle and extend all the way down to the top of the core.
Another very interesting observation and an interesting complexity is that the slabs are usually quite stiff,
but they tend to bend in two locations in the upper mantle, not only at 700 kilometers, 660 to 700 kilometers,
but they also sometimes bend at 400 kilometers.
Well, it turns out these are the two major locations of phase transitions.
And when the mineral changes from one phase to another, it nucleates a whole set of small mineral grains that actually make the whole slab weak.
And so right at 400 and 660 kilometers, you have this transition from one mineral to another.
And in that process of changing minerals, the slab becomes very weak and is able to bend.
When the mineral changes all done, you have large crystals again of a new mineral and the slab becomes harder and stiffer.
Now, as I talked previously when I showed the tomographic image beneath North America,
the ocean slabs like the former Pharrellon plate can pile up down at the base of the mantle.
And here it turns out is a tremendously bizarre region called the core mantle boundary region.
Horizontally, it's almost as variable as the lithosphere.
There are temperature variations of more than a thousand degrees as you move about at this region.
There are anti-continents that are sort of the analogs of surface continents.
These are regions of chemically distinct material.
Just like continents, they get dragged about horizontally at the core mantle boundary.
Only unlike our continents, which tend to be a lighter, more buoyant, more silica-type rock,
here we have piles of hot, dense rock that's probably very metal and iron-rich.
And in fact, they provide the basis for these two large mega-plumes that exist beneath Africa and the Pacific,
which I'm going to talk about in a couple lectures.
You also probably have upside-down mountains, places where the bottom of the mantle is actually sticking down into the rock,
into the liquid iron of the outer core, sometimes getting eroded away and that rock rising to the top of the liquid iron outer core
and getting deposited in upside-down ocean basins, reforming rock of the mantle again.
There also seem to be very active chemical reactions between the liquid iron and the rock of the mantle.
And this makes the core mantle boundary region a tremendously bizarre and unusual place on Earth.
And of course, over time, that ocean slab rock eventually warms from the heat of the core,
becomes unstable and buoyant and rises back up towards the surface.
So, I hope I've given you a sense of the tremendous complexity and geological importance of subduction zones.
There's really nothing like it at all in the solar system.
A situation where you have two-thirds of a planet's rocky surface disappearing and getting replaced every 200 million years.
And all of this is going on beneath our feet constantly.
Who knew?
I mean, subduction zones are just a tremendously unique occurrence for a planet.
They are regions where the whole surface gets destroyed, but also the air and land and atmosphere get continuously renewed.
Now, subduction zones are also only half the story for collisional plate boundaries.
In the next lecture, I'm going to talk about what happens when you have a continent and a continent colliding and making new mountains.
