Welcome. In this lecture, I'm going to talk about intraplate volcanoes. Now, intraplate
volcanoes are getting their own lecture for two reasons. First of all, they're a really
dramatic part of geology. Some of the most explosive volcanoes that have ever happened
on the surface of the earth happen in the middle of plates and not at plate boundaries.
But even more importantly, hotspots and intraplate volcanoes represent a real enigma for geologists.
They are a whole aspect of our science that doesn't fit neatly into our whole story of
plate tectonics. The source for hotspot volcanoes we know comes from down deep within the earth,
but it's not related to the whole convection cell, the whole mental convection process that's driving
plate tectonics. Now, plate tectonics has been wonderful for explaining volcanoes at mid-ocean
ridges and at subduction zones, but it doesn't address volcanoes like Yellowstone that happen
in the middle of plates. Now, earth surface is covered with volcanoes, not at plate boundaries.
And for years, so many of these intraplate volcanoes were just lumped together under the
category of hotspots, hotspot volcanoes. And it was initially assumed that all of these
existed because the rock was unusually hot there and sort of like a lava lamp. Turns
out that recent work has found that there are many different ways of making an intraplate
volcano. And at the moment, there's actually a huge debate within our community as to what
causes all these volcanoes that don't come up at plate boundaries. For instance, remember
on the ocean sea floor, I talked about the many sea mounts that cover the Pacific ocean
floor. Well, it turns out many of these turn out to have been created at the ridge. So
those actually do fit into the whole plate tectonics process. It's just an added complexity
to the plate tectonic theory that we didn't understand initially. But there are lots of
sea mounts and islands in the Pacific that don't seem to have been caused at the mid
ocean ridge and seem to have ages that suggest they actually erupted on the sea floor long
after the time the sea floor was created at the mid ocean ridge. So how did they get there?
Well, if you go back to the early days of the discovery of plate tectonics, many scientists
were simultaneously looking at the phenomenon of hotspots. The J. Tuzo Wilson was one of
the early geophysicists who in the 60s looked at Hawaii and said, this must be some deep
plume of rock coming up from the mantle that's anchored within the mantle with the plates
moving across at the top. And people jumped on to this model. And before long, there were
catalogs of up to 400 different hotspots, one mantle hotspot named for each interplate
volcano. Well, in the recent decade or so, there's been a real backlash to that. People
looking at that model and saying, that doesn't make sense. We don't see evidence for all
of these hundreds of mantle plumes of rock coming up through the earth. So there must
be something else going on. And in fact, the whole mantle plume model began to be dismissed
somewhat. However, in the recent years, there's been a swing back towards the hotspot model
as some excellent seismic tomography has revealed that there really are genuine mantle plumes,
sort of columns of hot rock that are rising up from the bottom of the mantle, and that
these may be the root of many of the hotspot volcanoes, perhaps a dozen or so, not 400,
but at least they really do exist. Well, that means you've got hundreds of interplate
volcanoes that still need explanations. And that's part of the debate. For all of these
interplate volcanoes, how did they get there? Well, of course, this is all part of the bigger
question of just how our earth works. How does the mantle cycle material from the surface
to the bottom of the mantle and back up again? Well, we've looked at these questions before,
and it's true the sinking slabs of oceanic lithosphere really dominate the whole forces
— remember the force of slab pull — the forces that drive the plates of mantle convection.
So we're pretty confident that these sinking ocean slabs dominate the down-going of material.
But what dominates the upward flow? And that's what we're still struggling with. Is it plumes,
or is it some broader flow of material? We have a real problem, because in deep earth
geology we rely so much upon seismic imaging, seismic tomography, to see the features inside
our earth. Well, it turns out that seismic waves have a real hard time seeing plumes,
seeing anything where the seismic waves travel slowly, because it turns out that the waves
just travel right around it. In other words, if I have a column of hot rock here and I
have seismic waves that pass through it, they just sort of wrap around and the energy just
diffracts right around the plume, and the waves are hardly affected by it. So it turns
out our best tool for solving this problem doesn't help out so well here. Well, how
else can we attack the problem? We can figure out, theoretically, what should be the source
of our plumes. Remember I talked about how heat is leaving earth at 44.2 trillion watts,
44.2 terawatts. And based on the cosmic abundances in our solar system, the compositions of meteorites
and of the sun, we figure that about half of that heat is coming from the radioactive
decay of elements like uranium, thorium, and potassium. But we also know that the decay
rates of radiogenic isotopes in the past were much higher, so a lot of the heat that
is coming out of the earth was also generated from radioactive decay but far in the past.
So where does that leave us for the energy required to generate plumes? Well, plumes
at the core mantle boundary would be generated by heat coming out of the core, and based
on these estimates of radioactive elements, maybe 10 to 20 percent of the heat that comes
out of the surface is heat that has come from the core into the mantle. So that would suggest
that plumes do exist, but they're not the dominant source of energy. But there's a huge
amount of uncertainty still in that number, and so that really can't help solve our problem.
Now, in the traditional model for a hotspot, you have heat coming from the core into the
base of the mantle, and what this does is it dramatically lowers the viscosity of the
material. Why? Because if you have heat from the core coming into the base of the mantle,
you have the bottom of the mantle about a thousand degrees hotter than rock only two
or three hundred kilometers above it. Well, remember my melted chocolate, if I take rock
and I heat it, it becomes much more fluid. And so with a hotspot, it's actually the material
right at the core mantle boundary that sort of whisks up into a column of rock that as
it rises off the bottom of the mantle has a mushroom-shaped head, sort of picture in
your head the cloud from a nuclear bomb, that mushroom-shaped cloud. Well, that's the same
sort of picture that geologists have had for these hotspot mantle plumes rising up slowly
through the mantle. Now, they're rock, they're solid, but they're still flowing. When that
mushroom-plume-like head hits the surface, it erupts as an enormous flood basalt, which
we talked about previously. So the Deccan traps in India represent one of these outpourings
of enormous amounts of lava that represent the birth of that hotspot at the surface.
One behind that head is a long conduit and the rock will continue to flow off the base
of the mantle, the low viscosity, more fluid material will whisk up that conduit and that
will keep continuing up to the surface. At a place like Hawaii, this makes sense because
Hawaii we see 70 million years worth of continuous volcanism. The islands of Hawaii extend all
the way from the current island all the way to the Aleutian trench. And so this continuous
set of volcanoes, as the Pacific plate has moved westward, makes sense in the idea of
a conduit of material coming up. The rock when it reaches the surface should be still
several hundred degrees hotter than the surrounding rock. And as a result, we think that the rock
there should melt more easily simply because it's hot. Well, if we look around the earth,
do we see other evidence of this? Yes, there are cases that really seem to fit this model.
A good example as I mentioned, the Deccan traps, that initial outpouring of lava is connected
to Reunion Island in the Indian Ocean. That's the current location of the hotspot and when
that hotspot was born at the surface, it came up as the Deccan traps, the thick layers of
lava that flowed across India. And perhaps most significantly, the Yellowstone for North
America, the Yellowstone hotspot was born at the western part of North America as the
Columbia River flood basalt when that hotspot first reached the surface. Well, is there
evidence for the mantle plume model besides these connections between the hotspot locations
islands and these initial flood basalts? Well, there is some evidence. First of all, these
hotspots seem to be fairly fixed with respect to each other as far as plate motions go.
In other words, we know the plates move about at about, well, five to ten centimeters per
year or so. Well, if you look at the locations of the major hotspots, places like Hawaii,
they don't seem to be moving with respect to each other more than a few millimeters
per year, about one tenth the rate that the plates move. They're not perfectly fixed in
the mantle, but we also know that the mantle is flowing as well, so we wouldn't expect
them to be. But the fact that they're not moving very much relative to each other really
seems to suggest they are anchored within the mantle. They're not related to the plates.
Another aspect is just the fact that the chemistry of these hotspot volcanoes is significantly
different from the chemistry of the volcanoes at mid-ocean ridges. In other words, though
they're both basalt, the rock is both the same. The compositions have slight differences.
The ratios of rare earth elements, heavier elements, is slightly different in hotspot
magnet, we call that ocean island basalt, than mid-ocean ridge basalt. The difference
is subtle, but it's still very significant, and that suggests to geologists that they
come from different places. They have a different source, and that gives support to the idea
that these hotspots are actually coming from deep down within the earth.
What does seismic tomography actually show us? Well, seismic tomography already shows
us that there may be multiple types of hotspot plumes. It may not even make sense to talk
about mantle plumes as a single object. For instance, we do see plumes like Hawaii that
are massive columns of rock that do seem to come up from the base of the mantle, but we
also see lots of evidence, tomography is now getting fine enough in its resolution that
we can begin to see smaller plumes that seem to be rising off of the massive African and
Pacific mega plumes. Remember I've previously talked about how at the base of the mantle
there are these two large features that have iron-rich rock that's very hot, but also very
heavy sitting on top of the core. Well, this material, because it's rich in iron, is too
heavy to rise, but the iron does something also very important. The iron lets the heat
conduct through this much more easily. Remember I talked about how heat conducts much more
quickly through metal than it does through rock? Well, if you have rock that's very iron-rich,
it can be more than a billion times more efficient in conducting heat through it. So perhaps
these sort of cap-like mega plumes that sit on top of the core mantle boundary act as
sort of heating pads that take the heat out of the core, whisk across them, and what we
seem to see in the seismic imaging is, for instance, beneath Africa, that off the sides
of this African mega plume we have smaller plumes like the Azores, the Cape Verde Islands,
the Canary Islands, Tristan Island, coming off of this feature and rising up. It's a
different kind of a plume than the large Hawaiian plume, but it still is a plume coming
from deep down within the earth. Now, people have questions about Hawaii, but it does seem
to fit the model remarkably well. One interesting aspect of Hawaii is that if you look at the
chain of Hawaiian islands, it actually takes a bend past the island of Midway. In fact,
from past Midway North, we actually give that a separate name, those are called the Emperor
Seamounds. In other words, if you strip away the water of the ocean and you look at the
Pacific seafloor, you see this dot of islands going from Hawaii to Midway, taking a sharp
bend northward and heading into the Aleutians. People have puzzled as to what would cause
this bend, and here again we have a debate that is not yet resolved. There's one camp
of geologists that says, well, that represented a change in the direction of the Pacific plate
at that time. At first it was moving primarily northwest, north northwest, and now it's
moving primarily west northwest. When it changed its direction, the island chain took a bend.
Other people don't see evidence of that change in plate direction going back in the past,
and they suggest that if it is a plume, perhaps the plume itself is moving at the base of
the mantle. In other words, the actual base of the plume is moving around, and that causes
the magma source to change, and that's what has caused the bend in the Hawaiian Islands.
Again, there's a lot of research going on to try to figure that out.
Well, what are some other problems with the mantle plume theory? Many geologists object
to the fact that the tomography shows that so many of these hot spots, even though they've
been stationary for a while, don't show up in the tomography, and when they do, their
sources seem to be very shallow. Another big objection is that many of the hot spots seem
to occur at mid-ocean ridges. Think of Iceland, Galapagos, Easter Island, Tristan, the Azores.
These are all continuous hot spot volcanoes that are located right at the mid-ocean ridges.
If they really are independent of plate tectonics, what are they doing at the ridges? Well, people
who advocate mantle plumes don't necessarily see a problem with this, because they give
two answers in reply. Well, it could be that the plumes are affecting plate tectonics.
In other words, there's so much hot rock coming up here that it forces mid-ocean ridges to
stay located over them. In other words, the hot spots play a very active role in affecting
plate tectonics. Or another argument could be just the opposite, the plumes could be
passively sucked up towards the mid-ocean ridges. In a sense, they're blowing in the
mantle wind. The mantle flow is moving towards the mid-ocean ridges, and it just takes the
hot spot plumes and pulls them up toward that. Remember earlier I talked about how people
had done experiments with tanks of corn syrup. Actually, many of the experiments done in
these tanks do indeed show that plumes should be pulled towards mid-ocean ridges in a passive
manner. Another objection that scientists have about mantle plumes is that there are
places where there are so many other reasons why you simply could have volcanism in the
middle of a plate. I talked previously about the importance of water, wet spots in the mantle.
It turns out there's a lot more water in the mantle than we ever imagined, and water lowers
the melting point so dramatically that you'd only need a little bit of water in any particular
region of the mantle to cause that rock to melt much more easily. So you wouldn't need
to call upon some large plume of rock coming up from the base of the mantle. You just need
to have a little bit more water that's come down into the mantle through subduction that
would cause volcanism at that region. Another very likely scenario for some of the hot spots
like Iceland, for instance, is that previous basaltic ocean crust has been brought down
into the mantle and is now being sucked up towards the ridge and melts more easily. After
all, basalt formed because it melted more easily. It's the material that melted when
mid-ocean ridges pulled apart and the isthenosphere got brought up towards the ridge. Those compositions
that made the basalt were the first materials that melted out of that mantle rock. Well,
if that basaltic ocean crust after plate tectonics gets subducted back down, in the case of Iceland
during the Caledonian Erogyny, this is a period of mountain building that created many of
the mountains that you see in places like Scotland, if that crust is now being brought
up towards the ridge at Iceland, it's just going to melt much more voluminously. It doesn't
need to be wet, it doesn't need to be hot, it will just melt more easily on its own.
Now there are other interesting possible causes for interplate volcanism. One of them has
to do with all those volcanoes on the ocean seafloor and people who object to mantle plumes
have long noticed that several of the lines of volcanoes, like the lion islands, that
people have used as a classic example of hotspot tracks across the ocean seafloor, have volcanism
that doesn't go in order. In other words, if you go down and drill into each of these
islands, it isn't the case that they go sequentially in age from one side to the other. The volcanism
seems to be random and one interesting feature that's come out through convection modeling
is that if you have an ocean plate that's moving across the esthenosphere, it actually
creates rolls of convection within the esthenosphere that are perpendicular to that motion. When
those rolls have material coming up, you're bringing hot rock up towards the surface and
some people have noticed that many of these volcanic islands seem to line up with locations
in the gravity anomalies of the surface where we think those rolls are coming up. So again,
maybe they weren't formed at the ridge, maybe they're not hotspots, maybe they are simply
esthenosphere features, material coming up in lines that still create these lines of
volcanoes, but they don't have anything to do with hotspots. For interplate volcanism
beneath continents, there are also several possible reasons that have been given. One
of them is something that I talked about in the previous lecture where I said that if
you have a case where you have the delamination of the bottom of a lithosphere, in other words,
where India is crashing into Asia, as it slides beneath Asia, it's actually torn off the bottom
part of the Asian lithosphere which is dripping off and falling down into the mantle. As it
does so, hot esthenosphere comes back up to the surface and causes volcanoes. That same
process of that lithosphere falling off the bottoms of continents, we call that mantle
drips, maybe the cause of volcanoes that we see commonly at the edge of continents, like
in places like Cameroon and Madagascar and the Camorris Islands along the rim of Africa.
Now, all of this is not going to be figured out right away. There are so many different causes,
it's very complex, but one thing that we do know is that we're going to continue studying this
because when these interplate volcanoes do come to the surface, they can be tremendously explosive
and catastrophic. One of the best examples would be Yellowstone and it's something that's a
tremendous hazard to all of North America. Now, why are these volcanoes so explosive?
Well, remember we talked about the different reasons that the viscosity of magma changes.
Well, it turns out that if you have an interplate volcano in the middle of a continent,
its magma is very rich in silica and so those silica tetrahedra are all tightly bonded together
and the magma is just thick, it doesn't flow easily and you need a lot of pressure to get it to blow.
Another aspect is that the continents are just cold. The continental crust is very cold
and the colder the temperature, the more viscous your magma is and the last aspect is you've got
a lot of water in the continental crust and you add the water to this thick viscous stiff
magma and what you get is a very explosive eruption when you do get enough pressure for it to erupt.
Now, Yellowstone is of concern for a couple of reasons. First of all, Yellowstone has erupted
several times in the last few million years and it's been the largest eruptions in North America
during this time. It erupted 2.1 million years ago, 1.3 million years ago and 0.64 million years ago,
each time blanketing North America with ash. Now, some of these have been enormous. The eruption
2.1 million years ago ejected two and a half thousand cubic kilometers of rock and ash out
onto the surface of North America. This is a volcano of a magnitude we just can't even conceive of.
Well, it's interesting. You look at 2.1, 1.3, 0.6, when's the next one? Well, it looks to be right
about now. Of course, we can't use only three points to make a statistical analysis. That's a
really good example of doing bad statistics. But certainly, just going by past experience,
it's reasonable to assume that we could have one in the not too distant future and when it does
happen, it'll be enormous. The caldera from Yellowstone is huge. It's 80 kilometers long by 50
kilometers wide. Remember, calderas are the collapsed surfaces of magma chambers. So in other
words, it holds a whole lot of magma underneath before it goes. Well, what has a lot of geologists
concerned is over the last five years or so, the surface of Yellowstone has actually lifted up about
five inches, about 12 centimeters. What's causing that uplift? Well, it's probably magma filling
that magma chamber back up again. Perhaps it's getting ready for that next eruption. Now, Yellowstone
doesn't just erupt once every 600,000 years. It has smaller eruptions frequently. There were
some significant eruptions about 70,000 years ago that actually filled in the previous Yellowstone
caldera with rhyolite lava. There have been volcanoes nearby. I mentioned previously the
craters of the Moon National Monument in southern Idaho. Well, there were eruptions there about
11,000 years ago. But the fact that the caldera is lifting up and we also see recent increases in
temperature suggests that this really could be a region that could possibly have the next large
supervolcano. Now, hotspots geologically have an even bigger consequence. It turns out that hotspots
may be vital for the very breakup of supercontinents. You see, when Pangea broke up, what first happened
was the eruption of several of these hotspot volcanoes, causing flood basalts right in the
middle of the supercontinent. Another good example is the Iceland hotspot. When the Iceland hotspot
first erupted, Greenland was attached to Europe. In fact, the mid-Atlantic ridge went between
Greenland and Canada. But the hotspot came up beneath that juncture of Greenland and Europe
and split those two apart. And the mid-Atlantic ridge actually jumped location from Greenland
and Canada to being between Greenland and Europe. One of the best examples currently
is the AFAR hotspot beneath Eastern Africa. What seems to be happening here is this AFAR
hotspot is rising up beneath Africa, doming the whole continent. And in the process,
it's creating radial rifts in three different directions. You've got the Red Sea splitting
apart as Arabia moves away from Africa. You have the Gulf of Aden rifting open, where
Arabia moves from Africa towards the east. And then you have the African rift zones in Kenya
and Tanzania. All of those three rift zones come together above that one AFAR hotspot that
seems to be lifting up the continent. And perhaps the breakup of Africa, the splitting away first
of Arabia and now of Nubia and Somalia is the result of the active rising up of one of these
hotspots. So in a sense, Pangaea hasn't finished breaking up yet. We're still seeing that process
happening with the separation of Africa into three separate plates. Now, what happens at one of these
rift valleys is actually quite interesting because it turns out that the hotspots come up
along the former sutures, these orogenic belts, where the continents once came together. These
these orogenic belts, these these underlying features to old mountain ranges actually have
thinner lithospheres than the surrounding deep cratons. And it may be that the plume rock when
it comes up from below gets channeled up into these cratonic belts. Well, wait a minute, I may
hear you complaining here. I just explained previously how mountain belts have very deep
roots. Yes, the crust is very thick at the locations of these sutures, these mountain
belts, these orogenic belts. But it turns out that the lithosphere at these or at these contacts
between continents is actually shallower than the very old deep cratons themselves. Thicker
crust, but thinner lithosphere. And so when these plumes come up from beneath, they get channeled
up into the the lines that used to be the boundaries, the plate boundaries between
colliding continents. The heat from those hotspots further thins and weakens the lithosphere.
And it's sort of like perforating the plate. It makes this zone, this line, an area of weakness
in the plate that allows the plate to pull apart at that place. It may be the case that
hotspots alone can't break apart continents. But if you have other forces involved, like the slab
pull force around the edges of a supercontinent, hotspots might help decide where it breaks apart.
So it's not just the forces of plate tectonics that pull supercontinents apart. It's the combination
of plate tectonics with this other enigmatic process of hotspots that might work together
and be responsible for breaking apart supercontinents once they actually come together.
Well, we're still struggling on struggling trying to figure out what's happened in the past. We have
even less idea of what's going to happen in the future. But we actually do have some ideas from
seismic tomography. It turns out that the work that we're doing currently with seismic imaging
finds some regions at the base of the mantle, for instance, beneath the western Pacific in the area
of New Guinea, that have enormous hot regions sitting at the base of the mantle. And these might be
the plumes that will come up tens of millions of years from now. Of course, we don't need to worry
about this at current, but far off in the distant future, these may be the locations of the enormous
interplate volcanoes that will be a hazard to life at some point in the distant future.
In starting in the next lecture, I'm going to focus more on this aspect of geology, the aspect of
the hazards to humans of things like volcanoes and earthquakes. I've talked about these deep
processes going on within the Earth, but we live on the surface as well. And I'm going to start to
focus a little bit on what the effects of these large, deep Earth processes are for humans.
