Welcome.
In this lecture, I'm going to complete my overview of the history of the motions of
Earth's tectonic plates by talking about the creation and assembly of North America.
Now, it's interesting.
If you look at a globe of the Earth, you can usually tell how old the globe is by actually
looking at the names and outlines of the different countries.
They're always changing, and the globes constantly need to be revised.
Politics turns out to be pretty good for map makers.
To a political historian, the political boundaries must seem incredibly ephemeral, constantly
shifting and changing.
Well, to a geologist, the shapes of the continents themselves are ephemeral and changing.
Now, this happens over short times, with sea level change.
In other words, if the sea level goes up, the shoreline can move inward by hundreds or even
thousands of kilometers.
And during a period of ice age, the sea level drops tremendously.
In fact, just 20,000 years ago, Alaska and Siberia were connected.
People walked from Asia over to North America.
The Bering Strait is very shallow.
Well, over long times, the shape of the continental crust itself changes.
Now, we're very attached to the shape of the United States as it appears on the globe.
This image appears all over the place, not only on maps, but pictures and bumper stickers
and books.
But as you go back in time, that shape of the United States becomes more and more unrecognizable.
Also as you go into the future, the same thing will happen.
Geology turns out to be good for map makers, too, just much more slowly than politics.
Now, one more thing, North America turns out to be in the middle of a global controversy.
I know, I hear you say not again, but this time it's not political.
It turns out there's a huge debate on how continents grow in size.
It turns out that North America is the classic example for how a continent begins as a small
core and increases continually over time.
North America is the poster child for continental growth, starting small and building up to
a large continent.
Because it's interesting, not all continents work this way.
Many others get to a certain size and then repeatedly split apart.
Australia is an example.
It doesn't get very large, not compared to a large supercontinent like Eurasia.
So we have to figure out why this happens.
Well, it turns out there are two different ways that we can view the history of continents.
First of all, we can assume that there was a very small amount of continental crust that
existed back four billion years ago, half a billion years after the creation of our planet.
Or we can think of there as being the same amount of continental crustal rock that's
been around throughout Earth's history.
It's just been continuously reworked with erosion and volcanism and repeated plate collisions.
Now we know that North America has been around for a very long time, more than four billion
years, because we find rock that is incredibly old.
The oldest rock, as I mentioned in the last lecture, is found in the cratons, the shields
of Canada and Greenland.
Turns out that most of the rock that forms the United States didn't exist for billions
of years.
The U.S. is a relative newcomer.
We also know that there were rocks in North America that were much older than four billion
years.
And it's interesting because if you go to some of these oldest parts of Canada, the
four billion year old rocks of a craton called the slave craton in northwest Canada, or the
rocks that are almost four billion years in Greenland, both of these rocks consist of
metamorphosed sedimentary rocks.
They're nicest.
They're highly metamorphosed rocks, but they began as sedimentary rocks.
So that meant there must have been some older rock that was eroded, turned into sediment,
washed down rivers, deposited on the ocean seafloor, turned into rock, and then collided,
and mashed into a mountain by the collisions of continents and created and became new metamorphosed
rock.
In other words, the four billion year old rocks weren't the start.
They were the altered version of some older rocks.
We just don't have any of that rock left over, so we don't know what it was that it began
as.
And that's a real problem with trying to figure out the history of our country.
We have so little of that initial rock, just very little is known about what went on back
then.
Now, it turned out that if you actually go around the country, and you go around all
of North America, in fact, you find mostly rock from much more recent times.
For instance, you find rock that is either glacial debris, so this is material that was
dumped across the surface by fairly recent glacial events.
Or you find rock that's older, but it's only hundreds of millions of years old.
It's sedimentary rocks that formed relatively recently in Earth's past.
Now, I can attest to this.
I've done seismic deployments in Canada, and I've driven across thousands of kilometers
of Saskatchewan and eastern Alberta.
And there are just fields of fields, kilometers after kilometers of wheat.
There really aren't very many rocks visible.
That's because on top of those ancient rocks are thick layers of glacial sediments or tundra.
Just very few of those rocks are left at the surface.
And the rocks that do remain from that time are often highly metamorphosed, so we don't
even know what the initial rock was.
We have a sense, however, that by two and a half billion years ago, North America consisted
of several small, cratonic fragments that had come together to form a continent, and
we call that continent arctica.
That became the core of what would eventually become our continent of North America.
Now, arctica became part of a larger supercontinent, Kenorland.
And when Kenorland broke up, the large mass called Laurentia that contained all of those
early Canadian cratons moved away as a single independent continent.
And very interestingly, from two and a half billion years ago until the formation of Pangea,
which was more than two billion years later, Laurentia was a distinct continent that behaved
as a single entity.
It became part of several continents, but it always broke away, keeping essentially its
basic shape intact.
Now, Laurentia grew considerably in size about 1.8 billion years ago when the supercontinent
Columbia formed.
At this point, there were large origins, these collisional mountain belts, that formed as
the different fragments came together.
A good example is the Trans Hudson origin.
This is an ancient mountain belt that extends down Saskatchewan into North and South Dakota,
or the Pinocchian origin, which is in modern day Wisconsin and Iowa, that connected cratons
like the Churchill in northernmost Canada and the superior craton in Ontario and Manitoba
into a larger land mass.
At this point, 1.8 billion years ago, Laurentia extended down to about Nebraska and Iowa,
east to about Michigan, and west to about Wyoming.
Anything else in the United States, to the west, south and east, didn't even exist yet.
Subduction began soon after that in a big way.
Between 1.8 and 1.6 billion years ago, all along the southern edge of that Columbia supercontinent,
enormous amounts of material got subducted either onto or underneath the continent,
and this process of accretion created much of the interior of the United States.
It both stuck on other rock and island arcs and fragments of ocean to the side, and created
tremendous outpourings of volcanic lava that would form much of our country.
During that first period, from about 1.8 to 1.7 billion years ago, there was a broad belt
of volcanic rock that was created.
It's known as the inner accretionary belt, and it created our country from about Arizona
to modern-day Chicago.
This material was actually added on to the southern part of Laurentia.
For the next 100 million years, a second belt of volcanic rock called the outer tectonic
belt created new continental crust from about New Mexico to Missouri, and that was added
on.
Over these 200 million years, grew southward through the accretion of this volcanic rock.
Enormous amounts of granite and rhyolite were erupting on the surface as lava and in place
underground as granite, and this continued even through periods of 1.5 and 1.3 billion
years ago, more added on to the southern edge of Laurentia.
During this time, much of what is now Texas, Oklahoma, southern Missouri, Illinois, Indiana,
Kentucky, and Tennessee was all created.
The rock in these states, if you can get down deep into the core of our continent, dates
back to about 1.5 billion years old.
Now, I have to say, we don't have this all figured out.
The exact origin of this granite and rhyolite is not understood.
We don't know exactly why it formed, the way it did, and how, but nonetheless, if we dig
down deep enough, we find it there.
There's a place in southern Missouri, in fact, where a lot of this granite is exposed at
the surface, and it gets quarried and used for buildings all about Missouri.
In fact, all the buildings at Washington University, my university in St. Louis, are
covered with this granite, and it has a lot of potassium feldsparin, which gives it a
very pretty pink color.
Rocks are used throughout the Midwest for construction, but they actually don't appear
above the surface in very many places, and that's an important point that I'm going to
get back to at the end of the lecture.
Now, about 1.3 to 1.1 billion years ago, a very important tectonic event occurred along
the southern and eastern part of North America, and this was called the Grenville Erogyny.
The continent of Laurentia grew even further to the southeast, as part of the formation
of what would become the major supercontinent of Rodinia.
New land from North Carolina, all the way across Pennsylvania and New York, and as far
as Newfoundland formed during this time.
The Adirondack Mountains were enormous tall mountains during this period, made from metamorphose
subduction zone materials.
Some of it was igneous in origin, some of it was sedimentary in origin.
Just like the Himalayas of today, rock of all different types gets smashed up into the mountain,
and if you go across the Adirondack Mountains, which are just small remnants of the tall
mountains they used to be, they contain all these different sequences of an active subduction
zone.
At the end of this Grenville Erogyny, the southern part of Laurentia almost broke up.
In fact, a very large rift called the Mid-Continent Rift was active about 1.1 billion years ago,
stretching our continent in half, from Oklahoma all the way to southern Canada.
It's the continent itself, the crust stretched and thin, large amounts of basaltic lava flowed
up to fill the crack, and it almost turned into an ocean.
But for a reason we don't understand, it stopped before the rifting actually broke
our continent into two pieces.
It's unusual some continents have actually continued that process and turned in and become
two separate continents with an ocean in between.
That didn't happen with North America.
Now North America took on its current shape, the shape that we're familiar with on maps,
during the events that led up to the assembly of the supercontinent of Pangaea.
A whole series of plate collisions built up the eastern United States forming the Appalachian
Mountains.
It didn't happen from a single plate collision, but a whole series of collisions.
In fact, it's often divided into four separate distinct orogenic events.
During the first part, known as the Teconic Erogyny, about 450 to 400 million years ago,
a large volcanic arc stuck on to the southeastern edge of Laurentia.
This is called the Yapatis terrain, and a terrain is a name we give to any distinct piece
of land that formed somewhere else and was carried into its current location.
This formed the land that would actually become much of New England.
The Teconic Mountains at that point, which go along the eastern border of New York State,
were once huge and continued as a large mountain range all the way down through New York and
into Pennsylvania as the current Hudson Highlands.
The Green Mountains in Vermont, the Berkshires in Western Massachusetts, and Connecticut were
all part of this Erogyny.
During the next phase, called the Acadian Erogyny, this is about 375 to 325 million years,
a large piece of continent, a continental fragment that we call the Avalon Terrain, got stuck
on to the eastern coast.
This formed part of Newfoundland, Maine, and eastern Massachusetts.
The current day Catskill Mountains actually formed at this time from sediments that were
eroding away from the western, the backside of the Acadian Mountains.
These sediments flowed west and were deposited in a shallow ocean delta where southern New
York State is now.
The Catskills are actually part of a large plateau known as the Allegheny Plateau, which
existed just west of this collisional mountain range and were slightly uplifted during this
time from the subduction process.
Now, it's interesting if you go across the Allegheny Plateau, which includes the Catskills,
the Poconos of Pennsylvania, and parts of Ohio and West Virginia, there are often ridges
that look like mountains, but these were formed from later erosional events and not from the
uplift directly related to the plate collisions.
But all the rock that makes up this land is sediment that washed off the backs of these
once enormous mountain ranges.
Now, the big event was the Allegheny and Erogyny.
And this happened between 320 and 250 million years.
It's sometimes called the Appalachian Erogyny.
This is what formed the Appalachian Mountains.
It happened when Gondwana land, particularly Africa, collided with Laurentia as part of
the formation of Pangea.
All the way from Canada down to Alabama were enormous mountains.
And simultaneously, further south, about 300 million years ago, the South American Ocean
lithosphere was subducting beneath Laurentia.
And this formed the Ouachita Mountains of Arkansas, which at that point were probably
taller than the Rockies.
This connected up with further mountain ranges that were developing the Marathon Mountains
of Texas.
And so the Appalachians, part of this whole Erogyny, extended from Texas all the way up
to Canada, and at their highest were probably taller than the Himalayas, and perhaps equally
as wide, a massive plateau of rock.
Now along the western coast of Laurentia, we had a very different situation happening.
There weren't large continents that were continuously colliding in.
There seemed to be a lot of subduction, so there was a lot of volcanic activity, and
a lot of small little slivers of rock, very small, different distinct terrains that were
repeatedly accreted onto the continent.
If you actually look at a map of where the rock came from along the western coast of
North America, you see there's a very complex and complicated set of subduction events that
must have created this.
Pieces of island art, pieces of marine sediments, ancient ocean floor slivers, as well as separate
continental fragments all got stuck on, all the way from Baja all the way up to Alaska,
a whole series of separate small subduction events.
A good example is the Rangelia terrain, which creates a large portion of western British
Columbia.
This began as a separate island arc about 300 million years ago, and then got welded
on to western North America along with other pieces of ocean and continental fragment.
The western U.S. was built up through this whole series of subduction-related collisions
that we've given different names, the Antler Orogyny from 375 to 300 million years ago,
the Sonoma Orogyny from 280 to 200 million years ago, the Nevadan Orogyny from 180 to
150 million years ago, which formed much of the early Sierra Nevada mountains, the Sevilla
Orogyny which happened between 130 and 80 million years ago, again creating a mountain
range that extended probably from Canada to Mexico going right through current day Utah.
And then lastly the Laramide Orogyny from about 70 to 50 million years ago, which is
what formed the Rocky Mountains.
Now it's interesting if you look at the difference between the east coast and the west coast,
you find two very different types of processes occurring.
Along the east coast, the orogenes, the mountain building events occurred successively outward
from the continent, each time adding new material onto the continent as it grew.
But for the west coast, the Sevilla and Laramide orogenes actually moved progressively inland,
and this was because of the very shallow subduction of the Feralon Plate beneath North America,
which I've talked about several times already in the course.
Let me give you an example.
The granite that forms the Sierra Nevada Batholith, the beautiful white granite that Yosemite
valleys carved out, for example, was actually created quite a while ago in an earlier event
of subduction during the Sevilla Orogyny about 115 to 85 million years ago.
The Sierra Nevadas of course were immediately eroded down, erosion happens very quickly,
but then were uplifted again about 25 million years ago when North America rode over the
ridge between the Feralon and the Pacific Plates.
That event had a tremendous effect on the entire geology of western North America because
as North America moved over the Feralon Plate and then moved over the back of the plate,
it meant that hot isthenosphere rock that had been right at the ridge between the Feralon
and the Pacific Plate was now in direct contact with the bottom of North America.
That hot isthenosphere lifted up the continent, raised the Colorado Plateau and stretched
the basin and range region of Nevada and Arizona.
That lifting and stretching of the basin and range broke up the continent into a whole
set of normal faulted blocks.
There are large grobbins that separate pieces of the whole North American crust in the basin
and range region.
Now the sinking of the Feralon Plate beneath North America has another interesting effect.
It causes a tremendous amount of compression to exist currently in the central and eastern
parts of the United States.
Think of a cake batter with a spoon.
Suppose you have a bowl of a cake batter and you take a spoon and you push it down into
the batter.
What happens?
The spoon moves the batter aside but then it comes in, flows in behind that down going
spoon.
Well, the Feralon slab is doing something very similar with North America because you
take the Feralon slab and you plunge this down beneath North America and it causes the
whole mantle rock to suck in behind it and in the process it squeezes our continent.
So the earthquakes that happened along the New Madrid fault in 1811 and 1812 are thrust
faults and yet this region began as a rifted fault, a rifted region a half a billion years
ago.
Why?
Well what's happening is as the continent gets squeezed together the faulting is going
to occur on some of the weakest regions and when this area got stretched apart half a
billion years ago the whole lithosphere itself actually got thinned and weakened and now
that it's being squeezed together that's the place that it breaks.
It's sort of like perforating a piece of paper and then pulling it that's the spot that
it's going to tear.
Now if you go across much of the United States you don't find old rock at the surface as
I previously mentioned for two reasons glaciers and sea level changes.
If you go to the northern part of North America the bedrock as I said is just covered with
glacial debris, glacial sediments that got scraped off of mountains to the north, Canadian
mountains and just dragged all the way across and dumped across thousands of kilometers
through the process of glaciation which I'll talk about quite a bit more later on in the
course.
However, most of the rock that covers continents and certainly this is the case for North America
happens because of sea level rises.
So what happens if you take North America and you raise the sea level?
Well what you do is you flood the continent with shallow seas and during these shallow
periods of shallow oceans you end up with the deposition of sediments like sandstones,
shales and limestones and these can stretch for thousands of kilometers.
And whatever old or volcanic or metamorphic rocks might lie underneath.
We call these platform sediments.
Do you remember the Grand Canyon?
I talked about how the canyon is cut down through all these successive layers of sandstone
and shale and limestone.
Those are all ocean sediments deposited.
You could find them now in Utah, Arizona, the middle of the continent and yet they clearly
formed in marine ocean environments.
Well what happened was between about 550 and about 225 million years ago the sea level
had several episodes where it covered many parts of North America.
These were relatively warm periods, there wasn't a lot of ice, the sea level was high and
the water flooded the continents and these sedimentary rocks, limestone, sandstone and
shale actively formed in these shallow sea environments.
Now interestingly for much of this time North America was actually located at the equator
and was therefore quite warm and wet in terms of its climates.
These warm climates did two different things.
For marine environments there was a very rich marine life creating a tremendous amount of
organic material that got dumped on the ocean floor.
And on land this warm climate led to a tremendous growth in swamps and forests.
And when this material died and fell to the bottom of the floor when it was compacted
by further organic material and sediments this led to the creation of rich layers of
coal.
As I'll talk later on near the end of the course North America has some of the largest
coal deposits anywhere around the globe.
It mostly formed during this time 550 to 225 million years.
This period of warm climates when North America was located right close to the equator.
Now if you look over the history of the formation of North America we see two competing themes
battling with each other.
We see processes for both adding rock and subtracting rock from our continent.
And it's really not clear to geologists whether the total mass of all the continents has increased
or whether the same continental material has been repeatedly reworked.
As I mentioned at the start of this lecture continents like North America grow in size
and mass over time and they do this for a couple distinct different ways.
First of all volcanism is continuously adding new igneous rock both internally making these
large masses of granite underground and externally as lava that flows across the surface.
Also when you have rises in the sea level which don't just change the outlines of the
continents on a map you get whole new layers of rock these platform sediments deposited
on top of whatever existed there before.
And third and very important the process of subduction adds new material onto the side
of the continents and causes the continent to grow out laterally over time.
The accretion of sediments, island arcs and pieces of ocean crust.
At the same time however our continents are constantly losing rock in a couple different
ways.
First of all any time that the sea level is below the land in any form the land erodes
away erosion rapidly as removes rock once it gets exposed above sea level and which
is different but partly related continental collisions with other continents shorten the
continents horizontally and end up removing rock.
Well you might say wait a minute if you collide one continent with another the rock goes up
but it doesn't disappear.
Yes but as soon as you create a mountain you have much more rapid erosion so you take a
flat line continent that's eroding only slowly you squeeze it laterally create a mountain
and rapidly erode that mountain away the result is a net loss in the total amount of continental
rock.
Now we would expect the total volume of North America to be increasing over time for two
reasons not just North America all of the continents.
First of all we've had a continued process of mantle convection and that process of mantle
convection should continue to help separate the lighter minerals out of the mantle and
leave them at the surface.
And second we've had the continued incorporation of pieces of ocean crust at these locations
of continental collisions.
In other words we have pieces of the ocean added into the continent and sometimes these
mantle derived magmas these very mafic iron and magnesium rich magmas deposit in subduction
zones and hotspot volcanoes which then become part of continents.
It should make the continents become more basaltic in composition over time but nonetheless
it should add to their growth.
However at the same time the continental rock could be continually lost to the mantle through
the subduction of sediments because if you take a continent and you erode that rock and
dump it on the sea floor we know a lot of it gets scraped off as these accretionary wedges
of rock at the edges of continents but some of it also goes down deep into the earth.
And because we have so little rock from both the deep past and the deep interior of the
earth we just don't know whether the amount of continental rock is growing or not.
So see I'm ending up the wrap up of my solid earth part of the plate tectonic, solid earth
plate tectonics part of my course with a fundamental question.
We really don't know how North America got to be the way it is and I guess this is important
away.
I don't want you to think that we've got all this worked out.
There are still so many basic fundamental questions that remain and part of the reason
simply is we just don't have that much evidence.
We don't have a lot of rock going back in time so the detective work gets really difficult.
Now starting on the next lecture I'm going to shift my attention to that of water.
Now I'm not done with the deep earth, everything on the surface of the earth and the interior
of the earth is all connected.
Now there's plenty of water deep in the earth and that's going to play an important role
in how the earth works and the surface and the interior affect each other in all kinds
of ways but I'm going to begin to show you lots of other ways that you can change the
shape and appearance of continents and it's all driven by water and the sun and how the
whole engine of the energy from the sun takes water, moves it through a dynamic cycle called
the water cycle and the way that movement of water erodes the rock that we've created
through plate tectonics, mantle convection and volcanism.
