Welcome. In this lecture I want to talk about erosion and weathering.
It's the start of the process of tearing down all the land that I've just spent half a course creating.
Now the word erosion is often used in many different ways, but here I want to have a specific use of the word.
Here I'm going to talk about erosion as the weathering and removal of land, and it has two steps to it.
Weathering the destruction of rock in place, and to the removal and transportation of that rock to some place else under the force of gravity.
Now let me tell you one of my first lessons on the geology of weathering.
I mean there were many. Like most kids I had left my bicycle out in the rain several times and come back to find all the unpainted metal parts covered with a thin layer of rust.
That's a lesson in chemical oxidation.
And I'd hiked around many mountain tops and had seen the beaten, worn and crumbling appearance of the exposed rocks there.
But what puzzled me most, I remember, as a kid was Cleopatra's needle.
Now, if you walk across Central Park in New York City, going from the American Museum of Natural History to the Metropolitan Museum of Art,
right in back of the Met, there's a tall four-sided column of rock.
Now a perfect Sunday might consist of a morning at the American Museum of Natural History and the afternoon at the Met,
and along the way you'd pass this tall granite obelisk with hieroglyphics carved in it.
It was brought to New York City from Egypt in the mid-1800s, and it had stood there, unaltered, in the desert for 3,000 years.
But here's the puzzle. The hieroglyphs on the east and north side were still quite visible,
but on the west and south sides of the obelisk they looked like they had been erased.
The edges were gone, the wording was almost invisible.
It was years later that I found out the reason. The rain comes from the west and south in New York City.
Now, rain is naturally slightly acidic, and aided by the industry in New Jersey, the rain was even more acidic.
And that rain that had been hitting Cleopatra's needle for only 150 years was acid enough to wear away the hieroglyphs.
In other words, it was eroding away a monument that had lasted intact for thousands of years in the dry desert of Egypt,
and it was happening more slowly on the sides away from the wind and the rain.
In a relatively short amount of time, very short by Earth standards, this ancient Egyptian carvings, they were all weathering away, and they'll soon be entirely gone.
And this isn't just true there. It's true for all buildings, walls, sculptures, statues, anything outside that's made of rock or stone or any other material.
I mean, the gargoyles on top of Notre Dame Cathedral are doubly grotesque with the effects of erosion further disfiguring their already frightening faces.
Walk into any old graveyard, and you can't help but feel a strong sense of the whole impermanence of the world.
I mean, the gravestones that were put up to be permanent memorials for loved parents or siblings are often eroded to the point that the names can no longer be read.
There's a whole rows of nameless testimonials to unremembered loves, and no one is exempt, not you and not me.
Erosion is an awesome power, and it's made even more so by its unassuming nature.
I mean, it's not like an exploding volcano. You don't see it happening, but you turn around and whole mountains have disappeared.
In New Hampshire, you can walk across rocky ridges made of granite, metamorphosed rocks tremendously altered, mountain top to mountain top, far above the treeline.
You feel like you're on top of the world, but it's staggering to realize that all of that rock was once in the deep core of an immense mountain range many miles below the surface.
To realize the intense volumes of rock that weathering and erosion have removed.
And where does this rock all go? Rivers like the Mississippi carry hundreds of millions of tons of sediment every year back to the ocean.
Now interestingly, the material that gets weathered off of these mountains and statues and washed down the rivers is in two different forms.
It has solid sediment and has dissolved chemical ions, because weathering is the breakdown of rocks and minerals by both mechanical and chemical processes.
The start of the surface part of the rock cycle that ends with the formation of new sedimentary rock in the oceans occurs both by taking physical pieces of rock and moving it and by dissolving the rock and carrying it in solution.
Now, there is one very positive side to this whole process of weathering that's of particular interest to humans.
Weathering is responsible for the creation of soil, and soils allow us to grow plants and food, and they're a vital natural resource for our entire culture and civilization.
Example, go to Hawaii and drive around. I've talked about Hawaii repeatedly during this course as a place of tremendous volcanic activity.
But what's remarkable is if you go there and you look in areas where the lava flows aren't even that old, you don't find hard black basaltic lava.
What you find is crumbly, soft, red-rich soil. Why? Because there's a lot of rain in places in Hawaii, and that rain rapidly breaks down the lava in place disintegrating that basaltic rock into new soil that ends up being very fertile land for crops to be grown.
Now, weathering, as I said, takes two different forms. Mechanical weathering and chemical weathering.
Mechanical weathering is the breakdown of rock into sediment through physical means, and chemical weathering is the destruction of rocks through chemical reactions that actually dissolve the minerals or convert them into entirely new minerals.
The rates and mechanisms of weathering are very widely in different geographic regions.
They are tremendously affected by differences in temperature, water, composition, or the way the bedrock is layered.
With both of these processes, however, water is the most critical factor. Water is the basis of chemical weathering, and it turns out to be incredibly important for mechanical weathering as well.
As a result, rock weathers and erodes much more quickly in moist regions than in arid regions.
Now, temperature is important as well, both the absolute temperature and the rate of change of temperature.
For instance, chemical reactions just tend to occur more rapidly at high temperatures, so if you're in a warm climate, those chemical weathering processes of dissolving the rock or converting the minerals into new minerals is much more accelerated.
Large changes in temperature are also important, and that ends up being the basis of mechanical weathering, as I'll talk about in just a moment.
Now, the different compositions of the rock play a vital role as well. Different materials are going to weather at different rates.
In general, igneous rocks, like granites, are stronger and more resistant to mechanical weathering than sedimentary rocks.
But, as I just mentioned in the case of Hawaii, the salt actually weathers quite quickly when it's wet.
Turns out rocks that have some sort of layer in their foliation, like shale and slate, flaky layered rocks, weather very quickly because the fractures are pathways for that water to soak into the rock, and once the water gets in, all sorts of weathering occurs.
This also holds true for even igneous rocks if they're highly fractured. Those fractures, even in a tough rock like granite, give water pathways to enter the rock and quickly begin to dissolve it away.
One of the fastest weathering rocks is limestone, made of calcium carbonate, and though limestone weathers quite slowly in dry arid climates like deserts, it arose very quickly in moist climates.
Now, mechanical weathering, as I said, is the breakdown of rock into sediment through physical means, and there are many ways that this happens.
Let me give you one example. Why is it that the streets of Chicago are such a mess every spring?
I mean, if you drive around, there are heaves in the road and potholes and all these construction crews working for months in the spring to fix them.
Well, it's due to the property of water that it expands when it freezes. It's that process of frost wedging, I mentioned. Ice expands into 9% greater volume than water.
Now, interestingly, why is this worse in Chicago than in some place much further north, let's say Spitzberg and Norway?
Well, it turns out if you have a situation where you have frequent alternating freezing and thawing, it's like driving a pickaxe repeatedly into the rock, because every time the rock freezes, it expands.
But then when it melts, the water seeps back in further, freezes and expands again.
If you just freeze it for the whole winter, then you don't have that continual repetitious creation of these frost heaves in the road.
Turns out that temperature and changes in temperature are very important for the mountains.
Even without water, large temperatures cause a continual expansion and contraction of the rock. That stretching and shrinking and contraction repeatedly for rock is enough to shatter rock over time.
And mountains will just peel away in sheets. This is also very important for deserts.
Remember I talked about how water provides a thermally insulating process for climates, because it takes so much energy to cause water to change its temperature.
Well, if you go to a desert, you don't have a lot of water, so there are huge temperature variations between the day and the night, and that over time is enough to cause rocks to shatter.
Also, very rapid changes in temperature, like forest fires, are very effective in physically breaking apart rock.
Another important mechanism, especially in steep areas, is simply physical abrasion.
Falling rock, landslides or avalanches, having one rock fall down on top of another.
Anytime you have a landslide where you have the instabilities, that rock tears away a lot more rock underneath.
Also turns out that biology plays a very important role, more as I'll mention in a moment.
But let's say you have a house and you want to grow grass. What's the best way to do it?
Put in a sidewalk with cracks in it. You may not be able to grow grass in your lawn, but for sure there's going to be grass and roots growing up in those cracks.
Well, it turns out anytime you have rock, go to any cliff and look at the side of that cliff, there'll be trees and plants sticking out.
And over time, those roots of the trees are going to work their ways down into the cracks, prying and wedging that rock apart.
Interestingly, those roots also are very involved with chemical weathering, as I'll mention in just a moment.
Another important mechanism in dry areas is actually salt crystal growth.
If you have a desert where you get an occasional rain that washes those salts out of the mountain and leaves them on the valley floor in those dry playas that I talked about previously,
as those salt crystals grow, if they're in the soil, they will expand as they grow and they will pry apart rock as well.
Now, chemical weathering is the destruction of rocks through chemical reactions that dissolve these minerals or convert them into other minerals.
And this happens in three primary mechanisms. Chemical processes are called dissolution, hydrolysis and oxidation.
Now, dissolution is what we normally think of when we think of dissolving away rock.
It's a situation where waters that are slightly acidic react with minerals to remove the positive and negative ions from the minerals and put them into an aqueous solution.
This is actually dissolving away rocks and it's a direct result of that polar nature of water.
The fact that you have a positive hydrogen side to the water molecule and a negative oxygen side means that those water molecules are going to bind to either the negative or positive ions in the minerals
and over time they're going to pull those atoms apart and actually break apart the minerals.
Some minerals are dissolved very, very slowly, but some of them are dissolved quite quickly.
Rainwater is naturally acidic. It usually has a pH of about five and a half or so.
On the pH scale, seven is neutral. Numbers less than seven are acidic.
And this is due to the presence of carbonic acid and this is going to be really important later on in the course.
But I'm just going to mention it briefly here. Carbonic acid results naturally from the combination of carbon dioxide and water.
And carbonic acid is present in small amounts in all rainwater.
But that acid actively dissolves away these minerals even more rapidly than if the rainwater were entirely neutral.
Salts and limestones are especially dissolved rapidly.
As I'll show later when I talk about groundwater, there are whole giant cave systems underground primarily in limestones where water that's slightly acidic has just opened up caverns that sometimes are as large as football stadiums.
Hydrolysis, the second mechanism of chemical weathering, is the chemical transition of one mineral into another.
And it's done with the help of the addition of a hydroxyl ion, which is the combination of hydrogen and oxygen together.
This turns out to be vitally important because it affects primarily felled spars.
And felled spars are the most abundant mineral on the surface of the earth.
And what it does is it takes felled spars and turns them into clay.
So all the mud that you see off the coast of the shoreline is the mud that will eventually become a shale or slate.
These mud, these clay minerals began as felled spar minerals and were dissolved through the reaction process of hydrolysis.
Interestingly, also during this chemical reaction, you end up as a byproduct with dissolved quartz, dissolved silica.
And it's that dissolved silicon oceans that later precipitates out to form the cement that holds sedimentary rocks together.
So basalt, which is rich in felled spar, is the most common source of the clays and muds we find in the ocean.
And by the way, the hydrolysis reaction tearing away those felled spars, it's what's happening to Cleopatra's needle.
That's what's primarily responsible for the destruction of that obelisk, causing the minerals over time to dissolve and fall right out of that structure.
Oxidation, the third mechanism of chemical weathering, occurs when free ions of oxygen join up with iron or magnesium rich minerals to create whole new minerals like hematite or limonite.
This is the process of rust, that bicycle that I left out in the rain.
It got oxidized, free oxygen that existed within the rainwater combined with the iron to create new minerals.
And the red color that we associate with rust is due to the presence of iron.
I left off one thing that's remarkably important, and that's the role that life plays.
It turns out our whole way of thinking about how weathering occurs is in the process of radically changing.
It used to be those three reactions that I just mentioned were really seen as the full story for chemical weathering, dissolution, hydrolysis, and oxidation.
But it turns out that life may play as large or even larger role in controlling and catalyzing those chemical reactions.
I mean, go out into a mountainous region and look at a rock, and what do you see?
Do you see bare rock? No. Usually you'll see lichens and mosses on the surface of the rock.
Now lichens are amazing organisms. They are actually a symbiotic relationship between fungi and single-celled organisms that work together to over time feed off of and dissolve that rock.
Bacteria, mosses, the roots of grasses and vines, all of these roots are constantly releasing chemicals that help dissolve away that rock, turning it into soil over time.
So it turns out that the presence of life on our planet has greatly accelerated over our planet's history the rate at which rock is weathered away.
If you were here on land three billion years ago, before there was life up on the surface of continents, rock would have lasted a lot longer than it does now.
Now, from a human perspective, the most important aspect of weathering is the creation of the world's soils.
Most soils, surprisingly, form in place. They're not brought there through the downward percolation of water.
Water gets into rock and begins to dissolve away some of the materials, but also convert minerals to others.
For instance, convert the feldspar into clay, and let's say you had a granite where the feldspar minerals would begin to turn to clay, that would leave behind the quartz grains as sand.
And typical soil is a combination of sand and clay and organic material from life that exists within that material.
So take a granite boulder and put it in the ground and you'll break it down over time.
Now you remember previously I talked about my friends who tried to isolate zircon crystals by breaking apart a granite boulder.
Well, they did it in a month. The earth works more slowly than that, but it is equally thorough.
Leave that granite in the ground and over relatively fast geologic time chemical weathering will turn that into its separate minerals, its sands, and its clays.
Now, I don't want to give you the wrong impression. Some soils are brought and moved into a new location from somewhere else.
This is very common, for instance, in flood plains where the flooding of a river will deposit silt out of the water, forming a new layer of soil on top of the pre-existing one.
Or, following a period of glaciation, rock that's been crushed and ground up by the glacier can either be dragged across land and deposited by the ice itself, or blown as silt after the ice has long gone.
Both of these are very important. For instance, most of Illinois is covered with hundreds of feet of blown silt that's the glacial debris left over from the last ice age, brought down from Canada.
Now, seeping water as it goes into the rock breaks up the material and what you have very quickly within soil is a set of layers.
And how far down these layers go is a function of how much rain has occurred in that region and how long that weathering has been allowed to occur.
The very top layer of soil is what's most important for humans. It's the layer of topsoil, and it contains a significant amount of organic material.
A lot of it, and primarily it's at a single cell level, bacteria, and this supports plant biomass and all of our agricultural crops.
I'm going to talk more about this in the next lecture when I talk about different geographic regions.
The important thing here though is that soil takes a tremendously long amount of time to form, thousands to even hundreds of thousands of years to form.
And topsoil is actually one of our most important natural resources, though if you were to ask someone to list what the major natural resources are, they might not think to include topsoil.
As a result, we've been tremendously careless with it. We actually lose about 70 gigatons of topsoil every year to inefficient agricultural methods.
Now, our way of farming has changed tremendously and conservation conscious agricultural methods are now being employed almost all around the world, and this is greatly reducing the rate at which our topsoil is being lost.
But still, if you look at our global inventory of topsoil, we have about 4,000 gigatons of topsoil around the globe, and this isn't something that we can easily replace.
This is something that takes thousands of years to create, and we're still losing almost 2% of our topsoil every year, washed off of fields into streams and out into the ocean.
Over the past four decades, we've lost about one third of the world's total arable land to erosion, so it's something that it's a process, a catastrophe that we don't see happening in the way we would a hurricane or a volcano, but it's something that has people very concerned.
Now, the process of weathering has a very interesting result from a geologic perspective. Remember at the start of this lecture, I talked about walking along the tops of the White Mountains of New Hampshire.
The rock at the top, granite, and metamorphic rock like schists and nices formed way down deep underground, so why are they up so high now?
Well, it turns out it's not just that the tops have eroded, because weathering works hand in hand with isostasy.
Think about it, if you have a mountain that's balanced by its deep root, and you wear away the mountain, you're no longer isostatically balanced, and your whole crust is going to rebound up.
The process happens not suddenly, of course, but quite gradually, and so as you continue to erode the top of the mountain down, the whole crust bounces up, which brings more rock back up to the elevation that it was.
The metamorphic rocks that we would otherwise never even know existed get brought to the surface many tens of kilometers, and the process occurs in just the reverse of the way it formed.
In other words, for every five kilometers of rock that gets eroded from the surface, you need to bring up the crust 25 kilometers.
And so that means this process of weathering and erosion is removing five times as much rock at the tops of mountains as we actually see evidence of, at least evidence of in the topography.
We do see the evidence in the metamorphic rocks that once existed many tens of kilometers underground, including gems like garnet and tourmaline and spinel, which only grow at very high pressures, which we would never otherwise have been able to see.
Now, I want to end on an interesting note about the history of chemical weathering on the surface of the earth.
It turns out the chemical weathering didn't always occur at the same rate, and that's not just because life didn't exist on land going back beyond a billion years.
Turns out that if you go back in the early history of the earth, there wasn't any oxygen.
Remember, early on in earth's past, early on in earth's history, we had a tremendous amount of carbon dioxide, which later got soaked up by the oceans and then soaked up by plant life.
But when did we begin to get free oxygen in the atmosphere? Well, I want to show you an interesting rock. I'm using it here for my coaster of my cup.
This rock with the different colored layers in it is called Abandoned Iron Formation. Now, it's very interesting.
If you look at the different layers within it, the colors represent layers of iron that are either oxidized or unoxidized.
That doesn't sound very unusual to you, but let me explain. Life began about three and a half billion years ago, but there wasn't any photosynthesis at that time.
It turned out it took a long time for photosynthesis to get going. Life at this point used other sources of energy, heat from thermal vents around mid-ocean ridges perhaps, or the heat from volcanoes.
The sun is a great source of energy, but it took a while for life to figure out how to really take advantage of it through the process of photosynthesis.
When life did figure it out, it was very successful, and plants from that point onward have been one of the most successful life forms on our planet.
But that transition occurred about two and a half billion years ago, which is the time that this rock dates from.
At first, as this photosynthesis began to occur, as a byproduct of photosynthesis, you had free oxygen, or you had oxygen molecules produced.
This isn't oxygen trapped as carbon dioxide, this is oxygen gas.
And the transition occurred slowly, but when you had oxygen in the atmosphere, you began to have oxidation.
Before then, my bicycle would have been just fine, it would have sat out and it would not have been rusted quickly.
But as the amount of oxygen got pumped up into the atmosphere, that whole process of oxidation occurred at a much more active rate.
From that point onward, there was no such thing as unoxidized iron.
And this rock is from the time of that transition, where life, plant life, and early photosynthetic life was just trying to get started,
and just beginning to produce oxygen at high levels.
Climates would change, it would drop, and so you'd get these alternate layers of rock that was either filled with oxidized minerals or unoxidized minerals.
Now, oxygen did more than just rust iron of course, it then provided the needed basis for animal life to occur as well.
Essentially, this banded iron formation was our ticket to existence on the surface of the land.
Now, I hope here I've begun to show you the power of erosion in shaping the surface of our planet.
And I think you're also getting a sense of the critical role that water plays in the whole process.
Not only in causing chemical reactions to occur actively, but also to actually soak in the rock and pry it apart when it freezes.
In the next lecture, I'm going to talk about what happens in the two extreme cases of the availability of water, in jungles and deserts,
in places where you either have too much water or too little, and in both cases, it makes geology and life very extreme.
Thank you.
