Music
Welcome. In this lecture, I want to talk about the geology of deserts and jungles.
Now, desert and jungle climates don't look like they have a lot in common,
but both support life that has had to evolve in order to deal with a serious shortage in a basic resource.
In deserts, that resource is water. In jungles, the missing resource is fertile soil.
It turns out you can have too much of a good thing, and sometimes, geologically,
moderation really is the best plan.
Now, with jungles and deserts, and all climates in fact, the most critical factor is water,
as we've already established, the amount of rain and snow that falls on the land.
And with jungles and deserts, the levels of precipitation are largely due to the patterns of atmospheric distribution of water vapor.
And this is primarily due to two things.
The distribution of continents, and more importantly, the locations of mountains,
and Earth's rotation and the Coriolis effect.
Now, Earth's overall pattern of atmospheric circulation involves six distinct convection cells, three in each hemisphere.
These six cells control the distribution of water and all precipitation on the surface of the Earth.
The cells are given names. From zero degrees in terms of latitude to 30 degrees north or south,
these convection cells are called Hadley cells.
From 30 degrees north to 60 degrees north, or from 30 degrees south to 60 degrees south,
these are called Farrell cells. And from 60 to 90 degrees in latitude, both north and south, these are called Polar cells.
Now, because of the Coriolis effect, moving air masses via clockwise in the northern hemisphere
and counterclockwise in the southern hemisphere, as we've already established,
it turns out the number of convection cells, six, for our planet is a direct function of that rotation rate.
Now, what would happen if Earth wasn't rotating at all?
We would have just two large convection cells, and they'd be entirely driven by thermal convection.
They would both start at the equator, and then one would move towards the north pole,
and one would move towards the south pole.
You'd have warm air heated by the sun at the equator, rising up, flowing to the poles,
cooling, sinking down, and flowing back along the surface of the land from the north pole back to the equator.
However, because the air will veer to the right in the northern hemisphere, because of Earth's rotation,
that air that moves either north or south doesn't end up going the straight line.
It turns, and when it turns, it breaks up that large thermal convection cell into separate layers.
Interestingly, if Earth rotated faster, it would have more than six cells.
For instance, if you look at the planets Jupiter and Saturn, they're huge planets, and they actually rotate very quickly,
and as a result, they have many different cells of atmospheric circulation, a direct result of their fast speeds of rotation.
Now, what I want to do is explain this pattern of circulation by following a parcel of air, as it moves from the equator outward.
That air is going to go up at the equator, down at 30 degrees north,
and then I'm also going to show air that moves up at 50 to 60 degrees north, and then comes back down at the poles.
So let's say we're sitting there at the equator.
The sea sun beats down on the equator, the air heats up, it also causes an enormous amount of evaporation.
So the air that's rising off the equator is not only warm, it's very moist.
And remember, I said that warm air can carry a lot of water vapor within it.
So this air is very rich and loaded with water vapor.
However, what happens when the air rises?
As soon as it begins to rise, it begins to cool.
And remember, I also said when air cools, it can't hold as much water vapor within it.
So that water vapor begins to condense, turn to rain, and fall out.
Most of the water vapor that turns into rain that comes off the equatorial region falls right back down in the same area as rain.
As that air mess, let's just take the northern hemisphere, for example, moves through that Hadley cell and begins to move north up high.
It loses almost all of its moisture.
So that by the time it comes down back to the surface at about 30 degrees north,
it's got no moisture. It's very dry.
And in fact, it acts like a sponge.
It comes down and it actually absorbs into it as it heats again any moisture that's on the ground.
So the equatorial region is very damp and moist, but 30 degrees north ends up being very dry.
Well, something similar happens about 50 degrees to 50 to 60 degrees north.
We have another location there. It's called the subpolar low where air is lifted up.
And as it rises, it takes this moisture within it and precipitates it back out as rain.
And that provides the rain for the temperate regions.
That air rising up follows two paths.
One of it goes southward along the top of the ferrule cell and the other moves northward towards the polar regions,
where the cold air then comes back down at the north pole.
And again, the same thing is happening on the south pole.
Now, it's interesting.
The air that moves north or south, as I said before, doesn't go straight north or south.
It turns as a result of the Coriolis effect.
And this creates the prevailing patterns of winds that we see at the Earth's surface.
For instance, the air that comes down at 30 degrees north
and then begins to move northward along the surface as the bottom part of that ferrule cell.
As it's moving north, it's going to veer off to the right as the Coriolis effect moves it,
just like that baseball hit north.
At the same time, air that comes down at 30 degrees and moves back south towards the equator
again moves off to the right, but this time it moves it to the west.
Those airs that move from 30 degrees north veering off to the right are called the westerlies.
Those are the prevailing winds that end up moving from west to east across North America.
Those winds that come down and move from 30 degrees to the equator moving westward,
those are known as the trade winds.
The combination of the two of those working together create that clockwise spiral of motion
that I said was the subtropical gyre resulting as part of the whole Gulf Stream in the Atlantic Ocean.
Again, in the Southern Hemisphere, you have the subtropical gyre behaving the same way,
but they move in a counterclockwise direction.
Now it's interesting that air that came down at the North Pole and also the South Pole,
I said was very, very dry.
As a result, when that air comes down, it doesn't rain very much or snow,
and in fact it actually absorbs a lot of moisture, and these regions are deserts.
It's strange to think of the North or South Pole as a desert because there's always water there.
I mean, it's frozen, but it's always present, but it turns out the precipitation rates are so incredibly low
and in fact Antarctica is actually the world's largest desert.
Now the North Pole has no land, it's just a continuation of the Atlantic Ocean.
It does have a frozen ice sheet at the surface that's a few meters thick.
In other words, the surface of the sea there is actually frozen.
However, because of continued global heating, that ice sheet is shrinking continuously each year,
and it's thought that it may be entirely gone within a century.
This would have very significant impacts on the whole ecosystem at the Arctic, dependent upon that ice.
Now, talking about ecosystems, it turns out that the equatorial jungles have the most complex and diverse ecosystems in the entire world.
It's a result, ironically, of having the worst soils in the world.
Now, I know this sounds strange because when you picture jungles, you think of these different layers, these canopies of life,
such complexity of interactions between plants and animals, but it turns out there's so much rain in the tropical regions
that the soils are hundreds of meters thick.
Well, this sounds like a good thing, right?
No, it's not soil the way we think of it, it's got no topsoil.
All of the nutrients have long since just been washed right out through the soil, down deep into the ground.
The soils in these regions are sandy and rusty and highly weathered.
They're everything that's left over after all the decent minerals have been long since taken out.
The soil can't even hold on to any new nutrients without them also washing away.
So as a result, the life has evolved there in order to take advantage of a situation that keeps all the organic material above ground.
Now, this has really significant impacts on people who live there because if you remove that jungle canopy for raising crops or cattle,
the soil left over is worthless.
It can't support farming or grazing for more than about a year.
It's really an unfortunate situation because some of these countries often have very struggling economies
and would really like to have the same opportunities for agricultural prosperity as countries in the temperate regions.
However, it just can't happen.
They have to find sustainable crops that can be raised within the rainforest environment.
Otherwise, they won't be able to last sustainably for more than a couple of years.
Now, life in the jungle regions, in tropic regions, as I mentioned, has evolved to keep organic nutrients out of the soils.
And life has evolved in a bizarre set of mechanisms in order to do this.
Biomass gets quickly recycled and reused before it breaks down and washes into the ground very often.
For instance, ant colonies will swarm upon leaves that fall upon the bottom of the jungle, break them up and bring them back up into the canopy.
Most ant colonies live above ground and not underground.
There are unusual symbiotic relationships that sometimes evolve in order to deal with this.
For instance, there are types of trees called acacia trees that have evolved with large hollow thorns.
And those thorns hold ant colonies that have co-evolved with the tree.
Now, what does the ant provide for the tree?
If there are other trees that begin to grow up around the acacia trees, the ant colony will swarm and grab them and kill them and use them for food.
The tree provides housing for the ant, the ant provides protection for the tree.
There are tremendous, whole, unusual ecosystems that evolve in these situations, but they try to keep material from going down underneath the surface.
Turns out, most of the world's species actually exist in rainforests.
Our greatest biodiversity is in a fairly small percentage of the world's surface.
The rough soil conditions but ample water make for this intense evolutionary diversity.
And for a selfish reason, removing the rainforest is a really bad idea because it turns out we get a huge number of our medicines and antibiotics from plants and animals and fungi that live in these tropical regions.
Because, let's say you're trying to find some resistant chemical towards a disease.
Well, you can either try to figure it out in the lab or you can let evolution do the work.
Because evolution is a very powerful mechanism within any ecosystem, within any geologic environment.
What doesn't work dies off.
So, species of all sorts of organisms have survived that have developed immunities and resistances to otherwise harmful bacteria and viruses.
And many of the medicines that we've used to battle these same bacteria and viruses have been developed by other plants and animals first.
Now, let me switch to deserts.
Deserts are the opposite situation.
They also have unique geology and biology, but they occur in situations where you have a tremendous shortage of water.
The definition of a desert, technically, is an area where the precipitation is less than 25 centimeters a year, less than 10 inches of rain over an entire year.
These regions often go extended periods of time without any rain at all.
And so, the geology and the biology are both unique to this kind of an environment.
Now, deserts occur for two main reasons.
First of all is what I talked about with that whole atmospheric cell distribution of having down going dry air masses at about 30 degrees north or south.
But also you get deserts when air masses move over mountain ranges.
I talked about this previously, this mechanism of orographic lifting, where you take an air mass that's moist, bring it up over a mountain ridge, it loses its rain, and when it goes over the mountain, the air mass is now dry.
Most of our deserts are roughly 30 degrees north or south.
If you look across a map, you can see this.
In Africa, the Sahara Desert, or the Kalahari Desert.
In Eurasia, the Great Arabian Desert, or the Thar Desert in India.
In Australia, you have the Simpson, Gibson, Great Sandy, and Great Victoria Deserts.
And in North America, the Sonora, Mojave, and Chihuahua Deserts are all roughly 30 degrees north or south.
The Sahara, by the way, as you probably know, is the largest of these.
Again, it's not the largest desert. Antarctica has that distinction.
But it's the largest hot desert.
At 9 million square kilometers, it's almost as big as the United States.
Now, these other deserts that exist behind mountains, we call those rain shadows.
And if you look in Asia, for example, the Gobi Desert is the largest example of this.
It exists in Mongolia and northern China.
And the air just has to travel a tremendous distance.
And it usually has to pass over the Himalayas.
So air is that air mass comes up on the south side of the Himalayas.
It drops its moisture out as snow on the Himalayas.
But as it moves over, the land behind is incredibly dry.
It's very, very cold.
In fact, much of the Gobi Desert is frozen during the winter.
But it's very, very dry, very little precipitation.
Another large rain shadow desert in Asia is the Takla Makin in China.
In South America, the Atacama in Chile, the Patagonia in Argentina,
and in North America, the Great Basin.
Remember, I talked with that process of orographic lifting of the Mojave Desert.
That's a classic example in the United States.
The west side of the Sierra Nevadas are quite lush because the rain precipitates
as the air that comes off the Pacific Ocean is lifted up over those mountains.
But when that air travels over the Sierra Nevadas and down, it's very dry.
And the Mojave is one of the driest areas in North America.
Now, if you don't have a lot of water in a desert region,
other mechanisms are going to be very important as eight geological agents.
And it turns out that wind in a desert region is a very important agent
of erosion, transportation, and the deposition of sediments.
I mean, when you think of a desert, what image comes to mind, right?
Something like Lawrence of Arabia with these giant seas of sand.
Now, it actually turns out that sands cover only about one-fifth, twenty percent of deserts.
Most deserts are not covered with seas of sand, but they are very dry,
with a lot of sand present.
The surface of most deserts is actually quite rocky in general.
Hard, dry, very sparse, but usually present vegetation.
This is because desert soils are the thinnest in the world.
And this happens for two reasons.
First of all, there's very little rainfall.
So the water hasn't had a chance to do much with the bedrock,
and much of the surface in deserts is actually bedrock exposed right at the surface.
And the second reason is soil that does occur often gets blown away.
The wind is often strong in a desert because of the very large changes in temperature
that I talked about previously.
Those changes in temperature cause changes in pressure that cause very strong winds,
and soil will eventually blow away, accumulating in places like sand dunes.
One of the interesting effects of these strong winds is the formation of desert pavement.
If you have a mixture of sand and silt and rock,
the lighter sand and silt gets blown away, leaving the harder cobbles behind
as a very rocky surface called the desert pavement.
However, you have to be careful.
It turns out that many things in geology have different mechanisms of formation.
It turns out you can also make desert pavement by the alternating freezing and thawing of the soil.
As the soil expands when water gets in and freezes and then contracts again when it melts,
that process will actually move large objects, large rocks to the surface.
It's a phenomenon called the Brazil nut phenomenon.
If you take a mixture of nuts of different sizes, the largest nuts,
the Brazil nuts will end up floating to the surface when you shake the material.
A similar process happens with these rocks in the desert.
Now, blown dust and wind in desert environments can be really formidable when they occur as large storms.
Some of these dust storms end up extending for hundreds to thousands of kilometers.
The largest are in the Sahara, and they can sometimes appear as a solid wall of dust more than a kilometer high.
These large dust storms can end up moving entire sand dunes during a single storm.
It's very interesting.
Sahara and dust storms are now about 10 times more common than they were about 50 years ago.
The exact reasons for this are still not entirely known.
Now, it used to be common in the United States, great plains, to have these sorts of dust storms.
If you remember the story, the grapes of wrath, places like Oklahoma used to be large dust bowls.
Most of this phenomenon doesn't occur anymore because so much water is being pulled out of the ground to grow crops
that much of the sand has since been covered over.
But we still do get some dust storms in America.
In February of 2007, a huge dust storm covered much of West Texas.
In fact, the Dallas-Fort Worth Airport was shut down because there was so much dust blowing across it.
Interestingly, the worst sand storms and dust storms in our solar system are not on our planet.
That distinction goes to Mars.
Mars occasionally has dust storms that actually cover the entire planet and last for weeks.
In fact, there is on occasion so much dust thrown up into the Martian atmosphere that the heat trapped in by it
actually causes the whole planetary temperature to increase by about 30 degrees.
On Earth, the dust that gets picked up by these dust storms often gets carried much greater distances
than just the nearby surrounding environments.
In fact, significant amounts of the sediment that accumulates in both the Central Atlantic and Pacific Oceans arrives from wind-blown dust.
Some of it comes from the Sahara and Gobi Deserts.
Those are the two major sources of dust on the ocean seafloor.
Hundreds of millions of tons of African dust are actually transported by wind to the Caribbean each year.
That's on the same scale of the amount of sediment that's carried by the Mississippi River.
In fact, interestingly, over the past decades, there's been a considerable die-off of corals in the Caribbean Sea.
Many scientists think that this is related to an increase of dust that's been brought into the Atlantic Ocean from the Sahara Desert.
Now, sand is usually too heavy to be suspended by wind.
It gets moved about in the form of dunes.
The sand in a dune moves through a process called saltation.
It's very similar to what happens on the bottom of a stream.
As the sand gets blown, it moves up a dune until it builds up a slope that's unstable.
Then you get a little landslide as that sand slides down.
The process repeats itself and you get multiple landslides of sand being repeatedly brought down.
As a result, if you cut into a sand dune, you can actually see from all these small little landslides the direction of motion of the sand dune.
We can even go to fossilized sand dunes too, like in Zion Canyon in Utah,
and we can figure out what the ancient direction of wind was by looking at the orientation of this layering in the fossilized dune.
Now, it turns out there are lots of different kinds of dunes, and they depend upon the strength and consistency of the wind direction.
Barkhand dunes have horn-like shapes that are blown when there's not much sand around.
If you have enormous amounts of sand, as in the case of a sea of sand,
you can sometimes get these transverse dunes, long lines of sand that march all the way across a desert.
Star dunes occur when you have wind blowing from a variety of different directions
that create very chaotic peaks of sand that are constantly moving and shifting as a result of the changing winds.
Now, wind, it turns out, can also be a significant agent of erosion.
This is equivalent to sand blasting away exposed rock,
but even in deserts, most erosion still occurs as a result of rain and ice,
even if it occurs infrequently. In fact, some of the worst flash floods actually occur in desert regions.
Many people die every year as a result of flooding in deserts.
Why? Because the ground is so hard, the soil is thin, bed rocks near the surface,
and when it does rain, there's no place for that rain to go into the ground.
It all goes into runoff, and you get very short-lived, but sometimes very powerful streams,
washing that rain away downhill.
Now, life in desert regions has co-evolved with the desert climates
to deal with the very high temperatures and the lack of water.
The primary plants in desert regions are succulents, cacti, yucca, century plants,
plants that hold significant amounts of water within them and grow very slowly,
and as a result can survive extended periods without any additional water.
The classic, the best known of these, is the saguaro cactus, which grows up to be 50 feet tall
and can live for more than 200 years.
Much animal life has evolved in very unique ways as well.
Animals often become active only after the sun sets,
and their coloring is often camouflaged to the grays and tans that you find in the desert.
The lighter colors will also reflect the sun and absorb small amounts of sun during the day.
For instance, the U.S. military uniforms used to be dark green.
Why? Because our wars were fought in jungle regions.
Now they're mostly tan.
Why is this?
If you stand out, you get killed.
The same thing that applies for soldiers also happens for animals in the desert.
Now, certain plants turn out to do very well in desert conditions,
often across different deserts, and the classic example is that of the prickly pear,
which was brought to Queensland, Australia in 1839 for someone's garden in their backyard.
They thought it would be really nice.
Prickly pear wasn't native to Australia.
It was native to the Western Hemisphere.
Well, the prickly pear did really well in this new desert.
In fact, by 1925, more than 60 million acres of Australia were covered by prickly pear,
and it was quickly taking over the whole country.
They couldn't burn it or slash it fast enough.
Why? It didn't have a natural predator.
It wasn't until they brought over a particular moth called cactoblastis
that lasics eggs in the prickly pear and the eggs hatch into larvae that eat out the inside of the cactus.
Well, within five years, the entire population of prickly pears collapsed.
Now, you had a lot of moths, but within a short amount of time,
both the prickly pear and the moth populations dropped.
Now, you have an interesting environmental situation
where there'll be an occasional flare-up of the prickly pear
and then of the moth, which will bring them both back down again.
Most of Earth's biomass, it turns out, is in temperate regions.
Not the deserts, not the jungles, but the regions where you have the ideal mixture of sun, rain, and soil.
Precipitation rates are high, but not too high.
The temperatures aren't too warm, aren't too cold, they're just right.
And interestingly, because the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere has increased over time,
these temperate forests are actually becoming healthier.
They can breathe more easily with more carbon dioxide to breathe in.
How long they can continue to do this, we don't know,
but for a while they're actually acting as buffers absorbing some of the additional carbon dioxide we're putting into the atmosphere.
In contrast, very little biomass exists in the desert and polar regions
compared to the rich biomass in the temperate regions.
One of the largest problems for humans around the globe is desertification.
It's a transition from a temperate or other climate to a desert climate.
Climate plays an important role in this, but most of this is due to human activities.
It's due to overuse of the land, it's due to deforestation, overgrazing, crop harvesting,
human activities that expose the soil and let it blow away to make sand or make the surface barren.
Because with the removal of shade, the evaporation rates increase,
the moisture decreases, salts are drawn to the surface, and that in return prevents further vegetation.
A classic example is the Gobi Desert.
The amount of desert there is increasing by three and a half thousand square kilometers every year.
The grasslands are being overrun by the desert.
About 50 billion dollars in economic losses occur each year to China as a result of it,
and it's largely due to deforestation and overgrazing that increases the aridity and the mobility of the sand.
Desertification is nothing new.
Many early cultures fell prey to this process, a combination of climate change and the environmental stresses of overpopulation.
For instance, in India and Pakistan, what was once the site of the thriving, glorious Indus Valley civilizations is now covered with sand.
It's just the great Indian desert.
Interestingly, places like Nebraska, in many regions of the Great Plains,
actually have thinly covered sand dunes underneath a small amount of vegetation.
They've been deserts in the past and could well be in the not too distant future.
Let me read to you the end of one of my favorite poems,
Osamandias by Percy Shelley.
You know, the one where there are two vast and trunkless legs of stone that stand in the desert.
The end goes,
And on the pedestal these words appear,
My name is Osamandias, king of kings.
Look on my works ye mighty and despair.
Nothing beside remains.
Round the decay of that colossal wreck, boundless and bare, the lone and level sands stretch far away.
You know, erosion generally happens slower in deserts than in jungles and other moist climates,
but even in deserts nothing lasts forever.
Weathering and erosion will always tear it down.
Now, in the next lecture, I'm going to talk about more ways that erosion alters the land.
I want to talk about the large scale removal of rock and soil under the force of gravity,
landslides and avalanches, a general process that we call mass wasting.
