Welcome.
In this lecture, I want to talk about ice ages, but I'm also going to start the discussion
about climate change and the role it plays in shaping Earth's surface and, it turns
out in controlling the very course of human history.
Now, as an Earth scientist, I often get asked the question, where is the climate going?
Well, I can't give a simple answer to that.
It just doesn't work that way.
Okay, suppose you worked with financial stock markets and someone asked you, where is the
market going?
How would you answer?
You first might answer by asking questions back.
Which market?
Which sector?
Are you talking short term or long term or intermediate term?
Are you talking global markets, a regional market?
Even then, it wouldn't be easy because a particular sector might be heading in one direction,
but you might know that there are other factors aligning that will cause it to change and
go in another direction.
The same situation applies for climate change.
I mean, when you ask about climate change, do you mean temperature?
When of a temperature, do you mean annual mean temperature, the annual range of temperature,
or is it rainfall or vegetation?
Are you talking global climate or regional climate?
I mean, for instance, yes, global climates have warmed over the past century, but not
everywhere.
Some places have actually gotten cooler during this time.
It's not a simple question.
And if you are talking global, how do you even measure that?
Are these, are you talking about land-based measurements, ocean-based measurements, measurements
in cities, measurements of temperature taken from satellites, taken on land?
How do you measure the mean stock market?
Are you talking about Dow Jones, index 500, the Wiltshire 5000?
You can see these are difficult questions.
And here are the big questions for climate.
What are the systems involved and over what time scales do they operate?
Because it turns out that climate lies at the intersection of so many of the different
parts of earth science that we've already talked about.
The deep earth, the atmosphere, the ocean, the sun and the rest of the solar system,
chemistry, physics, and of course, life itself.
And as for time scales, well, climate change occurs over cycles.
Within cycles, within further cycles.
Now some of these we understand fairly well.
It's warmer during the day than it is at night because there's more sunlight.
There is a daily cycle of temperature that we understand quite well.
There's also a seasonal change in temperature.
It's warmer in the summer than it is at winter.
But there are also cycles that get a little bit more complicated.
For instance, temperatures on a global scale seem to vary on scales of tens to hundreds
of years.
This involves a variety of factors that include the output of energy from the sun or ocean
circulation patterns, the water cycling back and forth between the different oceans that
we already talked about.
Well, over scales of tens of thousands to hundreds of thousands of years, it turns out
there are other factors that control climate.
And these are totally different.
This is the way the earth spins on its axis and the way it orbits around the sun.
And if you look at scales of tens of millions to hundreds of millions of years, you have
a totally different set of factors that are driving climate change.
Things like plate motions, large-scale erosion of mountains, and in the whole broad long-term
distribution of carbon dioxide cycling in between the atmospheres and the land and the
ocean.
I mean, we're just beginning to understand these properties.
So, where's the climate going?
Well, it's going up on one cycle, it's going down on another, and of course, now we humans
are doing all sorts of inadvertent experiments with the system as well.
It's just not an easy answer.
Over the next few lectures, I hope to give you a sense of the complexity of the whole
system of factors that we call climate.
And I also hope to give you a sense of just how important this is for us.
Now, humans are certainly having an effect on climate and climate change in a variety
of ways.
And unfortunately, this has become a fairly politicized subject.
I will talk about the role of humans in global climate change, but not until lecture 45.
Not until I've talked about how the earth's climate changes on its own without our help.
Now, by the way, you do know why there are seasons, right?
I mean, I asked because there was an infamous study of graduating Harvard students who were
asked all sorts of questions like, why does the sun rise in the east and why are there
seasons?
And frighteningly, large numbers of them got these questions wrong.
So first of all, earth rotates around an axis, and it rotates in a clockwise direction if
you assume that the north pole is up.
And this is why the sun rises in the east.
Now, let me ask another question.
How long does it take earth to make one full rotation around its axis, 360 degrees?
No, actually, it's not 24 hours.
It's 23 hours, 56 minutes, and 4 seconds.
Because during that time, the earth has not stayed still.
It has moved part of its way around the sun and its revolution around the sun.
And so the earth has to rotate an additional three minutes and 56 seconds to bring the
sun back to the same spot overhead, and that gives you the full 24 hours.
Now, the seasons turn out to be a result of the path that the earth takes in its revolution
around the sun.
All planets move in elliptical orbits, not circles.
This is the discovery of Johannes Kepler, and the earth is no exception.
So why are there seasons?
Well, no.
The reason we have winter is not because the earth is farthest from the sun at that point.
In fact, it turns out the earth is actually closest to the sun around January 4th each
year.
The seasons occur because the earth's axis is tilted with respect to the plane that it
travels around the sun, what we call the ecliptic.
That's why all the globes are always shown with the earth tilted at this angle.
This is 23 and a half degrees.
And so earth's axis is not perfectly perpendicular to its path around the sun.
It's slightly tilted.
So what happens is when the north pole points towards the sun, the northern hemisphere gets
more sunlight.
That's our summer.
The southern hemisphere is pointing away from the sun.
That's their winter.
Six months later, when the earth is on the other side of its orbit, the northern hemisphere
is pointing away from the sun.
That's our winter.
At the same time, the southern hemisphere is pointing more directly toward the sun.
That's their summer.
So now we know why there are seasons.
Now what does this all have to do with ice ages?
Well, here's the key.
The characteristics of earth's rotation on its axis and revolution around the sun change
slightly over time, over scales of tens of thousands to hundreds of thousands of years.
And this is the reason that we have ice ages.
Now, our life is nearly totally dependent upon sunlight.
I mean, there are a few exceptions I've talked about.
There are bugs that live down in the rock.
There are worms in mid-ocean ridges that feed off of whole food and systems that aren't
photosynthesis-based.
They don't use sunlight.
But for the most part, life is incredibly dependent upon the existence of light.
And the existence of light coming to the earth is slightly variable.
So life on the earth exists in a fairly delicate balance concerning the sunlight that it gets.
Now I don't want to alarm you.
Earth's orbit is fairly steady.
It's not going to fly off into space.
But it does have very small fluctuations that change the amount and the distribution of
sunlight across the globe.
And this can have very serious effects on global climates over intermediate timescales.
Now, let's look at a record of global temperatures extending back a few hundred thousand years.
When you do that, there are several patterns that become immediately apparent.
It seems to happen that, again, if you look over the scales of hundreds of thousands of
years, our climate occasionally jumps up into brief, stable periods of warm temperature.
We call these interglacials.
And these are followed by a decline in global temperatures to colder climates, but also
more importantly, very variable climates.
A temperature changes quite rapidly over short timescales.
So the last interglacial occurred about 130,000 years ago, and it lasted fairly briefly.
The temperature was fairly stable.
The temperatures dropped, and we went into 70 to 80,000 years of colder variable temperatures.
Then starting a little after 20,000 years ago, the temperatures began to warm rapidly.
And from about 10,000 years ago until now, we've been in another one of these warm interglacial periods.
Warm temperatures, but more importantly, very stable temperatures compared to the way climate
change usually occurs during the periods of ice ages.
Just before we had an interglacial, we had an extended period of ice ages, very cold,
very variable times.
So this is the pattern over the scale of tens to hundreds of thousands of years that we
need to be able to explain.
Now it's really challenging to try to figure out past temperatures because we weren't there
with thermometers, so we have to use other methods.
We use what are called proxies, and these are other techniques that give us the temperatures
in the past.
Now one very important method is using ice cores in Greenland and Antarctica, the two
large continental glaciers, because the ice has been sitting there for up to a million
years in places.
So if we can drill down, we can figure out what the climate was at these different times.
So this method looks at the atmospheric compositions because it looks at the rain that fell out
or the snow that fell out onto the glaciers compacted into ice.
It gives us long term changes in temperature going back many hundreds of thousands of years.
Now the drawback is it's only giving us information at Greenland and Antarctica, however those
are very good measures.
It uses an unusual technique that looks at the different isotopes of hydrogen atoms within
the water molecules.
You see, hydrogen usually consists of one proton and an electron, and because the weight of
electrons is almost insignificant, the weight of that is essentially just the one proton.
However, occasionally rarely an isotope of hydrogen also contains a neutron, we call
that deuterium.
So it has a proton and a neutron and it's twice as heavy.
Now there aren't many of these, only one in every 6,500 hydrogen atoms has that neutron
and forms deuterium.
However, they exist in quantities enough that we can measure.
And here's the interesting thing, if you've got deuterium sitting in the ocean, it takes
more energy to lift a heavy atom, and therefore more deuterium gets evaporated when the water
is warm and when the air is warm.
So if you go to Antarctica and you drill down and you look at the composition of the ice,
where the ice contains more deuterium means that there was snow that fell on Antarctica
in a warmer climate, where the temperatures of the air and the water at that time were
warmer.
We can also get temperature change in a more global sense, and this comes from a very different
technique.
We use the ratios of oxygen isotopes in the oceans.
You see, most oxygen occurs as O16.
This is an isotope of 8 protons and 8 neutrons.
However, there are also small amounts of O18.
This consists of 8 protons and 10 neutrons, so it's a little bit heavier.
That means when water evaporates off the surface of the ocean, very little of the O18 gets
evaporated.
So what does come out is water H2O that contains the O16.
So you have an ocean with mostly O16, so O18.
You take the O16 out, you drop it on land as snow.
Over time, a ratio of O18 to O16 in the ocean will get higher.
Will be proportionately more O18.
Now this would be fine, except how do we actually have a record of it?
We don't have ice forming from this time all around the oceans.
Well we do have another trick, and that is that marine shells from organisms contain
oxygen.
Most marine shells, clams, and other shells are made of calcium carbon.
This is calcium and carbon and three atoms of oxygen.
So if you look at fossils that form at different times, and you look at the oxygen atoms, and
you look at how many of them are O16 and how many of them are O18, you get a sense of global
climates.
During ice ages, the ocean was rich in O18, so fossil shells from that time are rich in
O18.
So marine fossils end up being very good for global climates.
Why?
Because the oceans are well mixed over very short time scales.
Remember I said how the ocean whole pattern of global ocean circulation may take less
than a thousand years.
Well when we're looking at scales of hundreds of thousands to millions of years, that's
a fairly short amount of time to totally mix an ocean.
Now the deuterium isotope values in ice cores, and the oxygen 18 isotopes in marine fossil
shells give us very similar results, and that's really important because we have totally
different data in different places and they give the similar results.
So that gives us a sense of reliance that we have a fairly good measure of the ice volume
and the temperature going back over hundreds of thousands of years.
If you look at this figure, the top two curves are ice core measurements of the deuterium
isotopes from Antarctica.
The bottom curve is the oxygen 18 isotopes in a sediment core from the ocean, a measure
of ice volume, and you can see indeed they line up very well and we get that same pattern.
Every hundred thousand years or so there's this spike of warm climate, the sudden rise
in temperature, it lasts a short amount of time and it goes back down into an extended
period of cold temperatures of essentially worsening ice ages until a sudden rapid rise
again.
Now, I said that the pattern of climate change is very related to Earth's rotation around
its axis and revolution around the sun.
Well where does this come into play?
The slight changes in Earth's orbital parameters, which we call the Milankovitch cycles by the
way, named after Militon Milankovitch, they occur in three ways and taken together they
affect the amount and distribution of sunlight that the Earth gets.
First of all, the ellipticity of Earth's orbit changes, that's also called the eccentricity
and the obliquity of Earth's axis of rotation changes, obliquity is a fancy word for tilt
and that axis of rotation also processes, it moves around, it doesn't point in the same
direction over time.
Well let me break these down.
Earth's orbit as I said is an ellipse, now it's nearly circular but it's still elliptical
and more importantly it oscillates over time.
Now why is this important?
It turns out if you have an elliptical orbit of let's say the planet around the sun, as
the planet moves close to the sun it moves very quickly but when it moves out on its
elliptical orbit at the far end it travels very slowly, when it comes back in it speeds
up again, that means the more elliptical your orbit is, the more your planet will spend
time far away from the sun, more elliptical, less total sunlight over the course of a year,
less sunlight means colder.
Now that ellipticity that actually oscillates over long periods that are much longer than
an Earth year, so for instance the orbit, the Earth is traveling around the sun quickly
but that orbit is oscillating in its ellipticity and it's a very complicated process, it's
influenced by the gravitational attraction of other planets in our solar system as well
and the range of that oscillation in the period and length is from about 95,000 years to a
little bit more than 400,000 years but the dominant period ends up being a little more
than 100,000 years, does that sound familiar?
That's the amount of time in between these interglacial periods, just like we saw in
the temperature change records.
Now, the second one, Earth axis, the tilted Earth axis, I said that Earth axis is currently
tilted 23 and a half degrees with respect to the ecliptic but that ranges from 22.1
degrees to 24 and a half degrees, okay?
It doesn't sound like a lot, it's just a couple degrees, however when your axis is more tilted
you get stronger seasons, in other words there's a greater annual temperature change between
winter and summer, obviously if the axis were perfectly perpendicular to the ecliptic there
wouldn't be any seasons at all, if it were very tilted on its side there would be dramatic
changes and this tilt oscillates with a period of 40,000 years, 41,000 years and also 54,000
years and combined together it's a dominant period of about 41,000 years.
Now the third part I mentioned, the procession of Earth's axis is quite interesting, turns
out currently our North pole points at a star that we call Polaris, the North star, it doesn't
always stay that way, in fact over about 12,000 years the axis is actually going to point
in a very different direction, it's going to point close to the star Vega and in another
dozen years or so it's going to come back again and we'll point towards Polaris again,
so the procession, the direction, the axis precesses, it moves in a circle around as
the Earth spins out in space and you know what, you probably have some familiarity with
that, if you've ever taken a top and spun it, what happens when it spins, the axis
actually tilts, the path sometimes the top takes might be a little, a bit of a circle
and that axis will tilt back and forth, well our planet is a spinning top in space, it
does the exact same thing as this top, only it takes a whole lot longer. Now the procession
of the axis by itself, if you're listening carefully, doesn't change either the amount
or the distribution of sunlight, however it's timing in relation to the change in ellipticity
of Earth's orbit and the tilt of the axis does have effects on climate change, in other
words is it pointing towards the Sun when the Earth is farthest away from the Sun or
is it pointing away from the Sun, these factors do change the way sunlight gets distributed
around the planet, well if you take all of these together and combine them, what you
see is a very interesting pattern of climate forcing, so if you look at this figure, you
see the top curve represents changes in climate due to changes in temperature that would be
recorded at some point in the northern hemisphere due to changes in the precession of the axis
at a combination of 1922 and 24,000 year periods. The next one, the green curve is
the obliquity, how tilted that axis, that axis is over a period of about 41,000 years.
The blue curve represents the change in Earth's orbit, its eccentricity, its ellipticity and
if you combine the three together you get the yellow curve which represents the temperature
change, the solar forcing at some location at a latitude of 65 degrees north in the summer,
just chosen as an example. When you combine them together you see there is actually quite
a strong similarity to many of the changes in climate that are represented in the bottom
curve which show the stages of glaciation. All these different factors play a role but
notice most significantly that the times of the interglacials line up very well with
that blue curve, with that pattern of the ellipticity of Earth's orbit and so there
we have it, it is these small variations in Earth's orbital parameters that end up driving
temperature changes over the scale of hundreds of thousands of years and are what cause the
ice ages. Now the most recent ice age extended from about 70,000 to about 10,000 years ago
and at times it covered much of northern North America and Eurasia with ice and it created
so much of the dramatic geology that I have already talked about in this course, large
scale continental glaciation, caused extreme erosion and deposition that I have described
in the lecture on glaciers and elsewhere. Remember the lakes in Minnesota, the giant
massive terminal moraine that is a continuation of Long Island all the way straight up through
to Cape Cod, the glacial soils that cover much of the mid part of the country, the existence
of the Ogallala aquifer, all that water that was recharged underground from the runoff
of the large ice sheets, the giant lakes that once covered parts of Utah and other states
that evaporated away to leave us the giant salt flats like the Great Salt Lake and the
Bonneville salt flats, the massive carved out valleys like the Alps and Yosemite where
the motion of the glaciers tore away large portions of the rock. I talked about the rebound
of Canada moving upward as the ice was removed and the ascentosphere began to flow back underneath.
I talked about the giant ripple marks that cover parts of the northern plains where these
massive glacial lakes burst dramatically, flooding the surface with enormous amounts
of water. I mean, for example, the Great Lakes today represents some of the largest lakes
of the world, but they're really just puddles that are left over from the last ice age.
They were once huge, enormous lakes, much larger, containing a lot more water than they
do today. Now, the times of global cooling like these last ice ages also have very important
effects on life, on living organisms, on the very evolution of species, both plant and
animal because it's tough to live through a time where the temperature drops dramatically
and it's really cold. As the global climate would have cooled gradually, regional climate
bands would have shifted all around the planet. In other words, alpine environments would
have dropped down to much lower elevations and zones of temperate forests would have
extended to lower latitudes, further from the poles, and this is in areas that weren't
entirely covered with ice anyway. During the recent ice ages, cold temperatures also
favor the evolution of larger animal sizes because if you're larger, your heat has to
go further to get to the surface, you just retain your heat much more efficiently. So
many mammals such as the giant mammoths and elk and sloths evolved to be enormous. There
were ground sloths that were more than 20 feet high. There were horses whose backs were
taller than an adult human. And interestingly, as the climate warmed, these species no longer
survived because their whole body structure had evolved to deal with very cold temperatures.
The drop in sea levels during the ice ages also had very interesting effects on earth
geology and biology. Suddenly you had enormous expanses of exposed land, again those areas
that weren't covered with ice, and so you ended up with very increased rates of erosion.
Remember back in geologic time I talked about unconformities, places where the geologic
rock record was missing. Well, if you suddenly drop the sea level because you've put all
the water up on the land as ice, you erode the surface everywhere, and layers of rock
that may have taken tens of millions of years to form now get eroded and are permanently
lost. Interestingly, you greatly increase the total area of continents. I mentioned earlier
that continents actually occupy 39% of the surface of the earth. However, 9% of the surface
of the earth, about a quarter of continents are currently flooded, are under water because
of the rise in sea levels. So 30% of our surface is land, but a large portion exists as continental
shelf. Those are very fertile shallow marine environments. Well, during times of glaciers,
all those areas are brought above sea level, and so your marine environments are very limited
to the steeper continental slopes and tend to be quite narrow zones. These are rougher
times for marine organisms, as well as causing a change in global climates because often
larger continents mean a shift towards monsoon type climates, a large annual alternation
between rain and dry, rainy periods and dry periods. You drop the sea level, you also
do something very interesting. You connect continents. The Bering Strait is very shallow.
It's about 150 feet deep. Well, the sea level was 400 feet deeper when, during the time
of the last ice ages, that means that Eurasia and North America and South America were all
one continuous land mass. So about 20,000 years ago, woolly mammoths that had evolved
over in Eurasia crossed over from Siberia to North America. And following soon after
were us humans. Humans came across into North America from Asia about 14,000 years ago. And
interestingly, they brought their domesticated dogs with them as well, the first dogs to
come into North America. At the same time, in Southeast Asia, the lowering of the sea
level there connected Australia with the rest of Asia. And the native aboriginals that
live in Australia now came over at that point, were able to walk across or at least move
across very shallow regions in order to get from Southeast Asia into Australia. Now, all
this came to a rapid end 10,000 years ago. Why? Because of these Milankovitch cycles.
It was the end of the glacial period. It was the start of the next interglacial. It was
just the way the different orbital parameters combined. It's part of that whole intermediate
time cycle of global climate change. There was a very rapid rise in temperature and the
start of a warm, stable period, interestingly, that also coincided and not coincidentally
with the start of human civilization. I'm going to talk more about this in lecture 41.
But first, I need to explain the reasons that we have very long time scale change. I mean
even much longer than the Milankovitch cycles. I'm going to do that in the next lecture.
And I also need to explain some of the reasons that we have very short time scale, time scale
climate changes. And I'm going to do that in lecture 40.
