Welcome.
In this lecture, I want to talk about how climate changes over short time scales.
Now, there's been a lot of attention paid to the whole topic of human impacts on climate,
and I don't want to take anything away from the importance of this question.
It's not going to go away, and in fact, it may well be the dominant question that ends
up defining the 21st century.
But first, we really need to understand what climate does on its own before people come
into the picture.
Now, in the last two lectures, we looked at climate variations at time scales from tens
of thousands to hundreds of millions of years.
But what about change over years or decades?
Well, it turns out there are several factors that affect climate at these shorter time
scales.
Here, variations in sunlight, ocean current fluctuations, eruptions of volcanoes, these
different mechanisms cause very rapid, instantaneous changes in climate that have had a tremendous
effect on humans.
Now, I've already talked about how complex variations affect the whole climate system.
There are many different interactions between the geosphere, the biosphere, the hydrosphere,
cryosphere, atmosphere, and solar input, all of these work together to affect climate change.
However, there are certain instances where we can actually look at a particular climate
event and identify a possible cause for it, and I'm going to try to do that here.
However, I've got to warn you, this is still a very speculative field of research.
There is not necessarily a direct causation between events that are correlated.
It's quite possible.
There might be two or more causes for a certain climate event.
In fact, it's even statistically likely that sometimes there are multiple causes for particular
events.
Or even still, there may be many cases where certain climate changes are occurring due to
causes and mechanisms we haven't even identified yet.
However, there are some that we've begun to identify, and I'm going to try to outline
these here.
Now, first of all, our whole surface geologic system is driven by the sun, so changes in
sunlight have a tremendous effect on Earth's climate.
We call these changes an insulation, INSOL, A-T-I-O-N, not insulation.
The insulation is the amount of sunlight we receive on Earth's surface, and these changes
turn out to be small, but end up playing very important roles in controlling Earth's
climate.
Now, our understanding of this is relatively new, and there's still a lot of uncertainty.
And a major part of the problem is, we don't have fossil sunbeams.
In other words, there's no record going back in the geologic past of how much sunlight
Earth's surface received.
But that's not entirely true.
We have one mechanism for going back in the past and figuring out sun's temperature, and
those are sunspots.
This is a very interesting situation.
Our sun, as I've mentioned previously, is an average-sized star.
The fusion goes on in the core.
This is where the energy gets released.
You get 340 trillion, trillion, trillion protons fusing to form helium nuclei every second,
and that process of nuclear fusion destroys a small amount of mass that gets converted
into energy, and it's that energy that heats the surface of the Earth.
Now, inside the sun, interestingly, the temperature is so increased that that heat gets transmitted
out of the core by radiation, unlike Earth's interior, and that powers, at the top part
of the sun, a large convection zone.
And here, the solar plasma, essentially it's just protons stripped of their electrons,
just in tall, narrow columns.
And the tops of these convection columns have sort of a bumpy, knobbly appearance, and that's
what's the sun's photosphere.
That's what we see.
Now, the sun doesn't really have a surface, it's just plasma.
But we call the photosphere the sun's surface because that's the boundary for visible light.
And that surface has a temperature of 6,000 degrees Kelvin, and that determines the radiation
that leaves the sun.
Primarily peaked in the visible spectrum of electromagnetic radiation, but also large
amounts of ultraviolet and infrared.
So that bumpy surface of the sun has some unusual characteristics.
It sometimes appears to have spots on it, that's what we call the sun's sunspots.
And the number of spots are tremendously variable.
They range from none to a couple hundred at any given time.
They're not islands.
Remember, the sun doesn't have a surface.
They're regions of very strong magnetic field that slightly inhibit the sun's convection,
making the surface of that spot a little bit cooler and therefore appearing darker to us.
But interestingly, the times the sunspots occur are times when the sun's photosphere
is elsewhere slightly hotter, emitting slightly more energy.
If you look at a correlation over the last decades of time, we see the very strong correlation
between the number of sunspots that are visible and the amount of radiation the sun is emitting.
The amount of sunlight we get varies very slightly.
This irradiance varies between 1,365.5 watts per meter squared to 1,366.5 watts per meter
squared.
It's a very small amount.
One part in a thousand, however, that's enough to play a significant role in affecting Earth's
climate.
So we have this correlation.
The sunspot, more sunspots, more energy.
And it varies over short time scales with a very clear period of about 11 years.
It may also vary over much longer time scales, and that's a very interesting point.
If you look back over the last few hundred years in the number of sunspots that have existed
on the surface of the sun at any time, we see long-range patterns.
In the 1600s and 1700s, the times there were almost no sunspots.
This is a period we call the Mondur Minimum, a minimum in solar input received at the Earth.
In the 1800s, there was a period called the Dalton Minimum, again a decrease in the number
of sunspots and therefore the sun's energy.
Interestingly, the number of sunspots sort of peaked going from 1900 to 1950.
In fact, the increase in global temperatures on Earth in the first part of the 20th century
is partly due to this increase in solar output.
Perhaps a third of the increase in temperature we saw is due to a slight warming of the surface
of the sun.
However, since 1950, the surface has cooled off a little bit and the number of sunspots
has decreased.
Why does this record only go back to the 1600s?
Well before then, there weren't any telescopes.
No one was looking at the sun and counting the sunspots on it.
So we have a mechanism that goes back a few hundred years, and that gives us a sense that
indeed the sun's output does fluctuate.
Maybe over even long time scales, we just don't know that yet.
We can look back at these times.
The little ice age between 1550 and 1850 corresponded to this decrease in solar output, the Maunder
Minimum and the Dalton Minimum, periods of depressed solar activity with fewer sunspots.
Sea ice around Iceland, for example, that had been non-existent during the warm and
middle ages, now clogged up the seas for weeks out of the year, starting in about 1600.
This actually peaked by 1800, when for half the year the sea was clogged and frozen up
with ice around Iceland.
In 1690, with so cold, Eskimos actually landed in Scotland, and many Scots moved southward,
emigrated to Northern Ireland, setting up the stage for the political unrest for centuries
after.
This was a period of cold throughout Europe, and life moved inside at this time.
This also saw a great increase in the arts, music and painting, the whole sort of explosion
of culture that happened during the Baroque period.
Some historians have attributed to the fact that it was cold, and people spent more time
indoors.
Interestingly, we also see climate change at the end of one of these periods of minimum
solar output.
At the end of the little ice age, in the late 1800s, this increased warming led to a period
of rains in Europe, and this caused the potato blight in Ireland that killed off millions
of Irish and caused a huge migration of Irish to America.
Another region where we can point to particular events of sudden change in climate are involved
ocean circulation.
Although we have a similar problem for ocean circulation that we have with sunspots and
the output of the sun, we don't have a fossil record of ocean circulation changes.
We only have sort of historical records and accounts.
Now we have satellite monitoring, which provides us with a direct record of surface temperatures
and patterns of motion at any given point.
But this is very recent, and we're really just beginning to understand the tremendous
variations in the transfer of heat between different regions of the ocean.
Remember, I talked about the oceans as being this conveyor belt system, this constantly
shifting and changing, moving water throughout the different oceans.
And because of the very high latent heat of water, remember the fact that you need
to give water a lot of energy in order to change its temperature, the oceans are huge
reservoirs of heat, and these currents therefore carry heat all about the surface to various
parts of the world.
So if you have changes in the patterns of ocean currents, you have significant changes
in regional climates.
We already talked about one of the most important patterns of ocean circulation changes, the
El Niño effect, which is actually tied into a broader oscillation pattern.
El Niño is often followed by La Niña, and it's part of it.
It's often called ENSO, ENSO for El Niño Southern Oscillation.
So what happened with El Niño?
Well, we had warm Pacific equatorial currents that usually go from east to west, changing
their direction and flowing west to east.
The warm water arrives on the coasts of Central and South America, which had really deleterious
effects on fishing yields there.
El Niño, however, is also a coupled ocean atmosphere system.
At the same time, it involves large changes in atmospheric circulation patterns.
So when you have an El Niño affecting ocean currents, you also have extensive droughts
on the eastern side of the Pacific, and you get large typhoons and thunderstorms occurring
on the western side.
El Niño is followed by La Niña conditions, which involves warm waters moving even further
west than normal.
So it's almost like a big spring, where the waters flow one way for a while, and then
the warm water flows back again with La Niña.
This whole process, this oscillation of the large-scale ocean convection patterns, occurs
over a scale of fairly short times by human standards, about three to eight years, and
is of variable strength.
We don't quite know what drives that particular period, or what causes some and so oscillations
to be strong and some small.
They are clearly the strongest of the current ocean oscillation phenomena, but what exactly
drives them?
We still don't have a direct sense.
Solar output plays a role, but if so, why doesn't and so occur at an 11-year cycle?
Part of the problem in trying to figure this out is that what we have is a very complex
set of interconnected systems.
I like to think of it as a whole group of springs of different shapes and sizes all
connected, like some strange rhub goldbird contraption.
And if you push on it in one place, there's not a direct correlation as to what's going
to come out someplace else.
We haven't been able to predict that yet.
We may at some point, but we're just not there.
I talked about another important example of changes in ocean oscillation, and that's
what occurs when the Gulf Stream shuts off.
Now, the shutoff of the Gulf Stream doesn't occur on a regular basis, but it can have
dire consequences for Europe.
Let me give you an example.
Suppose you have a flood of cold water into the North Atlantic.
This cold water, you would think is being heavy because it's cold, but it's actually
buoyant because it's not salty.
It's fresh water, so it doesn't sink down.
Remember, the Gulf Stream involved a process where you had warm water from the equatorial
Atlantic flowing in through the Gulf of Mexico up along the east coast of North America and
across the top of the Atlantic towards the North Atlantic and then sinking down again.
Well, if you suddenly flood the top part of the Atlantic with fresh cold water, that whole
pattern of thermohaling circulation, thermohaling temperature and saltiness, those are the two
characteristics that affect the density of the water, that circulation of thermohaling
convection stops and it shuts down.
If the cold water doesn't sink, the Gulf Stream can't move up to replace it.
The fresh water comes from a variety of sources, but usually from melting glaciers or the sudden
burst of a glacial dam, and it can serve to shut down the ocean convection in the North
Atlantic.
And remember, these processes of bursting glacial dams can be quite catastrophic.
Remember I talked about the ripple marks 100 meters apart in North America where water
flooded across.
There's another great example in Europe.
The English Channel was actually cut by such glacial dams bursting.
Actually the English Channel was formed by two such floods, both at the start of one
of these interglacial periods, one 425,000 years ago and another 225,000 years ago.
So it's ironic.
You can have a period of global warming which can shut down the Gulf Stream and end up sending
Western Europe into a deep freeze.
We actually think that this happened about 500 to 400 years before the Common Era, following
an extended warming period.
Interestingly, during this time, because Europe was so cold, many Europeans moved southward
in order to find better pastures, greener pastures, better places to grow crops.
At that time, 500 to 400 before the Common Era, the Macedonians moved southward from
more central Europe, invaded Greece, essentially overran the Greek culture, and set the stage
for the Macedonian King Alexander, Alexander the Great, to essentially form the first
giant civilization encompassing Europe and parts of the Middle East.
So I've talked about sunspots, I've talked about ocean circulation.
Perhaps some of the most dramatic and sudden changes in climate are due to volcanic eruptions.
These can and have been the most catastrophic of these climate changes that can significantly
alter the course of human history instantaneously.
Now I've already talked a little bit about what comes out of a volcano, the carbon dioxide
and the water vapor.
These are greenhouse gases, so over long periods of time, volcanic activity causes in general
warming.
Remember, this is what happened following the whole breakup of Pangea, where I had slabs
sinking into the earth, rock rising up, and lots of hotspot volcanism that caused a lot
of the warming that happened during the Cretaceous period.
Well, over short time scales volcanoes have just the opposite effect, because very fine
dust and aerosol particles that are ejected into the atmosphere block out sunlight.
It's like putting up an umbrella, a parasol, blocking out sunlight, and this can reduce
global temperatures over very rapid time scales by greatly increasing the reflectance of earth's
atmosphere.
Sunlight just doesn't get in.
But interestingly, the dust is important, but what's actually more important are aerosols.
Very small, tiny droplets of materials, like sulfuric acid droplets, because these can
last in the atmosphere for months to years, and in fact, their effects can even last longer.
For example, Krakatoa erupted in 1883, catastrophic volcano.
Following that eruption, sulfate aerosol levels increased by a factor of five.
They were five times higher than usual in the atmosphere, and that lasted for about
a half a year.
However, global temperatures dropped for three years following the volcano.
Now interestingly, there's another effect of having all this little particulate material
in the atmosphere.
It causes dramatic sunsets.
Some of you may know the painting, Edvard Munch's The Scream, with this dramatic, red,
almost violent sunset in the background.
Well he started painting that right after 1883, right after the Krakatoa eruption.
Volcanoes, you can trace throughout human history cases where sudden climate events
have actually significantly affect human activities.
For instance, why did the French Revolution occur in 1789?
Okay, if you've taken courses in modern European history, you probably have a whole bunch of
reasons having to do with a variety of socioeconomic problems developing in Europe.
Well, it's much simpler than that.
It was volcanoes.
In 1783, heckle of volcano in Iceland and a sum of volcano in Japan erupted violently.
These spewed out tremendous amounts of ash and aerosols that decrease the temperatures
all across the globe.
In fact, the year before the storming of the Bastille was the coldest winter of the century.
Crops failed everywhere.
A massive starvation occurred.
It's interesting, there was an American statesman living in France at the time who reported
that the sun shone weekly all summer and gave off little heat, and he actually guessed that
the cause was due to the Iceland volcano.
You can probably guess who that was.
It was Ben Franklin, the same guy who had figured out the whole process of mantle convection
and had mapped the Gulf Stream.
France fell.
The storm in the Bastille happened in 1789, but it was only one of about a dozen governments
in Europe that collapsed.
It was a widespread change in the whole socioeconomic situation in Europe.
Why?
You know, the whole thing with, you know, let them eat cake because they didn't have
bread.
Well, why didn't they have bread?
They didn't have bread because of the volcano had dropped the temperature, had caused the
crops to fail, and people were starving.
And when people are starving, there's generally political unrest, or changes of a variety
of types.
Here's another example.
After 1815, there's a huge push of Americans heading westward.
A huge westward expansion happened at this time.
Why?
I mean, what would make you pick up your belongings, throw them in the back of some covered wagon,
and head off into some unknown territory in the western U.S.?
Well, you'll do that if you're starving to death, if you don't have any food.
Why didn't people have any food?
Because of the eruption of a volcano, Mount Tambora.
The year after that eruption, 1816, is known as the year without a summer.
Snowed in New England in the summer.
It snowed in June.
It was the coldest year since 1601, which interestingly followed a volcanic eruption
in Peru.
The worst famines of the 19th century happened then.
An interesting quirk, the Farmer's Almanac, which had been a fairly unknown publication
up until that point, had a typo that erroneously predicted snow in New England in June.
And it snowed in New England in June.
And from that point on, the Farmer's Almanac became a huge bestseller.
Well, it wasn't just Tambora.
In fact, there were several volcanoes.
St. Vincent Island in 1812, Mayan volcano in the Philippines in 1814, and then Tambora
in Indonesia.
And Tambora was the largest volcano of the past thousand years.
It ejected about 100 cubic kilometers of tephra into the atmosphere.
And all that dust and particulate matter dropped global temperatures rapidly and sent many
parts of the world like Europe into a deep freeze.
Incidentally, spectacular sunsets were also observed after Tambora's eruption.
Many of you may know the dramatic sunsets and the paintings of Joseph Mallory Turner.
Well, his sunsets don't have those colors in the years before the Tambora eruption.
Interestingly there was a study in the year 2007 of more than 500 paintings by many artists
such as Turner and Rembrandt, Rubens, Degas, Coppoli, Gainsborough, and it showed that
the sunsets of these artists were significantly more colorful in years following a big volcanic
eruption than before.
I mean, yes, they were creative and interpretive in what they were painting, but they were
also painting what they saw.
Now, I can go on, there are many examples of other significant historic volcanic eruptions
that greatly changed civilization.
If you go back 3,000 years ago, 1,150 to 1,136 years before the Common Era, again Iceland
was erupting heckle of volcano, ashes rained on China for 10 days straight, and many anthropologists
suggest that 90% of the population of Scotland and Northern England died at that time.
209 years before the Common Era, again probably an Iceland eruption, caused again global devastation.
The Chinese historian Pan Koo said that great famines killed more than half the population,
people ate each other, and the emperor lifted legal prohibitions against the sale of children.
The stars weren't seen at night the following year for a period of about 3 months.
The year 536 in the Common Era, Mount Rabaul in New Guinea, the Byzantine historian Procopius
wrote that the sun gave forth its light without brightness, like the moon, the darkness lasted
for 18 months, and each day the sun shone for only 4 hours.
He also said that 80% of the population starved to death at that time.
Now population losses on the order of 80-90% are absolutely unfathomable today, but we
can go back within just the last few thousand years and find several events, several times
where volcanic eruptions caused this to happen.
Incidentally, there is one eruption that may have been worse than any of these.
It's interesting, if you go back and you look in the climate record, a period of severe
ice ages began about 75,000 years ago, a little less than 75,000 years ago.
It's very interesting.
If you look in anthropology at the mitochondrial DNA of Homo sapiens, it seems like humans
living today evolved from common ancestors also about 75,000 years ago.
Now this is interesting because Homo sapiens had evolved, we think, somewhere around 200,000
years ago and had spread into different regions of the world, had come out of Africa, but
we're not related to those people.
We're related to a small group of people that seem to have all existed about 75,000 years
ago.
Why?
Is there any correlation between these two?
Well, 75,000 years ago, Mount Toba erupted, Toba volcano in Indonesia is the largest eruption
of the past 100,000 years, 280,000 cubic kilometers of rock was ejected into the atmosphere.
The explosion of this volcano was equivalent to a gigaton of TNT.
If you go there now, you see the caldera from this volcano is 100 kilometers in length.
It's the largest in the world.
What some anthropologists propose is that though humans had scattered somewhat about
the globe, the strain on the environment was so severe that most humans may have died.
It was just in a few places like the warm, sheltered rift valleys of Africa where a few
tribes survived and all modern humans have since evolved from that group that survived.
In other words, a volcanic winter would have followed this eruption, but following that
volcanic winter would have been an extended period of cold, probably lasting thousands
of years.
And so over weeks, to months, to years, to decades, to millennia, the population would
have continued to drop and dwindle and pass through a narrow bottleneck.
And that bottleneck, the tightest point there, represents the population from which all modern
humans evolved.
These sorts of phenomena, eruptions like Toba, don't happen very often, but they have happened
in the past and of course they always have the potential of happening again.
From this lecture, I hope that you now have a better understanding of how climate changes
happen sometimes rapidly and sometimes over very short time scales.
So now over the past few lectures, we've now examined the mechanisms of climate change
over very long, intermediate and now short time scales and seen the different ways that
they can affect human history long before people came into the story with the whole
industrial revolution and our own production of greenhouse gases.
In the next lecture, I want to talk about some specific examples of how climate and climate
change have actually shaped the course of human society and civilization.
I'm going to essentially run through a timeline of human history and show how the events in
the history of our civilization have been punctuated by particular changes in climate
from mostly these short time scale events that I've talked about today.
