Welcome. In this lecture, I want to focus on the current most powerful agent of geologic
change, us humans. As a poster, I see on the walls of airports for the organization care,
and it shows the dusty face of what looks to be an African woman. And the title on the
poster reads, I am powerful. And every time I look at it, I think, you have no idea.
Now, there's nothing new about life altering the planet. This has happened regularly over
the past four billion years. What is remarkable, however, is the speed with which one particular
species, humans, are doing this. Now, there are many previous examples of life significantly
changing Earth's surface. Photosynthetic cyanobacteria two and a half billion years ago removed the
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and put free oxygen, which gave us ozone, allowed life on
continents. Ocean worms and marine sediments ended the snowball Earth's runaway greenhouse
huge temperature swings by churning up sediments and getting methane out of the sediments.
Corals and shells created limestone that now cover most of the continents.
Leafy trees became a massive store of carbon dioxide, tremendously buffering climates.
And of course, single celled bacteria and archaea cause or catalyze almost all geochemical reactions.
There's almost no such thing as geology at the surface that doesn't involve life.
So what's so unusual about humans? Well, we have managed to significantly alter our planet
in just 200 years. Remember, humans are so young. Six percent of all human beings that have ever
lived are alive today. And 20 percent of all adults that have ever lived because in the past
many humans died during childbirth. 20 percent of all adults are alive today that have ever lived
on this planet. And we've done this through a scientific understanding of how the Earth works.
Just the things I've talked about in this course, natural resources, how to channel energy,
how to incorporate physics and chemistry with the aspects of the Earth,
and through the development of this information, what we call engineering and industry.
Now, I have to be careful when I talk about this subject. Because when I go through this
list of our effects on the planet, it too easily sounds like a litany of bad deeds and
moralistic judgments, pollution, the ozone hole, mass extinctions of animals, global heating,
and on and on and on. It can get depressing and nobody wants to hear it. But that's not what
I'm saying here at all. Again, I'm a geologist. I take a long look at things. This is all inevitable.
It's because we're an infant species. We're like a child, a big child that doesn't yet know its powers.
And because we're young, we make mistakes. Each mistake we make, however, is an opportunity
to teach. And the hope is that the lessons are learned when the mistakes are small,
so that the big mistakes don't happen. I mean, people don't intentionally destroy their homes,
right? Humans have done that at times. But only because we're so young and we're just beginning
to realize what we're doing. I mean, we've never been here before. It's inevitable that
we're going to do some things wrong. Believe me, if there are other species in the galaxy that have
reached this same stage of development, they're making plenty of mistakes too. Now, you don't want
to pretend that there aren't any mistakes. That's societal neurosis. And you don't want to deny that
they've happened. That's lying. What you want to do is learn from them while they're still small,
so you don't make the big ones. Now, there are plenty of examples of mistakes that were caught
before they became larger. I've talked about the ozone hole already, right? An ozone hole is a really
bad idea, but we passed legislation that stopped the production of chlorocarbons around the globe
to a great degree, and the growth of the ozone hole has largely stopped, and maybe even begun to
reverse. Okay? Letted gasoline was a really bad idea. It washed off roads, into streams, into
people's water supplies. But in 1973, the U.S. began to phase out lead in gasoline, and lead levels
in streams have dropped considerably and almost are gone. Atmospheric nuclear testing was a really
bad idea. Okay? It led to clouds of irradiated isotopes that got into crops, that got into milk,
okay? But testing moved underground, and now nuclear testing is almost non-existent around the
whole globe. Now, the presence of countries makes things a little bit complicated, because lessons
learned by one country can sometimes have to be re-learned by other countries at a much later
date. In one sense, the countries are like a bunch of children, all of different ages. Some have
already made their mistakes and are learning from them. Some are a little bit behind. Okay? What I'm
going to do here in this lecture is list a few areas where humans are rapidly and powerfully
altering their world. You can think of it as a report card if you want, but no one should be sent
to his or her room because of it. There's no shame involved here. We're just trying to figure out
how to do this. However, some dinner table discussions might be a good idea. Well, let me start at the
top. Literally, we're putting a whole lot of stuff up into space. It's an area you don't normally
think about as having a large impact on humans, but there are currently more than 600,000 objects
of at least a centimeter in size that orbit around the earth. These are remnants of previous
satellite launches. The United States Strategic Command actually tracks the locations continuously
of the largest 10,000 of these, most of which are larger than a meter in size. They pose serious
hazard to the International Space Station, any other missions out in space, and all the satellites
that we have up there. And actually, one person so far, Lottie Williams in Tulsa, Oklahoma, on
January 22, 1997 was actually hit in the shoulder by a small piece from a Delta II rocket fuel tank
that had been launched the previous year. Humans are significantly changing the appearance of many
parts of the land, of course. Erosion rates have increased dramatically, primarily through the
removal of vegetation and increased agriculture, but also a lot of other activities. Now,
for the past 10,000 years, humans have been removing forests in order to make
lands for livestock and agriculture. That's nothing new. This, however, has had a tremendous effect
on the biosphere, and currently, this is a remarkable statistic, about 35 percent of the
world's land. That's one-third of all the continents that are not covered with ice
are now used for human food, for growing crops and grazing livestock in order to feed us,
and that number is rapidly rising. Each year, I mentioned previously when I talked about soils,
about 70 gigatons of rare topsoil is lost each year. Stuff that takes thousands of years to create
is being washed away every year, though that number is decreasing, as better agricultural
practices have been developed. Highway road cuts have rapidly increased erosion in many parts of
the world. Wetland regions have been largely drained or even filled in, removing the water
from the land. This makes regions more arid and makes for much larger seasonal temperature changes
because you remove that water buffer. Remember, water has a very high heat capacity, a latent heat.
If you take those wetlands away from a particular region, you remove its ability
to buffer its seasonal temperatures, and also you make the areas more arid, and they have,
therefore, less rain, which makes them more arid again. Now, sometimes this process is inadvertent.
An interesting example came at the end of the Ice Little Ice Age, where it was so cold in Europe
that European settlers in North America killed more than 50 million beavers in order to make
fur coats and hats for Europeans. Well, you remove the beavers, you remove the damned upstreams,
and the New England wetlands disappeared. It actually has made winters in New England much more
harsher because you've removed a huge portion of the surface water there. And in the process,
you've actually added to the increase in cold temperatures because you've removed a significant
amount of biomass from these regions. The amount of the U.S. that's now paved is greater than the area
of the state of Ohio and increasing rapidly. The paving affects land temperatures, which
affects storm patterns. As I talked about previously in streams, it also affects water flow patterns
because it increases the amount of water that rushes into the streams and out into the ocean
during storms. In other words, you prevent water which should be going into the ground to recharge
our groundwater, and you're taking that water and you're washing it out into the sea. In urban areas,
that has become a huge problem. Humans are currently generating waste at a staggering pace.
There are about 450 million tons of garbage generated every year in the United States.
It's about a ton per person per year. However, recycling has gone up considerably and quite
dramatically. In 1991, recycling reclaimed and recycled and reused about 11 and a half percent
of U.S. wastes, and that number went up to 32 percent, about a third of wastes in 2001.
Now, the amount of course is much lower in other countries that aren't as far along on their
recycling programs. China, for instance, dumps one-third of industrial wastes and about two-third
of human wastes untreated, and China has a whole lot of people. Recycling is in general on the rise.
There are other places like Europe, however, which recycle even much higher percentage of their waste
than in America. This is a lesson that's being learned. Humans have had significant effects on
streams and lakes. In America, government legislation has been extremely successful in
reducing pollution. Streams are recovering well. Okay, the situations, however, are getting worse
in other countries that are developing their industrial complexes. In America in the 1960s
and 70s, many rivers and lakes were polluted to the point that they were undrinkable, unswimmable,
unfishable, they were unusable. Where I grew up in northern New Hampshire, there was a river,
the Andrus Goggin, that was so polluted, it filled the entire valley with an incredible stench.
Well, that river is largely clean now. A textbook example back at that time, though,
however, was the Cuyahoga River in Cleveland, which had been filled with so many industrial
chemicals and hydrocarbons that it actually caught fire and burned two different times,
in 1952 and again in 1969. Well, a few years later, the Clean Water Act, which went into effect
between 1972 and 1977, began cleaning up these lakes and streams, and it's really a tremendous
success story. Life has returned. These streams are now mostly clean. Swimming and fishing has
returned. The report card is not perfect. Many streams in this country still have very high
levels of pathogenic bacteria that are largely due to livestock and human wastes.
Part of the reason for this is just our population is increasing so rapidly, and therefore, so are
our food supplies. Groundwater. Groundwater supplies in many parts of the world are significantly
contaminated. As I talked about previously, when I talked about the whole groundwater system,
and this comes from a variety of sources, industry, dumping petroleum spills in farming
areas, it's agricultural chemicals, and unlike streams, groundwater takes much longer to recover.
It may be thousands or tens of thousands of years before the groundwater recovers from the impact
we've already had on them. The course of many streams and large rivers are diverted or damned.
Remember the world's largest engineering project, the attempts to keep the Mississippi
River in its current channel? Well, they're rivers around the world that have been significantly
altered or used. One example is the Colorado River. Part of the year, not a single drop
of the Colorado River actually makes it into the ocean. It's entirely withdrawn for human purposes,
partly for drinking water, but mostly to grow our food, the crops in the California's
Imperial Valley. Remember the one-third of the world's surface that isn't ice that's being used
to feed us? In fact, water resources across the entire western U.S. have been largely diverted
and re-rooted to places like Los Angeles to provide drinking water for the 13 million people there,
or is it 14 or 15 million? The rapidly increasing populations in some of the cities.
One of the largest effects of human activity has, of course, turned out to be on the atmosphere.
As I've alluded to several times during the lectures on climate change,
carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases have been increasing in the atmosphere,
but it's not just greenhouse gases. Pollution comes from other areas, particulates and aerosols,
often causing an increase in cloud cover. Sulfur oxides, nitrous oxides, these materials in the
atmosphere have significantly increased the acidity of rain. Remember I talked about rain
as having normally a pH of somewhere in the order of five to six? That's a level of acidity.
It's slightly acidic normally. Well, there are rains now with a pH of vinegar, 2.4 or lower,
in some cases. Quite common for rains to have pHs of four or less. The acid rains have removed life
from many lakes and ponds, life that cannot handle this level of acidity. And interestingly,
the added acidity in the rain has increased chemical weathering on our planet, the rate at
which our land erodes. Remember my example of Cleopatra's Needle in Central Park? Well, you add
this increased levels of acidity in the rain, it increases your global erosion rates. We have
actually greatly accelerated the rate at which the whole rock of the planet is eroding.
As I also previously mentioned in the lectures on climate, temperature and carbon dioxide have
this historically paralleled each other. Well, by the year 2007, the levels of carbon dioxide
increased up to 380 parts per million, which represents a 20% increase, a one-fifth increase
during my lifetime alone. It's interesting. Carbon dioxide levels had been steady for centuries
and millennia before that, at about 280 parts per million for a while. In fact, if you actually look
at carbon dioxide levels going back over hundreds of thousands of years, the levels of carbon dioxide
as a volume of the atmosphere had fluctuated between about 200 and 280 parts per million.
Well, starting with the industrial revolution about 200 years ago, with the burning of coal,
they began to increase rapidly and are now well on their way to the levels that they
haven't been since, I don't know, maybe the Cenozoic long time ago.
It's interesting. The effects of humans on global warming are actually not so simple,
because our atmospheric pollutants both heat and cool in cases, as well as other effects that we
have. Carbon dioxide and methane are greenhouse gases, so our increased production of these
obviously lead to heating. Clearing the forests, however, which we've done, increases the surface
albedo, the amount of sunlight that gets reflected and not absorbed. That's actually
had a cooling effect on the climates. The production of aerosols into the atmosphere,
these materials reflect sunlight and also prevent sunlight from being absorbed by the ground.
That also has a cooling effect. When you take all the different factors, however,
and you bring them together, the net effect is in general an increase of heating of about
one and a half watts per meter squared. During the past century, the mean global temperatures
have gone up about two-thirds of a degree Celsius, about 0.7 degrees. However,
we're currently adding seven gigatons of carbon into the atmosphere every year.
Now, this has many regional climate changes as well as a general global change. Remember,
I talked about that, how the increase in temperature may be a global phenomenon,
but the regional climate changes can be very, very variable. In general, there are increases
in droughts, though some areas have actually received more rain. One result of having the
increase in droughts, in particular in the western United States, is a tremendous increase in
forest fires, which have been devastating and caused tremendous amounts of damage.
Sea level rise is occurring, and perhaps even an increased activity in storms in the North
Atlantic. It's interesting. All indications were that until the last 200 years, we were
heading back into another period of ice ages. This isn't surprising. This is what follows every
interglacial period. Remember, driven by those Milankovitch cycles, you have a few thousand years
of warm temperatures, and then the temperatures gradually cool, and for tens of thousands of
years they continue to cool until they rise very rapidly for another interglacial. Well,
global temperatures actually peaked about seven to eight thousand years ago, and have been continuously
cooling over the past millennia. But those temperatures stopped cooling and began rising
right at the end of the Little Ice Age in the mid-1800s, and they haven't stopped rising ever
since. By conservative estimates, global temperatures will probably rise by two degrees by the end of
the 21st century. By more generous estimates, it may be five degrees. So the temperatures within
the next hundred years or less will actually increase two to five degrees globally, which is an
enormous amount. However, what's even more significant, if you look at a map of the predictions
of where temperatures will rise most rapidly, you see a very alarming pattern. The largest
temperature increases occur on land and not on oceans. Of course, water has a high heat capacity.
It takes a lot of energy to raise the temperature of water. Land temperatures increase much more
rapidly. So predictions are that the temperature increases on many parts of the land could be
more than eight degrees higher by the end of the 21st century, especially in regions like
equatorial South America or even very northern latitudes, northern North America and Eurasia.
An eight-degree change in climate and temperature would have significant changes on climate,
bringing droughts to many parts of the world that are already environmentally stressed.
Another effect of the increase in temperatures, of course, is that glaciers are melting.
Nearly all alpine glaciers have thinned over the past 40 years. In fact, the global mean
alpine glacier glaciers and mountains, the alpine glacier thickness has actually decreased every
single year except for three since 1960. And the total amount of thinning of these glaciers
is about 50 feet, about 15 meters. That rate, however, is rapidly increasing. Of course,
Greenland and Antarctica comprise most of the ice on the land, and they're melting too rapidly.
In fact, some large blocks of the Antarctic ice sheets, the sizes of states like Connecticut,
have begun to break off the continent and float off into the ocean and melt.
Sea level has already risen 20 centimeters in the past century. By conservative guesses,
it would be another 20 centimeters by the end of the 21st century, but more likely and more
generous estimates are on the order of 60 centimeters. That may not sound like a lot,
because that's less than a meter, but that puts huge parts of the eastern United States seaboard
at a very high risk from storm damage. Not only is the sea rising, but storms are getting worse
in the North Atlantic, and we have many regions along the eastern U.S. that are sinking from
pumping out water and petroleum from the ground. It's not just Louisiana and not just Florida,
the places that you would expect. It's all along the coast, from Texas through Alabama and Georgia,
the Carolinas, Virginia, Maryland, Delaware. All these areas have huge parts of the land
that are within a meter or a few meters of sea level, and those will be at tremendous risk
as the sea level continues to rise. If you actually look at a similar map for eastern Asia,
the situation is even more critical, because we see that many of the areas of the world's
densest populations, places like Bangladesh and India, coastal China, these populations on the
order of many, many, hundreds of millions of people in some cases, live right at sea level
and are at a very high and increasing risk of disaster from ocean storms.
Talking about people, the population of the human species is perhaps the single most important
factor in this whole discussion. The number of people in the earth has more than doubled during
my lifetime alone. The population was 3 billion when I was born. It's now approaching 7 billion.
We just don't know how many people our planet can reasonably hold. There's some scientists who
study the topic of human sustainability. In other words, what conditions would be required to have
humans peacefully exist on the planet for indefinite amounts of time? Some of their estimates are that
human populations couldn't exceed 1 to 2 billion in order to do that. Well, the population of the
world hasn't been 2 billion since 1930. We would need to get back to population levels at that time.
How do you get there? How would we do that? Through education, through government control,
through war or disease or famine, which are the traditional ways of controlling populations,
none of those are very good options, but we can't keep expanding exponentially.
Now, one of the greatest changes we've had on the earth is on the biosphere.
Everything that I've talked about so far in this lecture not only affects the planet,
it affects all the organisms that live in these regions and not just people. Interestingly,
one of the greatest impacts that humans have had on the planet, both geologically and in terms of the
biosphere, is through our trade and travel all over the planet. Within the last couple hundred years,
97% of the species on Hawaii have been recently brought there by people visiting it. Whole
environmental systems are reeling from the sudden takeover of regions by organisms that may have no
natural predators. Remember, I gave the example of the prickly pear cactus that was brought to
Australia for a garden and almost took over the continent because it was so well suited to those
dry climates and had no natural predators. It wasn't until the cactoblastis moth was introduced,
a natural predator from Central America that the prickly pear population was reduced. Well,
there are countless other examples of species that have been introduced by humans, either
intentionally or accidentally, that have then spread explosively. Kudzu vines in the southeastern
United States. Starling birds, which were brought over in the 1800s from England, now spread all
across North America. You see these large, enormous flocks of black birds, essentially pushing out most
other bird populations in regions where they've settled. The African honeybee that came into
South America, lampreys and zebra mussels brought into the Great Lakes. I mean, the list of such
sudden introductions is enormous, and we still have absolutely no idea what the environmental
consequences of all this transfer of organisms around the planet will be. Part of it, a big part
of it is germs. Before Western settlers came to North and South America, it's estimated that about
20 million Native Americans live there. With the introduction of a variety of bacteria and viruses,
within a short amount of time, that population had crashed to about one million people,
five percent of the initial population. The same thing happens not only with humans,
but with other organisms as well. You bring germs rapidly into other parts of the world,
and it can have devastating effects on populations. Okay, I saved the biggest change for the end of
the list. We don't know how many species of life there are on the planet. It's probably millions.
Most are in the tropics, and most are probably still undiscovered, and they range from tiny,
simple, single-celled archaea and bacteria to the enormous blue whale. Just a whole heck of a lot of
beetles in between. Now, the distinct extinctions of organisms we know are a natural process. They've
happened throughout history, but they're currently happening at a catastrophic rate due to the pollution
we've put in the atmosphere and waters and ground, the changes in habitat, the climate change,
and the transfer of organisms around the planet. Estimates vary widely, but it's probably a
conservative guess that 20 percent or so of life forms that are alive today will be extinct by the
end of the 21st century. I mean, have extinctions occurred at that rate before? Maybe. Large meteorite
impacts. But you know what happens to the geologic record when there are large periods of mass
extinctions? These represent the boundaries between geologic time eras. Now, the Cenozoic era that
we're in now began 65 million years ago when a large meteorite impact killed off the dinosaurs.
In an instant, the course of the planet's history was changed, and we are doing the same thing.
Inadvertently, accidentally, we have single-handedly brought about the end of the Cenozoic era.
We have ended a 65 million year era of time in a very short amount of time. We have reached that
level of geologic power. Now, does this list of topics bring people down? It's my hope that it
wakes them up. Some of the mistakes are irrevocable. I mean, once a species is extinct, it's extinct,
but many of the mistakes we're making are not. And we've already proven that many of the mistakes
we've made can be changed. I mean, we need to understand them, not ignore or deny them
and change them. And we need to be sure that we're not shamed or embarrassed by them. I mean,
when a child makes a mistake, do you embarrass it or shame it or punish it? No, you teach it. You
let it learn. We're in the same situation. We're making mistakes. For many of them, there's no shame
in them. It's what any civilization or species would do as it makes that leap from being part
of a long chain of, in our case, hominids and simians to a race, a species that can teach a course
about it. We're the most powerful force on the planet. We can do this.
