Welcome.
One day back in 1950, the famous physicist Enrico Fermi was having lunch with some colleagues,
and they were talking about recent experiments about the origin of life.
Were those discoveries that life would begin naturally in the presence of water, carbon
dioxide, ammonia, and some of the other basic materials that were found in Earth's early
atmosphere?
Well, it seemed that life might start up on any planet that had liquid water and an atmosphere.
So maybe Earth was just an ordinary planet.
But Fermi paused and then asked a simple question that has puzzled scientists for more than
a half century.
Well, where is everybody?
I mean, given the size and the age of the universe, there should be all these other
civilizations then, right?
Why haven't they contacted us?
That became known as Fermi's paradox.
I mean, we search the galaxy with visible light and radio waves, and we just don't see any
signs of life.
I mean, surely if there had been all these civilizations around, for billions of years,
at least one of them would have sent a probe here.
I mean, you can get most anywhere in the galaxy within just a few tens of millions of years,
and Earth would be an obvious candidate for life.
They could tell that from the surface temperature of our planet.
We know there are lots of planets around other stars.
Actually using several very clever techniques, astronomers have now discovered several hundreds
of them.
In fact, in 2007, the first Earth-like planet, Gleasy 581C, was discovered orbiting a red
dwarf star, Gleasy 581, that's only about 20 light years away from us.
But does this planet have life?
How many planets out in the solar system actually have life on them?
And in how many cases is that life complex, multicellular, or intelligent?
Is anybody out there, and if they are, where is everybody?
You know, these are some of the most important questions that face science, because it's
just an integral part of being human, to have that desire and drive to discover who
we are, and how we got here, and if we're special, are we unique in the galaxy?
Or are we just one of many different organisms that has solved the riddle of consciousness
that's made that long crawl through the mud?
I mean, either way, it would totally change the way we think, right?
Arthur Clarke once said, sometimes I think we're alone in the universe, and sometimes
I think we're not.
In either case, the idea is quite staggering, right?
Think about it.
Are there lots of other planets like us?
Are we one of just a whole huge community?
Are we it?
Now, there have been a lot of different attempts to try to answer Fermi's paradox.
For instance, maybe these civilizations have tried to contact us, but we just don't recognize
the signs.
Arthur C. Clarke once said that any sufficiently advanced technology would be indistinguishable
from magic.
You know, maybe it's harder to get a message across space than we think, or maybe we aren't
looking in the right places, or at the right things.
Maybe these creatures would just be too alien to even be able to communicate with us.
Maybe they all eventually choose to be non-technical and return back to a life devoid of the industry
and complexities that now seem to drive our civilization.
Maybe civilizations don't last that long.
Maybe it's the nature of intelligent life to destroy itself after some point of time,
or even worse, maybe to destroy others.
Maybe they're intentionally avoiding contacting us, something called the Zoo Hypothesis.
Well, let me pose another solution to Fermi's paradox.
Maybe they just aren't there.
Now during the previous 47 lectures of this course, I've shown you that Earth is a remarkable
planet, right?
It's an incredible place.
We've got this high energy, internal heat engine that drives heat flow, that drives
mantle convection, that moves the plates around as part of plate tectonics.
And these are so delicately and sensitively balanced with the whole solar heat engine
that shapes the surface and drives climate change, and water flow, and weathering and
erosion, all within such narrow fluctuations in temperature.
I mean, we've had liquid water continuously at or near Earth's surface for four billion
years.
That's a third of the age of the universe.
And you know, maybe this just doesn't happen very often.
Maybe the requirements to make a planet like Earth are remarkably stringent.
Now, Gleasy 581c was the first planet out of hundreds so far, discovered out of our
solar system to even have a surface temperature close to ours.
But as I'm going to show you here, there are many factors that all have to line up for
us to expect a welcoming party when we eventually go and visit there.
This hasn't always been the conventional view.
There was a time when scientists calculated that there might be enormous numbers of civilizations
out there in the galaxy.
For instance, Frank Drake, a very famous astrophysicist back in 1960, constructed a formula that's
now called the Drake equation that he designed as a thought problem to try to address Fermi's
paradox.
This equation he constructed calculated how many planets there might be within our galaxy
that would have civilizations, you know, advanced life forms that would be attempting to contact
us at this very moment.
Now, Drake was one of the founders of SETI, the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence,
and he encouraged people to look for possible communications from outer space.
The Drake equation that he came up with took the form of a product of probabilities that
when you multiply them all out would give you some number n of inhabited planets with
advanced civilizations wanting and attempting to contact us.
Basic probability works that way.
If you want to find the likelihood of any particular event occurring, the odds of that
event, you multiply together the separate odds of each particular part of it.
So for instance, if you want to know what the odds are of rolling box cars with two
dice, two, you know, double sixes, well, the odds of rolling a six on one die are one out
of six.
The odds of rolling a six on the other die are one out of six.
You multiply them together, you get one out of 36.
That's the odds of rolling double sixes.
So what Frank Drake did was take all the different factors involved with having an advanced civilization
and multiply them together.
Let me show you one form that this equation takes.
It's n, that's the number of these civilizations, equals r star times fs times fp times ne times
fl times fi times fc times l.
Let me break these down.
R star is the average rate of star formation per year, the number of new stars that are
actually forming in our galaxy.
Fs is the fraction of stars that would be suitable suns for planetary system.
Fp is the fraction of those suitable suns with planetary systems on it.
Ne is the number of planets in the continuously habitable zone, and I'll get back to this
and what that means, but it's the zone around a star where a planet like Earth could exist,
essentially with liquid water on its surface.
fl is the fraction of these planets on which life actually originates.
fi is the fraction of these planets on which life eventually becomes intelligent.
fc is the fraction of intelligent species on these planets that are willing and able
to communicate with others.
l is the average or mean lifetime in years of a communicative civilization, and again,
is that number of intelligent civilizations within our galaxy able and interested to communicate
with us.
Well, it's really hard to solve this equation because we actually don't know the estimates
for many of these figures here.
We just have one planet Earth to go by.
But Carl Sagan, the very famous astronomer and author, said that because there were
billions and billions of stars in our galaxy alone, I mean it's now thought to be somewhere
between 200 and 400 billion stars in our galaxy, and there are more than 100 billion galaxies
in the universe, that meant many, many trillions of civilizations out there.
Well, to begin with, it's remarkable that we even have planets, right?
I talked about this earlier in the course.
The very existence of stars and planets requires incredibly narrow bounds on the fundamental
laws of the universe.
Here back in lecture six, I said if the relative strengths of the four fundamental forces
of the universe were only slightly different than planets and people, all of matter material
couldn't ever exist.
For example, if the strong nuclear force were only slightly larger than it is, then all
the hydrogen in the universe would have converted to helium right in the early moments of the
universe.
There'd be no water, there'd be no long-lived stars, nothing would look like what we have
today.
Gravity slightly smaller than it is, and no stars or planets would ever form.
The whole universe would just be a diffused cloud of hydrogen and helium.
These sorts of consequences hold for all four of those fundamental forces.
This is known as the anthropic principle, or sometimes called the Goldilocks Enigma.
It's a paradox of why our universe seems so finely tuned toward having just the right
characteristics needed to support planets and people.
The anthropic principle has taken many forms, and it's often been misinterpreted and misused.
But let me give you a couple solutions, a couple proposals that people have given for
solving this Goldilocks Enigma.
Maybe we live in an absurd universe.
In other words, it just happens to have turned out this way by random chance.
I mean, that's possible, but frankly it's not very satisfying, because the odds against
it are just so overwhelming.
Maybe we live in a unique universe.
In other words, there is some deep underlying principle of physics that just requires the
whole universe to work out this way.
Some theory of everything that will explain why all the various features of the universe
must have exactly the values that we see, only we just haven't found it yet.
I'm okay with this, there's so much that we don't know, especially at these big scales
of space and time.
Maybe there's an overwhelming underlying life principle, some principle that constrains
the universe to evolve towards life and mind and spirit, and again we just haven't found
what that is yet.
Again, that's not very satisfying.
Some people have proposed the fake universe.
In other words, we're living in a virtual reality simulation, like in the movie The Matrix.
The real world has rules that are much simpler and much more obvious, only we don't live
there, so we can't see them.
A lot of people have proposed the designed universe, an intelligent creator designed
the universe specifically to support complexity and the emergence of intelligence.
Now, in general, there's absolutely no conflict between science and religion or belief in
a God, many scientists believe in God, though in this case we still have the troubling question
of who created the creator, and then we have to go through this whole analysis again on
the creation of a God, or the multiverse.
Maybe there are multiple universes, maybe an infinite number that all exist in parallel,
and each one of these has slightly different ratios of those fundamental forces.
So in other words, you span the full spectrum of possible combinations of characteristics
of the universe, and we naturally find ourselves within the one that would support our existence.
Interestingly, many physicists actually favor that multiverse interpretation because it turns
out that the existence of many parallel universes is also an outcome of string theory, however
at the moment this isn't testable, and some people question whether this even falls within
the realm of science.
Okay, back to aliens, or the lack of them.
Recent work in the areas of planetary geology and astrobiology suggests that even in a universe
that is favorable to the formation of planets, like our universe, the conditions required
to support complex life on a planet may be incredibly small, and Earth just seems to
have those right conditions.
It's another Goldilocks enigma.
I mean, to begin with, we're in the right location in our galaxy.
Most stars in a galaxy are close to its center, and this is a terrible place to live.
You've got nearby stars passing by that would regularly throw trillions of comets into any
planet.
You'd have enormously high rates of bombardment.
In addition, there's an intense level of ultraviolet radiation in the center of the galaxy due
to frequent explosions of large stars, supernovae going off all over the place.
The planetary services would be highly irradiated, as well as bombarded.
Now, if you go to the other end of the galaxies, at the edges, you have very few planets.
Starlight suggests that star systems out there are starved for metals.
They're low levels of silicon and iron and magnesium.
All the other materials for building planets and people, the building blocks of life, they're
just not there, because the stars are so small, they live a long time.
You don't have enough supernovae to make heavier elements.
And you'd also have very low amounts of radioactive elements, and any planets that form there without
the radioactive elements would be geologically dead.
Because remember, it's the decay of the uranium, potassium, and thorium that keeps our planet
simmering on a low boil that keeps all of our planet alive, land-forming, oceans and
atmospheres generated.
You wouldn't have any of that on the edge of the galaxy.
So it turns out there's a narrow zone in spiral galaxies that's in the middle.
Maybe five to ten percent of the total number of stars could even be considered as possible
candidates for planets like Earth, and the existence of life on them.
Many galaxies, it turns out, elliptical and irregular galaxies seem to be entirely metal
poor, likely unable to support life at all.
It turns out only spiral galaxies like ours are significantly metal rich, and even then
only near the centers.
In addition, our sun is just the right size.
It's not too small that it would emit too little energy, and it's not too big that
it would burn out quickly.
It turns out large stars have very short lifetimes.
Only smaller stars can last for billions of years in their main hydrogen burning phase,
and we need those billions of years for the evolution of life.
Large stars also emit far too much ultraviolet radiation.
It would be damaging to living tissue.
So it turns out all stars have a very narrow habitable zone.
As I said before, the distance from a star where a planet could exist with its temperature
in between the freezing and boiling points of water.
For our sun, it's about 0.95 astronomical units to about 1.15 astronomical units.
Remember, an astronomical unit is the distance from the sun to the earth.
So in other words, that habitable zone for our sun is only about 5% closer than the earth
is to about 15% farther.
So it's a very narrow zone that our earth could have been in in order to have life
existing as long as it did, billions of years.
Now for small stars, like red dwarfs, the habitable zone is much closer to the sun because these
stars emit much lower levels of energy.
Well, if you're that close to a sun, there's a significant danger of solar flares that
could bathe the planet with high levels of very destructive ionized plasma.
Also, planets that are close into a star tend to be very tidally locked.
Like remember the way the moon is locked around the earth so that one side always faces the
earth?
Well, the same thing would likely happen.
So you'd have one side of a planet constantly facing the sun and it would be burning and
the other side would be constantly facing away from the sun and it would be freezing.
Well, that's important because it turns out that small stars are about 90% of all stars.
So that may eliminate huge numbers of stars in our galaxies even being possible candidates.
In addition, there are some stars that actually change their energy output very greatly over
time and so they would either move in or out of that habitable zone and they wouldn't
be able to support life continuously for a long amount of time.
So being generous, stars like our sun are probably 5% of all stars.
In addition, earth, it turns out, has just the right shepherd, Jupiter.
Jupiter prevents the earth from getting bombarded by probably 10,000 times the number of comets
and meteoroids that actually do hit it because the gravitational field of Jupiter just flings
them right out, flings them out of the solar system and out into space, out of the inner
solar system.
However, if Jupiter's orbit were slightly more elliptical than it is, it would have
just the opposite effect.
It would gravitationally destabilize, for instance, the asteroid belt as well as the
orbit of earth and the other terrestrial planets and there would be stuff flying all over the
place.
Well, this turns out to be important because all the Jupiter side planets that have been
observed in other solar systems so far are bad Jupiters with fairly eccentric orbits.
So in all of the situations that we've observed so far, it would be hard for a planet like
earth to survive the destabilization, the gravitation destabilization of their solar
system and they would be constantly bombarded by smaller objects.
Interestingly, if Jupiter was also much larger than it is, it would also be a problem.
So earth seems to be the right kind of planet to support life in terms of its location in
the galaxy and its sun and it turns out also its own geology.
It's large enough to hold on to a thin atmosphere.
It's not too large to be smothered with hydrogen and helium like the gas giants.
The large planets attract far too many comets and meteoroids, way too many impacts.
It's also harder for mountains and continents to form with higher gravity.
You probably end up with one giant ocean and you lose that land feedback mechanism for
regulating carbon dioxide.
Earth has just the right composition.
It's got a great balance of rock and metals and life uses this stuff and it needs all
of these materials.
In addition, earth has a nearly circular orbit that keeps it at just the right distances
to maintain liquid water.
And even so, the ice ages and interglacial periods that we talked about in the lectures
on climate result from the slight fluctuations in those in those in Earth's orbit, those
Milankovitch cycles we talked about.
Earth in addition has a large moon at just the right distance.
And this turns out to be really important because having the moon orbiting the Earth
acts like a large gyroscope.
It actually minimizes the changes in the tilt of Earth's axis.
And that maintains climate stability.
So the Milankovitch cycles are very small compared to other planets.
Even so they cause large climate changes, but it's really important having that small
fluctuation and having the presence of that large moon.
The formation of the moon was also probably very important for Earth because to begin
with it gave Earth its tilted axis.
It gave us a fast rotation rate and it gave us a large core.
Now the fast rotation that probably existed from that impact keeps day-night temperature
swings from being too great.
It's just the opposite of the situation of having a planet with the same side always
facing sun.
Here because Earth is spinning, the temperatures get quite evened out.
If Earth spun more slowly, there would be huge temperature swings day and night.
The tilted axis turns out to be important because it gives us seasons and that may actually
have helped evolution by providing climate variations which have been a huge stimulus
for natural selection and the whole evolution of life on the planet.
As far as the core goes, when the moon, the protomoon hit the Earth and Earth absorbed
most of the protomoon's iron core that made our core much larger and gave us a large strong
magnetic dynamo and that produced a large magnetic field which produced our magnetosphere
which protects us from the solar wind, from solar particles constantly shot at us out
of the surface of the sun.
Earth also has enough carbon to aid in the development of life but not too much so that
you end up with a runaway greenhouse effect like what happened with superheated Venus
or too little which would have put us into a permanent ice age.
And Earth relies upon both oceans and land to balance and regulate that carbon cycle.
So Earth has a good amount of radiogenic isotopes as well as I mentioned before, it keeps Earth
warm and geologically alive.
It powers mantle convection and plate tectonics, it gives us land, air and water and creates
the many different ecological niches and microclimates that has promoted tremendous biodiversity.
In short, Earth seems to be just the right size, at just the right distance from just
the right kind of star, at just the right distance from the center of just the right
kind of galaxy.
I mean, it's sober to contemplate the implications of this line of research.
We can now return to the Drake equation and try to guess on some of the values now.
Our star might be about six for the fraction of stars that are suitable suns, maybe one
out of twenty, for the fraction of suitable suns with planetary systems, maybe a half,
it's at least ten percent, for the number of planets around suitable suns in the continuously
habitable zone, maybe one out of a hundred and fifty, not very high.
The fraction of these planets in which life actually originates, I'm guessing probably
one, I think it happens all the time, if you have the right conditions, but the fraction
of these planets in which life would eventually become intelligent, maybe one out of five hundred.
The number of these intelligent species on these planets that would be willing and able
to communicate with others, I don't know, fifty percent, that's a total guess, the average
or mean lifetime in years of a communicative civilization, I'm being very optimistic, maybe
a million years, multiply them all together and you would get one, and that would be us.
Okay, I obviously tinkered with these numbers to have it come out to one.
I don't have any idea what many of these numbers should be, and no one does, it's really only
meant as a thought experiment, not a rigorous calculation.
The important point is, the number could be very low, even much lower than one.
In other words, intelligent life on Earth may have occurred in spite of overwhelmingly
strong odds against it.
Interestingly, when Isaac Asimov wrote a famous series of futuristic books called the Foundation
Series, he predicted a galaxy with no other intelligent life forms in it, this is before
the Carl Sagan era, and later generations of authors criticized him for this what they
called oversight.
In fact, when a trio of younger authors, David Brinn, Greg Baer, and Gregory Benford,
set out to complete Asimov's Foundation Series, they came up with some scenario where human-made
robots had gone out into the galaxy and exterminated all other intelligent life forms to make way
for human expansion, that fit their assumptions.
But maybe Asimov was right after all.
Maybe we are alone, maybe there'll be no one on Gleasy 581C to welcome us when we arrive.
What are the implications of this?
Would this change the way you view Earth and humanity?
I mean, if there really is only one creature in the universe that resembles a tiger, do
we have a responsibility to make sure we don't drive it to extinction?
You know, I don't think we will.
As I mentioned previously, I think we're growing up as a society, as a civilization, and I
think we are realizing both our power as a geologic force and the responsibility that
comes with such power.
For example, Einstein once wrote that a human being is a part of the whole, called by us,
the universe.
A part limited in time and space.
He experiences himself, his thoughts and feelings as something separate from the rest, a kind
of optical delusion of consciousness.
This delusion is a kind of prison for us, restricting us to our personal desires and
affection of a few persons nearest to us.
Our task must be to free ourselves from this prison by widening our circle of understanding
and compassion to embrace all living creatures.
And the whole of nature in its beauty.
And do you know what?
We're doing this.
Our cultural evolution has been one of continually widening the circle of compassion, from individuals
to family, to extended family, to a clan or pack, to a community or town, a city, a state,
a country, a continent, I mean, look at the European Union forming, eventually maybe our
whole planet, our solar system, our galaxy, the universe.
Who knows maybe even the multiverse, okay?
As I hope these 48 lectures have demonstrated, Earth is a remarkable planet.
It's this delicate balance between so many complex and interconnected.
Different systems, physical, chemical, geological, biological have gone through all these different
areas.
And yet there is nothing as complex as humans and the world we're creating, perhaps in the
galaxy.
The philosopher Alfred North Whitehead once equated complexity with beauty and equated
maximizing this beauty as reaching God.
He said that God's in the future and we're moving toward God, God's not up there but
up ahead in time.
And in this way of thinking, maybe even the internet can be seen as part of this process
of an increase in complexity, a kind of beauty, a long process that started with a big bang
moving from energy to matter to life to mind and next maybe to spirit.
Now, of course, you don't need science or philosophy to know that our planet is beautiful.
I mean, Bob Dylan said you don't need a weatherman to know which way the wind blows.
The only thing that gets painted or drawn by artists more often than the human body
is the natural landscape, mountains, oceans, sunsets, fields, forests, rivers, lakes.
I mean, think of a place in your past where you have felt most at peace with yourself
in the world.
A place where you go in your memories to meditate or relax, to feel connected or at
one with the world.
I bet it's a place in nature, the ocean, top of a mountain, beside a stream.
And you know, I have to say, if I can give any advice as a doctor of geology, it's to
get out and enjoy the world as absolutely much as you can.
I mean, Earth has so many different unique climates and environments, each one with a
unique geology in life that's involved to live in it.
You know, you don't have to fly to Alaska or the Himalayas to experience it, although
it would be cool.
You know, there are parks and places everywhere and they all have their own different worlds
to explore.
And remember, you don't need to avoid people.
We're a big part of the Earth too.
But I guarantee that you'll see the whole world around you in entirely new ways.
I mean, a mountain will not just be beautiful and majestic, but you'll see it as a battleground
between the forces of tectonics that made it and the forces of erosion that are tearing
it down.
A shoreline will not just be a soothing and relaxing walk in the sand, but you'll see
it as a violent, pounding struggle as the waves continuously try to make crooked coast
lines straight again.
And you'll see it as a factory for all the sedimentary rocks that you see elsewhere in
places like the Grand Canyon.
I guarantee you'll never look at a bowl of miso soup the same way.
You know, Marcel Proust said the real voyage of discovery consists not in seeing new landscapes,
but in having new eyes.
Well, that may be true.
You will have new eyes.
But get out and see the new landscapes as well.
