Sorry I made this.
As we saw last time, examining an object at the atomic level can reveal its hidden history.
Today we will extend this notion to archaeological investigations and show how precise dates can
be derived using atomic decay.
Carbon-14 has been the primary source of archaeological dating since the technique was
invented around 1950.
It's something that comes up over and over again in these lectures and so it's worth
making sure we understand this in detail because it acts as the archetype for all other
radioactive dating techniques.
Carbon has three naturally occurring isotopes, as I mentioned in the second lecture.
The stable isotopes, carbon-12 and carbon-13, make up respectively 98.9 and 1.1% of the carbon
in the natural world, that is essentially all the carbon.
The ratio of protons to neutrons, 6 to 6 in carbon-12 and 6 to 7 in carbon-13 are happy.
They are stable and once made, they will not be changed.
It's important to emphasize here that when I refer to carbon-12 and carbon-13, I'm really
referring to the nuclei of the atoms, not the atoms themselves.
Carbon and its multitude of electrons can change partners frequently.
Carbon can join up with other molecules, those bonds can break, it can appear in the
form of graphite, it can appear in the form of diamonds, it can appear in the form of
the carbon dioxide being exhaled by my breath as I speak, so it can take many chemical forms.
But the nuclei of the atoms, which were created, as we'll see in the cores of massive stars
billions of years ago, have been unchanged since that time, and the stable isotopes,
carbon-12 and carbon-13, will remain so forever into the future.
Carbon-14 is a radioactive isotope of carbon with a half-life of 5,730 years, and it represents
roughly one out of every trillion atoms of carbon in the Earth's atmosphere.
So carbon-14 now, again with six protons because it's carbon, but with eight neutrons, is an
unstable ratio of protons to neutrons, and it has this convenient timescale for decay
of several thousand years, just the kind of timescale we need to date historical and
prehistorical events.
Now, that's useful for us, but with a half-life of 5,730 years, you might well ask why there's
any carbon-14 left at all.
Four and a half billion years ago when the Earth formed is almost a million half-lives
ago, and as you recall, the amount of radioactive material left after a certain number of half-lives
is one half to that power, so one half to the millionth power is to a very good approximation,
zero.
Thus, you might expect that there'd be no carbon-14 left at all, however much there
was when the Earth formed.
The trick is that carbon-14 is constantly being produced in the atmosphere by the interaction
of extremely high energy particles from space called cosmic rays with the very abundant
nitrogen atoms in the atmosphere.
Rising stars far across space accelerate particles to very high speeds, very, very close to the
speed of light, and they streak through the galaxy.
When they collide with something like our planet, they're likely to make a mess, because
even though these particles are tiny electrons or single protons or perhaps helium nuclei,
as they come crashing into the atmosphere, every once in a while they'll hit dead on
the nucleus of an atom.
A cosmic ray hitting a nucleus of nitrogen can rearrange the quarks inside its constituent
protons and neutrons and turn one of the protons into a neutron, thus demoting it one step
in the periodic table from nitrogen number seven to carbon number six, because it's
lost a proton, but in the process adding a neutron, making it carbon-14, this unstable
arrangement of fundamental particles.
All living things are composed of carbon-based molecules.
The reason for that is two-fold.
One is carbon is the fourth most abundant element in the universe.
Helium is second, but it can't make any chemical compounds.
Oxygen is third, and it makes a lot of compounds, but carbon is unique for a second reason,
and that is that it has two electrons in its outermost shell.
With six electrons in total, shell number one has two, that's its maximum.
Shell number one of shell number two has two, and then sub-shell number two of shell number
two has two, leaving four unoccupied spaces.
That means a carbon atom is happier if it joins up with one electron atom, two electron
sharing atom, three electron sharing atom, or even four electron sharing atoms.
Indeed, carbon likes to link up with itself and makes long chains of molecules.
So carbon is a very versatile molecule, and it can be the basis of very complex molecules
the kinds of things we need for life.
So its abundance and its chemical ability to share is what makes carbon the basis for life.
Plants absorb carbon dioxide, CO2, out of the air through little holes in the bottom
of their leaves, through chemical processes cleave off the O2 molecule, breathing that
back out into the air, convenient for us, because that's of course what we breathe in,
and incorporating the carbon molecule into the structure of the plant.
All the carbon in animals ultimately derives from the intake of carbon from plants because
animals lack the clever trick of photosynthesis, being able to take carbon out of the air and
incorporate it into organic molecules.
Now isotopes, you will recall, are chemically identical.
So all three isotopes of carbon are incorporated into plants in roughly the same proportion
as they exist in the air.
I say roughly because slight discrepancies amongst the heavier carbon-14 and carbon-13
compared to carbon-12 will become important in our story in a couple of lectures.
But for this purpose, it's roughly proportional to their abundance in the air.
As a consequence, plants take in mostly carbon-12, about 1% carbon-13, and every once in a rare
while, once every trillion times it needs a carbon atom, one of those will be carbon-14.
Thus, any organic substance, anything that ever was alive, bones, wood, charcoal, linen,
which comes from the flax plant, wool which comes from a sheep, cotton which comes from
a cotton plant, parchment which comes from the hide of animals, any of those things that
were alive are among the artifacts we can date with this method of carbon-14.
Carbon-14 dating relies on the fact that once dead, an organism ceases to incorporate new
carbon into its chemical structures.
The carbon-12 and the carbon-13 that were ingested during the plant or creature's lifetime
remain unchanged.
As I said, they're inviolable.
The nuclei of those carbon-12 and carbon-13 atoms will never change.
But the carbon-14, which are sitting in there amongst the other carbon atoms, starts to
decay away.
The ratio of carbon-14 to the sum of carbon-12 plus carbon-13 then, declines steadily from
the moment of death.
Carbon-12, carbon-13 in the denominator are constant, but the carbon-14 slowly decays
away with half of it disappearing in 5,730 years.
And so this ratio, carbon-14 to carbon-12 plus 13, gives us a direct determination of
the age at which the substance ceased to live, usually within a decade or two, even
over tens of thousands of years.
Now, after about 10 half-lives or so, the amount of carbon-14 remaining will be so small,
less than one part in a thousand of what was originally there when it was only one in a
trillion atoms to start with, that so little is left, the method can no longer be used.
The oldest states that have been used then are about 10 half-lives or 57 60 thousand
years, something like that.
Two methods have been employed to count the number of carbon-14 atoms.
When the technique was invented in the 1950s, it originally sufficed to simply monitor a
substance looking for the fast electrons that came flying out of the radioactive beta decay
of carbon-14 to nitrogen-14.
The 14 goes to N-14 plus an electron plus the inevitable anti-neutrino.
As one of the neutrons in carbon, which is now out of balance because there's eight of
them to every six protons, flips over a quark, turns into a proton, and moves carbon back
up one step in the periodic table to nitrogen, giving off the negative charge that it needed
to do that.
So one can just put the sample near a detector that can catch fast, speedy electrons and
determine how many decays there are each minute, day, or whatever, and therefore determine
the ratio of carbon-14 to carbon-12 plus 13.
This method, however, requires quite a few grams of material.
How can we know that?
Well, let's do a little calculation.
Each proton, or neutron, in an atom is said to have the mass of one atomic mass unit.
We describe the atomic mass of an atom as equal to the sum of the number of protons
plus the number of neutrons.
So for carbon, that number is 12.
Each atomic mass unit has a mass, if you put it on a scale, a very accurate scale, of 1.67
times 10 to the minus 24 grams.
Remember, atoms are really tiny.
And so if each carbon atom weighs 12 of those atomic mass units, one gram of that material
will contain about 5 times 10 to the 22 atoms, 100 billion trillion atoms, one gram.
Now most of those atoms are carbon-12, a few are carbon-13, and one out of every trillion
is carbon-14.
And so to find out how many carbon-14 atoms we have in a typical random sample of carbon
atoms, we multiply 5 times 10 to the 22 atoms per gram times 10 to the minus 12, one part
in a trillion, and we find we expect 5 times 10 to the 10, or 50 billion, carbon-14 atoms
in each gram of pure carbon.
Now that sounds like a huge number.
You might think it's easy to count them, but again, they're very, very small.
Furthermore, they don't decay very rapidly, right?
It takes 5,730 years for even half of those to decay.
Now the decay rate is not absolutely steady.
As you saw in lecture 5, the decay rate slowly declines continuously over time.
But let's just take a rough average.
Let's say that half of those atoms decay in the first 5,730 years.
There are 3.15 times 10 to the seconds in every year, so if we divide the total number available
by 2, half of them decay, and then by the total number of seconds in one half-life, we find
out we'd expect something like 0.14 or a tenth of a decay every second, one carbon-14
atom decaying every 10 seconds or so.
To get an accuracy of 1% on the answer for how many carbon-14 atoms are still present,
we need to measure at least 10,000 of these electrons, because a basic law of statistics
is that the accuracy of your measurement is represented by the square root of the number
of things you count divided by the number of things you count.
The square root of 10,000 is 100, 100 over 10,000 is 1,100 or 1%.
So to get an accurate answer, accurate to 1%, we need to sit there and observe and count
every electron coming out for about 20 hours, which is a little bit tedious.
Furthermore, we don't get every electron, because if we have a sample of carbon, many
of the carbon-14s that decay are going to be in the middle of the sample, and inside
the sample, the electron may go zipping out, changing the carbon to nitrogen, having undergone
the decay, but get absorbed by other atoms, knock other electrons out of other atoms,
give up its energy, and never make it out of the sample, so we're not going to get
every decay.
Thus, it would take days to measure a sample, even grams in size.
Often, we don't even have that much material.
Thus, a second method has been developed, beginning in the 1960s and perfected by today,
called atomic mass spectroscopy, which allows us to separate the carbon isotopes, atom
by atom, into different little buckets, and then just simply count the numbers that are
there.
So not relying on the decay at all, but actually actively taking the sample and breaking it
up into atom by atom, and counting the ratio of carbon-14 to carbon-12 plus carbon-13
atoms.
Atomic mass spectroscopy works like this.
It requires destroying the sample, but it only requires milligrams of material to obtain
an accurate date.
You take the sample and bombard it, either with particles or perhaps a laser beam, such
that it sprays apart into its constituent atoms.
And you hit it hard enough so that not only do the bonds between the atoms and the solid
break, but some of the electrons of the carbon atoms are rejected, so the atoms end up positively
charged.
One then sets up an electric grid with a negative charge over here, attracting all the carbon
atoms that are positive to it, and you leave spaces for them to go flying through.
Now, each carbon atom, having six protons, has the same charge, but the carbon-14 atoms
are heavier.
The velocity with which the atoms accelerate is proportional to the charge of the atom and
the charge on your negative grid over here, and so the acceleration, the force given to
all of them, is the same.
But just like pushing on a bicycle is easier than pushing on an SUV, if you apply the same
force, you get much more speed out of the bicycle than you do out of the SUV.
And so the heavy molecules, the heavy carbon isotopes, rather, move more slowly than the
light carbon isotopes.
Once you've got them all traveling together in a straight line, you set up a magnetic
field.
Now, charged particles moving in a magnetic field bend, and the amount by which they
bend depends on their velocity.
And so what one does is set up the magnetic field, have all these positive charges coming
along at different speeds proportional to their mass.
Carbon-12 the fastest, carbon-13 next, and carbon-14 slowest, and they come through and
they bend and they fall into different buckets.
The carbon-12 bucket, the carbon-13 bucket, and the carbon-14 bucket.
One then simply counts up the number of atoms once caught in each bucket and gets the ratio
we need to determine the age of the substance.
Now two complications must be taken into account in deriving reliable dates from this carbon-14
dating technique.
First one must be certain that no new carbon has been introduced in the material since
it died.
The key aspect of this technique is that the carbon is being incorporated at a steady rate
at a constant ratio into the material while it's alive, and then when it's dead it stops
the carbon-14 decays away and the other remains behind.
Thus one wants to be careful for example that there aren't bacteria that have been living
on a piece of cloth or whatever which have added active carbon to the material thus giving
you a date that'll be too young because there'll be extra carbon-14 in the substance.
The second assumption we must make and this one we'll examine in detail in the future
is that the rate of carbon-14 production in the atmosphere from these cosmic rays is
constant.
If it's not, if it's varied, the amount of carbon-14 taken in by a plant will be high
when the ratio in the atmosphere is high and low when the ratio in the atmosphere is low.
It turns out the carbon-14 production rate does vary slightly depending on such things
as the activity of the sun and the strength of the shielding earth's magnetic field.
It'll be important to take these small corrections into account over time which we'll do in a
subsequent lecture.
How do we apply this to actual archaeological sites that we wish to date?
Let's start with a water tunnel in Jerusalem that's actually mentioned in the Bible.
The Siloam Tunnel carries water from the only permanent spring that exists today and existed
5,000 years ago in the area of Jerusalem into the heart of old Jerusalem.
It's one of the oldest water systems in any city in the world.
It's described in the Old Testament as having been built by King Hezekiah who reigned between
727 and 698 B.C.
However, the king's name is uncharacteristically missing from the inscription on the monument
at the head of the tunnel.
This plus philological arguments concerning the inscription itself have suggested a date
five centuries later for the tunnel's construction.
An error of 500 years is pretty serious.
Standard archaeological techniques could not settle the age of this tunnel.
Amos Frumkin and his collaborators in 2003 used a multitude of techniques to drive an
accurate date for this tunnel.
They drilled small holes through the plaster lining of the tunnel and uncovered a small
wood fragment and the remnants of a short-lived plant that were trampled underneath as the
plaster was laid down in the original tunnel.
Since both these things were alive, a piece of wood in the small plant, carbon-14 dates
from atomic mass spectroscopy could be derived.
And they were derived with an error of only about 20 years and shown to be consistent with
700 B.C.
A second dating technique, using the decay of Uranium 234 to Thorium 230, a pair of characters
who will appear again later in our lectures, have dated a stalactite hanging down from
a leak in the roof of the tunnel.
Now, clearly, this crack occurred and the stalactite, which comes from the dripping
of calcium-rich water down, builds up over centuries, and the age of this stalactite
turned out to be 2320 years, appropriately a couple hundred years after the tunnel's
construction if it were constructed in 700 B.C.
So the carbon-14 date, the geological data from the Uranium-Thorium decay, and the biblical
written evidence are all consistent with construction in 700 B.C., settling the arguments of classical
archaeologists.
In the 1990s, techniques were developed to use carbon-14 dating on inorganic substances.
This was a huge surprise to me.
The basis of carbon-14 dating is that something is alive and incorporating carbon-14, and
when it dies, there's a particular moment, death, which sets the clock and starts the
decay of carbon-14, such that its ratio gives its age.
However, clever people have discovered that lime-based plaster, which is certainly not
organic and lacks this life-driven incorporation of carbon, and clearly lacks the mark of death,
can still be carbon-14 dated.
Much building plaster is made from limestone.
Limestone has the chemical formula calcium carbonate CaCO3, one calcium, one carbon,
and three oxygen atoms.
When you heat limestone to 900 degrees Celsius, which is about 1650 degrees Fahrenheit, about
the temperature you get if you put a sample in a Bunsen burner flame, you release all
of the carbon dioxide, yielding a substance called quicklime, the thing that's left from
CaCO3 if you take away CO2 is CaO, calcium and oxygen bonded together, quicklime.
In building materials, one takes quicklime and adds water to make calcium hydroxide,
CaOH2, that is two oxygens, two hydrogens, and one calcium, or what's commonly called
plaster.
CO2 from the atmosphere then combines with wet plaster, which releases water vapor to
the air to reform the limestone to make a hard substance again that now binds your bricks
or stones or whatever together.
The water evaporates into the air, that's an H2O gone, a CO2 is captured from the air,
that's a C plus two O's added, and one returns to calcium carbonate CaCO3 again.
So in a sense, plaster is alive in that from the moment you make it wet and stick two things
together with it, it starts sucking in carbon dioxide from the air and as it dries, it stops
doing that.
That usually takes only a matter of weeks.
Such that it now has a carbon-14 to carbon-12 ratio as though it was something that just
died where the carbon-14 gradually decays away and the carbon-12 and 13 remain unchanged.
Care must be taken when doing this and using this technique since the sand or gravel that
you mix with plaster to make mortar, which is usually what's used to hold things together,
can contain very old carbon that has no carbon-14 at all, which will throw off the ratio.
For example, limestone fragments on a beach, which might be scooped up in sand you use
to mix with your plaster, might well contain carbon, which is hundreds of millions of years
old.
Limestone is laid down as tiny little calciferous shells from little creatures in the sea fall
to the bottom and get built up, packed under pressure, and then the land through tectonic
activity, the rock comes up onto land and we see deposits of limestone.
That's 100 million years old, there's going to be no carbon-14 whatsoever left in that
and so you will artificially add carbon-12 and carbon-13, that is add to the denominator,
but not add any carbon-14 to the numerator, thus leading to an incorrect date.
As in many of these projects, they're interdisciplinary in an interesting way.
The team that first perfected the technique of dating drying plaster consisted of a nuclear
physicist, a geologist, an art historian, and two archaeologists working together to
solve this interesting set of problems.
The first one they succeeded at was a stone tower that still stands in Newport, Rhode
Island.
There are a bunch of people that are very enthusiastic about the Vikings and it tribute
almost everything that happened in the New World prior to the arrival of the Europeans
in the 17th century to the Vikings.
In particular, this rather peculiar stone tower was attributed by some to Vikings and
therefore thought to be over a thousand years old.
However, using this technique of drilling out small amounts of plaster in the mortar
that held the stones together and dating it using carbon-14 decay, it was shown that
the tower was built sometime around 1690, completely ruling out a Viking origin.
Indeed, it turns out the written record suggests this as well, as this tower is cited as a
base of a windmill in Benedict Arnold's great grandfather's will, but the Viking enthusiasts
needed harder evidence to rule out their hypothesis.
This group then attacked a problem of great interest, which shows that even in relatively
recent times, traditional archaeology can have a big uncertainty as to when structures
were built.
There are eight large churches on the Alland Islands of Finland.
Alland is a Swedish-speaking island province of Finland that nies rather closer to Sweden
than it does to Finland in the Baltic Ocean.
It was an important settlement in the Bronze Age when German seal hunters built an oil
processing plant there to use seal oil for light and heat.
Later, a large Franciscan monastery was established and large churches were built on eight different
islands.
These are important repositories of medieval sculpture and paintings and even some manuscripts,
but there is no written document that says when these churches were constructed.
Traditional archaeology has led to debates which ranged from 1100 years, 1100 AD rather,
to 1490, an uncertainty of almost 500 years, four or 500 years, even only 600 years ago.
This is a measure of the imprecision of classical archaeological and art historical techniques
in dating buildings such as this.
So are atomic historians to the rescue.
On the island of Kokkar, where the largest of these churches is, they sampled the plaster
and attempt to derive a date.
Now it turns out they were lucky because on this island, the beach sand contains no limestone
whatsoever, only things like silicon dioxide which they mixed with the lime to make the
mortar that held the stones together.
So there was no contamination from limestone, subsequently they found on other islands where
glacial deposits of limestone had been laid down on the beaches, their technique did not
work as well.
But on Kokkar, there was only quartz and felsvar and sand and no old carbon.
And so they derived a date for the church.
In addition they used another technique which we'll discuss in a subsequent lecture, counting
the tree rings in the roof beams of the church.
One of the beams, which gives a very precise date because we can match the thicknesses
of the rings exactly as I'll show, gave the date of 1281 AD.
The mortar dating came in with a date between 1279 and 1290, a perfect match, accurate to
ten years showing that these churches were indeed much older than some archeologists
had suspected.
Confirmation of this technique was done, of this date, was done with a third technique
called thermoluminescence, an examination of the roof tiles for a peculiar light that's
emitted when things like ceramics are heated.
When you have something like a volcanic lava or a ceramic pot or roof tile that's been
heated up to high temperatures, all of the imperfections in the crystals get wiped out
and the crystal is relatively perfect when it cools.
However, as cosmic rays, the same ones that make carbon-14, come charging in through the
atmosphere and slam into these materials, they can create defects in the crystals, knocking
electrons out of where they should be and trapping them in other imperfections in the
crystals so they're not where they belong, leaving charged particles, both positive and
negative, behind.
These trappings are really severe, the electron can be stuck there for something like a hundred
thousand years.
Now the number of trapped electrons in this state is proportional to the length of time
that the object has been exposed to cosmic rays since it was zeroed out by firing the
tile.
If you heat these samples slowly, you can liberate those trapped electrons, have them
hop back over the lattice and jump in to where they belong, and when, as we've seen, an electron
joins an atom and jumps down its energy levels, light is emitted.
The amount of light given off is proportional to the exposure that the substance has received
and thus to its age.
The thermal calibration of the technique is essential, one needs to know how many trapping
sites there are and how readily they're filled with electrons, and this is done after the
thermal luminescence is recorded by exposing the object to artificial neutron bombardment
and then calculating the trapping efficiency.
The Roman amphitheater in Merida in Spain was dated to 100 AD using this technique a
century later than the written inscription at the entrance to the theater.
However, consistent with it being a copy of the Roman Colosseum, which it was architecturally,
thus it was surprising that the inscription suggested it was built first.
In fact, carbon-14 dating of the mortar showed that it was built after the original Colosseum
in Rome.
The date for major construction on the elaborate villas of northern Portugal were found to be
580 AD, a century and a half after the collapse of the Roman Empire, showing that Roman technology
in building, in waterworks, and in other things survived long after the collapse of the Empire.
In several of these examples, the date measured using atoms helped to redefine history.
The concept that the atoms incorporated into a substance can help reveal its history is
a powerful notion that we will use repeatedly throughout this course.
Next time we will apply it to ourselves, since, atomically speaking, we are what we eat.
