As we saw last time, subtle differences in the isotopic ratios found in once-living
tissue provide a record of an individual encounter with his physical environment.
In addition, however, such ratios can record changes in the social environment of populations,
such as shifts in food production and consumption.
The history of agriculture is therefore written in the isotope ratios of carbon in human
tissue.
Carbon is the atom on which all life on earth is based, and that's why we keep coming
back to it, whether using carbon-14 for dating purposes or, as we will today, the other two
stable isotopes of carbon, carbon-13 and carbon-12, to understand the history of agriculture.
Now it's important to remember that carbon isotopes, like all isotopes, are chemically
but not physically identical.
All neutral carbon atoms have six electrons, because all carbon atoms have six protons,
that's what defines them as carbon.
And the six electrons of carbon are arranged in a particular way, which makes it particularly
versatile.
Two electrons in the first energy level, that's all a first energy level of any atom can obtain,
two electrons in the first sub-level of the second level, and two electrons in the second
sub-level of the second level.
Those two outermost electrons are what make carbon such a willing partner to join up with
other atoms to make a wide variety of molecules.
And again, all carbon isotopes behave chemically exactly the same.
But these three carbon isotopes, carbon-12, carbon-13 and carbon-14, have different masses.
And the mass ratios are rather different.
The ratio of 13 to 12 means that carbon-13 is 8% heavier, and carbon-14 to carbon-12
is 17% heavier.
Now recall that in any circumstance, the atoms, whether in a solid vibrating next to each
other, in a liquid touching but sliding over each other, or in a gas colliding with each
other like billiard balls, the energy is shared amongst all of the atoms equally.
With the energy shared equally, it means the heavier atoms move more slowly.
You'll recall that the velocity is proportional to 1 over the square root of the mass.
And so carbon-13 will be moving on average 4% more slowly than carbon-12, and carbon-14
about 8% more slowly.
Remember the billiard balls, the bowling ball, and the ping-pong ball on the pool table,
the light ones go flying off, the heavy ones barely move, and the intermediate ones bounce
around.
So carbon-14 moves much more slowly, carbon-13 somewhat more slowly, than the dominant isotope
carbon-12.
In any chemical reaction, slower atoms are discriminated against.
They just don't get there as fast, and so they don't have the opportunity to join up
with other atoms to make molecules.
Thus, the heavier isotopes will always be underrepresented in any chemical compound
involving carbon.
Since carbon-12 and carbon-13 are both stable, they never undergo radioactive decay, they
form a permanent record of the chemical composition leading to the compounds in which they are
found.
Carbon-13 and carbon-12 ratio of a substance then reveals its chemical history, not just
its origin, as we did by dating potassium and argon and rocks, for example, not just
the conditions under which it was made, but its entire history, the processes it's gone
through to reach the state in which we find it.
The global carbon-13 to carbon-12 ratio is roughly 1.1 to 100.
That is, there is 1.1 atoms of carbon-13 for every 100 atoms of carbon-12, in, for example,
the carbon dioxide I breathe out of my mouth.
We can easily measure this ratio, with totally straightforward techniques, to 100% or one
part in 10,000, and by using slightly more sophisticated techniques to a part in 100,000
or one one thousandth of 1%.
Thus even very subtle shifts in the carbon-13 to carbon-12 ratio can be easily measured
and recorded.
The standard value for this ratio is completely arbitrary, designated as that ratio found in
a particular marine limestone fossil excavated from South Carolina in the 1950s.
We have to have something as a standard.
Every substance on earth has a slightly different ratio of carbon-13 to carbon-12, and a long
time ago this particular fossil was designated as the standard ratio.
The ratio found in all other substances then is compared to this, and is expressed as a
fractional deviation, a value we label as delta-13C, where delta is the Greek letter
delta and always represents a change or a difference.
We define this as the C-13 to C-12 ratio of whatever sample we're studying, minus the
C-13 to C-12 ratio of the standard, this South Carolina fossil, divided by the C-13
to C-12 standard ratio.
So it's a fractional change measured in percent.
A substance that's identical to the C-13 to C-12 ratio of the standard has a delta-13C
of zero, because the two values in the numerator are equal.
The range in all carbon-bearing substances we've ever found on earth is from about plus
four-tenths of one percent to minus five percent.
That is, there are a few substances that have a slightly higher carbon-13 to carbon-12
ratio than this particular fossil, but most substances have a lower ratio of carbon-13
to carbon-12, all the way down to five percent lower.
For example, air out in the country has a delta-13C value of about minus seven-tenths
of one percent, but air in Los Angeles has a value of minus eight-tenths of one percent.
Why is it lower?
Because unfortunately, those of you who have visited or lived there will know this, a non-trivial
fraction of the Los Angeles air comes out of the tailpipes of cars on the famous Los Angeles
freeways.
Now, where does the carbon come from in the gasoline which these cars are burning?
It comes from fossilized plants, oil, plants that were growing 100 million or 200 million
years ago, and plants, as we shall see, discriminate in constructing their cellulose material against
carbon-13.
So the carbon-13 to carbon-12 ratio in gasoline is lower than the carbon-13 to carbon-12
ratio in air.
Thus in Los Angeles, there's a tenth of a percent difference from air in the country
because a significant fraction of that air is contributed by car exhausts.
On the floor of the Amazon rainforest, for example, the air has a delta-13C value of
minus one point five-five percent, a huge discrepancy, as a consequence of all the carbon
released from the rotting leaf litter on the floor of the rainforest, which, because it
is plant material, is also deficient in carbon-13.
Let's draw carbon into the food chain by absorbing it from the air as CO2, splitting
off the O2, sending that back out again, fortunately for us because that's what we breathe in,
and using the carbon to make material in the process we call photosynthesis.
The CO2 is drawn in from the air through tiny little openings in the underside of the leaves
called stomata, which have little valves that can open and close more or less widely depending
on conditions.
Since the C13O2 molecules move more slowly in the air than the C12O2 molecules, fewer
of them get to enter.
It's like a crowd trying to enter a sporting event.
The ones that are moving fast will get in before the ones that are moving more slowly.
At each chemical step, following their entry through the stomata, as complex molecules are
built up in the photosynthetic process, again, because the carbon-13s that do get in are
always moving more slowly, further discrimination occurs.
There are three primary photosynthetic pathways.
This has only been understood since the 1960s.
It was originally thought that photosynthesis was photosynthesis, a particular chemical
process which led from carbon dioxide in the air to the cellulose material that makes up
a plant.
It turns out that most plants, certainly most of those that live in temperate climates
like the continental United States, are called C3 plants.
Now don't confuse C3 for C12 or C13.
The C stands for carbon in all cases, but three in this case stands for the number of
carbon atoms that are linked together in the first step of the photosynthetic process.
Three carbons are linked in a little chain.
These are excellent at forming chains, which is why they are the basis of life.
And most temperate plants and grasses and trees and shrubs and fruits and berries are
C3 plants.
It was discovered in the 1960s, however, that a few particular kinds of plants, in particular
maize, the parent of corn, sugarcane, sorghum, and some salt-tolerant marsh grasses, began
photosynthesis in a different way.
Out of linking three carbons together, they link four carbons together.
And so they are called C4 plants.
But again, the C4 is not like C13.
There couldn't be a C4, because carbon by definition has six protons, so its atomic
mass must be at least six, and in fact is typically either 12, 13, or 14.
So four here, again, stands for the number of atoms linked together in the first step
of the photosynthetic process.
There's yet a third process called the CAM pathway, which is found primarily in succulents
such as cacti.
Now, to first approximation, most plants you encounter are C3 plants.
The exceptions again are maize, corn, sugarcane, sorghum, and switchgrass in the U.S.
C4 plants make up only about one percent of all plant species.
And they're especially well adapted to drought, to high temperature, to high salt content,
which is why they're found in some marsh grasses in salty water, and to low nitrogen
and CO2 availability.
Indeed, it is thought that C4 plants, this different pathway, evolved only recently in
the last few tens of millions of years in response to a drop in atmospheric CO2 levels,
which as we will see when we discover the history of climate and the Earth's atmosphere
were considerably higher in the past, such that plants didn't require this extra root
to photosynthesis.
Now the different chemical processes, linking three atoms together as opposed to linking
four atoms together, lead to different levels of discrimination against carbon-13.
There's greater discrimination in C3 plants because you only need three to get going,
whereas in C4 it's a little less picky because you have to wait around until you've got
four carbon atoms all aligned to join up in the initial chain.
The mean value of delta-13C for C3 plants is minus 2.65%.
Again, these plants draw in air that's got a delta-13C value of minus 0.7%, and discriminate
against the carbon-13 such that by the time the cellulose is formed, the value is minus
2.65%.
The range for all C3 plants is about six-tenths of a percent.
The mean value for delta-13C for C4 plants is minus 1.25%, less than half the discrimination
that we see in C3 plants.
Again, this process must be less picky because it needs to find four carbon atoms before
it can get going.
And the range here is only about a quarter of a percent.
The narrower range for the C4 plants probably just represents the fact that there are much
more recent evolutionary phenomenon, and they have a chance to diversify as much as the
C3 plants which have been around for hundreds of millions of years.
Now, since in our diets today, we eat a mix of C3 and C4 plants, the isotope ratios from
these plants is reflected in the carbon isotope ratios of our bones and flesh.
But turning food plants into bones and muscle involves further chemical reactions, which
again discriminate to a greater or lesser degree against carbon-13.
In some cases, they even favor carbon-13 over carbon-12, the more slowly moving isotope.
We call this level of further discrimination in a new set of chemical reactions the fractionation
factor, which is the degree of change a particular set of reaction introduces into the delta-13C
value.
The fractionation factor for mammalian fat, for example, is roughly minus 0.3 percent.
That is, an animal eating a diet exclusively of C4 plants would have fat with a delta-13C
value of minus 1.25 percent for the C4 plants, minus another three-tenths of a percent or
minus 1.55 percent in total.
The fractionation factor for bone collagen, the thing that's most likely to be left over
if we find a skeleton, is actually positive.
That is, the chemical process that creates bone actually favors the heavy isotope by
a little over half a percent.
There's an aside here that's important.
As you might imagine, the fractionation factor for carbon-14, which is even heavier than
carbon-13, is even more severe.
In fact, it's roughly twice as great.
So if the fractionation factor for carbon-13 is something like 1.5 percent, the factor
for carbon-14 will be 3 percent.
When we're using carbon-14 for dating, we have to take this into account, because as
you will recall, it's the ratio of carbon-14 to carbon-12, the radioactive isotope carbon-14,
which is decaying away over time, with the stable isotope carbon-12 that tells us how
old a substance is.
What we do is use the C-13 to C-12 ratio in a bone as a proxy for the amount of fractionation
there has been, and then apply that, updating it to the carbon-12 mass, such that it can
be used to calculate directly the correction factor by which carbon-14 has been discriminated
against, and thus changing the date.
Ignoring this effect, which is about 3 percent, can yield a date for something that's a few
thousand years old that's off by 250 years, far greater than the amount that the inherent
carbon-14 dating technique can yield.
So this is an important correction we have to keep in mind.
The delta-13C value for bones can thus reveal the types of plants the organism ate.
Since C-12 and C-13 are both stable, they never decay, this record lasts forever.
A range of values is possible based on the mix of plants at the bottom of the food chain
in that organism's diet.
For example, it's not just if you're a hunter-gatherer and you're a vegetarian, so you're eating
directly the plants that are either C-3 or C-4, or perhaps a mixture of the two, but
the animals you eat who eat those plants also are going to reflect the C-12 to C-13 ratio
of the mix of C-3 and C-4 plants they consume.
So a direct measurement of diet is provided by this ratio and offers a powerful tool to
reconstruct the history of human agriculture.
Let's start with Native Americans of the Midwest, for example.
Humans invaded North America nearly 15,000 years ago, and for thousands of years, those
who migrated to the Ohio Valley subsisted for a long period of time exclusively on C-3
plants and the animals that ate those plants because only C-3 plants were growing naturally
in that area.
Now recall that in 600 A.D., the anasazi we visited last time were already cultivating
corn, a derivative of the natural plant maize which is found in the highlands of Mexico.
It had already migrated through agriculture to the southwest of the U.S., but in the center
of the U.S., corn was unknown.
If we look at the bones of Native Americans from the Ohio Valley, we can measure their
dates by standard carbon-14 dating, but we can also measure their diets by looking at
the carbon-13 to carbon-12 ratio in their bones.
And what we find is, for thousands of years, a diet based exclusively on C-3 plants.
Between about 1,000 and 1,200 A.D., the delta-13 C values start to climb, that is, they get
less negative because C-4 plants have evidently been introduced into their diet.
This undoubtedly was a consequence of the introduction of maize agriculture.
And by 1,400 A.D., their diet was nearly 70 percent derived from maize or perhaps from
turkeys or other animals, deer that got into their maize patches and ate the maize, changing
the composition of their flesh and bones as well.
This technique, then, can be used to follow the spread of maize cultivation from its existence
as a wild plant in the highlands of Mexico, 5,000 miles away, spreading across the U.S.
Until by the time the pilgrims arrived in New England, the Native Americans there were
also cultivating this highly nutritious plant.
This technique can provide invaluable compliments to more traditional archaeological techniques
in other areas of the world as well.
In the Orinoco Valley in Venezuela, for example, it is known from standard archaeological techniques
that there were large populist chieftains over 1,500 years ago.
These were very hard to explain on the basis of the traditional anthropological view of
a tropical forest system of manioc cultivation, that starchy root that's grown in South America,
and hunter-gatherer activities.
The anthropologist Anna Roosevelt challenged the standard interpretation that the populations
grew only because they got even better at fishing and catching animals in the seasons
in which they could do that when the rivers weren't at flood stage, and even more intensive
in their cultivation of manioc.
She did this through standard techniques of anthropology by sifting through refuse piles
and looking for remnants of food and food processing equipment.
She concluded that over 1,000 years ago large-scale bean and maize cultivation was already present
in this area, but most anthropologists remained unconvinced.
Thus she decided to turn to the modern methods of carbon-13 to carbon-12 ratios to see if
the bones of people of that time indicated a diet rich in any C4 plants.
The first problem she had, however, was trying to figure out whether manioc, clearly the
staple of their diet, was a C3 or a C4 plant.
There was nothing in the literature which told her the answer.
Since she was at the State University of New York in Binghamton, about four hours north
of New York City, there was, at the time, in the supermarkets no ready manioc available
to advertise in the laboratory.
And so the only source was to send her graduate students on an eight-hour round-trip drive
to New York to go to a Puerto Rican market and bring back a manioc route so they could
analyze it in the lab and determine whether it was a C3 or a C4 plant.
Well, it turned out to be C3.
But the measurements of the bones of the people of the Orinoco Valley implied a diet that was
80 percent C4 plants by as early as 400 AD, which is when the population in these chieftains
peaked.
This showed unequivocally that cultivation of maize had already reached Venezuela 1600
years ago.
Animal diets, of course, are also reflective of the delta-13 C ratios in their bones of
the diets that they eat.
Since the mix of C3 and C4 plants depends on temperature and moisture, recall the C4 plants
evolved in response to dry, salty, and hot conditions, it can be used as a proxy for
climate change.
The average value of delta-13 C for the mix of vegetation on an African mountainside,
for example, can be used to determine the altitude to within plus or minus 100 meters.
The mix of C3 and C4 plants changes as you go from colder conditions to warmer conditions.
This of fossilized teeth from zebra in Lesotho show a change in the mix of grasses on the
mountain sides in which they grazed from 85 percent C3 plants at the peak of the last
ice age about 30,000 years ago to less than 40 percent C3 plants today, indicating this
part of Africa was much wetter during cold periods, although, as we will see, other parts
of Africa were drier during those times.
Isotope ratios can also be used to actually monitor the purity of food.
Honey you buy in the store that's typed pure clover honey is, of course, produced by bees
who collect the raw ingredients pollen from clover or other C3 plants.
That means the carbon-12 to carbon-13 ratio in the honey should be reflective of a C3
plant.
Likewise, orange juice you buy in the store that says pure 100 percent not made from
concentrate orange juice is also a C3 plant and therefore should have C3 carbon-13 to
carbon-12 ratios.
However, if the ratio is greater than minus 2 percent, the extreme of C3 plants, it suggests
the product has been adulterated with corn syrup sweeteners, corn being, of course,
a C4 plant and having a less negative C3 C4 ratio.
Brandy, for example, should be purely from grapes which are a C3 plant and not boosted
in alcohol content by adding grain alcohol which is typically made from sorghum or corn,
a C4 plant.
There are also potential medical applications and drug testing scenarios which can use isotope
ratios.
For example, in 1997 in the Tour de France, this was called the Tour of Shame because
of the initiation, something that has continued since unfortunately in doping amongst the
athletes.
The way this is done is to compare the C13 to C12 ratio of different substances in the
body.
For example, testosterone, something with athletes tend to take artificially, and cholesterol
which is produced with a natural C13 to C12 ratio reflective of the diet.
Now, each bicyclist might have a different diet, therefore a different mix of C3 and
C4 plants or of the animals that eat C3 and C4 plants, and so each athlete would have
a unique C13 to C12 ratio.
But the cholesterol in that athlete's body would have the C13 to C12 ratio representative
of his or her diet, whereas the testosterone, if taken as an injection, would have a different
C13 to C12 ratio.
This readily yields indication of illegal doping.
Now there are a number of other medical possibilities for this, and you know it's important when
you type into Google words describing C13 to C12 ratio in medicine, and the first 50
hits are for companies that are selling diagnostic equipment or tests for the consumer.
For example, the C13O2 ratio that you breathe out can be read with laser spectroscopy, shining
a laser beam in to excite the atoms, and provides a test for the common bacterium helicobacter
pylori, a bacterium which can infect the esophagus in the stomach, cause stomach ulcers and even
cancer.
This can be, the presence for this can be tested by simply breathing out.
An exhaled C13O2 can achieve an accuracy with this technique of 10 parts per million,
that is a part per 100,000.
Isotopes other than carbon can also be used to monitor the metabolic processes in the
bodily.
For example, the deuterium to hydrogen, that is heavy hydrogen to normal hydrogen in water,
and the O18 to O16 ratio in CO2 and water, can be used to test basic metabolic rates
in humans.
From nitrogen 15 to nitrogen 14, to isotopes of nitrogen that exist naturally in the ear,
in your urine can test for liver function.
Calcium 42 and calcium 44, the ratio of them in blood, can be a measure of calcium retention
and bone growth.
One can also use experiments by manipulating isotope ratios and seeing how they're processed
in the body or in a plant.
Inseed oil labeled with deuterium, heavy hydrogen, was fed to mice in the 1930s and found that
one third of it was incorporated into fat tissue, the first metabolic study of how fats
were incorporated into the body.
Deuterium nitrogen 15, that is Hn, using the heavy form of hydrogen and the heavy form
of hydrogen, double labeled leucine was used to investigate protein metabolism.
And H2O18, double labeled water, where you have the deuterium, heavy hydrogen and the
heavy oxygen, was used for daily energy expenditure and calcium 48 to study in pregnant women
how they metabolized calcium.
It's not just carbon 13 and nitrogen 15, as I said, makes up about a third of a percent
of air, and nitrogen cycling in crop plants can yield great insights into the optimal
use of nitrogen based fertilizers for agriculture.
If we label the nitrogen fertilizer with an excessive amount of nitrogen 15, not the natural
amount it would get from the air, but an extra amount, we can trace the fate of that fertilizer
through its whole life cycle.
How much of it is taken up by the plant?
How much of it remains in the soil?
How much of it is just lost to the atmosphere?
And how much of it, very importantly, is leached away in runoff waters?
By studying the nitrogen in this way, we can come up with optimized fertilization techniques
to minimize the amount that runs off into water supplies and damages their ecology and
maximize the amount that is taken up in plants.
Everything alive absorbs atoms with specific isotope ratios reflecting their diets.
All living things are what they eat.
We've seen in this talk how this can be used in archaeological settings and also in modern
day medicine and in testing of food products.
In particular, trees, another form of life, are what they eat.
And trees hold a special place in our atomic reconstruction of history because they come
in with a built-in, highly accurate clock, their annual growth rings.
We'll see next time how we can reconstruct a history of climate over the past 12,000
years by studying the isotopic ratios in tree rings, as well as correct a flawed assumption
regarding carbon-14 dating, all through the analysis of living and dead trees.
