While the ice core record we discussed in the last lecture is clearly physically restricted
to the polar regions, features correlated with ice core changes are found at all latitudes.
From caves in China where we can measure isotopic shifts in the rainfall in stalactites to ocean
floor sediments off New Zealand, we see that there are global changes whenever we see changes
in the ice core reflecting temperature fluctuations, wind speed fluctuations and precipitation
changes.
However, we know that regional changes are large and are not necessarily the same everywhere
in the world.
Changes in temperature and precipitation accompany global climate shifts and having measurements
that we can make in the 95% of the world that's not covered by ice is important to understanding
these effects.
Coral reefs and sea floor sediments provide a record that charts the synchronous rise and
fall of the sea with the ice ages as well as allowing us to probe much further back in
time and to explore these regional climatic effects.
To produce the massive glaciers of ice that the ice ages see means a very large volume
of water must be transferred to the land and this large volume of water can only come from
one place, the oceans.
How do we know how large the glaciers are?
They leave scars on the land which the astute observer can easily see.
In my class at Columbia I take my students out to Central Park where there are several
massive outcroppings of bedrock called Manhattan Schist appropriately in us.
In this bedrock one can see deep grooves about this wide and sometimes that deep that run
in parallel over these large outcroppings of the rock.
What this represents is a place where the last glacier which only 20,000 years ago was
more than a mile thick over Manhattan has slowly and exerably dragged large boulders
with it and scoured out streaks in these rocks.
Some of the boulders are actually left behind.
These rocks are called erratics.
They're erratic because they don't belong to the geology of the region but have been
carried hundreds perhaps even thousands of miles from their origin and then dumped there
when the glacier retreats.
In addition large geographic features are a consequence of the glaciers advance.
Long Island for example, the 100 mile long island that exists off Manhattan is actually
a glacial moraine, a place where the glacier acting like a bulldozer stopped in the last
ice age and as it retreated and melted back left a pile of detritus, a pile big enough
that it's 10 miles wide and 100 miles long and hundreds of meters deep that makes up
Long Island today.
So we have good geological markers for the size and extent of the glaciers during the
glacial maximum.
Coral reefs in addition to helping us calibrate the carbon 14 clock as we discussed last time
provide an excellent prehistoric tidal gauge if you will that allows us to read the history
of past sea levels and decide whether or not how much water from the ocean ended up on
the land.
We can make a rough estimate of this from the geological features I described earlier.
It looks as though the glaciers advanced nearly 4,000 kilometers down from the pole and if
you take the average circumference of the earth at these latitudes of about 7,000 kilometers
and recognize the glaciers were about 2 kilometers thick that means a total of about 5.6 times
10 to the 7th or 56 million cubic kilometers of ice.
Now if you imagine taking that from the oceans taking the whole area of the ocean which is
about 70% of the whole area of the earth and dividing that into that volume of ice you
find a depth of ocean that must have disappeared of 150 meters nearly 500 feet fall in sea level
or half the height of the Empire State Building.
This is our crude estimate from the land area and the thickness of the glaciers that we
think must existed during the ice ages.
Carls can help us measure this in quantitative detail.
Carls are animals actually a few millimeters in size that live in a complex relationship
with the marine ecosystem.
They exist in colonies of thousands to millions of identical individuals called polyps that
can reproduce both asexually by splitting and sexually by releasing gametes into the
water.
Well these creatures have little tiny stinging tentacles with which they can catch plankton
and microscopic fish and other little sea creatures.
Most of their nutrition from a large collection of coral comes from symbiotic photosynthesizing
algae that is algae that lives in a relationship with the polyps and uses photosynthesis to
produce food.
The principal signature of coral of course the thing you think of in your mind when I
say that word are the massive and beautiful reefs that are formed, built up over thousands
of generations of coral as they secrete calcium carbonate, the material that makes shells.
Because of the algae that the coral need to live with, coral can only live between five
and fifty meters below the ocean surface.
Fifty meters being the maximum depth to which enough sunlight penetrates that photosynthesis
in these algae can occur.
In addition, depending on the species, they require certain temperature and salinity conditions
to thrive.
If the sea level suddenly falls, a coral reef is left exposed and then it dies.
If the sea level suddenly rises, the reef drowns because insufficient sunlight can reach
the photosynthetic algae that the coral polyps rely on for their growth.
Radioactive dating using both carbon-14, because the coral are living creatures and therefore
suck carbon out of the water, and the uranium-234, thorium-230 clock that we talked about earlier
allow us to date the changes in the rise and fall of sea level in coral reefs precisely.
As but one example, a sudden sea level rise of about fifteen to twenty meters at sixty
or seventy feet in less than five hundred years has been identified from Tahitian coral
reefs, as occurring about fourteen thousand seven hundred years ago, just as the world
began the transition out of the last ice age towards the current interglacial period in
which we reside.
Detailed analysis of many reefs off Barbados, the same ones that my Columbia colleagues
used for dating before that corrected the carbon-14 dates back fifty thousand years,
allow us to determine the time of the last glacial maximum, that is, the glacial maximum
being when the sea level was lowest, about twenty one thousand to twenty six thousand
years before the present, with a total sea level fall very close to that crude calculation
I gave you of about a hundred and thirty meters or over four hundred feet.
The coastlines of the world look very different during an ice age because so much of the ocean
water ends up on land.
Even more sudden rises of three and four meters heights have been inferred during the last
interglacial period, one hundred twenty five thousand years ago, the last time the world
was relatively free of ice as it is today, when sea levels were near today's level.
Presumably that sudden rise then was also a consequence of the collapse of an ice sheet,
a large ice sheet sliding off a continent into the ocean and raising sea levels suddenly.
In addition to the orbit driven ice age cycles, the ones caused by the procession of the earth,
the changing tilt of the earth's axis, and the changing size of the earth's orbit that
we've discussed, some researchers have claimed there's a fifteen hundred year, one thousand
five hundred year oscillation of climate, and they have linked it to variability in
the sun.
The data come from North Atlantic Ocean course.
Just as with ice, we take a drill and go down through the ice and pull out a cross-section
of the ice with which we can measure the history of climate, we do the same thing in the bottom
of the ocean.
Obviously, oil is drilled in the bottom of the ocean so we have this equipment readily
set up.
We can drill down and pull out a core about this big around in which every layer going
down allows us to go backwards in time.
These cores in the middle of the North Atlantic Ocean reveal in alternating bands little grains
of reddish rock.
It doesn't bear any geological resemblance to the other materials in that part of the
ocean floor, but indeed chemically and isotopically it's identical in composition to rocks that
are on the surface of Northern Canada and parts of Greenland.
These little reddish grains from thousands of kilometers away are thought to be delivered
to the mid-Atlantic by huge flotillas of icebergs breaking off the Canadian and the Greenland
glaciers and drifting south, far enough south to drop their grains off the bottom as the
icebergs melt to leave these grains in a location where they're geologically foreign.
This requires for the icebergs to get this far south significantly colder, colder ocean
temperatures during these periods.
These layers of red grains recur with a period of 1500 years, nine different such layers
have been identified in the last 12,000 years since the rough end of the last Ice Age.
These same authors have identified simultaneously an increase in the formation rate of carbon-14
another radioactive isotope produced in the atmosphere, beryllium-10, both of which come
about as a consequence of these high energy particles striking nitrogen and oxygen atoms
in the atmosphere of Earth.
Now as I mentioned earlier, when the sun is active, that is when its energy output is
high and there's lots of sunspots on the surface, its overall global magnetic field
extends out and embraces the Earth, helping to shield it from these cosmic rays coming
in, meaning that the rate of production of these radioactive isotopes like carbon and
beryllium goes down.
What these authors that identified the 1500 year cycle of red grain deposit in the middle
of the Atlantic have shown is that when those red grains are deposited, the amount of carbon-14
and beryllium-10 actually increases, suggesting that the sun is in a less active phase having
withdrawn its magnetic field, remove the protected blanket from Earth and allow the cosmic rays
to generate more of these elements.
The suggestion that the sun undergoes a roughly periodic change in activity levels that influence
Earth's climate significantly on millennial timescales is a little controversial.
As we shall see when we study the stars, there is nothing in the life cycle of a star that
suggests such short periods of fluctuation. Indeed, changes in stars tend to be measured
in millions to billions of years, not just thousands of years. So personally, I remain
somewhat skeptical that changes in solar output is a consequence of changes in solar output
actually produce these changes in sea surface temperature. But there's compelling evidence
that sea surface temperature actually does change.
Analysis of ocean cores from West Africa, thousands of kilometers from the red grain
deposits in the North Atlantic, show additional indications of temperature change that are
correlated with the grain deposition.
The mix of species of tiny single-celled organism, planktonic organism that are called
forminifera, or forams for short, are extremely sensitive to sea surface temperature, changing
the temperature of the surface by a couple of degrees, changes completely the mix of
species of these forearms that one can detect.
The forearms are ideal climate tracers because they form little calciferous shells, just
like little clam shells, only they're much, much tinier, and as they die, they sink to
the bottom of the ocean and, year after year, produce layers, which allow one to again have
a record of climate change.
Each species have a different kind of shell, some of them curve left, some of them curve
right, some of them have lots of holes, some of them are more solid, and a trained eye,
I must confess I don't have one of those, but a trained eye can easily detect which
kind of species it is under a microscope looking at the shells of these forearms.
Now one can also take these shells and analyze them isotopically, as we're now familiar with
doing, and the oxygen isotope ratios incorporated into these shells provide a direct measure
of sea surface temperature as well.
Recall how the heavy oxygen, oxygen 18 when combined with hydrogen, makes H218O heavy
water, and the heavy molecules, as always, move more slowly than the light ones. Thus,
as we found in the ice, when temperatures rise, the heavy molecules tend to escape the
sea more readily, and fall and rain on the ice, meaning an excess of heavy isotopes
corresponds to a high temperature in the ice cores.
But the exact opposite effect, of course, must be found in these shells, because if
the heavy oxygen is evaporating with the water into the atmosphere, that leaves less of it
in the ocean for it to be incorporated into the shells of these creatures.
So we have the exact opposite effect on warm temperatures, there's a smaller amount of
H2O18, or O18, found in these seashells, and for low temperatures there's an excess
of O18. Thus, isotopic analysis of these shells allows us to measure the temperature with
reasonable precision.
Drops in equatorial sea surface temperature are correlated with the ice-rafted debris
in the North Atlantic several thousand kilometers away off Africa.
These cores of West Africa also reveal much larger quantities of Sahara Desert dust blown
off the continent in the cold periods, indicating that it was drier then.
You may have seen satellite photographs of these plumes of dust that are blown off the
Sahara today. They're really quite extraordinary. They reach all the way from Africa to the
Caribbean and to Florida. Particles precipitating out of the atmosphere, borne aloft by the
winds from the desert. Now we know today, of course, the Sahara is very dry, which means
these winds can carry the dust a long way. It appears also that Sahara was very dry
during the periods of colder ocean surface temperatures that correspond to the red grains
in the North Atlantic and extra dust deposits off Africa.
In addition, this dust carries along pollen grains, which, as it settles onto the surface
of the ocean, gradually rain to the bottom of the sea. By analyzing these pollen grains,
we can tell whether they come from C3 plants or C4 plants, those two different photosynthetic
pathways we discussed before, which discriminate against carbon-13 in different ways, the C3
plants having less carbon-13, the C4 plants having relatively more.
By analyzing the C13 to C12 ratio in these pollen grains, we can calculate the fraction
of C3 versus C4 plants. And yet again, consistent with the other data, we find that during the
cooler cycles, when the red grains are deposited, when the dry dust blows into the ocean, there
are C3 plants predominate, whereas C4 plants rather predominate under the dry conditions.
The cores from seabeds in the Arabian Sea on the other side of Africa and the Gulf of
Aden also show plant species change when the red grains are present in the North Atlantic.
Dust storms scrub the waxy material off the leaves of plants and carry it with the dust
out to the sea. You know how plant leaves feel slightly waxy? That's an organic substance
which can be rubbed off by sand grains brushing against it as the wind blows it over and attached
to the sand grains, which actually ends up being a dominant component of the organic
material found in the terrestrial dust in the sea ocean cores.
The carbon-13 to carbon-12 ratios in this wax also allows the determination of the relative
mix between the C3 and the C4 plants. And again, the dry conditions coincide with higher
C4 plant abundance. It is worth pausing here with that statement to see how far we have
come. We understand that carbon, an atom which always has six protons and six electrons
and therefore chemically behaves the same way, comes in different isotopes, a consequence
of the different number of neutrons in its nucleus. The plants absorb the different isotopes
at different rates owing to the physics of heat, which is just the motion of individual
particles, of the way energy and chemical change involve a discrimination against the
slower moving heavier carbon-13 molecules. That the C cores, by their layered nature,
as with ice cores and the rings of trees, offer a calendar of past events that, opened
appropriately, we can read. And that isotopic analysis of the organic matter in this windblown
dust thousands of miles away on the C4 reveals the mix of plant species, which in turn is
controlled by the changing climate. The mix of atoms on the ocean floor tells us this whole
story.
The C cores also provide a history of the tropical monsoons and demonstrate that the
amount of sunlight shining on the equatorial latitudes, in addition to the orbit-driven
ice cycles at the poles, is an important determinant of climate there. Monsoons are regular seasonal
rainfalls. The term was first applied to India, but they occur in several parts of
the world. And they result from the differential heating of the land and the ocean. Water has
a high heat capacity. That is, it can soak up a lot of heat before the temperature rises
very much, because a large column of water, down tens of meters, is warmed and regularly
mixed. So imagine heat coming in from the sun, energy coming in from the sun, energy
comes in in the form of photons, light that we can see, and is absorbed by the molecules
of water in the surface of the ocean. These molecules become warmer. Again, what do we
mean by warmer? We mean the molecules are jiggling faster. But the ocean is very turbulent,
and so some of these rapidly moving molecules get mixed down lower in the ocean, where the
molecules are moving more slowly. They collide with each other, and they share their energy
equally as all such particles do. Thus, the sunlight has to continue to shine on the ocean
for a long period of time before it gets all those molecules in the contact region moving
rapidly, before, in other words, the sea surface temperature will rise. On land, the molecules
also absorb energy from the sun and make themselves jiggle faster, but it's only the top meter
or so of soil that actually warms up in response to energy input for the sun. And so, it takes
much less time to warm the land than to warm the ocean. Those of us who live on the east
coast of the United States understand this in terms of our climate seasons. The warmest
part of the year is in August and September, long past the point where the maximum amount
of sunlight was shining on the earth, because it takes that long to warm up the ocean around
us, and the ocean exchanging energy with the air keeps it warm well into the fall.
Whereas the cold part of the year comes in February, a couple of months after the minimum
amount of sunlight hitting the earth, because the ocean is still cooling off, it retains
some warmth, and it takes a long time for it to lose all that energy to the cold atmosphere
above it. Monsoons are an extreme response to this kind of differential heating of land
areas and oceans. As the land heats, the air in contact with it, as the molecules come
in and bounce off, those jiggling molecules, rise. The air rising creates a region where
air from the ocean can come in. The air from the ocean, of course, is more saturated with
water because it's in contact with all those water molecules which is evaporated into the
air. As they come in and rise up, in the case of India, the foothills of the Himalayas,
the water condenses and falls in the form of rain. In the opposite season of the year,
where the ocean is warmer than the land, the air above the ocean rises and the air from
the land rushes out towards the sea. So these seasonal monsoon changes are critically important
to the agriculture and all of life on the subcontinent of India, and understanding their intensity
over long periods of time is important to our understanding of climate. A 120-foot-long
sediment core taken off the coast of West Africa provides a continuous 155,000-year history
of monsoon intensity. The age going down in the core, because the sedimentation rate
is not necessarily constant, was derived from that Argon-40 to Argon-39 test of radioactive
decay that we talked about in a few lectures ago. The Oxygen-18 isotopic signature in the
forearms indicate that the warmer periods correspond to more intense monsoons. This is not surprising
because the warmer it is, the more energy the ocean absorbs, the more energy the ocean
absorbs, the more rapidly its molecules are moving, and the more easily the most rapidly
moving molecules of water can escape into the air, that is evaporate. The more evaporation
there is, the more saturated the air becomes, and when the water then condenses in the air,
the more intense the rainfall. The monsoonal cycles, it turns out, are linked both to the
high-latitude solar energy input, which governs the ice ages through the procession, tilt,
and orbital changes of the Earth, and to the maximum amount of sunlight that's striking
the equator in either March or September, the spring or the fall. This adds a certain
complexity, having to take into account the tilt cycles of the Earth separately from the
other orbital changes. Putting them both together leads to maximum monsoon intensity.
Longer-term ocean sediment records suggest the link between changing climate and human
evolution in Africa. Deep cores off both the west and east coast of Africa yield continuous
records for the past five million years, the time over which the human species has evolved.
Prior to 2.8 million years before the present, the dominant cycle was the 23,000-year axis
procession of the Earth. That's when we went from warm and wet to dry and cold. Since that
time, after 2.8 million years ago, first the 40,000-year tilt cycle became dominant,
and then, as is true at present, as we saw in the ice cores, the 110,000-year ellipticity
change cycle has become dominant, just as they do in the ice core records. Why this
is so? Why one cycle of Earth orbital changes dominates at one period of history, and another
cycle at another is unclear to everyone studying this problem. However, particular steps in
increasing dryness and climate variability are known to occur from these deep sea records
at 2.8, 1.7, 1.2, and 0.6 million years ago. After 2.8 million years ago, the time when
large-scale glaciers first appeared, ice ages have not existed on Earth forever, although
there were some dozers in the past, which we'll talk about in a few lectures, only in
the last 2.8 million years have glaciers come and gone with regularity on Earth. That period,
2.8 million years ago, is a particular marker in the evolution of the fossil record of the
human line. It's when Lucy, the lineage that led to Lucy, the famous skeleton discovered
in Ethiopia some decades ago, split into two separate species. At 1.7 million years ago,
another step in climate change, drier climates predominated in Africa, and the large-brained
Homo erectus species first appeared. At 1 million years ago, as the dry-wet climate
cycles intensified, the genus Peranthropus died out, leaving Homo as the sole surviving
genus in the hominid line. Now, one camp suggests that it's the change in climate that pushed
human evolution along, and another suggests that it's the increased variability, not the
change from wet to dry, but the fact that wet to dry cycles were coming with greater
rapidity pushed human evolution, driving us to require better adaptability for the species
to survive, where better adaptability presumably leads to larger brains and perhaps to language.
Now while this theory is somewhat controversial, the correlation between changing climate and
human evolution provides yet another tantalizing connection between our physical and biological
evolution on the planet. As we reach back several million years, another major factor must be
taken into account in discussing the history of Earth's climate, and that's the positions
of the continents. Indeed, the climate system shift about three to four million years ago,
which led to the onset of the ice ages, may well have been linked to the last major event
in the ever-changing positions of the continents on the surface of the Earth, that being the
closing of the isthmus of Panama. Prior to that time, the ocean flowed freely from the
Atlantic to the Pacific between North and South America. However, as part of the ongoing
motion of the floating continental plates over the surface of the Earth, this region closed
about three million years ago. This produced a major change in ocean currents, which is
clearly seen in the delta-13C ratio of deep ocean forams. Unlike the forams that float
on the surface and record the surface temperature very accurately, there are some that live
very deep down in the ocean and absorb, as all creatures do, carbon from their environment.
A change in the amount of carbon-13 to carbon-12 in these shells indicates a change in the ocean
circulation, because that carbon is mixed into the ocean by the currents that interact
with the air on the surface and then drag it down to the deep ocean. There's a tight
coupling between the ocean and the atmosphere. The closing of the isthmus of Panama also set
up a salinity difference, the amount of salt dissolved in the water, between the Atlantic
and the Pacific Ocean, which, as I mentioned earlier, is responsible for the great conveyor
belt that drives the ocean flows today. There was no more ability for ocean water to mix
from the Pacific to the Atlantic. What happens is the trade winds, the winds near the equator
of the earth, which blow from east to west, evaporate lots of water from the Caribbean
Ocean, Caribbean Sea, carry it over Central America and dump it in the Pacific. But when
you evaporate water, you evaporate the water, not the salt, the salt stays behind, and so
the water gets evaporated, carrying it to the Pacific, dumping fresh water into the Pacific,
removing fresh water from the Atlantic, leading to a difference in the salt content of the
two oceans. Indeed, the current distribution of all the mountains of the world, the huge
range of mountains that runs all the way from Alaska down through California, and then the
Andes, which run all down South America, take the dominant winds and mid-latitudes, which
flow from west to east, and block the water vapor they're carrying, having it dump in
the Sierras and the Andes, and flow back into the Pacific Ocean. Whereas the water that's
evaporated from the Atlantic gets carried over all of Europe into Siberia and eventually
falls and flows off to the Arctic, again, removing fresh water from the Atlantic and
dumping fresh water into the Pacific. This ultimately leads to a difference of salt content
of about one part per thousand between the Atlantic and the Pacific. This may not sound
like much, but it's enough to play a dominant role in driving the entire ocean circulation.
This huge river that starts in the ocean, in the Caribbean, and flows north in the Gulf
String, carries as much water as a hundred Amazon rivers. It carries its warm, salty
water north, cools, because it's salty, it's dense, sinks to the bottom of the ocean, and
redistributes this throughout the world. It has recently been suggested that climate
is more stable during interglacial periods than in glacial states, owing to the salt
difference that's kept up here. Ocean cores have allowed us to extend Earth
history to millions of years. Most of the changes we see take place on timescales long
compared to human lifetimes. Indeed, the dominant philosophical underpinning of Earth history
since the middle of the 19th century has been uniformitarianism, the slow accumulation of
changes over very long periods of time. The Colorado River slowly carves out the Grand
Canyon over millions of years. The Himalayas rise as India collides with the Eurasian Plate.
The majestic glaciers expand and then contract on timescales of hundreds of thousands of
years. While this picture is largely correct, sudden
and catastrophic changes have also left their mark on Earth's history, and particularly
on the history of life. To understand this, then, we cannot consider
only changes on the Earth itself, or changes in its energy source, the Sun. By considering
the small tugs on Earth's orbit that the Moon and the planets produce, we have acknowledged
that the Earth and the Sun are not alone in space. While these massive bodies, distant
planets, produce subtle changes in our orbit that affect climate on long timescales, much
smaller bodies in space can have an even larger and more immediate impact on Earth.
Our story next time presents the most famous example of catastrophic intervention, which
occurred 65 million years ago and led to the death of the dinosaurs.
