By the time the Chixolub meteor put an end to the age of the dinosaurs, life had already
been flourishing on Earth for more than 3.5 billion years. Indeed, in the first 10% of
the life of our parent star, the sun, life emerged in abundance on this planet. Why did
this happen so fast? And why has it not emerged elsewhere?
The answer to the first question involves the atomic raw materials that are available
and the molecule level conditions which obtained on the early Earth. The answer to the second
question, why hasn't life emerged elsewhere, is, maybe it has.
The precursor molecules of life are abundant in interstellar space. As we shall see in
more detail in upcoming lectures, new stars and the planets that frequently accompany
them are born in clouds of gas and dust in interstellar space. In most of the volume
of interstellar space, there is only about one atom, and you remember how small an atom
is, for every cube about 10 centimeters on a side, about the size of this Kleeneck box.
There's one atom in there, and there's one atom over there, and there's one atom over
there. That's really empty space, because in this box right now, just full of air, there
are about 10 to the 21 atoms in the air in this room.
So interstellar space is really empty. Furthermore, in most of that volume, the temperatures are
extremely high, about a million degrees, heated by the explosions of stars over the course
of the life of the galaxy. So the individual atoms that are there, mostly hydrogen of course,
are running around with extreme rapidity. When they collide with each other, they knock
their electrons out of each other's orbit, and the material is by and large that fourth
state of matter, which we don't see often on Earth, called a plasma.
Now there are regions of space that manage to cool off, and where the gas gets cooler,
it starts to collect. Denser regions arise until the atoms reach densities of thousands
of atoms per cubic centimeter. A sugar cube is about the size of a cubic centimeter, and
rather than one atom in a space this large throughout most of the hot regions of space,
there are clouds where there are a thousand atoms inside this sugar cube. Now again, this
sugar cube contains more than a trillion trillion atoms at the moment, but relative
to Earth bound things, space is still empty. But this is a dense region of space. As the
matter gets denser, that means there's more mass. When there's more mass, there's more
gravitational attraction. And so, the little clump of matter over here that's managed to
cool itself down, have its electrons join up with its atoms, become a gas rather than
a plasma, the atoms exert a gravitational attraction from material over here, which falls slowly
towards it, and material over here, which falls slowly towards it. Well that of course
just creates a larger mass here, which has an even greater gravitational force, which
extends farther out into space, so that mass here and here and here all start falling towards
this region as well. Gradually, over the time scale of millions of years, these cold
regions can accumulate the mass of thousands to millions of stars. Huge amounts of matter
concentrated in a cloud that's only about 10 degrees above absolute zero. In other words,
the atoms are moving around very, very slowly. So many atoms are there, and they're moving
so slowly that they tend to bind together to make molecules. So we call these structures
in space molecular clouds. And of course, since hydrogen is the dominant element in
the universe, and forms molecules easily by linking two of them together, the vast majority
of these clouds are made of two hydrogen atoms stuck together, H2. These clouds are also filled
with tiny particles of dust, far too small to see with the naked eye, which range from
collections of tens of thousands of atoms that are all stuck together in a quasi-solid
two really little grains that you could almost see made of carbon and iron and other such
elements. On the surfaces of these dust grains is a place for atoms to meet up. The dust
grains, because they get bombarded occasionally by the same cosmic rays that produce radioactive
isotopes in the atmosphere of the Earth, spew off electrons, and so the grains become positively
charged. Atoms that stick to them, then, can move around on the surface and eventually
can find each other to link up. In interstellar space, even though the cloud is dense, there's
still huge space between the atoms. In the air in this room, the atoms are about this
far apart if each fist represents one atom. In these molecular clouds, the two fists would
be blocks apart. And so the odds of them coming together and coming together slowly enough
that they just gently merge and share their electrons to make a molecular bond is small.
On the surface of these dust grains, however, as they vibrate around on the surface, they
can meet up with each other and link together because, first of all, they're moving more
slowly, and secondly, they have a solid surface on which to rest. We detect these molecules
formed on these dust grains and subsequently ejected back into the gas through the microwave
radiation they emit. In addition to the jumping between electron levels of an atom, which
emits mostly visible light that our eyes can see, these molecules, with one, with two,
three, four, five, six, up to 15 atoms together, manage to undergo two other kinds of excitation.
One is, they vibrate. You can imagine them as two little balls connected with the spring
and given a little nudge from a passing atom, they'll vibrate like this. Now, just as the
electrons orbiting the nucleus of the atom can only exist in specific orbits and therefore
only have specific energies, the transitions between which give rise to light, these little
vibrating springs can only vibrate at certain frequencies, this fast or twice as fast or
four times as fast, and so also give off only certain frequencies of light, giving a unique
signature to that molecule. Finally, there's a third mode of even lower energy excitation
in which if a molecule gets dumped, bumped into, it can sort of tumble, rotate around
and again, it can't rotate at any speed, it can rotate this fast or it can rotate twice
that fast or it can rotate four times that fast, but not at speeds in between, again giving
a unique signature to each molecule. These types of excitations, vibrational excitations
and rotational excitations of molecules give off radiation between the infrared octaves
of the spectrum into the radio octaves of the spectrum, in other words, long wavelength
light because they are much lower energy than the little electrons which are zipping around
the nucleus of the atom, when the electrons change levels, they give off high frequency
light, eyes can see, when these vibrational modes or rotational modes give off energy,
it's much longer wavelength light that only radio telescopes or infrared telescopes can
pick up. Nonetheless, the important point is that each different kind of molecule, water,
carbon dioxide, or whatever, has a unique set of modes in which it can vibrate and
rotate and therefore gives off a unique set of specific frequencies which, when measured
with a telescope, can identify that molecule. Over 140 different molecules have already
been discovered, most of which contain the most common elements unsurprisingly, hydrogen,
carbon, nitrogen and oxygen, but also including things like silicon and sulfur. After H2,
the most common molecule is carbon monoxide, carbon and an oxygen atom joined together,
and its radiation dominates these interstellar molecular clouds, but water and ammonia,
two common elements on earth, are also present. Many of the molecules are carbon containing
organic molecules present in all life on earth, such as ethyl alcohol, formaldehyde
and acetic acid. These exist in enormous quantities in these molecular clouds in interstellar
space. The most complex molecule discovered to date has 13 atoms joined together, but
there are many signals in the radio part of the spectrum which signal the presence of
molecules but remain unidentified because we haven't synthesized those molecules in
the lab and made them vibrate and rotate to reveal their secret wavelengths. It's clear,
however, that the raw materials for life are present in all newly formed solar systems
because all such solar systems emerge from these molecular, ribbon clouds. The meteorites
in our solar system, the rocks left over from its formation which fall to earth, show that
even more complex organic molecules came together in the early solar nebula as the
planets and the sun were forming. Analysis of the interiors of meteorites which have
fallen to earth show that they contain purines and pyrimidines. Purines are five carbon atoms,
four hydrogen atoms and four nitrogen atoms joined together, and are two of the four chemical
bases of DNA, adenine and guanine, the genetic code of life. And pyrimidines are the other
code, there are four carbons, four hydrogens and two nitrogens, and they form cytosine
and thymine, the other two letter codes of DNA, plus uracel, the code in RNA for translating
the DNA instructions out to the rest of the cell. Meteorites also contain a number of
the 20 amino acids which are the basic building blocks for all proteins and therefore the
basic molecules of life. Now a remarkable fact is that these molecules
in meteorites and in earth based life are left handed. What do I mean by left handed?
Many complex organic molecules come in two varieties which are chemically identical
that is they contain exactly the same number of each kind of atom. The sole difference
between them is the three dimensional arrangements of these atoms, one is the mirror image of
the other. There's nothing you can do to fit a right handed glove onto your left hand,
you can turn it around, you can turn it upside down, but there's no way you can make it
match perfectly. Likewise, when you hold up your hand to the mirror you get the reverse
image. A mirror image molecule is one that's the same, you hold it up to a mirror you get
the reverse image, there's no way you can rotate the molecule so it looks the same.
In fact the same atoms are there but they form a mirror image of each other. It turns
out that these molecules are called right and left handed because of the way they treat
light. Light as we learned in one of the early lectures is a wave. It's a wave of electric
and magnetic fields and if I were to try to reproduce that with my hand it would look
something like this. The electric field grows and falls and in response the magnetic field
grows and falls in a perpendicular direction. So a propagating light wave looks something
like this. My students have made a little dance out of that routine. If we follow just
the electric component of the field the wave goes up and down like the wave of water. But
there's no reason that a molecule emitting such light needs to go up and down in this
plane. It could go up and down in this plane, it could go up and down in this plane. There
are infinite number of rotations of that plane of oscillation for the electric wave. Polarized
light means light which has restricted the modes in which the wave oscillates. So light
that is purely polarized means that all the waves are going up and down in this direction
or alternatively all the waves are going back and forth in this direction in terms of their
electric field. Motion. Polarized sunglasses work by providing a little picket fence in
the plastic of the glasses such that the light say reflecting off the hood of your car that's
polarized in this direction comes in and sort of buries itself in the hood of the car and
so doesn't shine off and glare in your eyes. The light that's coming in polarized in this
direction does bounce off the hood of the car very easily and would come to your eyes
and make a blinding glare unless you had a little picket fence in which the light could
clatter against and not get through. Polarized sunglasses then pick out a particular orientation
of the oscillation of the waves of light. Right and left-handed molecules also pick
out particular planes of polarization in just the same way. And if you have a little vial
of right-handed molecules in which the polarized light is going this way it will actually rotate
that plane of oscillation to the right as it passes through whereas left-handed molecules
cause it to rotate to the left. That's the name right-handed and left-handed molecules
is because they rotate polarized light in opposite directions. Now all of the amino
acids all 20 of them have which have a handed up handed this some of them don't have a
handedness but many of them do that are found in all forms of life on earth are left-handed
all of them left-handed. You would think naively if you just shake up some molecules in a test
tube before life exists you get an equal number of right-handed and left-handed ones. But life
on earth today consists of only left-handed amino acids. Remarkably when we look in the
meteorites for the amino acids that exist there we also find a preponderance of left-handed
molecules. These are the most ancient objects in the solar system and somehow they have
already had imprinted on them the notion that molecules are preferentially left-handed. It's
possible to speculate on the origin of this asymmetry. I find this a fascinating and delightful
speculation but I can't argue that it's unquestionably true. As we shall see there
is good atomic evidence that a massive star exploded in our vicinity just as the solar
system was being born. The radioactive isotope aluminum-26 which when it decays on a relatively
short timescale turns into magnesium-26 an isotope we find a lot of in the solar system
is prevalent. The only way you can produce this short-lived radioactive isotope is in
the explosion of a massive star. Now such explosions often leave behind bizarre objects
called neutron stars where the mass of an entire sun has been compressed into something
the size of Manhattan ten kilometers across the size of the meteor that wiped out the
dinosaurs. That means the atoms and actually the atoms are crushed out of existence so
the protons and neutrons are packed together to such a density that the entire object has
the density of the nucleus of an atom. A billion tons per teaspoonful of matter. This
sugar cube would weigh a billion tons. These bizarre objects have a number of properties
which we'll explore in a later lecture but one of them is that they spin very rapidly
and because of intense magnetic fields send out along their north and south magnetic poles
spirals of circular waves of light on the north pole rotating in one direction and on
the south pole rotating in the opposite direction. Now when molecules that have a handedness
absorb light that's going in the same direction as they are they're excited when they accept
light going in the opposite direction they tend to be destroyed. Right-handed molecules
are destroyed by left-handed circular polarization and that can produce an excess of lefties
say ten percent. My Columbia chemistry colleagues have actually shown how a small initial asymmetry
could be amplified to left-handed dominance under conditions that are expected to prevail
on the early earth. In this scenario a star explodes and leaves a neutron star behind.
The light from one pole of that star irradiates the cloud that will become the solar system
and produces a preference for left-handed molecules perhaps an excess of five or ten
percent. My colleague Ron Breslow and his student Mindy Levine have exposed five percent
excess left-handed amino acids to the hot dryish conditions with a little bit of water
that are probably appropriate to the early earth and they have found that the left-handed
molecules and the right-handed molecules in the solution tend to bind together and crystallize
and fall out of the solution leaving only the excess the five percent excess of left-handed
molecules free in the solution to wander around and connect to other molecules making them
for more complex things perhaps like proteins. This is a fascinating notion that the explosion
of a star and the irradiation of our nascent cloud with circularly polarized radiation
could have produced a small preference for left-handed molecules and then the conditions
of the early earth could have amplified that preference to the point that every amino acid
on earth today is left-handed. The fact that the left-handed preference is also seen in
the meteorites gives some credence to this story. The young earth had conditions that
were reasonably conducive to the formation of life. What do I mean by life? We have to
begin with a very simple definition of life stripped to its bare bones. I define life
as a self-reproducing chemical system capable of Darwinian evolution. Now that may not sound
much like your mother-in-law or it may sound like your mother-in-law but it's a good
bare bones description of what life is like. Clearly we would all agree that life must
be self-reproducing. That's the essential element of life that it reproduces itself.
Rocks don't do that. Bacteria and humans do. Secondly, my suggestion is that life is
a chemical system. Now science fiction writers have imagined non-chemical based systems to
be alive. For example, the famous astrophysicist Fred Hoyle who doubled as a science fiction
writer wrote a wonderful book called The Black Cloud in the 1950s which as in most good
science fiction was more about the humans than the creatures from afar. But the thing
that was alive in that story was a large dark cloud, perhaps one of these interstellar
clouds diffused with dust, whose intelligence was conferred by the threaded magnetic field
through the cloud. I'm not saying it's inconceivable that there could be a kind of life, even intelligent
life that's not based on chemical molecules, but excluding that from our definition is a
conservative hypothesis. It's important to remember that chemistry is identical everywhere
in the universe. The atoms of carbon that exist in my thumbnail are identical to the
atoms of carbon in the most distant quasar I can see across the universe. Furthermore,
the rules under which those atoms of carbon join together to make chains or join with
oxygen or nitrogen or other kinds of atoms to make complex molecules are identical across
the universe. So when I say life is based on chemistry, I don't have some chauvinistic
notion of our chemistry or my chemistry, it's the chemistry of the universe and it will
operate on the early earth the same way it operates in the most distant galaxy we can
see. So, self-reproducing and chemical, the third component of life is that it's capable
of undergoing evolution. It means it must transmit instructions from one generation to
the next in a mechanism that allows mistakes, errors in transmission, which can therefore
be subject to natural selection and therefore change speciation. This definition requires
that molecules store information, if they have to pass it on to the next generation
they surely have to store information in some way and therefore the molecules must be reasonably
complex. H2, two hydrogen atoms joined together, or even H2O for that matter, an oxygen joined
to two hydrogens, is not very complex, it can't store a very large amount of information
and putting a lot of them next to each other doesn't help very much. The actual molecules
that store information in living creatures on earth of course is DNA, which is a rather
complex molecule consisting of thousands of atoms joined in very specific patterns,
which can then transmit information to the next generation. This assumption of complex
molecules requires that we need a moderate temperature. Temperature you will recall is
just the measure of the speed with which atoms or molecules move. If it's too cold, the atoms
move so slowly that they rarely meet up with each other and join together. If it's too
hot on the other hand, as soon as a molecule forms it will be smacked by another molecule,
which then instantly breaks it apart. And so complex molecules will not evolve. Complex
molecules are also most easily formed in the liquid state. Recall in a solid that atoms
and molecules are locked in place, they can't move and if they can't move they can't migrate
to join up with other friends and build something complex. In a gas the molecules are free to
run around but they encounter each other rarely and when they do they tend to bounce off each
other like billiard balls. So liquid is a reasonable compromise between these two states.
In a liquid the atoms are touching or the molecules are touching so they're close to
each other, they find lots of friends but they're free to slide over each other and
therefore to migrate through the liquid. Water, liquid water is made of the two most abundant
chemically active atoms. The most abundant element in the universe, hydrogen, the second
is helium but that can't make molecules with anything so cross that out and the third most
abundant atom is oxygen. So the two most abundant chemically active ones join together with
one oxygen and two hydrogen attacks. It's not true that water is absolutely essential
for life. Any liquid would allow this conjoining of molecules that can migrate through it but
water is particularly copacetic because of many of its characteristics. In particular
water is said to be a highly polar molecule. That is the distribution of electrons orbiting
around in the oxygen and two hydrogen atoms, looks a little bit like a Mickey Mouse hat
with the big oxygen here and the two little hydrogens acting his ears, are not smoothly
distributed. The positively charged nucleus, nuclei are locked in place but the electrons
spend a lot more time orbiting around the oxygen than they do the hydrogen. Just this
molecule on one side tends to be negatively charged on the oxygen side and where the two
ears are, since the electrons don't spend much time with the hydrogen atoms, it tends
to be positively charged. Negatively charged down here, positively charged at the top.
This means that molecules that are wandering through which have a slight charge of their
own or perhaps even ions that have lost an electron and therefore are positively charged
will preferentially stick to the negatively charged part of the water molecule. When you
put lots of water molecules together you can then imagine them like a little scaffold on
which more complex molecules can be built because of this essential polarity. Abundant liquid
water on the earth clearly aided the development of life. Life's history is one of adaptation
to changing conditions, some of which were brought about by the existence of life itself.
The earth was initially far too hot for molecules to survive. As it gradually cooled over the
first hundred or two hundred million years or so, the crust formed on the surface and
molecules rained down from many asteroids, not once every hundred million years or so
like we have today but perhaps every day raining down onto the surface. In addition, comets
which are sort of dirty snowballs, balls of ammonia and water ice which contain within
them the products out of which the solar system formed including all these molecules we see
in the net molecular clouds out of which the stars form, are falling down out of this debris
disk that surrounds the sun. Gradually the earth is sweeping it up but all of this stuff
is falling onto the surface. The sun was actually less bright than it is today, less luminous.
It was putting out less energy. But the atmosphere of the earth was very rich in carbon dioxide,
even more than the amount of carbon dioxide we humans have put in it today from the numerous
volcanoes that were constantly erupting on this still hot earth. And that, as we'll see
in the next lecture, provides a blanket which keeps the temperature warmer than it would
otherwise be. And so the temperature was kept above the freezing point of water so that liquid
water rained out of the original atmosphere. Within about 750 million years, life emerged.
The oldest actual fossils we have of life are about 3.5 billion years old. That is only
a billion years after the earth formed. The first solid evidence we have for life is blue
green algae, blue green algae called cyanobacteria. They were the first to use photosynthesis and
produce oxygen. The oxygen was poisonous to them, as a matter of fact, but it allowed
the development of all the life that breeds oxygen that we have on earth today. These
blue green algae collected into vast mats, living in symbiosis with bacteria and other
primitive life that was around at the time. And we see their evidence today in geological
formations called stromatolites, which are layered, intricately layered and folded regions
of minerals that were collected by these mats of algae and layered in place as they died.
All of these organisms, the bacteria and the cyanobacteria, were cells that had no nuclei.
They lived over most of the 4 billion years of earth's history, but now are found in
only a few isolated places. They are also responsible for the geological deposits called
banded iron formations. Iron emerging from the interior of the earth, where we learned
most of it is, is initially soluble in water. But when it joins up with oxygen, it rusts,
in other words, it precipitates out from the ocean. Banded deposits result from the periodic
rise and fall of the oxygen levels in the water. Whether this was seasonal or some longer
term event, we don't know because we don't have a clock to measure 3.8 billion years
ago. But these banded iron formations were laid down between the period 3.8 billion years
ago and 1.8 billion years ago, and they form the principal iron ore deposits that we mine
today.
We've learned in discussing the history of agriculture that living things prefer carbon
12 over carbon 13. So rocks with a high carbon 12 to high carbon 12 to carbon 13 ratio provide
evidence for early life.
Such rocks with lifelike carbon ratios have been found on Achillea Island off Greenland,
for example. The rocks have been dated using the uranium lead dating in zircons that we
talked about last time. The zircons originally containing no lead provide an excellent clock
with the double uranium 235 and uranium 238 decay chains to give us a check.
There is some dispute about the exact date of the age of these Greenland rocks, the oldest
ones found on Earth, but apparently it lies somewhere between 3.7 and 3.85 billion years,
close enough as far as I've concerned, implying that life was already prevalent only 700 million
years after Earth formed.
It then took another 3.8 billion years to get to us.
It should be noted that we're here, but the sun has not yet lived even half its lifetime.
We contain 50 trillion cells. If you average that over over time, it means we've been adding
about 13,000 cells per year, but the rate has been far from uniform. For the first two
and a half billion years, there were not even cells with a nucleus. Multi-cellular organisms
took another half a billion years to evolve.
Subsequent evolution produced an elaborate feedback loop between the changes in life
and the changes that life affected on Earth's atmosphere, as we'll discuss next time.
Life emerged on Earth from commonplace interstellar chemicals after less than 10% of our sun's
lifetime was complete. For billions of years, it was dominated by the physical conditions
in which it found itself. Then life gradually took over the planet. In the next lecture,
we'll see how life also took over the atmosphere.
