The composition of the Earth's atmosphere has been heavily influenced by the evolution
of life on Earth's surface, the topic of our last lecture.
As a prelude to the development of a detailed record of our solar system's history, we'll
focus this time on why planetary atmospheres in general, and Earth's atmosphere in particular,
have the compositions that they do, exploring the forces that shape the atomic makeup of
air.
The composition of a planet's atmosphere is determined by three factors.
The strength of gravity on the surface of the planet, the temperature of the planet's
surface, and the raw materials available to make molecules.
We should begin by asking the simple question, why doesn't the atmosphere fall down?
If you have a good memory, you'll remember the answer from my second lecture.
The atmosphere is made of atoms.
Atoms have mass.
The planet's gravity attracts everything that has mass toward its center.
So why aren't all the air atoms lying on the ground?
Well the answer is of course that air molecules do fall down.
They are attracted to the planet as are all other objects possessing mass.
However, the thermal energy the atoms have, the kinetic energy of motion they're jiggling
around, which gives them what we characterize as a temperature, bumping into each other
because they're warm, keeps the atmosphere up.
All atoms don't have the same speed because they have different masses, but for a given
temperature both an average speed and a distribution of speeds can be calculated.
The average speed of an air molecule at room temperature is about 450 meters per second.
At that speed a typical nitrogen molecule traveling straight up and not bumping into
any of its compatriots, an unlikely event, would reach 10,000 meters about the height
of Mount Everest before falling back to Earth.
Now since the temperature determines the average speed and the gravity determines the attractive
force, these two quantities are critical for determining the thickness of the atmosphere.
On Earth it's remarkably thin.
You may think if you've ever climbed Mount Everest that it's a very long way up and
the atmosphere is thick, but to put it in perspective, if the Earth is represented by
this orange, then the thickness of the atmosphere is less than this sheet of tissue paper.
So it's a very thin enveloping layer of gas that exists around our planet.
These two quantities, the temperature and the surface gravity, are also critical for
determining the atmosphere's composition.
To understand this, we must begin by dismissing an old saying that everything that goes up
must come down.
That's simply false.
If that were true, how could we send satellites to other planets and even out of the solar
system?
We throw them up hard enough and they don't come down.
Everybody, it turns out, has an escape velocity, which if you exceed it, you'll leave forever
and not fall down.
For example, if I take this orange and I throw it up in the air, throwing it gently means
it comes back quickly.
If I throw it harder, it takes a little longer to come back.
But if I throw it hard enough, it doesn't come back at all.
The orange has reached escape velocity and left the planet.
Now for the Earth, the escape velocity is determined only by its mass and its radius,
that is the mass and radius of the Earth, and is about 11 kilometers per second.
It's pretty fast, six miles in a second, but not outside the range of the speeds which
air molecules in the atmosphere can reach.
Thus, any molecule in the atmosphere that exceeds this speed will escape from the Earth.
Now the speed of a molecule, as we've repeatedly encountered, is dependent on its mass.
The light one moves fast and the heavy one moves slowly.
These nitrogen molecules have a mean speed of about 0.45 kilometers a second, more than
20 times lower than the escape speed from Earth, virtually none of them ever escape.
However, hydrogen atoms, or even hydrogen molecules, two hydrogens joined together,
have a mean speed of about 1.7 kilometers per second.
So those moving only six or seven times the average speed will escape.
You'll recall that atoms colliding with each other have a distribution of speeds, and while
the average is well determined by an equation relating the temperature and the mass, some
molecules are moving much faster than that, so six or seven times the average is not unusual
at all.
Indeed, all of the hydrogen originally found on Earth has escaped.
Thus, among the solar system, which formed out of material that was 98% hydrogen and
helium, virtually none of those atoms are left in Earth's atmosphere today.
Mercury, which is a small planet, which means it has a low mass, a relatively small radius,
and therefore a low gravity, and is very close to the sun, which means it's very hot, so
any atoms in its atmosphere will be moving rapidly, in fact, has no atmosphere at all.
Everything escapes.
Not only is hydrogen and helium going fast enough to escape, as it is from the Earth,
but the greater temperature, meaning a greater speed for things like nitrogen, oxygen, neon,
and other gases, also are moving so fast that they can easily escape the tenuous gravity
of Mercury.
Jupiter, on the other hand, which is huge, has an enormous amount of mass, and therefore
a very high gravitational force on its surface, and is far from the sun, meaning it receives
less solar energy, and therefore much colder, is composed mostly of hydrogen and helium.
None of its original composition escaped, and therefore its composition more closely
resembles the sun, that is, the cloud of material out of which all of the solar system formed.
The composition of Earth's atmosphere today, then, is a consequence of these fundamental
forces which shape all atmospheres, as well as Earth's particular history.
So what is, in detail, the composition of the atmosphere today?
If I take a thimble full of air, I contain millions of samples of a million molecules
each.
After all, atoms are very small.
So let's take a million atoms and sort them by type.
I have machines that do this.
It's not particularly difficult.
Oxygen and oxygen molecules, N2, two nitrogens joined together, and O2, two oxygens joined
together, make up more than 98.7% of the atmosphere.
In my million atom sample, 778,888, give or take a few, atoms will be nitrogen.
And 208,737, again, give or take a few, will be oxygen, more than 98.7% of all the air in
this room.
The third most abundant atom in the atmosphere might surprise you.
It's argon, which is a noble gas.
It's moderately abundant in the universe as a whole, and it's also fairly heavy, so
none of it has escaped from Earth.
About 9,300 out of every million atoms in the air in this room is argon.
Now, since argon is a noble gas, it's inert, it performs no chemical reactions, you breathe
it in, and you breathe it out, and nothing happens at all.
It's just a constant exchange.
The third most, the fourth most, rather abundant molecule in the Earth's atmosphere is water
vapor.
Roughly, 2,500 out of every million atoms in molecules will be water.
I say roughly because, of course, the amount of water vapor in the air changes from day
to day.
You're well aware of that.
Sometimes it feels very sticky, that's humid, that means when there's a lot of water molecules
in the air, and some days it feels very dry, that's when there are fewer water molecules
in the day.
Now, averaged over the Earth, it doesn't change very much, but from place to place it
certainly does.
Anyway, roughly 2,500 out of a million molecules of air will be water vapor.
Next is carbon dioxide, a critical molecule, as we'll see.
Carbon dioxide, a C plus two O's, makes up about today 384 out of every million atoms
in the atmosphere.
This is a number that has changed drastically over time.
We saw this in exploring the ice cores, and in measuring the increase of carbon dioxide
in the atmosphere as a consequence of human activity.
Water vapor and carbon dioxide are two very important molecules because of the way they
interact with the light from the sun and the Earth, a subject I'll get to in a moment,
when I finish my inventory.
Next on the list is neon.
Only about 18 out of every million atoms is neon.
Neon, of course, is another noble gas, it doesn't involve chemical reactions, we use
it for making pretty colored signs.
And next is helium, five out of every million atoms is helium now.
I said that all the helium atoms originally present, given that helium is so low in mass,
therefore has such a high speed, and therefore exceeds the escape velocity, is gone.
The only helium atoms we have on Earth today are those that rain in from space with the
interplanetary dust we've discussed before, a very small number of them, and the helium
nuclei that are produced in radioactive K of heavy elements, alpha decay, which are
spit out as positively charged nuclei, but soon accumulate a couple of electrons and
become perfectly happy helium atoms filling our party balloons.
Five out of a million today are helium, now the ones in the atmosphere have a high probability
of escaping, because they're light, like the ping pong balls on the pool table, when
you break with a pool ball, the ping pong balls fly away.
So the helium is constantly leaving the Earth, it's replenished by the continuing radioactive
decay of the Earth's crust, however, since that's a one way street, once an atom undergoes
an alpha decay, it's done, or it might undergo further decays, but that alpha is gone, then
when that helium escapes, it's left the Earth, and as the radioactive decay slowly declines
over the history of the Earth, the amount of helium in the atmosphere will decline as
well.
The next most abundant, which is not very abundant by this point, molecule in the atmosphere
is methane, CH4.
One point eight out of every million molecules of air are methane, but it also plays a critical
role along with water and carbon dioxide in the greenhouse effect we'll discuss in a
minute.
Next on the list is krypton, yes there really is a krypton, although probably not kryptonite,
one out of every million atoms is krypton, and it's just another of those noble gases
that hangs out in the atmosphere, being heavy it can't leave.
Hydrogen makes up about one out of every two million molecules of air, now again, hydrogen
left free in the atmosphere will rapidly escape, but hydrogen is highly reactive, so when for
example a water molecule is split by an ultraviolet photon, a hydrogen atom might temporarily be
present until it joins up with something else, or leaves entirely, but one out of every two
million in the steady state is hydrogen.
Then about one out of every three million are molecules that are mostly due to human
activity called nitrous oxides, and one out of every ten billion or so molecules is another
human produced substance called chlorofluorocarbon, something that was implicated, has been implicated
in the destruction of the ozone layer, and something in which we're trying to get control
over our production.
Now of these molecules then, 98.7% of the atmosphere is nitrogen and oxygen, and another
0.93%, almost 1%, is made of the noble gases, helium, neon, argon, and krypton, which never
participate in any chemical reactions.
The third most abundant molecule then that does participate in chemistry is water, and
that contributes about a quarter of a percent on average.
Carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxides, and chlorofluorocarbons make up the remaining
0.04%, but despite their very tiny fractions, they, along with water vapor, control the earth's
temperature through the greenhouse effect.
It's not just the temperature that controls the composition of the atmosphere, but the
composition of the atmosphere also controls the temperature.
The greenhouse effect works like this.
Oxygen leaves the sun, characteristic of the speed with which the atoms, or actually
ions, in the outer atmosphere of the sun are moving.
The sun's temperature is 5,800 degrees, which means those molecules and atoms and ions are
moving very rapidly.
The rapid acceleration of charges leads to rapid oscillations of electric fields which
propagate through space as light.
Our atmosphere, fortunately for us, is completely transparent to this light.
The light comes from the sun right through the air and warms the surface of the earth.
Some of it actually is reflected away by clouds, for example, or upon reaching the earth's
surface by other shiny things like glaciers, you all know the glare you have to wear sunglasses
for when you're on a glacier or skiing in the wintertime.
Those photons of visible light bounce right off and back into space and don't participate
in warming the planet at all.
Oceans are also somewhat reflective, water bodies, and deserts are more reflective than
tropical jumbles, of course, because tropical jungles are designed with plants to absorb
photons from the sun and produce organic matter.
That's what plants do, they eat sunlight for energy.
So this energy coming in from the sun, about 70% of it is absorbed by the ocean, by the
ground, by the plants, by you lying on the beach, and about 30% of it is reflected back
into space and doesn't participate anymore in the energy balance which governs the earth
temperature.
Now, you might think that's the end of the story.
Energy comes in and warms the earth, but if that were true, it would be like an oven without
a thermostat.
You turn it on and it gets hotter and hotter and hotter and hotter, until you burn the
house down.
If energy is flowing into the earth to keep a roughly constant temperature on the surface,
then energy also must be flowing out from the earth.
Indeed, an equal amount of energy must be flowing out from the earth.
However, since the molecules in the earth's surface, in the ground, in the ocean, are
jiggling at a temperature characteristic of earth, more like 300 degrees above absolute
zero or 20 degrees on the centigrade scale, then they give off a wavelength because of
their slower accelerations that's much more leisurely than the wavelength that the sun
puts out.
Rather than visible light, they put out infrared radiation.
Now, while the atmosphere is transparent to the high energy photons coming in from the
sun, it is largely opaque to the infrared photons lazily making their way up from the
earth.
In particular, carbon dioxide, water vapor, methane, nitrous oxides, and chlorofluorocarbons
all have modes of oscillation that I talked about before, those vibrations between the
atoms in the molecule and the tumbling motions that molecules make that are very good at
absorbing, sucking up, eating infrared radiation and exciting these vibrations and rotations.
Thus, while infrared rays try to leave the surface of the earth, they often get gobbled
up on the way out and redirected back towards the earth, acting like a blanket.
A blanket in your bed, in fact, works exactly the same way.
As you lie there at night, in the winter, you're cold.
The reason you're cold is because the atoms in your body are jiggling back and forth and
they're giving off infrared radiation at the rate of about the same as that of a hundred
watt light bulb.
You radiate a hundred watts.
That energy, when it leaves you, slows down the molecules of your body and that's what
makes you feel cold.
So what do you do?
You get up and you pull on a blanket.
What does the blanket do?
Well, as those infrared photons try to leave, the blanket absorbs them, turns them around
and redirects them back to you and you melt this nice little warm cocoon around you.
Exactly the same thing happens with these so-called greenhouse gas molecules on earth.
The energy comes in from the sun, but it can't escape.
And so the temperature of the earth warms up.
Without these molecules, the earth would be a very inhospitable place.
And in discussions today about global warming, the greenhouse effect is portrayed as an
evil thing.
In fact, the greenhouse effect is responsible for life on earth.
Without these infrared-absorbing greenhouse-glass gases, the temperature of the earth would
be about 15 degrees below zero on the centigrade scale.
Everything on earth would be frozen.
And indeed, in fact, as we shall see, that has happened in the past.
But because of this blanketing effect of the greenhouse gases, the temperature is raised
to the point where water is in a liquid state and life can live comfortably on the surface
of the earth.
But while pulling on one blanket at night in the winter feels comfortable, pulling on
six blankets soon won't.
Because then all of the infrared radiation trying to leave gets trapped.
You get hotter and hotter and hotter, you start to sweat, and you kick the blankets
onto the floor.
So while the greenhouse effect is a good thing, adding more and more of these molecules to
the atmosphere, carbon dioxide and methane and nitrous oxides, all as a consequence of
human activity, is like piling on too many blankets and may lead to the point where
the temperature rises too high.
Now, it's unsurprising that most of the molecules in our atmosphere contain hydrogen, helium,
carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen, since these are the five most abundant elements in the
universe, and they constitute 99.6 percent of the mass of the cloud out of which the
earth was formed.
The other planets all have atmospheres which are dominated by these same atoms, although
earth is unique in containing a substantial fraction of free oxygen.
The other planets' atmospheres are also determined by these balance of forces, the gravity which
holds them in, and the temperature which says how rapidly the atoms in the atmosphere are
moving, and the temperature in these other planets as well is modified by the greenhouse
effect.
In particular, Venus has an extreme case of piling on blankets in that most of its atmosphere
is carbon dioxide, and the temperature on its surface is now 900 degrees, a fate we
certainly don't want to match.
The oxygen in our atmosphere, however, is what makes our atmosphere unique.
Oxygen is highly reactive.
The process of burning is combining with oxygen, that's pretty reactive, and the process of
rusting is combining with oxygen as well.
Other atoms and molecules combine vigorously with oxygen.
The continued and unique presence in our atmosphere of oxygen is a consequence of life.
The initial composition of the earth's atmosphere was very different from that in evidence today.
The initial atmosphere was almost certainly composed of the primordial elements, hydrogen
and helium.
In addition, the compounds of the most abundant other elements with hydrogen, like nitrogen
plus 3 hydrogens, NH3, or ammonia, and carbon plus 4 hydrogens, CH4, methane, were likely
also present.
All of this atmosphere escaped because the high temperature of the molten forming earth
was such that the molecules moved so fast earth's gravity could not hold it in.
After about half a billion years, the crust started to form on the surface as the earth
cooled.
An intense volcanic activity dominated everything on earth.
Today we can measure the gas that flies out of volcanoes when they erupt.
It tends to be about 95 to 97 percent water vapor, 1 to 2 percent carbon dioxide, 1 and
a half to 2 percent sulfur dioxide, as well as nitrogen, chlorine, sulfur, and other compounds.
Further cooling of the earth meant that the water vapor that came out of volcanoes eventually
wasn't moving fast enough to escape.
And as it rose in the atmosphere and cooled, that is slowed down, little molecules of water
got together to make little drops of water, and when they got heavy enough, they rained
out to form the oceans.
The oceans then absorbed a lot of the carbon dioxide through geological and biological
processes, starting about 3.8 billion years ago when, as we saw the first bacteria lived.
Geological processes take carbon dioxide out of the water as well and make limestone.
The first oxygen, free oxygen, O2 oxygen molecules were actually produced not by life,
but by ultraviolet photons from the sun breaking up the water molecules that came out of volcanoes.
That is, you have an oxygen in two hydrogens.
If it absorbs an ultraviolet photon, the bond that holds the hydrogen to the oxygen vibrates
so violently that the hydrogen just disappears.
Knock off the other hydrogen as well, and you have a free oxygen atom.
These free oxygen atoms are very reactive, as I've said, and they quickly find another
oxygen atom to join up with, making O2.
So the first oxygen came from a non-biological process, the ultraviolet radiation from the
sun.
Ironically, however, as O2 builds up in the atmosphere and gets close to 1%, as opposed
to the 20% it is today, it actually starts absorbing ultraviolet radiation, breaking
it in half, the O2, into two single oxygens, and then, with a bunch of other O2s present
for a single oxygen defined, joining together in a triplet of oxygen atoms, O3, which is
called ozone.
Now it turns out, ozone is bound in such a way that it can readily absorb ultraviolet
light without breaking.
Indeed, the ozone layer above the earth is very efficient at absorbing the ultraviolet
light from the sun, meaning there was no more ultraviolet light available to dissociate
the water coming out of the volcanoes and the amount of oxygen in the atmosphere stabilized
at a low level of around a percent.
Life, in the form of cyanobacteria that we met last time, began producing lots of O2,
roughly three and a half to 3.3 billion years ago.
The atmospheric abundance of oxygen, however, remained relatively low, as, we have learned,
iron dissolved in the seawater gobbled up the O2 to make Fe2O3, iron oxide.
A way to say this is, the earth was rusting.
The banded iron formations I discussed last time, the main sources of iron ore that we
used today, are testament to this process, which went on for well over a billion years.
Another geological feature, called red beds, testifies to the growing abundance of atmospheric
oxygen as the iron eventually got saturated other atoms and molecules started to join
with the O2, starting about two and a half billion years ago.
By two billion years, atmospheric oxygen had begun to rise over one percent of its current
level, making it possible for the new kind of life then emerging, the eukaryotes, the
cells that contained a nucleus and, riding along for the ride, little symbiotic mitochondria
inside the cell, which can use oxygen from the air in providing energy for the cell's
life.
By one billion years ago, the rocks and the iron dissolved in the ocean had saturated
their thirst for oxygen in the atmosphere, and the atmospheric fraction therefore started
to rise.
More atmospheric oxygen again meant more ozone, which provided an even thicker ultraviolet
shield from the sun's radiation, and therefore protected surface-dwelling organisms in the
ocean and allowed the emergence of life on land, protected from this high energy radiation.
By about half a billion years ago, the Cambrian explosion brought a flowering of life, plants
covering the land, and a huge release of oxygen to the atmosphere.
In its entire history, only about five percent of the oxygen released into the atmosphere,
a total of about 30,000 trillion tons, is still there.
Most of the rest is tied up in minerals.
The O2 content has fluctuated between about 15 percent and about 35 percent over the last
half billion years, with major consequences.
The oxygen reached an all-time high between about 320 and 260 million years ago, sort of
the dawn of the age of the dinosaurs.
The creatures that could survive in this very oxygen-rich atmosphere were really quite extreme.
Fossils showed dragonflies with wingspans of 30 inches.
Today's insects in the atmosphere are limited in size by the amount of oxygen which they
need for life that can be absorbed through their chitinous shells.
They don't have lungs per se, but absorb oxygen directly through their shells.
So the surface area to volume of the insect, the volume determining the amount of oxygen
needed and the surface area saying the amount of oxygen that can be absorbed, sets a maximum
size on insects.
As the oxygen level rises, the insects can get larger and larger because it's easier
and easier to get oxygen through the shell.
And dragonflies with wingspans like this would be quite startling to see.
Another consequence of this high 35% fraction of oxygen, however, is that forest fires were
rampant.
Even wet material burns in a 35% oxygen atmosphere and every lightning strike started enormous
forest fires around the world.
Then about 251 million years ago, the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere skyrocketed, there
was a mass extinction which wiped out 90% of all species, as I said earlier, and the
oxygen in the air fell nearly two thirds to the range of 12 to 15%.
The cause of these sudden and dramatic changes is still a matter of much debate.
The complex history of an ever-changing atmosphere shows what we can learn about one planet in
one solar system, our planet.
Now we are about to take a step back and take a much broader view of our place in the universe
which will require a vast increase in our scales of space and time.
We'll begin this quest by exploring the origin of the solar system and determining a precise
date for its birth.
