The question we ended with last time, where did the atoms that formed the solar system
come from, has two very distinct answers. Virtually all of the hydrogen and 80% of the
helium was formed in the first few minutes of the universe, a time we will explore in
a future lecture. All the rest however, the carbon, nitrogen and oxygen of life, the gold,
silver and platinum, the neon, the iron, the uranium, were all made by stars. It is important
then that we turn our attention to the processes which give this essential richness to the
atomic world. And we begin by asking the simple question, what is a star? Now I must
confess this question would not have occurred to me, unbidden. I've lived with the knowledge
of what stars are for so long that it seems to me as obvious as asking the question, what
is water or what is a finger? You know what those are because you've known them all your
life. The importance of this question however, for most people was brought home to me by
an incident that occurred a few years ago. I grew up in a small town in southeastern Massachusetts
which I considered a very boring place and ran screaming from it at the age of 17, rarely
to visit it again. However a few years ago I went to visit my late 80s something father
who by that point had joined an organization consisting mostly of other 80 something men
in his town which was in need of entertainment. And so he asked if I would come and give a
lecture on what I did. To this event he invited my two 80 something maiden aunts who sat quietly
in the back of the room and listened. I was giving a talk on neutron stars, a subject
that I'm fascinated with and have spent most of my career studying. And in the course of
this talk I said something to the effect that well a star is a ball of gas and then
went on to describe the star. And Sophie and Edith my two aunts came up to me rather wide
eyed at the end of my lecture and said is that what a star is? A ball of gas? Now it
again seemed obvious to me that everyone should know what a star was just because I knew what
a star was. But of course it's not obvious at all. What you see as a star is a tiny twinkling
spot of light that appears night after night in the sky. It's not obvious what that is
and it's certainly not obvious that it's a ball of gas. Furthermore my statement was
slightly incorrect as you'll see. To an astrophysicist a star is and I quote a plasma
gravitationally bound supported by thermal pressure and hydrostatic equilibrium emitting
black body radiation and powered by nuclear fusion. Obviously this definition was going
to be of little help to Sophie and Edith and probably isn't much help to you too although
over the course of the lectures many of those terms have been introduced. Recall for example
from lecture two that a plasma is the fourth state of matter in which electrons are largely
detached from their nuclei. So atoms as such don't exist but the constituents of atoms
the electrons in the nuclei are running around independently of each other. Throughout most
of its mass stars are pure plasmas consisting only of bare nuclei and free electrons. In
the outermost atmosphere of the star the temperature may be low enough that is a mere five or
ten thousand degrees that the collisions are not quite violent enough to always split an
electron that happens to join up with a positive nucleus apart. So some electrons recombine
and make what are typically ionized atoms that is atoms lacking some of their electrons
but not all of them. With electrons in their orbits around a nucleus they can make transitions
to lower and higher orbits and in the process give off an absorbed light. It is these signatures
again unique to each atom that reveals the chemical composition of the star, something
we would otherwise not know, the rotation rate of the star from the broadening of the
spectral lines, the atmospheric structure of the star, the temperature of the star, the
magnetic field strength of the star and the surface gravity of the star which gives us
this clue as to its mass and size. All critical inputs to allow us to construct models of
stars. So the presence in the atmosphere of a few ionized atoms is key to our understanding
the physics of stars. The presence or absence of radioactive atoms can sometimes be detected
in a star and can give us a measure of age but this is not the primary means we have
for dating stars. A plasma then, gravitationally bound. Recall from lecture 3 that gravity
is one of the four fundamental forces of nature which here determines a star's structure.
Although gravity is, as I said, by far the weakest of the forces, the enormous mass of
a star is so great that gravity completely dominates its structure. Stellar masses range
from about 8% the mass of our sun to around 80 times the mass of our sun. In other words,
our sun is a very typical star right in the middle of the mass range. One solar mass,
the mass of our sun, is 2,000 trillion trillion tons or about 300,000 times the mass of the
earth. Now why can't we have stars if they're just balls of plasma of any size? Why is the
limit at 8% the mass of the sun and 80 times the mass of the sun? For two different reasons.
To power a star, as we'll see, we have to squeeze the core to such a high pressure and density
that the nuclei of hydrogen atoms, protons, can stick together and make helium. At 8% the mass
of the sun, a star can just barely generate the pressure and temperature necessary for this
reaction to occur. At 7% the mass of the sun, there's just simply not enough overlying material.
The gravitational force is simply too weak to make this process occur. And so since the star is
by definition one that is burning nuclear fuel, less than 8% of a solar mass isn't by definition
a star. The upper end, 80 times the mass of the star, is because too much energy rather than not
enough is being generated. If we go today to a star of 100 or 200 times the mass of the sun,
the energy generated in its core is so great that it will simply blow the star to pieces. And so
a stable star can't exist. Thus we have this range of a factor of 1000 from 8% the mass of the sun
to 80 times the mass of the sun that encompasses all of the hundreds of billions of stars in our
galaxy. Since the strength of gravity depends only on the distance between the two attracting
particles, stars become spherical with some slight distortions if they're rotating very rapidly
where they bulge out at the center or if they have a companion which raises tides on the star
the way the moon raises tides on earth. So a star is a plasma that's gravitationally bound.
The next part of the definition says that it's supported by thermal pressure. What do I mean
by that? Also recall from lecture 3 that heat is simply the energy of the motion of individual
particles. And thermal pressure is the force exerted by those particles as they collide with
each other and try to get away, that is expand from the center of the star. The average speed of
a particle you will recall is proportional to the square root of the temperature divided by the
particle's mass. More massive particles move slowly, higher temperatures make particles move
faster. When your tires on your car for example get hot in the summer they expand. Well what does
hot mean? Hot means the air molecules inside your tire are moving around faster meaning they both
collide with the tire walls more frequently and each collision is more energetic. As a consequence
the pressure of this gas expands the tire. Likewise the pressure of all the subatomic
particles moving around in the stellar core are pushing outward on the material while gravity
tries to bring it in. The surface temperatures of stars range from about 3000 degrees for those
lowest mass stars only 8% the mass of the Sun to over 50,000 degrees at the upper end. All temperatures
of course are on this kelvin or absolute physical scale where zero represents no motion. So 3000
to 50,000 degrees that's on the surface of the stars. But to make particles go fast enough to fuse
as we'll see they need to do the central temperatures of stars are much higher ranging from 15 million
degrees in a star such as the Sun to over a billion degrees kelvin. So a plasma gravitationally bound
supported by thermal pressure all that begins to make sense. In hydrostatic equilibrium or at least
usually so. What do I mean by that? Hydrostatic equilibrium represents the balance between the
two forces acting in the star. Gravity which is always trying to crush the star. Every particle
with mass always attracts every other particle with mass and they always want to get closer together.
So gravity which starts out making a star from a cloud of gas shrinks it down and wants to keep
shrinking all the way to the center. But when it gets hot enough inside when the particles are
running around fast enough the thermal pressure they exert pushes outwards. Most stars more than 90%
of stars and our Sun as an example are in a dynamic balance between these two forces.
Gravity that's trying to crush the star and thermal pressure which is trying to expand it.
And so every morning when you get up the Sun in the sky is exactly the same size
because these two forces are in balance and they've been in balance for four and a half billion years
which is why the conditions on earth have remained roughly constant over that time allowing life to
evolve. The high central temperatures in the star help in supporting this huge burden of
overlying gas. To understand how stars work we conduct construct models on computers that
mean to represent how the star behaves. We do this in a sequential fashion. We start with the
outer layer of the star which we can see directly. We therefore know its temperature very precisely.
We know the density of atoms there and therefore the total mass in the thin shell on the outside of
the star the part we directly observe. We then calculate what temperature and pressure and
therefore density of material must exist in the thin layer right under the surface
to support that surface. If the pressure is too high the temperature is too high because the
atoms are running around too fast or the density is too high there's too many atoms pushing out
then the outer layer of the star will lift off in our computer model that's no good.
If the pressure is too low that is there aren't enough particles there the density is too low
or the temperature is too low so the particles aren't moving fast enough
then the outer layer of the star in our model will collapse and that's not good and so we adjust
the layer one step down from the outside of the star to support the layer above it.
Well now we're on our way because we've got the outer layer and the next layer below it
consistent with that. Now what supports that layer well of course the layer below that and so we
make the next layer calculating the temperature pressure and density such that it supports
layer number two and then to layer number four supporting layer number three etc all the way
to the core of the star. We have a test of this which I'll describe at the end which allows us to
confirm this model building process. Throughout more than 90 percent of their lives stars maintain
this delicate equilibrium between pressure pushing out and gravity pushing in. When things get out
of balance however the star must either expand if the pressure inside is too great or contract if
the pressure inside is not great enough. We'll talk about those processes next time because both
are critical in the lives of the stars and the creation of the elements. So a plasma gravitationally
bound supported by thermal pressure in hydrostatic equilibrium emitting black body radiation
that's a mouthful what do we mean there. We see the stars because they radiate light energy into
space. Recall from lecture four you see how all those early lectures were preparation to what
we're building up to here that moving charges radiate electromagnetic and radiation. Positive
and negative charges zipping around each other as they are inside a star and on the surface of the
star give off waves of electromagnetic radiation the stuff that we see we call light. The
wavelength or color of the radiation given off is related to the energy of the emitting particles
the faster the zipping around the higher the frequency or shorter the wavelength of the
radiation and in the case of our eyes the bluer the color the slower they're moving the longer
the wavelength. We learned of course that the wavelengths that we see are a tiny fraction
only two percent of all the waves possible from radiating charges. The sun has a surface temperature
of about 5800 degrees meaning that the maximum of its radiation is a wavelength in the yellow
green part of the spectrum. Cooler stars which means their atmospheric molecules are moving
more slowly are redder and hotter stars are bluer. If you're very acute and you're in a very dark
place you can actually see a slight tinge to the color of the stars some of them are bluer
and some of them are redder. The stars at the head and foot of Orion the constellation one can see
in the winter sky are a good example of this. The range of energies of the radiating particles
leads to a range of wavelengths of the light. As you recall particles are not moving all exactly
the same speed at some temperature the average speed is given by the square root of temperature
over mass but there's a whole range of speeds and when we talked about the earth's atmosphere
we saw that the fastest ones escaped. Well likewise in a star there are fast particles
and slow particles all consistent with a given temperature and since the fast ones radiate
short wavelengths of light and the slow ones radiate long wavelengths of light we get a
distribution of wavelengths a distribution of colors and that distribution has a very particular
form related directly to the particular distribution of the radiating particles and we call that a
black body spectrum a spectrum of different wavelengths distributed in a certain way.
In the case of our sun the temperature 5800 degrees defines the peak of that spectrum
as being in the yellow-green part of the spectrum. Now it's not an accident that our eyes are most
sensitive to yellow and green light. We have over 400 million years of evolution evolved a device
the thing we call our eyes that's tuned very precisely to the wavelengths the sun puts out
most of. The sun puts out a little bit of infrared light and an even tinier amount of radio waves
it also puts out a little bit of ultraviolet light and an even tinier amount of x-rays
but our eyes are simply not sensitive to them because the most efficient thing for our sensors
would be to be where most of the radiation is and that's in the visible light part of the spectrum.
There are stars in the universe that emit most of their energy in the x-ray part of the spectrum
that would have been a sensible place to put the planet on which Superman grew up for example
because then naturally Superman would have x-ray vision again evolution having tuned his eyes
to be sensitive to the bulk of the radiation that his parent star puts out. He wouldn't have been
born on an asteroid orbiting our sun. The sun radiates at the rate of 400 trillion trillion
watts that's a lot of light bulbs. The energy leaving the star would cool it off because energy
going away means something gets cooler the atoms give up energy they slow down unless this temperature
were maintained somehow by some other process and now we're nearing the end of our definition
a plasma gravitationally bound supported by thermal pressure and hydrostatic equilibrium
and emitting black body radiation powered by nuclear fusion it must be powered by something
if it's emitting all that energy. Nuclear fusion is the source of energy that keeps
stars shining and maintains their hydrostatic equilibrium. Note it's not chemistry the connection
of atoms to each other when electrons are shared between them in a molecule gives off
energies measured in electron volts. In a star first of all there are no atoms the electrons
and protons are divorced but the reactions occur between the protons at scales 10,000 times smaller
than the electron orbits the atom with energies millions of times greater such that each reaction
gives off millions of electron volts not just electron volts. This is Lord Kelvin's unknown
process in the storehouse of creation. Nuclear reactions which provide so much more energy
they can keep the sun shining for many billions of years. Fusion is a process we haven't encountered
yet by which atomic nuclei actually stick together and make new nuclei not a simple transformation
as in radioactive decay where one or two particles flies out of the nucleus but the construction
of a new nucleus by fusing together of the nuclear particles protons and neutrons.
Recall that the strong force overcomes the electrostatic repulsion that two positively
charged would feel two positively charged particles would feel once you get to small
enough distances out here these two positive particles will sense each other and fly apart
because electric repulsion is strong but if you get them close enough into a distance of 10 to the
minus 14 meters the realm of the strong force the strong force overwhelms the electromagnetic force
and forces the particles to stick together. If protons and neutrons can be brought close enough
then they snap together giving off an enormous amount of energy and creating a new isotope
or a new element. Since the nuclear force is so powerful the energy released is huge from
one to ten million times that of electron proton interactions that occur in chemistry.
The typical nuclear reaction emits several million electron volts for each nucleon involved.
Recall from lecture five the nuclear stability depends on the ratio of protons to neutrons in
the nucleus. Thus some combinations are more stable than others and the more stable they are
the more tightly they are bound the more energy they give off when they're formed.
It turns out the most stable arrangement possible is the 26 protons and 30 neutrons
which make up an iron nucleus iron 56. Now again this is not to be confused with chemical
stability as for example in the noble gases which don't combine with anything because
their electrons orbits are perfectly happy. This is nuclear binding energy the nuclear
particles down on this tiny scale of the nucleus where the nuclear strong force is the dominant
entity and in which we must arrange protons and neutrons in just such a way that that strong force
maximizes stability. Each different isotope of each different element has a particular
binding energy and putting these all on one graph gives us what we call the nuclear binding energy
curve the stability of nuclei. On one axis the y-axis we plot the binding energy per nucleon
the amount of energy I get if I stick all those protons and neutrons together hydrogen of course
is zero because hydrogen has one proton and nothing to bind to so clearly there's no binding energy.
Helium is pretty far down on the curve several million electron volts for each helium
nucleon bound together in a helium nucleus two protons and two neutrons bound together
four particles each of them giving off several million electron volts when they snap into place
to make a helium nucleus and so on down through the light elements in the periodic table all the
way up to iron where iron with 56 nuclear particles represents the ultimate in a nuclear in a stable
nucleus as we add more particles more protons and more neutrons to make all the other 66 elements
beyond iron we actually are making slightly less stable nuclei this is one reason why when we get
all the way to the end of the process out near uranium none of the isotopes are stable they are
all falling apart due to radioactive decay nonetheless in creating these elements energy
is given off because each time I snap another proton or neutron into place I get energy the
process that most stars use to shine is the simplest one of all combining four hydrogen
nuclei together to make helium this is a three step process and it's the reaction that powers
all stars for the majority but not all of their lifetimes we start off in the center of the sun
with two protons two hydrogen nuclei they're simply protons now again when they try to come
together they feel the repulsion of their two positive charges and tend to fly apart again
the center of the sun is enormously dense and at a temperature of 15 million degrees the particles
are moving incredibly rapidly and so there are millions of collisions per second between one
proton and another but in almost none of these that is only once in 10 billion years on average
with 10 million collisions per second going on so it's enormously improbable did these particles
actually get close enough that they can snap together and stick now once in 10 billion years you
think it would never happen but there were 10 to the 57 protons inside the sun so on each one
has a really low probability of this happening altogether it happens a lot every second two
protons coming together to make what well proton plus proton would make a positive charge of two
and would that be stable no we make deuterium in the process in the violent collision and the
snapping together through the nuclear force one of the protons is turned into a neutron and we get
deuterium the heavy form of hydrogen a nucleus with one proton and one neutron that of course means
we have to balance the charge we started out with two positive charges we end up with one what
happened to the other one the other one goes off in a classic beta decay with an anti-electron a
positively charged electron flying away along with its ever-present accompanying neutrino
so hydrogen plus hydrogen come together to make deuterium plus a positron which goes off and
annihilates with some electron somewhere and a neutrino which streams directly out of the sun
because it interacts so poorly with other particles now we've got a deuterium nucleus what happens
to it well deuterium it turns out is highly reactive so as soon as it finds another proton
which will be almost instantaneously because the collisions are so frequent it gobbles that up
and they snap together now what have we got a proton plus a neutron in the deuterium nucleus plus
another proton added means two positive charges three nuclear particles we get the light form of
helium helium three so helium with two protons and one neutron an atomic weight of three and
in that process again the snapping together gives off energy so gamma rays go flying off through
the sun the ultimate source of the light and heat we get from its surface now we've got a helium
three nucleus what happens to it well it wanders around in the sun until it finally finds another
helium three nucleus which sticks together now we've got six particles but what are we left with
well that turns out to be unstable two of the protons go flying away and we end up with the
ultimate product of this fusion reaction helium four two protons and two neutrons an alpha particle
with two other protons re-ejected back into the sun to join the game again plus as always
when nuclear particles stick we get more energy pouring out of the sun
why should we believe this picture i'm telling you about a place that's 15 million degrees
with particles colliding millions of times a second only sticking once every 10 billion years
yet nonetheless coming together and producing a new kind of element helium out of hydrogen
in a three-step process we can't possibly see what's going on in the center of this star
but we can't see it with visible light we can't even see the gamma rays that are produced
but we can see what's going on with one of the byproducts of these processes and that is the
neutrinos neutrinos you will call only interact through the weak nuclear interaction and that
interaction is weak indeed neutrinos can pass right through the sun just as though it weren't
there at all through the intervening 100 million miles of space between us and the sun and be
captured at earth but it's the capturing them that's the problem because neutrinos pass right
through the earth as well nonetheless undaunted by this difficulty in the 1960s some scientists
built a detector in order to try to catch solar neutrinos to see what was going on in the center
of the sun well it turns out it's hard with a tank containing several hundred thousand gallons of
cleaning fluid carbon tetrachloride once every month or so a few of the chlorine atoms would get
turned to argon atoms argon nuclei that were in fact radioactive and could be detected through
their radioactive decay year after year decade after decade ray dravis filled his tank of chlorine
deep in a gold mine in the dakotas and once a month cleaned it out looking for this tiny number of
argon atoms transformed by solar neutrinos remarkably he found them but he didn't find enough he only
found a third as many neutrinos as he expected to see this caused great consternation in the
astronomical community because we thought we figured out the stars we thought we could predict to a
few percent how many neutrinos should be coming out simply by observing how much energy was coming
off the surface and knowing how much energy each reaction in its core must produce and yet we were
off by a factor of three this was an astounding result and for decades caused a vigorous debate
between astronomers and physicists the astronomers on the one hand convinced their models were right
said there must be something wrong with the physics of neutrinos the physicists with their
typical arrogance said we understand neutrinos there's clearly something wrong with the technical
details of your messy models that attempt to understand stars well i wouldn't be telling you
this story as an astronomer if we haven't won in the end it turned out less than a decade ago
that the problem is with the neutrinos as you recall from the beginning lectures there are
three different kinds of neutrinos corresponding to each of the different generations of leptons
or light particles the electron neutrino the muon neutrino and the tau neutrino it turns out contrary
to the expectations of the standard model that neutrinos can spontaneously morph from one of
these kinds to another an electron neutrino can become a muon neutrino a muon neutrino can become
a tau neutrino and vice versa what the problem was in davis's experiment is that the neutrinos on
their way from the sun were spontaneously transforming themselves from the type of electron
neutrinos that his detector was designed to detect into the other two types muon neutrinos and tau
neutrinos and so the factor of three that we were off was precisely right because a third of them
were the kind he was looking for and the two thirds were the other two kinds just perfect
this has now been confirmed by observations that can detect the other two kinds of neutrinos
and thus we are quite confident that the models we have built to understand the stars
and the elements they create are correct to make heavier elements it's even harder
because the electric repulsion you have to under under overcome becomes greater the repulsion is
proportional to the product of the charges on each of the two nuclei so to stick to helium
nuclei together with two plus charges here and two plus charges here is four times harder
than joining two hydrogen nuclei together furthermore joining two helium four nuclei together
in the violence of the collision produces boron eight an isotope which has five protons and
only three neutrons and therefore is off the nuclear stability line and therefore unstable
in fact it's so unstable it falls apart in less than 10 to the minus 16 seconds which creates a
bottleneck in the fusion process because we can go from hydrogen to deuterium deuterium to light
helium light helium to heavy helium when we try to make the next step and fuse helium together
we're stuck what happens is that the core of the star readjusts such that the helium is in such
close proximity that three helioms can suddenly stick together the so-called triple alpha reaction
which brings three helioms together to make carbon two nucleons and two protons and two
neutrons plus two protons and two neutrons plus two protons and two neutrons makes six
protons and six neutrons or the highly stable nucleus of carbon this reaction is the source of
most of the carbon in the universe and this is the reaction that powers the stars after they exhaust
their hydrogen fuel it requires much higher temperatures and densities however and this
requires a readjustment in the star's equilibrium in the case of our sun this readjustment will
be fatal for life on earth because shortly thereafter the sun will swell up and and the
earth will be orbiting through its atmosphere a most unpleasant experience shortly after that
the sun will run out of its helium fuel and it will also die more massive stars however have
an interesting story they go through multiple cycles of element production making ever more
oxygen and carbon and magnesium and sulfur and iron and all the other elements necessary for life
so now you know what a star is a plasma gravitationally bound supported by thermal pressure and
hydrostatic equilibrium usually emitting black body radiation and powered by nuclear fusion
does it make them any less romantic to know how they work i for one don't think so they're not
just pinpricks in a velvet cloth letting the supernal light shine through their element factories
taking boring hydrogen and helium nuclei and constructing the elements of which our variegated
world is made to complete our atomic history however we must first make sure that stars produce
the various elements that we find in their observed relative abundances oxygen there's lots of
platinum is rare and then we must arrange for a method by which these newly created elements
are distributed to interstellar space ready to be incorporated into new generations of stars and
planets these are the stories we weave together next time in recounting what we know of the lives of
the stars
