To search for the origin of the primordial elements, and even more fundamentally, their
constituent subatomic particles, we need to travel back to near the beginning of time.
This may seem like an impossible task, but the finite speed of light comes to our aid
because looking out into space is looking back in time.
Light travels at a finite speed, which means it takes a finite and calculable amount of
time to cover a given distance.
The speed of light is 300,000 kilometers per second, or for those of you still stuck
with English units, 186,000 miles per second.
That's enormously fast, and so in our everyday lives it appears instantaneous.
As you probably know, you can gauge the distance of a thunderstorm by watching the lightning
strike and then counting 1, 1,000, 2, 1,000, 3, 1,000, 4, 1,000, 5, 1,000, and hearing the
clap of thunder.
Sun travels through air at about 300 meters per second.
The light gets to you at 300,000 kilometers per second, so it of course gets to you effectively
instantaneously, and if the thunderstorm is 1,500 meters or one mile away, it takes five
seconds for the sound to catch up.
Old time intercontinental satellite phones, some of you may remember, give a hint of this
problem.
They sent a signal from where you were calling to a satellite 23,000 miles above the Earth,
because that distance, 23,000 miles above the surface, is the point a satellite has
to be at if it is to orbit around the Earth at the same rate that the Earth rotates.
Thus it stays above the same point on Earth all the time, ready to receive your signal.
So the signal travels up 23,000 miles and then down 23,000 miles, and when you talked
on such phones, you could hear a very annoying echo a couple of tenths of a second after
you made a sound, because you were hearing the reflection off the satellite where the
total signal had traveled over 46,000 miles.
Once one gets off the Earth, however, this delay starts to get significant.
As some of you probably remember, and others may have been told, astronauts did actually
walk on the Moon in the late 1960s.
Probably some of you remember that 2 a.m. event in July of 1969, when Neil Armstrong
made that small step for man and that great leap for mankind.
Well, that event was seen around the world by nearly a billion people, and that's when
there were only three billion people on the Earth altogether.
It was a momentous event.
But NASA kept at it, they kept sending astronauts back to the Moon, they went to different parts
of the Moon, they picked up different Moon rocks, which were useful in the story I told
you earlier about the origin of the Moon, but the public started to lose interest.
So they thought, what can we do to make the public really want to watch these moon shots
again?
What do people really like to watch on TV?
And they came up with a brilliant idea of golf.
Now, I must confess, why people like to watch golf on TV has never been clear to me, but
clearly they do, and they thought, ah, what we can do is have one of the astronauts hit
a golf ball on the Moon.
In the weakened gravity of the Moon, it would be easy to drive a ball, say a mile or so,
and people would be really impressed.
And so they set up to go to the Moon again, carrying a golf club, a tee, and a golf ball.
The first astronaut came down the ladder and set up the camera, connected the cables, and
got ready for the shot.
The second astronaut came down with his golf club, and in the process hooked his boot under
the cable between the camera and the satellite.
The controller in Houston, seeing this on his screen, of course, immediately shouted
into his communications device, look out, you're going to trip on the cable.
And then, of course, the screen went blank.
Because what the controller saw in Houston, 380,000 miles away, 380,000 kilometers away,
I should say, was the picture of the boot hooked under the cable 1.3 seconds ago.
And his command to the astronaut to avoid tripping took another 1.3 seconds to get there.
2.6 seconds is plenty of time for the cables of him ripped out and the golf game to have
been delayed.
If we go farther out into the solar system, this problem gets even more acute.
The little rovers that have traveled around on the surface of Mars for some years are
between 10 and 40 minutes, depending on the relative position of Earth and Mars in their
orbits around the sun, away.
It takes a round-trip conversation between 10 and 40 minutes.
And so you can't have a controller sitting at JPL in California watching the little camera
on the head of the rover as it moves across the surface and say, oh, look, the rover is
nearing the edge of a crater.
Because by that time, 10 minutes later, you have a billion dollars of space junk at the
foot of the crater.
You have to move very carefully when conversations take half an hour.
The nearest star is 4.4 light years away, which means we see it not as it is today, but as
it was when light left it on its journey to Earth 4.4 years ago.
There's nothing we can do to see what that star looks like today, in our today, because
the light takes 4.4 years to get to us.
Symmetrically, looking back at Earth from that star, if you lived on a planet that orbited
that star, one sees the past, not the present.
Let me illustrate.
Take the star Altair, one of the bright stars you can see with your naked eye.
It's about 17 light years away.
If you were an astronomer on a planet orbiting Altair, and you looked back at Earth, what
would you see?
No gray hair, lots more hair, not bad.
You'd see Earth as it was 17 years ago.
If you were on a planet orbiting Arcturus, another bright naked eye star that's 39 light
years away, and looked back at Earth, you'd see this, not even a beard, and note the little
National Honor Society pin there on the lapel.
Very sexy.
If you were on Capella, 53 light years away, and looked back at Earth, you'd see this absolutely
adoring, adorable platinum-haired young man.
And if you were on Aldebaran, which is 56 light years away, looking back at Earth, you'd
see the Michelin Tire baby.
Now, going even farther out into space, this starts to have serious consequences.
This is an image of the constellation Orion, one of the few constellations that I can actually
recognize.
It's got those three bright stars in a row that form the belt of the constellation, which
the Greeks thought of as the Hunter.
Just below the belt, the little smudge, represents that region of star formation I talked about,
the nearest big stellar factory to Earth.
But the bright red star at the head of Orion is about 400 light years from Earth, and is
called Betelgeuse.
Now, this is a very interesting star.
It's a red supergiant, and it's a star very near the end of its life that's exhausted
most of its nuclear fuel, and is about to explode.
Now, when I say about to explode, we can't predict that to better than maybe 10 or 20,000
years.
It could, in fact, have already exploded.
Indeed, it could have exploded about 399 years and 364 days ago.
There's no way I could know that.
But when I go outside tonight and look up at the sky, I could see a star that's a billion
times brighter, completely dominating the night sky, as the evidence of that explosion,
finally 400 years later, arrives at Earth.
Incidentally, this is what I looked like 400 years ago when I posed for Raphael.
The center of the Milky Way is about 35,000 light years away.
A big telescope there would see a very different Earth.
Indeed, one would see the Neanderthals wandering around Europe and making pretty cave paintings
of bison.
However, 35,000 years is a short time in terms of stellar lifetimes, as we've learned.
So there would be no big changes expected in how the stars look there, and indeed, we
don't see stars very differently.
Once we get out of the galaxy, however, the time scales get longer really fast.
The nearest large galaxy to us, Andromeda, is two million light years from Earth.
A civilization studying Earth from there now would see no humans.
The nearest rich cluster of galaxies is a hundred million light years away.
Astronomers there today would see dinosaurs roaming the surface of the Earth.
That's there today, of course, but wherever one is, it's your today.
Two or three billion light years away, a distance one can see with even a relatively modest-sized
telescope, the universe looks noticeably different.
Galaxies and stars have evolved on time scales of billions of years.
The most distant object ever detected is about 12.9 billion light years from Earth, and they
exist in the universe radically different from the way the universe looks as we see
it today, because their universe is less than one billion years old.
Very few galaxies have formed.
The stars are very young.
Heavy elements are almost non-existent.
But of course, out there, it's the day two.
We have to think very carefully about what we mean by now, and that leads us to thinking
about the connectedness of space and time.
The British essayist Charles Lamb wrote at the turn of the 19th century,
Nothing puzzles me more than space and time, yet nothing troubles me less.
I guess the difference between an essayist and a scientist, if something puzzles a scientist,
it also troubles him deeply.
From the middle of the 19th century, when Maxwell wrote down his equations that connect
light and electromagnetism and troubling thoughts about space and time were brewing.
The Irish physicist George Fitzgerald, for example, saw Maxwell's famous four equations,
which unite electricity and magnetism, link the two forces together to make light as an
incomplete starting point rather than as a final answer.
Hendrik Lorenz and Heinrich Hertz also recognized potential inconsistencies in this model of
electromagnetic waves producing light.
On the experimental side, the American physicists, Michelson and Morley, attempted to measure
the medium in which Maxwell's light waves were supposed to propagate, and they repeatedly
failed.
The point is that a wave, as Maxwell had concluded light was, waves something.
Water waves go like this.
The molecules of water go up and down as the wave moves forward.
Sound waves, as I described earlier, knock the molecules together like this as the wave
propagates by.
Something must be waving for a wave to exist.
What was it that was waving when a light wave passed through space?
The Michelson-Morley experiment was conceptually very simple, although the technical details
were a little daunting.
If light really were Maxwell's hypothesized waves, there must be something that was waving.
Whether it must occupy all of space, whatever it is, since clearly the light from very distant
stars clearly reach us.
In deference to Aristotle's fifth element that was supposed to occupy the celestial
sphere, this putative waving substance was dubbed the ether.
Michelson and Morley's idea was as follows.
As the earth completes its annual circuit around the sun, it must be plowing through
this ether.
Now, if the ether were stationary, and what stationary means will come to be a major part
of the problem here, but let's say it's sort of a steel ocean and the earth is moving
around through it, then in one season of the year, one should feel the ether wind in one's
face when one is moving this way, and six months later, it should be blowing from one's
back as one moves this way.
Even if the ether were not stationary with respect to the solar system, but were somehow
streaming through the solar system, the speed that we detect in it should change as our
velocity of 30 kilometers a second, not exactly as so speed, around the sun each year, continues.
So they devised a two-armed device to test this hypothesis.
Light entered from the left of the device, and in moving along, it encountered a half-silvered
mirror.
That's a mirror this designed such that roughly half the light that hits it passes right through,
as though it were glass, and the other half of the light that hits it reflects as from
a normal mirror.
They set this mirror at a 45-degree angle, such that the light coming from the left
passed through, for some of the waves, all the way over here, and the other of the waves
hit at 45 degrees, reflected at the equal angle, and went up.
At each location, the vertical moving light and the horizontally moving light, another
mirror was put in place that reflected all the light, and so the light rays started back
towards each other again.
They then, again, encountered the half-silvered mirror, and the vertical moving beam passed
directly through to a detector down below, whereas the horizontally moving beam reflected
off the mirror and also went to the same location where the detector was located.
In fact, it was a microscope which they could look in with their eyes.
Now, by carefully adjusting the lengths of the two beams to be equal, the light waves
should have arrived at the finish line in phase.
That is, as the peaks go this way, the same number of peaks should have made it as the
peaks that went this way because the distances were exactly the same.
And if the peak lines up with the peak of a wave and the valley lines up with the valley
of a wave, we have what we call constructive interference.
That is, the total wave gets twice as big because the peaks add and the valleys add.
If on the other hand, the path lengths are slightly different, say different by half
a wavelength, then the peak of one wave will line up with the valley of another, and the
valley of the first wave will line up with the peak of the second, and the wave will
actually cancel out.
You can see this effect easily in water.
So if the waves were traveling through this ether wind that was postulated, they would
not arrive simultaneously.
The situation is analogous to two swimmers in a fast-running stream.
One is asked to swim upstream 100 meters and then back again, and the other is asked to
swim across the stream and back again, also 100 meters each way.
With a little simple algebra, one can show that the transit times for the two equally
strong swimmers are different.
Going up and back against the current takes a different amount of time than going across
and back the current, meaning for the experiment that the light would not constructively interfere
if there were a medium in which light propagated.
Michelson and Morley spent years perfecting this experiment, but however precisely they
repeated the test, the evidence for the ether never appeared.
In 1905, Einstein crystallized the problem in a paper he entitled On the Electrodynamics
of Moving Bodies.
This is in fact the paper that introduced the concept of relativity to the world.
In Einstein's relativity, the seemingly separate concepts of space and time become linked together
through the special status of light into spacetime.
Einstein proposed two simple postulates.
The first postulate of relativity is that absolute uniform motion, constant velocity
motion that is, cannot be detected.
Now, you may think this sounds absurd.
It's obvious if you're standing watching a train go by that the train is moving and
you are standing still.
But in fact, you're not standing still.
You're moving at a pretty high speed.
You're moving at 30 kilometers a second, being carried around by the Earth, around the Sun,
the Sun and the whole solar system is moving at 230 kilometers a second, around the Milky
Way.
It takes 250 million years to go around once.
And the whole Milky Way, our galaxy, is moving through spacetime at 600 kilometers a second.
So who's for you to say that you're standing still and the train is moving?
Well nonsense you say, of course, with respect to the Earth, I'm standing still and the train
is moving.
Ah, it's with respect to something.
It's true, of course, that billiard players don't change their shots from spring to fall,
even though the difference in their motion through space is about 216,000 kilometers
an hour.
Nonetheless, the balls bank off the bank and into the pockets in just the same way.
The point is, you always judge motion with respect to something else.
That is, motion is relative.
And what Einstein's postulate says is that there's no experiment you can perform to
detect constant velocity, absolute motion.
My son discovered this when he was young in the New York City subway system.
The old subways used to have these long, smooth platforms that ran the whole length of the
thing, not individual seats, but the whole length of the car had a long, smooth surface.
And when the subway cars were empty, he liked to bring his little toy trucks into the subway
and put them on the bench.
What he discovered was, if he placed the truck in the middle of the bench, while the train
was rocketing along between stations at 40 miles an hour, the truck sat perfectly still.
When the train started to decelerate as it entered the station, the truck would take
off in the direction of the train.
When the train started to accelerate as it pulled out of the station, the truck would
take off in the other direction.
Accelerated motion can be easily detected.
It's that feeling you get in an elevator when it starts up.
Or the little truck on the subway bench starts to move.
But when the train is moving along at a constant speed, there's no experiment you can perform
inside that subway car that lets you know that it's moving, or indeed, how fast it's
moving.
The second postulate of relativity is that the velocity of light in a vacuum is constant,
independent of the motion of the source or of the observer.
Does this make common sense?
Well, rocks don't obey this postulate.
For example, a rock thrown at you from a car driving towards you has a higher velocity
than a rock thrown by a stationary adversary.
Center fielders know this principle well.
When they're in center field waiting for a fly ball and a runner is on third base tagging
up to run home, they always position themselves many feet behind where the ball is going to
land, and as it comes down, start running forward towards the ball such that when they catch
it, their velocity of motion plus their arm's velocity of motion will make the ball reach
home plate faster.
So physical objects certainly don't obey the rule that their velocities are independent
of this motion of the source or the observer.
The velocity of the source adds.
Now sound is a wave-like light, so perhaps we ought to see if this obeys that postulate.
It does, but only in a special reference frame, the air through which it propagates.
Imagine the following situation.
On the 4th of July every year in New York, the Macy's department store puts on an enormous
display of fireworks.
They line the East River with barges and thousands of fireworks go up into the sky.
Couple of million people usually line the FDR drive along the east side of Manhattan
to watch this show.
Now imagine one year a dense fog settles over the city.
It would certainly put a damper on the fireworks.
But you happen to be a friend of the mayor, and he's not going to let the fireworks show
go unwatched, and so he orders out his helicopter and takes you up in the helicopter hovering
above the East River maybe three kilometers away from the source of the fireworks.
The fireworks are launched from the barges that go up through the layer of fog.
They explode in the sky, and you see them and you hear them.
You see them essentially instantaneously because you're only three kilometers away and the
light travels 300,000 kilometers per second, so it only takes a hundred thousandths of
a second for the light to get to you.
You can't possibly measure that short of time period.
Your neural circuits work a hundred times more slowly.
So you see the light from the fireworks, the beautiful explosion, instantaneously.
The sound, however, has to propagate through the air.
And you think, in your little physicist's way, well, I'll measure the speed of sound
in the air tonight.
Perhaps it's a little different because of the fog.
And so you take out your watch, you watch the explosion, and you count, and you see
how long it takes for the sound to get to you.
Well, since sound travels, as I said, 300 meters per second, and you're three kilometers
away, then it takes 10 seconds, and you go, ah, the speed of sound is 300 meters per second.
10 seconds divided into 3,000 meters.
That's if you're hovering in the helicopter.
Suppose, instead, that your helicopter pilot decided to fly towards the fireworks to get
a better view.
Well, in that instance, you would see the flash of light, and you would time on your
watch how long it took, and you say, ah, it only took 7.5 seconds for the sound to get
here.
Just travel it 400 meters per second because it's traveled 3,000 meters in 7.5 seconds.
Nonsense, you'll say.
We were moving in the second case, so of course we get a different answer, and the answer we
get is wrong.
But how do you know you were moving?
I've been in a helicopter.
It's a very noisy and unpleasant experience, but it's very hard to tell when you're standing
still or when you're moving if you have your eyes closed and aren't looking out the window,
which I must say, part of the time I did have my eyes closed.
The point is, when you're in an airplane flying from New York to California, you have no sense
of motion.
When you drop your coke off the edge of your chair, it doesn't fly to the back of the plane
and pin the stewardess against it.
It just falls straight down.
There's no experiment you can do in the plane or in that helicopter to tell whether or not
you're moving at a constant speed, and therefore, there's no way to know whether your measurement
of the speed of sound was correct or not.
Ah, you say, yes I could, I could stick my hand out the window and I'd feel the air rushing
by if we were moving, and then I would know that we're moving.
Yes, precisely.
The frame of the air is a frame in which sound speed is constant, independent of the motion
of the source of the observer, but it's the only frame.
Now, since the Michelson-Worley experiment established that light has no medium through
which it propagates, it travels through the pure empty vacuum of space, Einstein's postulate
is not unreasonable.
Its speed is the same in all reference frames.
Following the logical consequences of these two postulates leads to a picture of the world
in which space and time are mixed together as an entity we call spacetime.
It also leads to some bizarre but experimentally verified results.
If you find the concept of spacetime confusing, let's take a step back.
Just start by trying to define time without any references to time itself.
Well, you say time is time, time moves through, I mean the seconds go by, time, it's not
so easy to define time, is it?
Time is something you experience, subjective time may seem to you run at different rates,
in fact you know the clock ticks in a regular way, but a clock is just something we've devised
to measure time.
Is time the same for me as for you?
Do my clocks run at the same rate as your clocks run?
This is something that we'll have to investigate based on Einstein's two relatively simple
sounding postulates.
Science proceeds by constructing logically self-consistent hypotheses and then devising
experiments to test their consequences.
As I constantly say to my students, although it's not popular with them or necessarily
with my colleagues, I don't regard science as a search for truth with a capital T.
I regard science as a search for hypotheses, for models if you will, for the way the world
works, which are testable and most importantly are falsifiable.
If I make a hypothesis such as Einstein did, I must test it and there must be a possibility
in that test of the hypothesis being proved false.
If there's no such possibility then it's not a scientific hypothesis because science
makes progress not by proving things true, but by proving things false.
By showing that one's model is incorrect, one makes progress in understanding the universe.
Einstein's relativity was not, obviously, true.
The two hypotheses sound simple and innocuous enough.
It's not possible to determine if one is moving at a constant speed and that the speed
of light, this slightly weird thing, travels at a constant speed no matter who's doing
the measurement or how fast the source is moving.
The point is that these two hypotheses lead to a number of predictions, all of which are
testable.
And over the last hundred years, Einstein's relativity has passed the test with flying
colors.
Indeed, we cannot begin to understand things like the high energy collisions of cosmic
rays with our atmosphere, the source of the carbon-14 atoms we've used so often in this
course so far, without applying this radical departure from our common-sense notions of
space and time.
Next time, we'll follow the logical consequences of Einstein's two postulates through to a
new understanding both of how subatomic particles behave and how the universe itself exists
in spacetime.
