with two perhaps non-intuitive, but straightforward postulates.
In fact, Einstein's theory of relativity
is the same as Einstein's theory of relativity.
Einstein's theory of relativity
is the same as Einstein's theory of relativity.
With two perhaps non-intuitive, but straightforward postulates.
One, that absolute uniform motion cannot be detected.
That is, there is no experiment you can perform
to establish whether or not you're moving at a constant velocity.
And two, that the speed of light is independent
of the speed of its source or the observer.
From these two postulates, he deduced the logical consequences.
This resulted in predictions of bizarre behavior
for a body traveling close to the speed of light.
To understand the conflict this engenders
with our common-sense notions,
we must begin by formalizing the concept of frames of reference.
Imagine me standing by the train tracks,
watching my wife, Jada, go by,
walking through a train with her little dog, Pixel.
Pixel is an absolutely beautiful, highly intelligent,
and thoroughly obnoxious little black-and-tan Pomeranian.
So here they are on the train, and Pixel's going for a walk,
while the train is moving by me.
Let's suppose the train is moving to the right,
with a velocity of 10 meters per second,
which will designate with the symbol U.
U will always be the relative velocity
between the two frames of reference we're studying.
Or, to be more precise, I should say,
from my perspective, the train is moving to the right.
Because on the train, looking out the window,
it appears that it is I who is moving to the left.
You may have had this experience before in a train station.
Sitting in a train engrossed in your work,
waiting for the train to leave,
you might glance up out the window
and see a train on the next track.
It's sometimes very hard to tell,
whether it's you that's moving forward
or that train that's moving backwards.
Pixel is walking in the same direction
along the train that the train is moving,
at, say, one meter per second,
which is about as fast as his little tiny legs can carry him.
Thus, it appears to me that Pixel is moving to the right
at 11 meters per second,
the 10 meters per second with which the train is carrying him,
and the one meter per second with which his legs are moving.
Now, let's superimpose on this picture two reference frames,
one in which I am stationary, the frame of the ground,
and one in which Jada is just strolling along slowly,
a frame that's attached to the train itself.
Since I'm the scientist in this little play,
I'll take the role of the observer,
and we'll assume that I truly am at rest,
ignoring the caveats I mentioned last time
about the motion of the Earth around the Sun
at 30 kilometers a second,
the motion of the Sun around the galaxy
at 230 kilometers a second,
and the motion of the galaxy through the universe
at 600 kilometers a second.
Here's the ground I'm standing still.
So, we draw the axis along the rate of the tracks,
the y-axis perpendicular to that,
and we'll have the origin right here
where the two frames at this moment overlap.
We'll mark quantities in Jada's frame differently
by denoting them with a prime little hash.
Now, we have carefully synchronized our watches,
and they're both very good watches,
so at the moment,
Jada is directly in front of me on the train,
we'll mark as time zero,
and the two coordinate systems will overlap.
At t equals zero,
t prime equals zero because our watches match.
Now, because the origins have been arranged to match
at this point,
we also have that x equals zero at the origin,
and x prime equals zero.
They're on top of each other.
Likewise, y equals zero,
and y prime equals zero at our origin.
We're on level ground here.
And the two other things we might want to know about
are masses and velocities.
The mass of pixel in the train is five kilograms.
That's about a little over his proper weight,
but I must confess he eats a little bit of my good cooking.
And that mass is the same for me
as it is for Jada on the train.
He is just a little chubby to both of us.
Finally, there's the velocity
with which pixel is moving through the train.
11 meters per second for me, that's v,
and v prime, the velocity with which pixel
thinks he's moving through the train,
is one meter per second.
Now, here's the picture one second later,
when the reference frame attached to the train
has moved with it.
Again, you would expect that for me,
one second has gone by on my watch,
and one second has gone by on Jada's watch,
so t equals one second,
and v prime equals one second.
X, to me, the location of pixel in the train
is 11 meters on the x-axis,
whereas x prime for pixel is only one meter.
Y is still zero because the train track is flat,
and y prime is zero as well.
The mass of pixel, we would expect still to be five kilograms,
in case he hasn't snarfed up anything on the floor,
but he's still five kilograms for me,
m equals five kilograms,
and he's still five kilograms in the train,
m prime equals five kilograms.
And finally, since nothing's changed,
the train is moving into constant velocity,
pixel's moving into constant velocity.
Velocity, to my point of view,
is still 11 meters per second,
and v prime is still for pixel one meter per second.
From these pictures, then,
we can derive a set of rules.
They're called the Galilean transformations,
because they were first discussed,
not quite in these terms,
but the basic ideas were put forth by Galileo.
It's a simple set of equations
that relate distances, velocities, times, and masses
in two different reference frames
that are moving with respect to one another.
In our case, that of the train,
and that of the ground outside.
X prime is going to be equal to x minus u times t,
where u is the velocity with which the frame is moving,
in our case, the train,
and t is the time over which this moves.
Clearly, that's true in the case of our circumstance.
Y prime is equal to y.
That doesn't change.
T prime is equal to t.
We both have watches, they run well, everything works.
M prime is equal to m.
There's no reason to expect the masses to be different.
And v prime, the velocity that pixel sees in the train,
is equal to v, the velocity I see,
minus u minus the velocity
with which the frame pixel is in, is moving.
These notions are, after all, just common sense.
Well, here's what Einstein had to say about common sense.
He called it,
that layer of prejudices laid down upon the mind
prior to the age of 18.
And he, Einstein at least,
was not encumbered by such prejudices.
Starting from his two postulates,
constant velocity motion cannot be detected,
and that all observers agree on the speed of light.
He showed that, with one exception,
all of these common sense relations
of the Galilean transformations are wrong.
Let's start with an investigation of how time behaves.
Imagine two spaceships.
Einstein and his writing always use trains
because they were the fastest thing around
at the turn of the last century,
but we have spaceships,
and we imagine then zipping around at close to the speed of light,
for example.
In one, you are standing still.
Wherever you are,
it always feels like you're standing still.
Your reference frame is your reference frame.
So you're in the spacecraft standing still,
while the other spacecraft contains a fellow experimenter
zipping along at high speed,
again represented by the velocity u.
And you each have a special kind of clock,
two parallel mirrors,
between which a light beam bounces,
back and forth, back and forth.
So the clock goes tick, talk, tick, talk, tick, talk.
We again designate quantities in the moving frame,
the moving frame to you,
that is in the other spaceship,
with the little primes.
We have your friend allow one tick of her light clock.
Now what happens?
The light goes from the top mirror to the bottom mirror.
The velocity, by definition,
is equal to distance divided by time.
So rearranging the terms,
distance equals velocity times time.
In this case, the velocity is clearly light,
speed c.
And since Einstein tells us
that the speed of light is always constant,
which is after all why we designate it
with a letter c for constant,
your friend finds that the amount of distance
separating her mirrors, d'
is equal to c, the velocity,
times t', the time on her watch it took
for the light to get from the top to the bottom.
Now, what do you record
when you observe one tick on her clock?
To you, it looks like this.
You see the light travel a greater distance.
Because the light going from the top mirror
once it leaves,
well, these mirrors are both moving along like this,
and so when it finally hits the bottom mirror,
it bounces over here.
It goes this longer distance in your frame d,
which is equal to c times t,
with t measured in your frame.
Meanwhile, the spacecraft have moved to the right
by a distance u times t,
u, the spacecraft's velocity,
times this same interval of time it took the light
to get from one mirror to the other.
This allows us to construct a simple right triangle,
where the sides are ct',
u, t,
and ct, where ct is the hypotenuse.
From the Pythagorean theorem,
you will recall that ct' squared plus ut squared
is equal to ct squared,
that is, the square of the two sides
is equal to the square of the hypotenuse.
Rearranging the terms and taking the square root,
it's easy to show that t' is equal to t
times the square root of 1 minus u squared over c squared.
The astonishing consequence of this little bit of geometry
and algebra is that time runs at a different rate
in the two spaceships.
When one second goes by off your watch in your reference frame,
less than one second passes in the moving frame,
at least the frame that's moving according to us.
Moving clocks appear to run slow.
Now the square root,
this factor of the square root of 1 minus u squared over c squared
is ubiquitous in relativity,
so we should probably take a moment to examine its behavior.
When u, the velocity of the reference frame,
is much, much less than the speed of light,
this factor is clearly very close to one,
because u squared over c squared is a tiny, tiny number
and 1 minus a tiny number is roughly 1
and the square root of roughly 1 is roughly 1.
This is true of what happens at everyday speeds,
which are much, much slower than the speed of light.
This suggests we should see no bizarre changes in time
in our everyday life, and of course, we don't.
The square root of term is almost always exactly equal to 1 for us,
t prime equals t times 1, or t prime equals t.
Driving at highway speeds, for example,
the correction would be less than one part in 20 million
or less than one second in six years,
and so you're not likely to notice one second in six years.
When you start approaching the value for the speed of light, however,
the factor starts growing.
For example, for u equal to 9 tenths the speed of light,
that is something that's moving by you
at a constant speed of 9 tenths the speed of light,
this factor, the square root factor, becomes 0.44,
meaning that t prime equals t times 0.44.
Time runs at less than half the speed in the moving frame.
One second ticks by on your clock,
and only 0.4 seconds ticks by on the other clock.
You have to wait two and a half seconds
before one second ticks by on the moving clock.
When you exactly equal c, what happens?
Well, u squared over c squared is 1, 1 minus 1 is 0,
the square root of 0 is 0,
t prime equals t times 0,
t prime equals 0, time stops.
It doesn't matter how long you wait on your watch for time to go by,
the time in the moving frame has stopped
when the velocity between u and it is equal to the speed of light.
What about when u becomes greater than c?
Well, then u over c or u squared over c squared is greater than 1.
1 minus a number greater than 1 is a negative number,
and this leaves us with the square root of a negative number,
something we call a complex number,
hinting that traveling faster than light
may take us into unfamiliar territory.
We call this effect time dilation.
Time gets dilated or stretched out
as the moving in the moving reference frame from our point of view.
It's important to note that it's not the clock that is somehow deficient
and is therefore running slowly.
It's time itself that is passing more slowly.
A dramatic confirmation of this prediction
was carried out by the National Bureau of Standards some decades ago.
They took two of the successors of Professor Robbie's atomic clocks I mentioned earlier,
left one at their laboratory in Maryland
and bought a first-class ticket for the other for an around-the-world flight
on a commercial airliner.
When the traveling clock returned to Washington
and was compared with the clock that left behind,
it was slow.
Less time had passed for that clock during its travels.
If the rate at which time passes can be different in different reference frames,
what about the other quantities from the Galilean transformations
that we also thought we understood?
Well, if you think about it, a logical analysis of this situation
suggests that if time changes,
then lengths in the direction of motion much change as well.
Because postulate one states that the absolute uniform motion,
the constant velocity between the frames, cannot be detected.
Another way of saying this is that there is no one reference frame that is preferred,
as in the case of sound, there is in the air.
As a consequence, all observers always agree on the relative motions
of the two frames, the value of u.
They just don't agree which of them is moving.
To me, Jada and Pixel are moving by on the train.
To them, looking out the window, I'm moving by in the opposite direction.
So we don't agree on that, but we do agree on the size of the velocity u.
Now, since the velocity is defined as distance divided by time,
or in our picture, u equals x over t,
where x is the distance traveled along the direction of motion,
and t changes between the two frames,
then x must change also for u to be constant.
To keep u the same for both observers,
x prime must equal x times the square root of 1 minus u squared over c squared,
so the terms in the denominator and the numerator cancel out.
That is, distance parallel to the direction of motion
appears smaller in the moving reference frame.
We call this length contraction.
Now, what about distances that are perpendicular to the direction of motion?
It turns out this is the one quantity where common sense actually prevails.
y does equal y prime even in the moving frame.
And I can show this by a proof called a proof by contradiction using a meter stick.
Imagine the following scenario.
I have a meter stick here, and I attach to the top a nice sharp blade sticking out like this,
and another sharp blade sticking down like this at the bottom.
And say I equip an adversary over there that's going to run towards me
with the same kind of meter stick, with a blade sticking out here and a blade sticking out here.
Now, if we charge towards each other, if he charges towards me, say,
I just stand still holding this out, what's going to happen?
If y prime, the moving reference frame, had a contraction in the direction perpendicular
to his direction of motion, then when he went by,
his meter stick would slice off the top and bottom of mine,
because it would be shorter, and therefore its blades would cut mine off.
Alternatively, if in the perpendicular direction to the direction of motion
to sort of make up for length contraction along the x-axis,
the y-axis somehow expanded when he ran by,
my ruler would slice off the top and bottom of his, because mine would now be shorter than his.
Now, we don't want the rulers to be sliced in either case,
because that would lead to a preferred reference frame.
I could say I am absolutely standing still because my ruler got sliced off.
That's not allowed by the first postulate.
As a consequence, since we don't allow one reference frame to be preferred over the other,
it must be the case that the meter sticks remain the same length in the perpendicular direction,
and nobody stick gets the ends sliced off.
With considerably more algebra, one can show that velocities don't simply add and subtract
as they do in the Galilean transformations.
In fact, it turns out that v prime, the velocity is observed in the moving frame,
is equal to v minus u, as it would be normally,
divided by the square root of 1 plus, in this case, u times v over c squared,
a somewhat more complicated expression.
Finally, even the masses appear different in the two reference frames.
m prime, it turns out, is equal to m divided by our famous factor,
the square root of 1 minus u squared over c squared.
That is, moving masses appear to grow bigger,
since the square root of 1 minus u squared over c squared is always a factor less than 1,
and dividing a number by a factor less than 1 makes it larger.
So, if we adopt Einstein's two assumptions about constant velocities
and the constancy of the speed of light,
we must replace the Galilean transformations with the relativistic ones.
t prime equals t times the square root of 1 minus u squared over c squared.
x prime equals x times the square root of 1 minus u squared over c squared.
y prime does equal y, but m prime equals m divided by the square root of 1 minus u squared over c squared,
and v prime equals v minus u times the square root of 1 plus u v over c squared.
It is important to note that the situation here is totally symmetrical.
Since, by postulate, there is no way to determine who is actually moving.
To you, who thinks you are stationary and your friend is zipping by in the spaceship,
your friend's clock is slow, your friend's lengths in this dimension are contracted,
your friend's mass is greater.
To your friend, however, who thinks she is happily sitting still
and watching you use it by in your spaceship in the opposite direction,
she's just fine in her reference frames,
and you're the one that's suffering all these indignities.
Well, which, you might ask, is really the case.
Relativity's answer is unequivocal, both.
These quantities of mass and velocity and length and time are relative.
Indeed, the very notion of absolute space and time itself is an illusion
fostered by the fact that we move around in our lives very slowly compared to the speed of light.
If we were all given tricycles that went at 50% of light speed at the age of five,
this view, this bizarre relativistic view would be common sense to us
because we would have seen these effects all the time.
They would also have the added virtue of being true.
But stuck in our slow-moving world as we are, the consequences seem bizarre.
Cosmic rays provide an excellent demonstration that these effects are not merely theoretical,
nor are they simply apparent changes.
These things really, really happen.
Cosmic rays are these very high-energy particles produced in the shock waves
from exploded stars in distant regions of interstellar space,
which we encountered in previous lectures.
They produced the carbon-14 in our atmosphere.
They produced the thermal luminescence in roof tiles and other terrestrial phenomena.
Unlike most things we encounter,
cosmic rays actually do travel very close to the speed of light.
Now, with the velocity approximately equal to C,
we should expect to see some of these weird effects of relativity
and that they'll become important.
Indeed, they do.
When a cosmic ray hits the upper atmosphere,
it's very likely to shatter an atomic nucleus of nitrogen or oxygen or some other atmospheric gas
and produce a whole shower of subatomic particles.
One of the many types of particles produced are muons.
Some of you will remember from lecture 2
that muons are a heavy version of an electron, a heavy lepton.
Now, muons aren't around, you don't find them under your kitchen sink,
because they're very unstable.
They have a half-life of one microsecond,
10 to the minus 6 seconds before they decay.
So they don't exist in our everyday world,
constantly, all the time, by collisions of cosmic rays with atmospheric atoms.
The question is, should we expect to ever see any of these muons hitting the ground?
They're created about 30 kilometers up in the outer fringes of the atmosphere.
So here's the surface of the Earth,
and here's the cosmic ray coming in, slamming into an atom,
and producing a whole shower of muons.
Now, since muons have mass, they cannot travel at the speed of light.
But they go very close to the speed of light.
So for an approximation, let's just assume for the moment that they do.
They will travel a distance d,
which is equal to c, the velocity they're moving,
times t, the time they have to live.
Now, the velocity with which they're moving is just a smidge in less
than 3 times 10 to the fifth kilometers per second,
the 300,000 kilometers a second of light speed,
and the time they have to live is 10 to the minus 6 seconds.
And so we should expect they can only go 0.3 kilometers before they decay.
Yet billions of them hit the ground each second.
How can they do that?
The effects of relativity are at work.
Here we see the muon streaking towards us
with its creation in the upper atmosphere at 99.995% the speed of light.
This is, in fact, a typical speed for a muon.
Using the time dilation equation,
we can then calculate how slowly, from our perspective,
that rapidly speeding muon will be decaying.
In our frame, for the muon, t' will be equal to t on our watches
times the square root of 1 minus u squared over c squared.
By plugging in the numbers t as 10 to the minus 6 seconds
and u as 99.995% the speed of light,
we find that t' is 10 to the minus 4 seconds.
Its clock is running 100 times slower than it would
if it were sitting on our bench in the lab.
So to us, it takes 10 to the minus 4 seconds to decay.
Now, how far can it go in 10 to the minus 4 seconds?
It can travel 100 times farther than it would
if it were dying in 1 microsecond.
So that's 0.3 kilometers,
the distance it would have traveled in 1 microsecond,
times 100, or 30 kilometers.
Guess what? That's where it was created, 30 kilometers up.
It hits the ground before it decays as we observe it.
How does this situation look from the point of view of the muon?
It, of course, thinks, to the extent that a muon could think,
but it's only living 10 to the minus 6 seconds
because it's living in its frame where it's standing still.
However, it sees the distance to the ground
as 100 times shorter since it sees moving lengths contracted
and it sees the earth rushing towards it at an enormous speed.
It agrees, therefore, that it will make it to the ground
because it only has 300 meters to travel before the earth hits it
and it's got 10 to the minus 6 seconds to make that trip,
bingo, it hits the ground.
It is always the case,
and this is absolutely critical to understand,
that two observers in the same place at the same time
will agree on the outcome.
The muon hits the ground.
They just disagree on how this managed to happen.
Now, the concept of relativity, of space and time,
the postulates themselves are all relative.
Even simultaneity,
where there are two events occur before or after each other,
is relative.
Picture two rocket ships traveling in opposite directions
at, say, 80% the speed of light, like this.
The two pass a third stationary ship,
the one on which you're located,
sitting still in space,
stationary, of course, because it's yours.
Now, just when the two spacecraft passed,
one above you and one below you,
you push a button that triggers a camera on either end of your ship
to take a flash picture of the other spaceships.
In this case, ship A, traveling to the right,
sees the following sequence of events.
Flash Y occurs first, and flash X occurs later.
Ship B, traveling in the opposite direction,
sees flash X occur first, and then Y.
Actually, from B's point of view,
what he actually sees is the following.
X flashes when the tail of A is aligned with the nose cone of B,
and Y flashes when the nose of A is aligned with the tail of B.
B also sees a tiny shrunken ship A
because it's moving by him so rapidly and its length is contracted
and concludes with confidence that X happened before Y.
Ship A, of course, sees exactly the reverse.
A tiny ship B flash Y happening before flash X.
You, on the other hand, see both ships as shrunken in size,
one's moving this way and one's moving this way,
but at the same speed their length is contracted by the same amount,
and the flashes X and Y you see as simultaneous.
But there is no way that you will convince your colleagues
that the two flashes actually happened at the same time.
After all, they both saw the order of events
in their particular reference frames.
The painting behind me is a two-dimensional representation
of a forest at night.
It's a flat piece of paper.
X, Y. That's it.
Yet my brain perceives when I look at it a three-dimensional scene.
Some of the trees are in front,
some of the trees are behind and block our view.
What happens when we view a truly four-dimensional world of space-time
through three-dimensional eyes?
A useful guide to this dilemma is provided by something like this stack of paper.
In the book, Flatland,
a British math teacher in the late 19th century
combines simultaneously a marvelous searing satire of the Victorian view of women
and a look into higher dimensions.
In Flatland, the women are straight lines.
It's a two-dimensional world.
Men are triangles.
Straight lines, of course, meaning that women are one-dimensional.
But the men are triangles, and the higher one goes in the political hierarchy,
the more sides one acquires.
So a square is ahead of a triangle and an octagon is ahead of a square.
One day, our hero and his wife, the triangle and a straight line,
are sitting in their little two-dimensional square house
and a sphere comes to visit.
Now, what would it look like if you were sitting in your two-dimensional living room
and a sphere came to visit out of another dimension?
While they're sitting there, a dot appears in the middle of the room.
It then slowly grows to a bigger and bigger circle
as the sphere passes through the two-dimensional world of Flatland.
And then it reaches a maximum size and starts shrinking again and disappears.
It doesn't come in the door. It doesn't come in the windows.
It comes out of nowhere from another dimension.
In a sense, our position is the same as the Flatlanders.
In reality, we inhabit a four-dimensional space-time,
but we observe it with three-dimensional sensibilities.
If I hold up this stack of paper in a bright light and only observe its shadow,
I see a two-dimensional image, which in this position tells me the length and height of the shape.
But if I rotate the book through time, its shadow changes.
What is the true book like?
In our slow-speed three-dimensional world,
we observe only the shrunken shadows of objects in the reality of four-dimensional space.
This is the lesson of relativity.
As the muon makes clear, relativity works.
It predicts the outcome of real experiments in the real world.
We are spared its more bizarre consequences because we travel around at such slow speeds.
When we want to explore the expanding universe to find the origin of the particles of which it is composed,
relativity is critical.
In particular, we must look at two of the most famous of relativity's predictions.
First, that nothing travels faster than the speed of light,
and second, that matter can simply disappear.
