Science fiction writers, ten-year-old boys, and many of the innumerable crackpots who
send me their theories of the universe each year are united by one conviction, that things
can travel faster than the speed of light. In fact, relativity does not impose C as an
absolute speed limit, but it does spell out the consequences if that limit is exceeded.
After this lecture, it will be up to you to decide if you're willing to live with those
consequences. Science fiction writers and ten-year-old
boys also love antimatter, but that's just fine, because antimatter really exists. Indeed,
as I explained way back in lecture two, every particle in the putatively fundamental list
of particles, the six quarks up, down, strange charm, top, bottom, and the six leptons, muon,
pow, electron, and their relative neutrinos, each has an antimatter mate. This is not just
theory. We can make and we can detect each of these antimatter particles, anti-muons,
anti-protons, anti-neutrons, anti-neutrinos. The anti-electron, or positron as we've called
it, is the instigator of half of all radioactive beta decays. The positron's emergence from
the nucleus signals the transformation of a proton into a neutron and the demotion of
that element one step in the periodic table. Antimatter is frequently produced in the cosmic
ray collisions with the air we've discussed, and as we shall see, antimatter played an
absolutely crucial role in the first moments of the universe when all matter was born.
Relativity theory is the theory that allows us to explain both the consequences of faster-than-light
travel and the mechanism by which antimatter arises. We'll begin with the former since
it is important for deepening our understanding of space and time, and we'll end with
the latter because it plays such a central role in the early days of the universe when
the building blocks of our atomic historians were created.
Let's start with the challenge I offered a couple of lectures of ago. Define time.
Not only does subjective time that we experience in our lives flow at different rates, we have
seen that relativity tells us that even objective time, kept by accurate clocks, runs at rates
dependent on one's velocity. My old cosmology professor, Ted Harrison, had a good metaphor
for time, although I'm not sure I'd endow it with the definition. He called time a wave
of vividity, and he drew it like this. At the moment we are now, our vividness is at
a peak. I vividly feel the lights on my face, the pencil in my hand, the paper under my
other hand. The moment is vivid. A minute ago, things were almost equally vivid. I was
standing here talking into the same cameras with the same lights and the same paper and
the same pencil in my hand. Yesterday, well, that's a little less vivid. I don't remember
exactly what I was doing at this time yesterday. A year ago, I certainly don't remember precisely
what I was doing, so the vividity index falls off, and generally slopes away close to zero.
I certainly don't remember what I was doing when I was two years old. There are little
peaks occasionally. For example, it's still very vivid to me the time when the zipper
on my jacket got stuck in first grade, and the teacher had to rip it off over my head,
including taking with it my shirt, such that I was standing half naked in front of my first
grade compatriots. So there are vivid moments like that. The wave of vividity also extends
a little bit into the future sometimes. If I step off the curve in New York without looking
and turn to the left and see a bus only two meters away, it's very vivid to me what's
about to happen. Still, this is a nice analogy for time, but it's not a definition of time.
We agree that time and space are not absolutes anymore once we adopt the theory of relativity.
Is there anything that all observers can agree on? They can't agree on time. It runs at different
rates. They can't agree on simultaneity. They can't agree on distances. They can't
agree on masses. Is there something that's absolute and invariant for all observers?
The Greeks recognized that one could calculate the distance between two points on a two-dimensional
plane using the Pythagorean theorem. You have a coordinate system with an origin. You have
an x value and a y value. You plot the point at that location and you draw a line. If you
take x squared plus y squared, it's equal to the distance d squared between the two
points. The 17th century mathematician, René Descartes, generalized this to a three-dimensional
world, the one in which we live. If you draw a three-dimensional graph on the piece of
paper and plot a point at some position x, y, and z in or out of the page, then the
distance from the origin to that point, d squared, is simply given by x squared plus
y squared plus z squared. Einstein now has generalized space and time into a four-dimensional
spacetime. One might expect, in this case, that the spacetime interval, d, will be given
by d squared equals x squared plus y squared plus z squared plus t squared, but as usual,
in relativity, one's common sense notions are incorrect. In fact, in relativity, the
spacetime interval, the distance between two points in the four-dimensional spacetime,
d squared, is equal to time squared minus space squared, where space here is meant to
stand for the three normal dimensions, x, y, and z, and where the minus sign is an indication
of the bizarre properties that spacetime has. This spacetime interval, d, defined in this
way, is in fact invariant. All observers will always agree on this interval between two
points in spacetime. They disagree, as I've said, on lengths in space and intervals of
time. They disagree on whether or not two events are simultaneous, but everyone agrees
on d. It will turn out that the shortest distance, the shortest spacetime interval between two
points, is not a straight line, yet another bizarreness of relativity. To represent spacetime,
we simply draw what we call a spacetime diagram, with one dimension of space, usually that
on the x-axis, and one dimension of time, which we draw on the y-axis. Now, in reality,
we would try to represent the full four dimensions, but I have trouble even drawing three-dimensional
figures on a two-dimensional piece of paper, so let's stick to the one x-dimension for
now as representing the dimension through space, and the y-axis being the dimension
through time. To make this easy to interpret, we label the axes, such that the time axis
say is labeled in seconds, and the x-axis is labeled in light seconds, that is, the
distance light travels in one second. Or, if we're talking about events out in the
universe, we might label the y-axis in years, and the x-axis in light years, the distance
light travels in a year. This diagram is made up of many, many events. A point in this
diagram represents an event, because it is something that happens at some particular
place in space, at some particular moment in time. The place in space is located on
the x-axis, the place in time is located up the y-axis, and a point there represents
the event. An object sitting still in a space-time diagram is represented by a straight vertical
line, because time is certainly passing for that object, but it's not moving anywhere
in space. We call this a world line. An object traveling from one point to another
at a constant speed in the space-time diagram looks like a tilted world line, because it
is moving through space, so along the x-axis, as time passes, so it makes it a tilted line.
Accelerating objects are a curved line. They start off standing still, so a vertical line,
and then they gradually tilt away more and more and more as they cover more space in
a given amount of time. Light has a very special place in the space-time diagram. With
the axes labeled conventionally, since light travels one light second in one second, two
light seconds in two seconds, light will be represented by lines at 45 degrees, covering
one light second in one second, two light seconds in two seconds. Drawing the two diagonal
lines from a given location forms what we call the light cone, because it looks sort
of like a cone. The light cone divides the diagram into a time-like part, containing
an absolute past and an absolute future, and a space-like part, which is at present unreachable
by the observer at the point where the lines cross, and contains relative past and future.
For example, if you're sitting here at the origin of these two 45-degree lines, anything
in the backwards part of your light cone you've already seen, because light from any point,
any event, an explosion, a birth, a death, in that back-life cone, the light will have
to have time to reach to you, and you will already know about it. The things in the forward
part of the light cone you absolutely have not got to yet. An event happening there will
not come into your ken until you reach that point in the diagram. But an event that happens
outside of the light cone is neither in your past or your future, or rather, it could be
both in your past and in your future. It could be in your past in the sense that if you drew
a line horizontal across the diagram from where you are today, you might think everything
below that is in the past. But as I discussed in talking about Betelgeuse, the star in Orion
that's about to explode, if the star is 400 light years away, and it exploded 300 years
ago, we won't know about it yet, because it will lie outside of our backwards light cone.
Only as we move forward in time and our light cone encompasses more and more and more of
the space-time diagram will the supernova eventually come into view. The invariant space-time
intervals, D, reveal interesting aspects of the diagram and of reality. The longest space-time
interval between points A and B on a stationary world line, that is, a vertical line, is that
distance, the straight line that connects points A and B, because D squared is time squared
minus space squared, and the space motion in that case is zero. You're in the same place,
you're at the same point on the x-axis. So T squared minus zero is the maximum amount
that you can get. A shorter interval would be obtained by traveling away from the location
and then returning again, because the same amount of time has gone by, but you get to
subtract off the space through which you've traveled. We'll see how this works in a moment.
We actually saw this effect when discussing the atmospheric muons last time. Let's see
what that situation looks like on a space-time diagram. From our perspective, the muon has
to travel a long way through space, from the top of the atmosphere over here on the x-axis
to the earth over here on the x-axis. Now it's traveling very close to the speed of
light, so it's almost at a 45-degree angle. What kind of space-time interval does it go
through? Well, it goes through that amount of space and that amount of time, D squared
equals T squared minus x squared, and you see it's a very small space-time interval
which it's gone through. It looks like a long time to us to get there, that's its moving
clock running 100 times slower than normal, but in space-time it's a very short distance.
From the muon's perspective, it sees the earth rushing upon it as soon as it's created
and a tiny interval later slamming into it. It lives what it thinks is a normal amount
of time, a small amount on the time axis, but that's okay because it doesn't have very
far to go. The space-time diagram shows how the unusual situations, the non-common-sensical
situations of relativity, are easily explained. The property of space-time, represented by
this effect, gives rise to the famous twin paradox. Suppose you have a twin who becomes
an astronomer, an adventuresome type, who decides to go off on an interstellar journey.
You, well, you'd rather stay at home and watch teaching company DVDs. So here's you
on the diagram, staying at home in the same place as earth, in the same space as earth,
staying at home in the same place as earth as a vertical one. And here's your twin that
goes accelerating away and then cruising at nearly the speed of light, off perhaps to
see whether Betelgeuse is really going to explode soon. He gets there, takes his measurements,
decides that an explosion is imminent, and promptly turns around to return and alert
the astronomers on earth so they'll be ready for this monumental event. Tragically, when
he arrives back home, he finds two things have happened. First, everyone already knows
the star has exploded, and second, his twin is dead. Let's analyze this scenario on the
space-time diagram. Because we're talking about traveling hundreds of light-years through
space, we'll label the x-axis in light-years and the y-axis in years. Now, here's you,
your vertical word line indicating that you're sitting still on the earth. And here's the
path of your twin's trip out to the vicinity of Betelgeuse and then back again. What happened?
After he started his return, the star exploded. And while he was traveling fast, the light
from the explosion traveled precisely at the speed of light, spreading out in all directions,
and in particular, moving towards earth at light speed, faster than his rocket could
travel. Obviously then, it arrived before he did, so the explosion was old news by the
time he returned. In addition, we must calculate the space-time intervals represented by your
journey through space-time and his. Your journey, sitting there watching the DVDs, is given
by d squared equals t squared minus x squared, and since the space you covered was limited
to that between your couch and the refrigerator, it's essentially t squared because the space
squared is zero, especially on this diagram where the x-axis is labeled in light-years,
one light-year being six trillion miles. In this scenario, 801 years has gone by since
your twin left on his journey. It's very likely, I'm afraid, that your personal word line
will end before 801 years is up. Your twin, however, will have covered a distance d squared
equals t squared minus x squared, but in his case, x squared is a very big number, he's
gone 400 light-years out and 400 light-years back. If, for example, he were traveling
at 99.9 percent the speed of light throughout most of his journey, the space-time interval
through which he has traveled, going from the time he left to the time he returns at
Earth, is only 36 years. So he'll be a little older, but just fine. There to meet your great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-grandchildren.
But wait, you should be saying, I thought you said last time that the situation was symmetrical.
I see his clock running slow because he's moving, but he should see my clock running
slow too, so why aren't I here to greet him? Well, remember, remember the conditions of
Einstein's postulates. They hold in situations where velocities are constant. Clearly, if
you accelerate from Earth to nearly the speed of light, go out to Betelgeuse, turn around,
and come back, your velocity isn't constant. I've slipped a new condition into this story.
Accelerations are involved. These accelerations and decelerations, when he turns around at
Betelgeuse, violate the strict conditions in which special relativity applies. General
relativity, which took Einstein another 11 years to figure out, takes care of this, so
the situation I've described would occur the way it does, but the simple equations of the
relativistic transformations I've taught you don't really take that into account.
The special role of light is apparent on the space-time diagram. The space-time interval
experienced by a photon, D squared, moving from here to here on the diagram, is zero.
Because it's the time squared minus the space squared, and since by definition this is a
45-degree line, those two distances are equal. T squared minus X squared equals zero. Light
does not experience space-time. The photons we will meet, which come to us from the very
edge of space and time, haven't gotten tired along their 13.7 billion-year journey. No
time has lapsed for them at all. Now, different observers draw different space-time diagrams
because each observer believes he or she is sitting still and is therefore represented
by a vertical line. The lines of one observer traveling with respect to the other will be
tilted with respect to each other. We just take the whole graph and rotate it, since
each observer thinks he or she is stationary. However, most importantly, the light cones
on these tilted space-time diagrams do not tilt because the speed of light according
to Einstein's second postulate is constant for all observers.
Space-time diagrams make it easy to illustrate the consequences of faster-than-light travel,
the first of the two keys of relativity I want to talk about today. Consider a scene in which
you are standing in a room, looking out the window, and see a nasty little kid pick up
a rock and hurl it at the window. So, space-time diagram we draw T on the Y axis, space X on
the X axis, we draw a vertical line for your world line, a vertical line near you representing
the window, and a vertical line farther away representing the kid who picks up the rock.
The sequence of events that you see is clear. The kid first picks up the rock, then you
see the kid throw the rock. These are all represented by light cones on the diagram as time moves
forward, and then you see the rock hit the window, and then you see the window break.
It's only common sense. Now, imagine instead, this is a high-tech kid that has a laser gun
instead of a low-tech rock. His aim is the same, to break your window. Let's plot what
you would see in a space-time diagram in this scenario. Well, the kid is born down here
sometime, he grows up, he enters your past light cone so you know of his birth, the kid
picks up his laser gun, and he fires the laser gun. The laser, of course, is just light,
so it travels along the light cone. From your perspective, it A, leaves the gun, B,
hits the window, and C, you see it simultaneously, because it travels at the speed of light,
and that you can't see anything that happens before the light ends just to reach you. Now,
this does not mean that light takes no time to travel this distance through space. Light
has a finite velocity, 300,000 kilometers per second. And so, velocity equals distance
over time, that means time equals distance over velocity, d over 300,000 kilometers a
second, that's a real number. It takes a finite amount of time for the light to get from the
laser gun to your window. However, it does mean that the light does not experience space-time,
its space-time interval is zero, and it means you do not see a gap between the time when
the gun is fired, the window breaks, and that information reaches your eyes. The gun really
did fire before the laser beam got to the window, but you cannot observe that because you can
only observe the light. Now, here's the challenge for you faster than light people. Consider
that the kid, rather than a rock or a laser, has a hyper rock that can travel faster than
the speed of light. Again, we draw the space-time diagram, time on the y-axis, space on the
x-axis, the vertical line for you, the vertical line for the window, out which you are observing
the scene. The sequence of events, if we draw the kid and the hyper rock in this way, comes
to you as follows. The window breaks, the kid is born, and then he throws the rock.
Now, this situation is not forbidden by the laws of relativity. Indeed, my late colleague,
Gary Feinberg, invented tachyons, theoretical particles that behave like hyper rocks that
go faster than the speed of light, and Gary worked out all their properties. They're
a little bit strange. They travel backwards in time. They have negative energy, etc. Gary
was a connoisseur of science fiction and would not be unhappy to see today that his tachyons
have gained life in popular literature, although he certainly didn't expect that their presence
would ever be discovered in the real universe because traveling faster than light eliminates
cause and effect. It is not forbidden by relativity. Relativity has nothing to say on the subject
except to allow one to compute the properties of entities that travel faster than the speed
of light. The price for allowing it, however, is abandoned cause and effect, all ye who
enter here. As a brief aside, I should note that it is the speed of light in the vacuum
of space that no object with mass can match. Light actually travels more slowly through
matter, through air, through glass, through water, and it is possible for particles in
air to exceed the speed of light in air, although not the 300,000 km per second limit. Indeed,
we actually observe particles. Traveling through air faster than light travels through air.
When they do, they emit a ghostly little blue light, which is called Cherenkov radiation.
And we've actually detected this signal in our atmosphere with telescopes, where the
signal is produced by high energy cosmic rays that we keep discussing that slam into
the atmosphere and make the radioactive isotopes and muons that we've discussed. While travel
faster than light in a vacuum is not happening. Antimatter is another matter, so to speak.
One of its most bizarre properties is that it disappears when it encounters normal matter.
Now I mean disappears completely. Its mass no longer exists. This would seem to violate
the law of conservation of mass, that pillar of 19th century science that was so central
in the development of both chemistry and of physics. And indeed, it does violate that
law. You start out with a proton and an antiproton. Both of them are perfectly well-defined objects.
They both have mass. You can put them on a scale. They weigh 1.67 times 10 to the minus
24 grams. Yes, it's a small number, but that's okay. They have mass. You can record it. You
bring them together. You end up with zero. M equals zero, precisely. Again, relativity
comes to the rescue to explain the circumstance. Yet another consequence of Einstein's two
postulates and the redefinition of time and distance they require is that mass is not
constant either. As we saw last time in the relativistic transformation, mass is one of
those relative properties which depends on the speed of the observer. M prime equals
M divided by the famous square root of 1 minus u squared over c squared. Pixel on the train
looks even fatter than he does in reality to me standing on the ground. This notion
alone already does violence to the idea of conservation of mass. But the full implications
of the theory of relativity go well beyond this. By following the logical consequences
of relative times, distances, velocities and masses, and developing additional such concepts
like relativistic momentum and rest mass energy, but without involving any terribly complicated
mathematics, one reaches remarkable conclusion that mass and energy are equivalent quantities,
that you can convert one to the other as long as the total of the two is constant. The famous
expression of this equivalence, perhaps the most famous equation of all time, is E equals
Mc squared. E is the total energy, M is the mass, and the proportionality constant between
them is c, unsurprisingly that speed of light again which keeps showing up everywhere, the
speed of light squared. If one has a photon, the ultimate expression of pure energy, absolutely
zero mass, it can spontaneously, if it has enough of that energy, turn itself into a
particle, antiparticle pair, both members of which do have mass. You can catch them,
you can put them on a scale, and you can weigh them. Symmetrically, any antiparticle
particle pair that meets up will quickly annihilate, their masses disappearing completely into
the energy of a photon that speeds away, obviously exactly at the speed of light. Einstein's
relativity provides yet another example of how on scales with which we cannot be intimately
familiar, in realms far from the direct experience of our senses, things can be very different
than they are in our prosaic world of human scales. Having yet to discover tachyons, we
must rely on photons traveling merely at the speed of light to bring us information about
the most distant reaches of space and therefore of time. In particular, we are now prepared
to examine the oldest photons in the universe, the afterglow of matter, antimatter annihilation
in the Big Bang itself, in order that we may complete our history of the atoms and their
constituents.
