Relativity has provided two critical results that we'll need in our search for the ultimate
origin of matter and the beginning of history. First, that mass and energy are equivalent
and inter-convertible. A photon with zero mass, a packet of electromagnetic energy,
can spontaneously split into two particles, a particle and an antiparticle, both of which
have mass. And vice versa, the combination of particle and antiparticle can eliminate that
mass from the universe and turn it into pure energy. Secondly, that space and time are
inextricably linked. Looking out into space is, quite directly, looking back into time.
To read the history of the universe, we need only turn the pages by looking deeper and deeper
into space. We are ready then for the final quest, to find the very first atoms, to learn
of their history, and then to push on to the creation of the electrons and the quarks from
which they are made. As we'll become clear, we cannot see the creation event directly,
but clues written in the photons which we can see allow us to tell a remarkably precise story
about what must have gone on in the first microsecond of the universe.
It was 80 years ago, in 1929, when we first recognized that the Milky Way was not the universe.
This achievement was the result of the work of two men, one of whom you have likely heard of,
and the other of whom you almost certainly have not. Edwin Hubble, who is familiar because of
his eponymous telescope, and Vesto Schleifer, who languishes in undeserved obscurity.
Schleifer was another of the younger astronomers, like Douglas of the Tree Ring fame, hired by
Percival Lowell to nightly chart the progress of the advanced civilization he thought existed on
Mars, digging away at their canals. Like Douglas, Schleifer had very little interest in Mars and
set out on another project of his own, to measure the motions of the spiral nebulae.
In addition to the billions of stars one sees in a telescope, scattered across the sky,
and the dark clouds where new generations of stars are formed, as I have shown you,
there are little spiral pinwheels of light that exist throughout the sky.
In the early part of the 20th century, these were in fact fought to be solar systems in
formation, a not unreasonable idea in that I told you real solar systems did not exist,
from collapsing spinning clouds, which end up with a ball in the middle, the star,
and a thin disk around them, which make the planets. So these little pinwheels look like
they might be solar systems in formation. But it wasn't clear, and Schleifer set out
to see if he could measure their motions, and if that would tell us something about their origins.
Well, waiting for them to move across the sky in a lifetime would never yielded anything of
interest. So instead, Schleifer looked at the motion towards or away from the earth.
He did this by using an effect, which is familiar to you, although the name may not be,
the Doppler effect. The fact that any object emitting a wave, when it comes towards you,
has the waves squished together, and therefore for sound raises the pitch, for light shifts
the light to the blue, and then as it moves away from you again, spreads out the wave
peaks, such that for sound, the sound is lower, and for light, the light is redder.
You've all been familiar with this from hearing a truck go by on a highway, or an ambulance
approaching, and then receding. The sound is characteristically, nyu, high pitch, nyu,
when it's coming towards you, because the waves are squished together, and the distance between
the peaks is small, and nyu, lower as the waves are spread apart, as they are spread apart,
lower as the waves are spread apart, as the object disappears. I can demonstrate that with
this little beeper here, as I spin it around, you'll hear the pitch change, high when it's
coming towards me, and low when it's going away. That's called the Doppler effect, and it works
for light, just as it does for sound. The light squishes closer together, means wavelengths
shifted to the blue, the light waves stretched farther apart, means wavelengths shifted to the
red. Now, to measure this, one can't just simply take a picture and see if a spiral nebula is blue
or red. The shifts for reasonable velocities are tiny. What one has to do is take advantage
of the unique barcode of spectral lines of, for example, hydrogen, with photons whose energy is
known precisely because they correspond to the jump of an electron from one orbit to another.
This means it's painstaking work. In the early part of the 20th century, photography was well
developed, but photographic film was a really poor recorder of light. The reason we've all shifted
to digital cameras these days is because photographic film typically converts about 1% of the light
falling on it into a signal, whereas digital cameras operate in efficiency closer to 90%.
The spiral nebulae were very faint, and so Sleifer had to carry his photographic glass plate out to the
telescope in the dark, of course, slide it into the camera, expose all night, carefully moving the
telescope as the object tracked across the sky, and then carefully take the plate out in the morning,
make sure it was covered in black paper, take it back to the dark room and store it, and come back
the next night to repeat the measurement. Typically, it would take a week of a single exposure to get
a measurement of the positions of the lines to measure the Doppler effect. In fact, between
dropped plates and cloudy conditions and the work that he had to do for Lowell looking at Mars,
it took Sleifer nearly 15 years to get 21 good measurements, but the result was quite remarkable.
17 out of the 21 spiral nebulae he observed were moving away from us, that is, their lines were
shifted to the red. This is really quite astonishing if you imagined a universe in which things are
randomly moving around. It's like getting 17 heads out of 21 flips of a coin. The odds against that
are nearly 100,000 to one. Enter Edwin Hubble. He was focusing on trying to measure the distances
to these same spiral nebulae. He had in fact, using the new large telescopes on Mount Wilson,
outside of Los Angeles, resolved individual stars in these systems and no longer believed
that they were clouds of gas, but separate galaxies, as he called them, other island universes,
like our own, expanding enormously the scope of the universe. The distance he calculated to each
galaxy was based on measuring the pulsations of stars whose intrinsic luminosity he knew from
studying them in the Milky Way. These stars expand and contract slowly with time, as I've mentioned,
with periods ranging from weeks to months. It turns out that the amount of time they take to go from
maximum to minimum and back again is directly proportional to their intrinsic luminosity,
and so having determined this in our galaxy from nearby examples, he then used the same
kinds of stars in other galaxies to measure their distance. Combining his results with Sleifers,
he discovered a remarkable result. The farther away a galaxy was, the greater its redshift,
the faster it was moving away. Here's Hubble's data. We plot on the y-axis the velocity of
the galaxy in kilometers per second. Negative velocities by convention mean objects moving
towards us, positive velocities are velocities moving away. We see that there are a few galaxies,
a handful, three or four, that are moving towards us at a few hundred kilometers a second. Indeed,
the nearest large galaxy to our own, the Andromeda Galaxy, and our galaxy are moving towards each
other at about 350 kilometers a second, and a few billion years from now, they'll actually collide.
Now, a colliding galaxies aren't quite as drastic as they sound because the star separation, remember,
is enormous. The orange here in Washington and the orange in Minneapolis, if you throw a bunch
of oranges separated by that distance from each other, they're very unlikely to hit head on.
The galaxies will basically pass right through each other, but the orbits of the stars will
indeed be messed up. However, if we look at the majority of the galaxies in Hubble's data,
we see they're moving away from hundreds up to more than a thousand kilometers a second.
Furthermore, by plotting their distance from Hubble's measurements on the x-axis,
we see that there's a correlation between these two quantities, that the nearby galaxies are the
only ones that are coming towards us or moving away at modest speeds, whereas the farther we go
away, millions of light years out into space, the faster the galaxies are running away.
Even more astonishing. The naive interpretation of Hubble's observation is very disturbing.
If all the galaxies are running away from us, it would seem that we must be the center of the
universe. Furthermore, if the farther away they are, the faster they're fleeing, then they must
know we're here and where we are. Both these thoughts violate something we call in cosmology,
the cosmological principle. That principle is that we do not occupy a special place in the universe.
Now, as a human-generated notion, the cosmological principle could of course be incorrect.
Nonetheless, it's worth trying to think of alternative explanations for Hubble and
Slyther's extraordinary discovery of the galaxies fleeing from us.
The simplest alternative is that space-time itself is not static, but that the space between
the galaxies is expanding. If space-time is stretching, the distance between all pairs of
galaxies will increase. We don't need to be the center. Any galaxy you sit on will be running away,
will see all the galaxies running away from it. Furthermore, the greater the original distance
between two objects, the faster the distance grows as the space-time expands uniformly in between.
The galaxies arrayed on the surface of a balloon illustrate this effect. So here I have a little
nighttime black balloon with a bunch of little galaxies affixed to it. As I blow up the balloon
or expand the space-time, you'll see that the galaxies which are barely separated by a finger
width now move apart. Now they're separated by up to three finger widths, and the two galaxies that
were initially farthest apart moved apart faster still. Now they're back together from the universe
shrinks. Let's see how this works in one dimension rather than doing a two-dimensional model like
this because it's confusing enough as it is. The observation of Hubble and Schleifer is that we
sit in a place where all the galaxies are running away from us. Let's take a one-dimensional analogy
here. Imagine a ruler made of rubber that's 12 inches long and affixed to it are four galaxies
separated by different distances from each other. Now let's imagine we take the end of that ruler
and we stretch it. We stretch it at the rate such that it doubles every 30 seconds or expands by
24 inches per minute. Let's look at what happens to each pair of galaxies. Well, the galaxy at the
origin of the ruler, of course, stays at the origin of the ruler. That will be, say, our galaxy.
And so its point has no velocity and is plotted at a distance of zero.
The next galaxy out, which is located at the two-inch mark on the ruler, begins life two
inches away. But as we stretch the ruler, ends up after 30 seconds, four inches away,
and after a minute, eight inches away. So it's moving away at four inches per minute
when it's initially started two inches from us. That gives us a second point on this graph of
velocity versus distance apart. Now let's look at the third galaxy. It starts out life five inches
away from us, and as we stretch the ruler, that distance goes to 10 inches to 15 inches to 20
inches as we keep doubling the size of the ruler. So it's moving apart at 10 inches per minute
when it started out five inches away from us, a third point on the graph. Finally, the last
galaxy, which starts out at the opposite end of the ruler, begins life, of course, 12 inches away,
and then as we double the size of the ruler goes to 24 inches away. So it's moving away at 24 inches
per minute having started at 12 inches from us, a fourth point on the graph. Now, of course,
we connect the dots. The line on the graph rises from the lower left to the upper right just like
Hubble's galaxies did, which we interpret as saying that the velocity with which they're moving away
increases with their distance from us. This looks like a nice straight line, and you may recall from
9th grade algebra that the equation for a straight line is that y equals mx plus b, where y is the
value of the y-coordinate, x the value of the x-coordinate, b the intercept with the y-axis,
which here is 0, so we can ignore, and m, the slope of the line, the slope being calculated by the
change in the y divided by the change in x. Here we have 12 inches per minute on the y-axis,
and 6 inches on the x-axis, giving us a slope of 2 inches per minute per inch.
This is effectively Hubble's law. In Hubble's case, we replace the y-axis with the velocity
of the galaxy in kilometers per second. The distance on the x-axis is the distance in millions of
light years, and the slope, which we name H in honor of Hubble himself, gives us the rate at
which galaxies are moving away, v equals h times d, where h is roughly 20 kilometers per second
per million light years. That is, for every million light years that go out into the universe,
a galaxy is moving 20 kilometers per second more away from us. The space is uniformly stretching
in all directions, or as we usually say, the universe is expanding. Thus, knowing that v
equals h times d, we measure h using nearby galaxies, as Hubble initially did. We measure the
velocity by using the Doppler effect, which is a very straightforward observational technique,
and we can find the distance equals v over h, two quantities we know, the distance of any galaxy.
This result was extremely ironic for one Albert Einstein. His 1916 model of general relativity
was dynamic. It had spacetimes that either expanded or contracted willy-nilly, and he was
very concerned about this, so he added a fudge factor called the cosmological constant to make
the universe static. Once it was discovered that the universe indeed was expanding,
Einstein referred to this as his greatest blunder. Numerous independent lines of evidence
confirm that the universe is indeed expanding from a much denser phase in the very distant past.
This is our framework for interpreting all of our observations, and is called the Big Bang model.
The redshift induced by expansion provides a handy way to measure the distance of even
extremely remote objects. Since all hydrogen atoms in the universe are identical, a theme I've
been repeating throughout this course, the transitions of their electrons between energy
levels lead to well-known emitted wavelengths. For example, the jump in the hydrogen atom between
level two and level one corresponds to an energy difference of 10.4 electron volts,
as we saw in lecture three, which produces a wavelength of light of 121.6 nanometers
in the ultraviolet part of the spectrum. In the ultraviolet spectrum, unless, of course,
that light is redshifted. By measuring the observed wavelength, which is observationally
straightforward, we can tell how rapidly the galaxy is moving away from us, and therefore
using Hubble's law how far away it is. The ratio of the observed to emitted wavelength
gives the factor by which the universe has expanded since the light left that emitting galaxy.
As the waves travel through space, and the space itself expands, their crests grow farther and
farther apart. As you can see on my white balloon here, we have a little wave, which if it's moving
through a space time that stationary will always have the same distance between its crests. But as
we stretch the space time, the distance between the peaks of the waves gets wider and wider.
That, in effect, is the redshift. It's not, technically speaking, the Doppler effect,
something moving through space. It's the space itself stretching, rendering the wavelength
longer and longer. Having measured the rate of expansion using objects of known distance,
the redshift thus directly gives the objects distance, and the most distant galaxies we've
detected are at a redshift factor of 6.5. That means the radius of the universe,
since the light left those objects, was about 7 times smaller. The universe was 7 times 7 times
7, this dimension, this dimension, and this dimension, or 350 times denser at that point,
because as we shall see, the number of fundamental particles has not changed since that time.
The light left these galaxies 12.9 billion years ago. How can we use this ancient light
to learn more about the history of atoms? A few minutes after the Big Bang,
only six types of nuclei were present in the universe. Two isotopes each of hydrogen, helium,
and lithium. Normal hydrogen, a single proton, and heavy hydrogen, deuterium, a proton with one
neutron. Light helium, helium-3 that we encountered first in the nuclear processes that power the
sun, two protons and one neutron, and normal helium, alpha particle, helium-4, two protons and
two neutrons, and finally lithium, the third element of the periodic table, which has either
three protons and three neutrons or three protons and four neutrons. Nothing else was present because
nothing with more neutrons and protons had a chance to form. Now the relative amounts of each of
these isotopes provides an extremely strong constraint on the earliest moments of the universe.
Measuring their robust abundances from a distance of nearly 13 billion light-years
is certainly a challenging task. At this time, most of the matter had not yet
collapsed into galaxies and was spread more or less uniformly through space in tenuous clouds.
The initially densest regions, however, had strong enough gravity to be able to have collapsed,
and some produced giant black holes, a billion times the mass of the sun, which gobbled up all
the surrounding material at a prodigious rate. This is the first mention of black holes in 23
lectures. When I give public talks, the first question, no matter what I speak about, is usually
about black holes. But you'll have to save those questions for another lecture series because we
don't have time to talk about them now. Here, all we need to know is that they're massive objects
which gobble up matter and in the process shine brightly. Yes, it sounds ironic, we call them
black holes and light can't escape from them, but as the matter spirals into them, it heats up to
very high temperatures and before it plunges over the edge of the horizon of the black hole,
it emits enormous amounts of light. In fact, one of these black holes can easily generate
a thousand times more energy than a galaxy of a hundred billion stars, and so can easily be seen
across the vast distances involved. Most galaxies today have these black holes,
so we're not surprised to find them as relatively common in the early universe.
Our galaxy has a particularly wimpy one, it's only about 3.6 million times the mass of the sun,
but most galaxies have masses of black holes between a hundred million and a billion times
the mass of the sun, and indeed these holes play a major role in the development and evolution
of galaxies. In any event, as the shining light from these black hole beacons passes through
the clouds of gas along the way, deuterium, heavy hydrogen atoms, absorb that light at the precise
wavelengths corresponding to their electron jumps, which differ ever so slightly from those of normal
hydrogen because of the difference in the mass of the nucleus. Again, not because gravity is involved,
but because as the electron orbits the nucleus, and the nucleus orbits in turn,
the heavier one moves less than the light one, and so the energy levels are shifted ever so
slightly, producing different wavelengths of light. Detecting both normal hydrogen and heavy
hydrogen in the same cloud allows us to calculate their abundance ratio. Since this gas is unpolluted
by the effects of nucleosynthesis in stars, indeed very few of any stars have formed yet,
it represents the value of the primordial material formed in the Big Bang itself.
And the answer is 30 deuterium atoms for every million hydrogen atoms.
Deuterium is relatively rare, for a reason we'll explain next time.
The other four isotopes are much less abundant than hydrogen, deuterium, and helium, and they're
very difficult to measure at high redshift, so their determinations are made more locally.
Galaxies which have yet to experience much star formation, which have taken very little of its
gas and process it through stars, which create heavy elements, are relatively pristine samples
of primordial material. Also, the very oldest stars in our own galaxy, the first generation to form,
some of which are still around because the small stars, as you recall, live a very long time,
are likewise made of material very close to that original composition.
From these observations, the primordial abundances appear to be as follows.
Helium 4, what I've said from the start is the second most abundant element in the universe,
at about 22%. Helium 3, at about 50 parts per million. Lithium 7, at only 3 parts per billion.
And lithium 6, still undetected at less than one part per trillion. Our instruments are just
not sufficiently sensitive yet to see this tiny amount of expected lithium 6.
These abundances are key to constraining the conditions in the first three minutes of the
universe. Just as in the cores of stars where the other elements are made, the number of each
type of atom created is extremely sensitive to the temperature and the density in the nuclear
cauldron where nuclei are created. We shall see next time how this works in the Big Bang.
The oldest photons in the universe are not from these gobbling black holes back 12.9 billion
years in time, but are even older than that and provide us with a direct picture of the structure
of the universe and the conditions which obtained when it was a mere 380,000 years old.
The most distant individual light sources, these black holes, have been discovered to lie at
around 12.9 billion years away. When that light was emitted, the universe was roughly 850 million
years old. It may well have taken that long for the diffuse gas to collapse through the gravity
and form objects, these massive black holes and stars, bright enough to see. The initial stars,
I might note, were quite different than stars in our galaxy today. Because of their lack of any
heavy elements, because of any ions other than hydrogen and helium, the pressure inside the star
of the light flowing out, which today limits stars to a maximum mass of around 80 solar masses,
lests the star be blown apart by the energy radiating from its core, the lack of things to
push on heavy elements in the early stars meant they could grow to 200, 300, 500, maybe 1,000,
maybe 2,000 solar masses. So they were impressive stars indeed. We've never seen one of these
individually yet, although the James Webb Space Telescope to be launched in the next decade
has one of its primary goals to find these primordial stars. But the black holes are there.
In any event, those individual objects come from a time when the universe was hundreds of millions
of years old. However, observing the sky at microwave wavelengths, at wavelengths of electromagnetic
radiation ranging from a millimeter to a centimeter, one can see a uniform diffuse glow coming from
every part of the sky. Not individual galaxies or individual stars, but a uniform background,
a glowing bright sky. It is never nighttime in the microwave part of the spectrum.
We call this glow the cosmic microwave background. And analyzing its spectrum gives us the remarkable
result that it fits perfectly to the glow of a uniform black body, just a warm object like a star
or the oven in your house at a temperature of precisely 2.726 degrees above absolute zero.
Its temperature and intensity are uniform to one part in 100,000 over the entire sky.
To picture one part in 100,000, picture the Empire State Building, which is about 1,000 feet tall,
and an ant standing on top of the antenna of the Empire State Building. The difference between
those two, which you could hardly notice with your naked eye, is the maximum to the minimum peak of
the microwave background. Remarkably uniform. But there are tiny fluctuations in temperature,
which are indicative of a slight neuron uniformity of the densities and temperatures even earlier in
the universe. Here it is. The baby picture of our universe. Photons emerging from a time when
the universe was only 380,000 years old, which may sound like an old baby to you, but when you're
13.7 billion years old, that's really from your youth. The color codes here represent
that slight temperature changes. Blue is the coolest spots, red is the hottest spots. It looks
very modeled. That direction may be red, that direction may be blue. But again, the fluctuations
are minuscule. They've been magnified here with the color scale. They're only a part in 100,000.
This radiation came from the moment when the first atoms formed, a mere 380,000 years after the Big
Bang. Prior to this time, the entire universe was too hot, more than 3,000 degrees, the temperature
of the surface of a star, for hydrogen atoms to form, that is, for protons to capture electrons
and keep them bound in orbits. Since collisions between the atoms and the photons that were
running around everywhere would immediately knock any electron away again that tried to
attach itself to a proton and make hydrogen. With all these low mass, speedy electrons running
around freely, photons couldn't travel very far before they bumped into one and changed direction.
When further expansion cooled the universe, as the stretching of space times shifted the
peaks of the wavelengths apart so the temperature effectively fell, just below 3,000 degrees,
the hydrogen atoms could form and the photons were no longer energetic enough to knock them apart.
All the electrons quickly bound up to atoms and the photons were allowed to flow freely in a
straight line through space, directly to us 13.7 billion years later, captured by our telescopes
where we observe them as the cosmic microwave background. If you go outside at the end of
this lecture and turn your face to the sky, 1,000 trillion of those cosmic microwave background
photons will hit your face every second. You will literally be bathing in the glow of the Big Bang.
Analysis of this radiation provides us with the most accurate estimates of the parameters
that describe the Big Bang model. They give us the age of the universe as 13.72
plus or minus 0.12 billion years, a measurement of the age of our cosmos accurate to nine tenths
of one percent, almost as good as Bishop Usher. It tells us the amount of matter in our universe
is 4.56 percent with an uncertainty of only three tenths of one percent of the total composition
of the universe. What? The matter I've been telling you about for 23 lectures makes up only
four and a half percent of the universe? I'm afraid that's true. It's a secret I've been
holding from you. 95 and a half percent of the universe is made of something else. What?
We don't know. We're ignorant. We know it's of two types. And to cover our ignorance,
we call one dark matter and the other dark energy. Dark matter makes up 22.8 percent,
dark energy, 72.6 percent. They are the subject for another course. And finally,
the microwave background gives us the Hubble constant to supreme accuracy also. It's 21.6
plus or minus 0.4 kilometers per second per megaparsec. We have now seen directly then
in the cosmic microwave background when the first atoms formed. We are about one step removed from
our final goal to discover how and when the building blocks of atoms, electrons, protons,
neutrons, and quarks came into existence. Using the information from the primordial element abundances
and the cosmic microwave background, we are now prepared to go beyond where we can see directly
to the first moment of the universe.
