Lecture 2, Play-Doh, Kicking Out the Poets
Ironically, Play-Doh is both the first literary critic and the first critic of literature.
Though himself a great literary talent, Play-Doh, when fashioning his ideal state in the Republic,
decided it would be best if the poets not be allowed to remain.
In this lecture, we shall consider first why Play-Doh kicked out the poets,
then why he should not have kicked them out,
and finally, what his enduring legacy has been to all those theorists who had followed him.
Now, first of all, most of you are probably familiar with the Republic.
It's one of Play-Doh's longest dialogues, and in this, they're discussing what justice is.
What is justice? They're trying to define it.
And what Socrates, he's the speaker always, Socrates slash Play-Doh,
what Socrates decides is the best way to figure out what justice is, is to blow it up onto a big scale.
In other words, let's construct a perfectly just society, or state, or republic.
Then once we've figured out a just republic, we can work our way backward to a definition,
a sort of abstract definition of justice.
Now, once he starts to develop his republic, I guess he gets carried away.
And he doesn't just describe the republic, he describes every detail of it.
And of course, an ideal republic has to have ideal leaders.
He spends most of his time discussing the education of the leaders of that society.
We call it the guardians. How will they be taught?
And by the way, any of you interested in education, you have to read Play-Doh's republic,
because it is the origin of education studies as well.
Now, after describing in detail what the guardians should and should not read,
in book 10, he decides that for the good of all, that the guardians should not read poetry,
and that in fact, the poets should be kicked out of the republic.
Now again, in the first part, I'm going to describe to you why he kicks those poets out.
So let's begin there.
First of all, why Play-Doh kicked out the poets?
Behind his reason is a deeper, metaphysical, philosophical reason that has to do with Play-Doh's concept of mimesis.
You'll remember from Lecture 1, mimesis is the Greek word for imitation.
Now, Play-Doh's concept of mimesis branded poetry as an unreliable source of truth,
and his republic is all about truth and justice and perfection.
Now, how does this work?
For Play-Doh, our physical world of becoming is but a shadowy reflection or imitation,
mimesis, of the unseen world of being.
Many of you are familiar, let's go over this quickly.
For Play-Doh, he turns everything on his head.
For most people today, even religious people, this world is the real world,
and up there is the shadowy world.
Even if you believe in heaven, it's still sort of shadowy.
This is the real world.
Play-Doh turns it on its head.
Up there, heaven, what we call heaven, that's the real world.
That's where everything is in a state of perfection,
and he calls that world the world of being,
because everything there is perfect, it's in a state of being,
it's not moving or becoming something else, it's perfect.
And as many of you know, in the world of being are the forms.
The ideas or perfections of everything exist up in the world of being.
They are perfect, unchanging, eternal, and they are also non-physical, non-bottling.
Now, our world, he calls it the world of becoming.
Our world is a world of change, a world of death, a world of decay.
Our world is not eternal, we're stuck in time, things grow old and die.
Now, for Play-Doh, everything in our world of becoming is an imitation of something in the world of being.
Play-Doh's famous example, in our world of becoming, we have lots of different kinds of chairs,
all different sizes and shapes and colors, but they're all recognizable as a chair.
And that is because all of our physical earthly chairs are an imitation of the form of the chair,
which exists in the heavens.
What we call chair with a capital C or chair-ness, if you will.
So the idea of the chair, the chair with the capital C is up here.
Our chairs down here are imitations, shadowy imitations of what's real.
Now, that works with physical objects like chairs and trees and tables,
but it also works with ideas.
In our world, there's love. There's all different kinds of love.
None of it's perfect because it's always changing and fickle.
But all earthly love is an imitation of the form or the idea of love that exists in the heavens.
So there's a form of love, love with a capital L that's up there.
Everything in our world is a shadowy imitation of love with a small L of that reality.
Again, it's a different way than we think now.
And again, another way to put it, again, everything in our world from objects to ideas
is but a pale copy of the perfect, unchanging originals of these objects and ideas.
Now, where does art come in?
Alright, art is not just an imitation for Plato.
It is an imitation of an imitation.
Let me explain.
If I were to write an ode to a chair, I am not imitating the chair up in the world of being,
the chair with the capital C.
I am imitating the physical corporeal chair, the chair with the small C.
Now, look how this works.
In other words, my poem is an imitation of a chair that is itself an imitation of the chair with a capital C.
In other words, my poem, or it could also be a painting, any work of art,
but my poem particularly is an imitation of an imitation.
It is therefore twice removed from the forms, which means, again, twice removed from reality.
And so what good is it?
It also works with ideas.
If I write an ode to love, a love poem to my beloved,
I am not imitating love with a capital L in the world of being.
I am imitating the physical love with a small L.
And so, again, my poem is an imitation of an imitation.
Again, since it is an imitation of an imitation, it is twice removed from reality.
And as such, it is an unreliable source of truth and can only lead astray those who study it.
You see, for Plato, you know, if you're going to be a philosopher,
and many of you know eventually he wants his kings to be philosophers,
the leaders of his state are philosopher kings,
and so their education is an education in philosophy.
The word philosophy in Greek means what?
A lover of wisdom or a friend of wisdom.
And so he wants his leaders, his guardians, to know truth,
the real essence of truth.
If they spend their time studying poetry, again,
they're studying something that is twice removed from truth,
twice removed from reality.
And if you spend your time with imitations of imitation, shadows of shadows,
what's going to happen?
You're going to become confused.
You're going to start worshiping imitations rather than the truth.
To put it in a sort of Christian term, you're going to be worshiping idols,
God with a small g, rather than God with a capital g.
So that is the metaphysical reason why Plato kicks the poets out of the Republic,
because for Plato, Minesis takes us away from truth
and therefore is going to dilute the truth of his Republic.
But there is another reason that's perhaps more practical.
According to Plato, poetry appeals to the weaker, inferior side of our psyche.
Now the word psyche in Greek means mind, and it also means soul.
At the same time, we don't really have a word for that.
Sometimes we mean that by psyche.
So a psychologist is not only a study of the mind, but a study of the soul.
So when I use the word psyche, Plato means both our mind and our soul,
the sort of spiritual, intellectual part of us.
And according to Plato, poetry appeals to the weaker, inferior side of our psyche.
According to Plato, our psyche is divided up.
There is a rational side and an irrational side, and an irrational side,
and there's a mediating side.
Freud's idea of the id, the ego, and the superego, some of you are familiar with,
that comes from Plato, this idea of a tripartite soul.
So there's a rational side and an irrational side.
And of course, Plato, very much interested in rationality,
wants his leaders, his guardians, to have a bigger rational side, if you will,
than an irrational side.
Now, unlike things like philosophy and math and music,
these things, he says, are apprehended by way of our rational powers.
When we study things like philosophy, it is the rational part of our soul that apprehends those.
On the other hand, poetry, being fanciful,
engages the other part of our psyche, the part that is illogical and irrational.
And a way we often use to speak of this is by referring to the
Apollonian and Dionysiac side of our soul.
Nietzsche talks about this in The Birth of Tragedy.
What he means by it is Apollo in Greek mythology,
is the God of order and rationality and music.
So the Apollonian part of our soul is the rational part,
the part that is intellectual, that is cool and calm and stoic.
That's the rational part that Plato wants to emphasize in his guardians.
On the other hand, the irrational part is linked to the God Dionysus,
also known as Bacchus.
He is the God of wine, women and song.
He is the God of fraternities and colleges, right?
And the Dionysiac part of our soul is the part that's wild and ecstatic.
The followers of Bacchus or Dionysus would get drunk and they would be sort of possessed.
And they would do wild irrational things.
Now, why does Plato not want to appeal to our irrational side?
Well, there's two reasons.
The irrational part of our soul, he says, is unreliable in matters of truth.
If you start emphasizing the irrational part and poetry does that, he says,
then you're going to have guardians who are a farther away from the truth.
The irrational part of our soul takes us away from the truth.
But there's another reason.
According to Plato, the irrational Dionysiac part of our soul is unstable.
You know what it does?
It induces us to partake in public displays of emotion.
I teach it about to school.
No PDAs, no public displays of emotion, right?
Between the boys and the girls.
Now, Plato doesn't actually say this, but he sort of genders these things.
The Apollonian side is more masculine.
Men are supposed to be intellectual and rational, right?
And the Dionysiac side is supposed to be more feminine, more emotional, more intuitive.
Now, Plato tends to privilege the Apollonian.
There are others that focus on the Dionysiac.
So poetry appeals to the weaker side.
That's bad.
Finally, a third reason why he kicked the poets out.
For him, poetry is a kind of madness or contagion.
There's another dialogue, a brief dialogue Plato wrote called the Ion.
And in this, Plato is talking or Socrates is talking to Ion.
Ion is a Rhapsod.
A Rhapsod is a public reciter of poetry.
He would take Homer and he would recite it publicly to an audience.
He was called a Rhapsod.
And they discuss, okay, Ion is excellent at Homer.
He can read Homer and understand Homer and make Homer come alive.
But he can't do that with any other poet.
They're trying to figure out why.
In the Ion, they're trying to figure out what is the source of Ion's rhapsody.
And behind that, what is the source of Homer's poetry?
Well, the upshot of the Ion is that Plato asserts that poets do not write,
nor Rhapsods speak by art or skill, but by possession.
He believed that poetry is a form of possession or contagion.
Homer is possessed by the gods or whatever, and Ion is possessed by Homer.
Now, according to Plato, neither the poet nor the Rhapsod understands rationally what he creates.
He is rather carried away irrationally by divine inspiration.
So poetry, poetic inspiration, is something Dionysiac.
It's a kind of possession, like getting drunk on wine.
And that is not good.
Now, this inspiration, which is really a kind of madness, has a way of passing its way down.
It starts with the gods, if you will.
It passes down to Homer.
From Homer, it passes down to the Rhapsod.
But from the Rhapsod, it passes down to the audience.
Plato uses a wonderful analogy of a magnet with three rings.
You know, you did this when you were a kid.
You put one ring, and then you can attach another ring to the first ring, and they'll all string out.
Well, there are three rings.
The magnets are the gods.
The first ring is Homer, the poet.
The second ring is Ion, the Rhapsod.
The third ring is the audience.
And so what happens is madness passes from one to the other to the next.
You know what I'm saying?
What Plato's saying?
Poetry is like wood stock.
Okay?
It's madness.
It's mass hysteria.
And we've got to stop this.
Okay?
None of this craziness.
That's kind of a modern analogy for what Plato saw as the problem with poetry.
Now, Plato does actually allow some kind of poetry.
He does say at the end of Book 10 that he will allow in his republic two kinds of poetry.
One is poetry that's hymns to the gods, and the other is a poetry that praises state heroes.
To him, those kind of poetry appeal to our patriotic, Apollonian, you know, rational side.
And so he does allow that kind of poetry because it is functional within the state.
Every other poetry has got to go.
Now, I think you all know anybody that's read Plato's Republic,
you always say, I don't want to live there.
It's more like a fascist state.
And in a way, this is a kind of censorship.
So those are the reasons why he kicks the poets out.
Now, I want to do something.
Have a little fun.
I'm going to give you some reasons why I think Plato should not have kicked out the poets.
First of all, Plato said that mymesis is bad because it takes us away from the truth.
Let's think about that.
Wait a minute.
What if mymesis does not have to pull us farther away from the truth?
Perhaps the poet does not imitate an imitation but captures in the physical form of the poem
the invisible essence of the forms.
Plato's taking for granted that when I write my poem about love,
I am imitating earthly love with a small L.
What about if I as a poet am bypassing the earthly love and jumping right up to love with a capital L
and capturing the essence of love?
Now, this is a higher form of mymesis.
And in the next lecture, when we look at Aristotle,
that's pretty much going to be Aristotle's view.
Aristotle's going to give us a high view of poetry because he's going to have a high view of imitation.
So we'll come to that later.
But that's a way to answer Plato.
Mymesis is not farther from truth, but it brings us closer to truth.
All right.
He says it's bad because it appeals to our irrational side.
But rather than arouse the irrational side, might poetry not purge our irrational side?
Think about it.
Since our emotions are an essential part of our psyche,
might it not be best to release these emotions in a controlled public setting?
Might art not serve a therapeutic function to cleanse us of excess emotion?
Even Plato admits that the irrational part of our psyche is a part of our psyche
and cannot be gotten rid of.
You can't just cut it out like a lobotomy.
There's going to be an irrational part of our soul.
So let's think about it.
Maybe rather than ignoring it, maybe poetry can help us deal with it, purge it as a way of letting out our emotions
and then purging them away.
So again, Plato maybe didn't think about that.
Maybe he didn't agree with this.
But again, poetry may not worsen our irrational side.
It may make it better.
Now we will return to this in lecture four because Aristotle's notion of catharsis,
a word probably you're familiar with.
We'll talk about that in lecture four.
Aristotle's notion of catharsis is just that.
Poetry purges excess emotions.
Irrational, quote, feminine emotions purges it away.
All right.
A third defense, another reason why Plato should not have kicked out the poets.
He said poetry is divine possession.
Well, if poets are possessed, might not the gods be trying to speak to us?
Might they not be having something to say, Plato?
Let's think about this.
In his dialogues, Plato uses a method of question and answer that's known as the dialectic or Socratic method.
Many of you are familiar with the Socratic method.
You arrive at truth through a series of questions and answers.
We also call that the dialectic.
Don't confuse that with Marx and Hegel's dialectics.
It's a little different.
The Platonic dialectic, the Socratic method, is a way of arriving at truth through question and answer.
The trouble is whenever we try to understand justice, we all have a view of justice with a small j.
In other words, we have an idolatrous view of justice.
We have a bunch of little justices, but we don't understand justice with a capital J.
What Plato's doing with his dialectic is through question and answer he is ripping away all of those false idols
so that we can pierce through the false idols to see the truth behind
or pierce through the world of becoming and its imitations to arrive at the world of being.
Now that's how Socrates or Plato's dialectic works.
Well, think about it.
If that's true, might not the divine madness of poetry be another way to rip away the veil of ignorance?
Excuse me, and misperception in order to reveal truth?
In other words, in the same way that question and answer rips away facades,
maybe the divine power and possession of poetry can also rip away all of these accretions.
So again, he should have thought about that.
Now this view and basically what I'm saying is maybe the poet's a prophet.
In the same way that the prophet John in the book of Revelation rips away the veil
and allows us to see what God is doing in history, maybe poetry is a form of prophecy.
And so it's a divine possession, but it's a possession that brings us closer to truth.
Indeed, might not the poet be even more a prophet than the philosopher?
This idea will be picked up in the romantic poets that we'll look at in Unit 4,
the concept of poet as prophet.
Let's look at a couple more reasons why Plato should not have kicked out the poets.
First of all, Plato himself was one of the greatest poets who ever lived.
Plato's dialogues are themselves recognized as a unique literary genre.
They're not poetry, per se, but those dialogues are wonderful.
They are literature in the highest sense.
So it's ironic how can he kick out poets when he is himself a poet?
Indeed, and here's a great irony,
Plato, I believe at least, is much easier to understand than Aristotle
precisely because his dialogues are filled with imaginative metaphors.
We're going to see in Lectures 3 and 4 that Aristotle raises the view of poetry.
He disagrees with Plato and gives us a high view of the poet.
But the ironic thing is that the reason Aristotle is so difficult to understand
is because Aristotle is not a poet at all.
Aristotle is a very systematic, logical, positivistic thinker,
and it's like reading an outline.
And so I find Aristotle very difficult to understand because there's nothing to latch onto.
Plato does what we try to do in the teaching company,
illustrate everything we say with metaphors and analogies that you can relate to.
Well, Plato does that. He's the master at that.
Listen, if you want to know Plato, don't read criticism of Plato.
Read Plato himself.
Plato is easier to understand than most of the books that are written about Plato
because Plato's never abstract. He's direct and he's full of metaphors.
He is a poet.
In fact, many times, Plato will consummate and concretize his philosophical points
with a memorable myth or allegory.
Remember I told you the Republic is about justice?
Well, after that long abstract dissertation on what justice is,
do you know how the Republic ends?
It ends with what's called the myth of Ur.
It ends with the myth about life after death and reincarnation
and how the things we do in this life affect our afterlife and our next incarnation.
In other words, in the myth that concludes the Republic,
he takes the abstract idea of justice and embodies it in what is basically a poem, a myth,
and makes it easier to understand.
He does this at the end of the Fedrus with this image of the horseman.
Remember I said we've got three parts of our soul, rational and irrational and the mediator?
He gives us an image of a charioteer and he's trying to write a chariot
or guide a chariot that's led by one crazy horse and one sane horse.
Well, that's an image of id ego and superego.
And as soon as he does that, you understand it because it's a myth, it's a poem.
And he does this in the symposium.
He does it in Tenaeus. He does it many, many places.
Let me give you an example from the Republic again.
In the Republic Book 9, the book that comes right before the kicking out of the poets,
Plato makes political science come alive by describing the natural progression from timarchy,
ruled by the honorable, to oligarchy, ruled by the few, to democracy, to tyranny.
He described that progression in terms of the tragic fall of a great house.
Let me explain.
If Aristotle did this, he would have spoken in very abstract terms
about these different political systems and how one gives way to the other.
But do you know how Plato does it? The poet.
What he does is he gives us a man who is a timarch
and that man has a son who becomes an oligarch
and his son becomes a democrat and his son becomes a tyrant.
And so the natural progression of political science is embodied in the history of a family.
And all of Greek tragedy is about the fall of a great house,
the house of Oedipus or the house of Atreus.
And so again, Plato's a poet.
In fact, Plato's so-called ideal republic is itself a giant poetic construct.
Plato himself says, many people miss this,
he himself says that his republic does not exist anywhere and it was never meant to exist.
According to Plato, the republic is merely a parable writ large,
a way to uncover the nature of truth.
By the way, do you know, you all have heard of the story of Atlantis, the myth of Atlantis?
That comes from another one of Plato's dialogues.
And he uses the Atlantis story to give us an example of a just society that went bad.
And I really don't think Plato was suggesting there was a real Atlantis.
He was using it as a poem, as an allegory, as a myth.
So I hope I've given you some good reasons why Plato should not have kicked out the poets,
and these reasons will come again and again.
Finally, in the last five minutes, I would like to explain to you
Plato's enduring challenge to literary theory.
Why do we always start literary theory with Plato?
At the close of Republic 10, the book where he kicks out the poets,
Plato issues a serious challenge.
Plato says that he will allow the poets back into the republic
if they can prove by means of some formal defense that poetry is okay.
Let me explain what he says.
Again, he kicks them out, but he says, I don't want to kick them out.
I love the poets.
Plato loved Homer.
He said, I don't want to do it, but I feel I have to.
But if somebody can prove to me that I shouldn't, as I kind of have tried to do,
I'll let them back in.
Interestingly, he says that this defense can actually be written
either in prose or in verse.
Isn't that funny?
He said the defense can be written in poetry.
And this defense, Plato says, has to prove two things.
First of all, it must prove that poetry has a useful function in a well-ordered state.
In other words, Plato says, prove to me that poetry is useful,
that it can not only please but teach, have a didactic function,
and I'll let them back.
The other one, you also have to prove, not only must you prove that poetry is useful,
socially useful, you must also prove that poetry does not deceive,
but rather enhances our knowledge of truth.
And so we've got to defend poetry on both a moral and a philosophical level, if you want,
both that it's useful and didactic and can teach,
and that it is not metaphysically unsound.
And he says, if you can prove this to me, I will let the poets back in.
Well, I want to claim here that this challenge that Plato lays down at the end of the Republic
is the very reason for being, what the French call raison d'etre,
the very reason for being for literary theory.
Nearly all critical theory mounts a defense in one way or another
of the philosophical or moral status of poetry.
In other words, almost every essay that we're going to look at in this course
until the very modern stuff is going to be an answer to Plato in one way or another,
proving the moral usefulness of poetry or the philosophical truth of poetry.
That, in a way, you could almost argue that's what literary theory is, that's why it starts.
It starts as a way to defend poetry.
Now, there are two ways to deal with Plato,
and we're going to see both of these ways as we go through our series.
All theorists construct themselves in one way or another.
Either they are going to counter Plato by creating a separate sphere for poetry.
In other words, one way to deal with Plato is to say,
Plato, you're being unfair.
You are judging poetry by philosophical criteria.
That's unfair. Poetry is something different.
And so one way to deal with Plato is to say, this is philosophy and this is poetry.
They serve different functions, and both of them are good.
That's one way to deal with Plato.
The other way, and I think this is more fun,
the other way is to actually co-opt Plato.
In other words, to present Plato as the highest kind of poet
and poetry as the highest kind of philosophy.
So in other words, one way to do it is to actually turn Plato on his head
and say, we don't need philosopher kings, we need poet kings.
And by the end of this series, you are going to see that poor Plato
is going to be turned around and around and around in his grave.
That poor man is not going to have any rest.
Now, I've got to say, though, that I am glad Plato issued this defense
because by putting literary theory on the defensive, he made literary theory better.
Why? Because after Plato, it won't do to say, oh, I think poetry is great
because it makes me feel good.
I get a smile in my face.
None of that, you know, saccharine, simple, mickey mouse thinking will do anymore
because Plato says, if you're going to defend poetry,
you've got to be as rigorous and philosophical, perhaps theological as I am.
And so what Plato did, again, is he added a kind of rigor or philosophical discipline
to the whole art of literary theory.
If you're going to defend the usefulness and philosophical truth of poetry,
you've got to answer the master himself, Plato.
And so you better do your homework and you better be very, very precise.
All right, in our next lecture, lecture three, we will turn to Aristotle
and we will look at how Aristotle gives us a higher view of Mimesis.
Thank you.
