Lecture 6 Longinus on the Sublime
In this, our second lecture on neoclassicism, we shall shift our focus to Longinus' treatise
on the sublime. We shall explore Longinus' view of the proper nature of sublimity and
enumerate his rules of thumb for achieving it. We shall next analyze his pragmatic approach
to theory and his influential conception of the ideal audience for sublime literature.
Finally, we shall watch with awe as Longinus mounts a direct refutation of Plato's republic
that not only converts Plato's negatives into positives, but transforms Plato himself into
one of the most sublime poets of all time. Now, I should say that on the sublime, like
Aristotle's poetics, is a very systematic work. It almost reads like an outline, very
logical like a proof, and it's very easy and clear to read. Something important. The author
of this work on the sublime is traditionally called Longinus, but we now know that it was
not written by him. Longinus is a later figure. We now know that it was written by an anonymous
writer, almost surely in the first century AD, perhaps two generations after Horace.
He's still living in Rome, but a little bit past the Golden Age, the second half perhaps
of the first century AD, but I will call him Longinus. He continues to be called Longinus.
In his work, Longinus attempts both to define the nature of the sublime and to lay down methods
for achieving sublimity in writing. This will remind you of Aristotle's two-prong approach
where he first discovers the elements that make it great and then sets down criteria
to reproduce it. Pretty much Longinus is doing the same, but specifically for what we call
the sublime, which I will define in a moment. Now, the main focus of this work is poetry.
Sublimity is pretty much linked to poetry, but he does give examples of prose, Plato's
prose particularly. Let's give a definition. Sublimity refers to a certain type of elevated
language that strikes its listener with the mighty and irresistible power of a thunderbolt.
When you hear the sublime, you are bold over by it. Unlike rhetoric, which merely persuades,
the sublime overwhelms its audience, literally carrying them away to a higher realm of experience.
Now, you can use the sublime to persuade, but rhetoric just wants to get you to agree
with them. Sublimity doesn't just want your assent. It wants your soul, if you will. It
wants to carry you away, overwhelm you, just knock you over, again, like the thunderbolt.
The sublime is so powerful that it has the power to unite contradictions. There's a Latin
phrase concordia discourse, which means unity out of disunity or concord out of discord.
What happens is that the sublime is so powerful, it takes things that are even opposite and
fuses them together. All different ideas and emotions can get all suddenly fused together
in what we might call the crucible of the sublime. Another aspect, a sublime passage,
can be heard again and again with equal pleasure. No matter how many times you hear it, it's
ever fresh and new and you're overwhelmed all over again. That's an aspect of the sublime.
Indeed, the sublime and its power to transport us transcends both time and space. And what
I want to do now for a second is recite to you an example of sublime, because I think
that's the best way of doing it. And what I'm going to do is recite for you the last
15 lines or so of Tennyson's famous poem, Ulysses. Ulysses is the Latin name of Odysseus.
And in this poem, Ulysses has returned to Ithaca. It's three years after his return
and he's bored. He wants to leave and go on one last adventure, one last epic sea journey
to discover the unknown. And in the passage I'm going to read, it's the last part of the
poem, he's calling on his mariners to join him on this one last quest for adventure and
discovery. See, if you are overwhelmed, Ulysses says,
Come, my friends, tis not too late to seek a newer world. Push off and sitting one on
a smite, the sounding furrows for my purpose holds to sail beyond the sunset and the baths
of all the western stars until I die. It may be that the gulfs will wash us down. It may
be that we will touch the happy isles and see the great Achilles whom we knew, though
much is taken, much abides. And though we are not now that strength which in old days
moved earth and heaven, that which we are, we are. One equal temper of heroic hearts
made weak by time and fate, but strong in will to strive, to seek, to find, and not
to yield. Now that's an example of sublumity. It's a work of poetry that carries us away.
When I listen to that poem and I can recite it again and again and hear it again and again
and I'm transported again. It's as if I join Ulysses on his journey. I'm taken away to
this, I don't know, this higher realm, this world of being, if you will, another place
of a higher mode of being or of existence. And you can hear it again and again and it
still has the same power. That to me is the sublime. Now, I told you that this is a systematic
work and so Longinus, like a good mathematician, not only tells us what sublumity is, but what
it is not. This is sort of like that Socratic dialectic. I told you that Platonic dialectic
where you wipe away what is false to get to what is true. Let me tell you three things
that Longinus tells us the sublime is not before we go back to the positive. First of all,
sublumity is not bathos or bombast. What is that? That is all that overwrought, pseudo-tragic
claptrap that we associate today with melodramatic soap operas. You know, like a bad silent movie
where everybody's, oh, ah, with all this tragic posing and you're trying to be serious, but
the subject matter does not befit this kind of treatment. We call that bathos, that's
an older word. We still use the word bombast. It's similar to our word pompous, which really
means full of hot air, pomposity. That is not what the sublime is. Even if the language
is beautiful, if the subject matter does not fit that treatment, it's bombast. It's not
sublumity. Another thing, sublumity is not. It is not inflated hyperbolic language that
is used inappropriately to heighten subjects that do not merit such treatment. In other
words, to go back to Horace, it's not a purple passage. It's not something that you do just
to impress people, but that doesn't belong there. Again, sublumity is not just pretty
words. There's got to be feeling and ideas behind it. We'll hear more of this as we go
along. Finally, sublumity is not merely the use of fashionable expressions or fanciful
images. It's not just some kind of high class literary, literati kind of thing. It's not
just being refined. Sublime is more than that. Let's come back now and talk more about it
from a positive point of view. In a famous phrase, Longinus says that sublumity is the
echo of a great soul. On the surface, such a phrase would suggest that sublumity lies
totally in the realm of genius and is thus limited to those born with a gift. If you
think of the echo of a great soul, that alone suggests this is genius. You're either born
with it or you're not. You either have a great soul or you don't. Indeed, part of Longinus
is genius. Let me give you an example where the genius side of the sublime, as opposed
to the art side, comes out. Longinus believed it was a better thing to produce one great
work of sublumity than a hundred faultless but passionless poems. You can write the most
beautiful, lucid, fluid. I mean, just have complete control of poetic medium. But if
it doesn't have the requisite passion and sublumity, then it's going to be forgotten.
And again, he actually said better to write one sublime passage than a hundred that are
faultless but not very good or not very sublime. The example I like to give is a great dramatic
monologue, a poem by Robert Browning called Andrea Del Sardo. This is a poem that's based
on a real person. He was an artist, a Renaissance artist who was a contemporary of Raphael and
Michelangelo. And he was known as the faultless pager because Andrea Del Sardo, if he could
imagine something or see it, he could reproduce it on the canvas flawlessly. Everybody envied
him because anything he saw, he could reproduce. But you know what the problem was? Andrea
Del Sardo lacked the passion. He could draw whatever he imagined, but his imagination
was limited. And so even though Raphael and Michelangelo and Leonardo have flaws, their
sublime passion rises them above Andrea Del Sardo. So again, there's that aspect of genius.
To a certain extent, you're born with it or you're not. However, Longinus does make it
clear that the sublime is the mixed product. Again, if you take it out of context, it sounds
like only genius. But if you read the whole thing, it's clear that genius and art both
have a role in the sublime. In other words, there is a component of skill involved in
the sublime. Again, we've got the debate we've looked at and we'll look at again between
genius and art, that perennial debate. Now actually, Longinus, like most neoclassical
writers, is going to come a little bit more to art, despite what I told you. I know he
contradicts himself a little bit here. But again, just a little bit of edge to art because
if you can't reproduce it, what's the point of writing a systematic treat is telling you
how to do it. There's got to be some art involved. In his work, Longinus, after telling us what
sublimity is and what it is not, Longinus proceeds to lay down five sources of the sublime.
He actually gives us five sources and two of these sources, we can link to genius. The
other three, we can link to art. So again, there's a little bit of balance towards art
if you do it numerically. Let's look at the genius qualities, first of all. The first
two sources of the sublime are grounded in an innate ability to conceive great thoughts
and feel great passions, great thoughts and great passions. And really, those are finally
gifts of genius. It's hard to learn to have great thoughts or great passions. I mean,
you can expose yourself to great art, but to a certain extent, if you're really going
to have these great thoughts and passions, that's really a gift of genius. A Horus in
one of his poems speaks about he on whom the muse breathes, the goddesses who inspired
poetry. So there is that genius side. You have to be born with this big soul. However,
the final three out of the five all lie within the scope of art. They constitute a craft
that can, through hard work, be acquired. And the word craft in Greek is the word tekne.
That's an important word. It's actually the source of our word technology. But tekne means
craft or art or skill. And there's a tekne of writing poetry. There's a tekne of pottery,
a tekne of shipbuilding, a tekne of weaving. I mean, so this idea that actually goes all
the way back to Hobart, and it was important in Plato, this idea of the art. And there
is, again, a skill to the sublime. Let's look at that way that works. These sources, the
three that are linked to tekne, have to do not with the thoughts and passions themselves,
but with how they are embodied in words, that's one, syntax, two, and poetic figures, three.
So it's not enough to have great thoughts and great passions. You need to embody those
in the proper, again, words and syntax and poetic figures. Poetic figures are like metaphors
and similes and symbols and whatnot. So again, I think if you're listening to me, you're
realizing that we've got a touch of decorum here. We've got an idea of fitting, of great
thoughts and ideas fitted to the proper words. And so even something as awesome and powerful
as the sublime also has to obey the rules of decorum. There has to be a fittedness between
the words and the passions. Now, one of the ways Longinus explains this to us is he actually
quotes copious passages from classical poetry of the sublime. He actually quotes the book
of Genesis. It's interesting. When God said, let there be light, he sees that as a very
sublime moment in terms of poetry. And he also quotes Homer and he quotes Sappho. Some
of you have heard of the famous woman poetry, but love poetry in the classical world. And
what's interesting is some of Sappho's poems only survive because Longinus quotes them
as examples of the sublime. So it's kind of interesting. Longinus has actually preserved
some poetry for us that would have otherwise been lost. Very interesting. All right, let's
turn to another aspect of Longinus. As a neoclassicist, Horace helped to establish ground rules
for the craft of poetry. We're going to look at those ground rules more in lecture eight,
but I want you to realize that all neoclassicists in one way or another set down ground rules,
not just a quorum, but rules and regulations. That's neoclassical. Let's look at some of
Longinus's ground rules. First of all, he believed that there must be an appropriate,
rational, organic relationship between form and content. Sound familiar? It should. Decorum
don't mix genres, but he states it again in his own way. According to Longinus, the
high and the low, the serious and the comic must never be allowed to mix. Again, he believes
in decorum. He uses different words, but again, there's a sort of sphere in which neoclassicists
often work and decorum is one of them. Another thing, and we heard this before, according
to Longinus, but he develops it more than Horace, poets should attempt to mimic in the sound
of their poetry the sense that they are trying to convey. And this is even more important
in sublime poetry than any other kind of poetry. Sound and sense. Longinus is, that's
important to him. Finally, according to Horace, I'm sorry, according to Longinus, the best
kind of art hides itself. It seems more natural than nature herself. And let me go back to
those classic Hollywood films I love from the 30s and 40s. They're a perfect example
of art hiding itself. If you see a lot of foreign films, they love to play with camera
work, and they love to point the finger at the camera. As opposed to Frank Capra would
be the classic embodiment of Hollywood style. He is a master of camera movement, Frank
Capra, but he never points attention to the camera work. We feel the impact of it, but
it's never center stage. In that sense, that's very much a Longinian and a Horacean idea
that art should hide itself.
All right, let's turn to another aspect of Longinus. Longinus is in part a pragmatic
theorist. Remember we said pragmatic theories, the poem, and the audience. Like Horace, he
is interested in the audience. And indeed, as we have already seen, Longinus defines
the sublime not just in terms of its nature and essence, that's a mimetic view, what is
the essence or nature of the sublime, but he's also pragmatic because he defines the
sublime in terms of the reaction it elicits in its audience. When I define the sublime,
or Longinus defines the sublime, as something that carries away or transports the audience,
that's pragmatic, right, because it's the impact on the audience. Now, he develops though
from Horace because he tells us that the best audience for the sublime is a refined, cultivated
one. Again, we saw a little bit of this in Aristotle. Such hearers, the refined, cultivated
audience, such hearers have sensitive souls that are uplifted by sublimity. In fact, only
such an audience is able to judge the relative sublimity of a work. The only person capable
of really judging whether something is sublime as opposed to bombastic or hyperbolic is if
they are sensitive and refined. If they're not, they're not going to be able to do it.
Let me give you an example of an audience that cannot judge the sublime. Teenagers who spend
all day listening to rap music and heavy metal have no subtlety and could never distinguish
the sublime. They're used to being blown over with loud music and all this stuff. They do
not have the discriminatory powers. We'll talk about this idea later in some other lectures,
but we start to get this idea of the refined audience. Now, this attitude, which is central
to neoclassicism, is somewhat aristocratic and elitist, is it not? Since the audience
longinus desires must be free from the low and vulgar thoughts that generally accompany
rustic toil. If you're out working as a peasant breaking your back, you're not going to have
time to refine yourself. So we can say this is a little bit elitist and aristocratic, but
I don't know that that's a problem. Today in our modern democratic society, if it's
a elitist, it must be bad. I don't know. I think that's one of our prejudices being
in a democratic country. I don't know that it's necessarily bad. Neoclassical literature
and neoclassical theory is very much in the ambit of courts and royalty and aristocracy.
Think about Handel's water music. That's something that aristocrats listen to. That's
very neoclassical, very baroque, as opposed to Tchaikovsky, where even the peasants listen
to it. Again, there's a difference here between the neoclassical and the romantic, and of
course we'll come back to that when we get to romanticism. I just want to end by saying
that this attitude that poetry is really for an elite refined audience, that's not really
going to be challenged until you get to romanticism, where they start wanting to spread out to
the people. Now there is, of course, one exception, and that is Shakespeare, who's always the
exception to a rule. Shakespeare somehow had the ability to appeal to both audiences, but
how did he do it? Think he broke decorum left and right. In other words, how did he get
rid of the people in the gallery? It's the sword fights and the pageants and whatnot.
So the reason he was able to move beyond the neoclassical audience was because Shakespeare
broke neoclassical decorum, so he is an odd figure, Shakespeare.
Finally, and this is my favorite part of Longinus, Longinus answers Plato's attack on the poets
by turning Plato on his head. Believe me, by the end of the series, Plato's going to be
dizzy from spinning around in his grave. Consistently, Longinus presents Plato as himself a master
of the sublime. I love this. Plato would say, don't do me any compliments here. He's having
fun. He actually quotes passages from Plato's prose as models of sublimity. I told you it's
mostly poetry, but when he quotes prose, it tends to be Plato. Plato's prose is as
sublime as epic poetry. He shows, Longinus shows, how Plato often gets caught up in a
swell of sublime passion. He shows that Plato, too, is carried away with sublimity in his,
and he actually quotes these. He proves it, so to speak, to us. Indeed, he argues that
it is often the poetic power of Plato's imagery that drives home his philosophical points.
I sort of alluded to this in lecture two, and it's true. To me, Plato really hits home
in his myths and his allegories. Some of you are familiar with the allegory of the cave.
That's when you really understand his metaphysics. I don't have time to go into the allegory
of the cave, but I mentioned to you the myth of Ur about life and death and rebirth. It's
really his myths that, I would say, concretize or embody. When I read those sublime myths
and allegories of Plato, that's when I understand him viscerally. You know that word, along
your viscera, along your veins and arteries. That's when you feel Plato. So it's when
Plato's the most sublime that I think he's the most persuasive and actually the most
easy to understand, if you will. Let's go more. He's not done with Plato. With great
irony, Longinus posits as the source of Plato's sublimity his near possession by the sublime
spirit of Homer. Isn't this wonderful? The reason Plato is so sublime is because he's
possessed, like the Ion, he's possessed by Homer. And I'll tell you, in the Republic
he quotes Homer again and again. And a lot of times Plato gets it a little bit wrong.
You know why? He's quoting from memory. Plato knows his Homer by memory and he quotes him.
In other words, what am I saying? The divine madness which Plato exposes in his Ion as a
form of contagion for Longinus, it is a higher form of mymesis. Sometimes critics deal with
the same reality, but interpret it totally different ways, partly based on their assumptions.
Indeed, what appears as possession is really a kind of wrestling, a struggle on the part
of Plato to exceed his poetic master. According to Longinus, there's a struggle with the Greeks
called an agon, a wrestling match going on between Plato and Homer. And out of that struggle,
out of Plato's struggle to outdo Homer, comes the great art.
Now, some of you may have heard of a critic at Yale, I believe, named Harold Loom. He
wrote a very influential book called The Anxiety of Influence. And what The Anxiety of Influence,
it defines an artistic and psychological need on the part of one poet to outdo his strongest
predecessor. In other words, what Harold Loom is saying is that if you're a poet living
today, you have got to beat out your predecessor, the great poet that came before you, to establish
yourself. This is very edipal. Isn't it the idea of the son having to rise up and slay
his father? So, again, Harold Loom doesn't say this, but I think he got it partly from
Longinus. But maybe it's an anxiety of influence, so he didn't tell us. It was from Longinus.
Now, for Loom, that struggle is sometimes good, sometimes bad, sometimes psychologically
good, sometimes damaging. For Longinus, the struggle is a good one. It is productive of
good art. To seek to imitate and exceed a past master, Longinus tells us, is not a
form of plagiarism, but of tribute. So, for him, it's edipal, but it's not so much, I've
got to kill Homer. I've got to imitate him and do better, but to do better is a kind
of tribute. So, it's kind of hard to entangle. Some of it sounds negative, some of it sounds
positive, but the idea is that there's a struggle, and out of that struggle comes sublimity
and comes great art. Let's add to this, according to Longinus, that same sublime spirit that
passes from Homer down to Plato, continues to pass down from Plato to his reader. We're
back to that magnet with the three rings I told you about in lecture two. This idea
of contagion, the only difference is, is that for Plato, that was, I called it, wood-stopped,
madness, craziness, everybody going wild. For Longinus, this is good. This sublimity
is passing down three levels. It's a good kind of madness. Indeed, for Longinus, this
inspiration ennobles and uplifts the soul of all those who come in contact with it.
It makes them richer, fuller men, and better, nobler citizens. This inspiration does not
make us worse. It makes us better. It uplifts and ennobles us, and makes us better citizens.
Finally, in the sublime conclusion to his treatise, Longinus not only offers his fullest
refutation of Plato, but defines the greatest threat to cultural refinement. Now, how does
he work up to this? First, Longinus laments that his age is not conducive to sublime art.
He just missed Horace's age by maybe 60 years, and like Aristotle, he felt that he was born
too late. Harold Bloom, to go back to him, calls this a sense of belatedness, a little
bit too late. Don't we all feel we were born too late? Oh, I wish I was a little bit earlier.
I would have been great if there's that feeling. Well, that's how Longinus felt. I believe
that one of the purposes of on the sublime is the same purpose as Aristotle's poetics,
namely, to inspire and equip a new golden age of poets. So he realizes, oh, I'm living
in an unheroic, unsublime age. Let me bring back sublimity. Alright, that's what he begins.
Then from there, he starts to tell us what it is that kills the sublime. Why is he in
a non-sublime age? And this is the fun part. Because at first, Longinus appears to suggest
that the ultimate threat to sublimity is tyranny. He sort of plays with us at the end of his
essay. He starts by making it sound like, if you've got a tyrant and you're a slave,
you can't have sublimity. But that's where he tricks us. With an unexpected, and I would
say sublime, turn, he reveals that there is actually something worse than the loss of
freedom. There is something that is anti-sublime even more than tyranny. And what that is,
the supreme killers of the sublime are materialism and hedonism. According to Longinus, and
it's kind of a moral ending, the lust for money and pleasure yields petty, ignoble thoughts.
It breeds both vanity and insolence and snuffs out the sublime spark of the soul. For Longinus,
even political slavery is better than that. I mean, if you are enslaving your body, at
least your soul is free to be sublime and to be creative and to overwhelm. If you are
materialistic and hedonistic and you think petty thoughts and are grubbing after what
they call filthy, lucre and pleasure, then that kills the sublime. What we today call
Philistineism. The Philistines who don't have a respect for art, that is what kills. If they
want to buy art, then that starts to kill the sublime. That is the greatest danger. According
to Longinus, the true sublime poet must rise above our petty world of cares. If you're
so focused on the material world and money grubbing and pleasure grubbing and all of
that, then your face is on the ground. Sublimity is something that rises above. It wants to
take petty thoughts and lift them up and make them sublime. What am I saying? And what
is Longinus saying? He's saying that sublime poets must, like the Platonic philosopher,
shun the false illusions of this world if he is to achieve his goal. And thus, ironically,
a treatise on poetry which Plato thought so deleterious to the morals of his republic
ends with a powerful moral critique of society. Let me stop and explain here. For Plato, it
is philosophy that makes us better and more nobler citizens and makes us rise above petty
cares. For Longinus, he turns it around. He says, no, it's not philosophy, it's sublime
poetry that makes us finally morally better because when you leave the world beyond and
look for sublimity, you're doing something that's quote, spiritual. And so the great
irony here is it's almost as if Longinus is suggesting, we don't need philosopher kings,
we need poet kings. It's poetry, not philosophy, that makes us more moral. And so once again,
Plato gets turned on his head. Instead of creating a separate space for poetry, he does the other
tactic I told you about. He shows us that poetry is in fact the highest kind of philosophy
and is what the perfect republic really needs. In our next lecture, we will jump ahead and
add almost 1500 years to the Renaissance to look at Sir Philip Sidney's great defense
of poetry.
