Lecture 7 – Sydney's Apology for Poetry
In this lecture we shall explore Sydney's great defense of the divine origin and social
utility of poetry and apology for poetry.
We shall discuss first how he praises poetry for being the cradle of civilization, for being
a channel of divine power, for teaching and delighting, and for combining and surpassing
the virtues of history and philosophy.
We shall then move on to show how Sydney refutes the main arguments made against poetry.
The first a few words about Sydney, his age and his essay.
Sydney was not only a great poet and critic, but he was a man of the world.
He lived during the great Elizabethan age, he was a contemporary of Shakespeare, during
the reign of Queen Elizabeth the 16th century, and we should remember that what we call the
Elizabethan age is really the English Renaissance, right, it begins in Italy and during the age
of Elizabeth the Renaissance makes it to England.
But Sydney is very much a Renaissance figure and what's interesting about him is again
in addition to poet and critic he was actually a soldier and a courtier, a man of the world.
And to me this is important because what better person to mount a defense of poetry.
I'm glad that poetry wasn't defended by what we would call a wimpy guy living up in
his garret.
This is a man of the world, he knows what we call Real Politique, he knows what it is
to live in the world, to fight pragmatism, and so again we don't have a fluffy kind of
man who has no strength.
He is somebody who knows what it is to be in the battlefield, knows what it is to move
in the court and so he is realistic.
And again I think he was the perfect person to defend poetry.
Now Sydney saw it as his task to revive the sinking reputation of poetry.
Again as I told you in the first lecture it is not just today that people have wondered
if poetry is worthwhile.
Poetry has always had its critics.
And like all the critics, let me use the different word here, now I'm talking about Sydney as
a critic, like all critics before him Sydney knew that he would have to answer not only
contemporary attacks on poetry but the attack by Plato.
In other words Sydney knew not only must he answer what people were saying in the Renaissance
but you always have to answer Plato.
He was always in the background, remember I said he was the raison d'etre, the reason
for being a theory, Plato was always there in the background.
Now one thing about his apology, even though the apology is a brilliant work, it is more
synthetic than original.
In other words most of the ideas that Sydney conveys in his defense or apology has been
said before by Horace, by Aristotle, by others.
What Sydney brings to it is an incredible polish.
This apology for poetry actually fits exactly a rhetorical strategy that people learn during
that age.
We don't learn rhetoric that much in school, everybody did back then.
And there are critics who love this that can actually outline Sydney's defense along
exact lines going back to Aristotle and Cicero and Horace.
Now again, everything that's here has been said before but Sydney makes it more persuasive.
But there's a difference now.
Not only does Sydney have to answer the attacks of Plato, Sydney is very much a Christian
critic.
And so his defense of the moral nature of poetry must answer both Platonic philosophy
and biblical theology.
In other words it's no longer just the Platonists who are saying poetry is immoral, there are
a lot of Christians now who are saying poetry is immoral.
That sounds strange since the Bible has a lot of poetry but that's still with us.
There are still many Christians, often more conservative ones that are a little bit suspicious
of poetry.
And so from this point on in the series I'll be making a few more Christian references
because almost all literary theory until the modern age has got to address Christianity
in one way or another.
And we could argue that literary theory from this point on and earlier is a mixture of
the classical world and the Judeo-Christian world.
So we're going to see more references from the Bible from this point on.
Alright let's look at the four arguments that Sydney makes in defense of poetry.
Again this is very logical, systematic like so many of the arguments we've seen in this
series.
His first argument in defense of poetry is that poetry is the light giver, the great
cradle of civilization.
As we saw with Horace, Sydney argues, I think almost more eloquently if that's possible,
that the poets are the first law givers, the first philosophers, and the first historians.
You'll remember in an earlier lecture I mentioned, excuse me, the myth of Ampheon that he built
the walls of Thebes by playing his pipe and the music, made the bricks move and form the
wall of Thebes.
Well this again is an idea that the poets are at the origin of civilization.
They tamed the beast within, they established civilization.
This is a tactic that many defenders of poetry will use.
This idea again that poets get everything started.
And isn't that a wonderful play on Plato to say actually the first philosophers were
poets.
And actually early philosophy, what we call pre-Socratic philosophy, most of it was written
in poetry.
Isn't that interesting?
Plato of course used prose, but early philosophy is written in poetry, like the wisdom literature
of the Bible that we've mentioned before.
Now along the line of this argument that poetry is the cradle of civilization, Sidney
says as many before have argued that Plato himself was the greatest of poets.
We've heard that before.
This is insistent here.
In fact, according to Sidney, Plato's fanciful dialogues and beautiful allegories are the
skin of his philosophy.
What he means by that metaphor is that most of Plato's ideas are abstract and the only
way we can understand abstract ideas is if you give them a flesh or incarnate them, put
them in the flesh.
And what Sidney argues is that those allegories that I've mentioned before, the myths and
allegories that populate the dialogues of Plato, that's sort of the body of his philosophy.
That's how he literally embodies his ideas.
We've heard this argument before, but again, Sidney's not going to miss it.
In a wonderful analogy, he compares poetry to a passport.
In the same way that a passport gets us ready and allows us passage into a foreign culture,
well, poetry prepares our mind to receive learning.
And the wonderful thing is if poetry hasn't sort of opened our mind and sharpened our
thinking, then when we learn other disciplines from philosophy to science, they're not quote
going to stick.
So this is a wonderful idea that again, poetry prepares our mind to receive other kinds of
knowledge.
Part of this idea that poetry is the beginning.
Everything builds on poetry.
Indeed, Sidney says, men who attack poetry are like sons who rise up against their fathers.
And in other words, the poets are the fathers of everything.
And we're back to that phrase I gave you before, the anxiety of influence, this edible need
to kill off the father.
Well, again, the reason people attack poetry is because they realize poetry is their father.
The poets got everything started, and so they feel a little inadequate, if you will,
in the presence of poetry.
So they attack it, particularly philosophers attack poetry.
Let's look at his second reason, his second defense of poetry.
According to Sidney, the power and craft of poetry are of the same essence as the divine.
He argues that in antiquity, poets were seers and verse the language of prophecy.
We've mentioned before, and it's true, in the Bible, every time there is a prophecy,
it is written in prose.
Now, I'm sorry, it's written in poetry.
Now there is a lot of prose history in the Bible, but whenever we get to prophecy, whenever
we're, you know, history just recounts what happened.
Whenever there's prophecy, what do they say, thus sayeth the Lord.
So in other words, in the Bible, somehow the closer you get to the divine, suddenly we
switch to poetry.
Sidney realized that, and he realized that that's not just true for the Judeo-Christian
ethic or prophecy, but it's true for pagan prophecy as well.
When you get close to the divine, suddenly we start speaking in poetry.
Indeed, he tells us that it is through poetry that King David in the Psalms was able to
express and embody the majesty and the beauty of God.
So not only is prophecy in poetry, but whenever we really want to praise God, whenever we
want to capture his essence, his majesty, his power, suddenly we switch to poetry.
And you know something?
This is even true in the epistles of St. Paul.
St. Paul is so practical and systematic and he goes through his philosophy and all of
his ideas and his theology so systematically.
But whenever Paul gets close to God, even he switches to poetry.
Oh, the depth and the glory of God.
He suddenly switches to poetry whenever he moves beyond ideas and gets to the reality
of God.
So again, in the Bible, both Old and New Testament, poetry is the language of the majesty of
God.
Heck, according to the Bible, the first thing said was a poem.
What did Adam say?
This is now bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh.
So the very first thing spoken by a man, according to the Bible, was a poem.
Let's link this to some other idea, this divinity.
According to Sidney, the poet is actually like God because both poets and God are makers.
They make things, right?
God created the world.
He is a maker.
And remember, he created the world out of language according to the Judeo-Christian tradition.
Now, whereas all other arts, from geometry to music to science, take their cue and their
foundation from nature, the poet alone transcends and even improves upon the natural world.
See, all the other disciplines are pretty much stuck with nature.
They got to take it as it is, we might say.
But the poet, like God, creates things that are new.
He maketh a new nature, Sidney says.
And in that sense, again, poetry touches on the divine.
That is to say, the mimesis or imitation of the poet is a higher kind of imitation.
Poetry transforms beasts into cyclops, transforms men into heroes, transforms bronze into gold.
It is poetry, rather than philosophy, that brings back or remakes the golden age.
Poetry maketh everything new.
Again, you can see that Sidney has a very high opinion of poetry.
Finally, in this defense here of the divinity of poetry, he argues that what the poet finally
imitates is not nature herself, but a more perfect idea in the mind to which the poet
gives a shape or form.
You'll remember the difference between Plato's low view of mimesis and Aristotle's high view.
This is closer to Aristotle.
The idea is that when a poet imitates, he doesn't imitate an imitation, but he imitates
the essence of things.
However, I would argue that in this argument, Sidney is not so much devoted to Aristotle
as to a famous Neoplatonic philosopher named Plotinus.
Plotinus was a new Platonist, and he strongly influenced St. Augustine.
He was coming from a Pagan tradition, but he influenced Augustine.
What Plotinus did is he took the ideas of Plato and mixed them together with the ideas
of Aristotle.
In other words, what Plotinus did is he accepted the world of becoming dichotomy of Plato,
but to that he added an aristocratic idea that poetry goes for the idea rather than
for the imitation, and Sidney is working in that tradition.
The third defense is that the end of poetry is to teach and please.
We've heard that before.
Sidney says, if that's true, then it must be useful to society.
If poetry really teaches and pleases, what better function can it serve than to teach
and please?
In fact, he says that the imitations of poetry are able to delight and teach because they
do not merely copy virtues and vices as they are, but as they should be.
All the other disciplines are stuck with the world as it is.
Poetry can change things, and so when poetry talks about vice and virtue, it can talk about
what we might call the form of vice and the form of virtue.
You see, in our world, think about the fruit of the knowledge of good and of evil, which
Adam and Eve ate of.
That says that good and bad is all mixed together, vice and virtue is all mixed together.
Well in poetry, because poetry can change things to the way they should be, poetry
can give us a perfect example of vice and a perfect example of virtue.
Why is that important?
Because what happens is poetry is able to inspire the soul both to scorn the vices
of its villains and to imitate the noble and virtuous actions of its heroes.
In other words, it can prevent us, present us with such perfect examples of vice and
virtue that it impels us as reader to follow virtue and forsake vice.
You know what?
It does it better than philosophy.
Why?
Because philosophy, Sidney says, is too grave and austere to bring delight.
It leaves the soul cold and indifferent.
Again, there's something cold about philosophy, and it's too cold to inspire us to action.
Philosophy can explain good and bad, but it's too cold to impel us to seek the good
and forsake the bad.
Poetry, which is, quote, hot, and it entertains us and it's full of passion, inspires us
not just to contemplate virtue and vice, but to live out the virtue and shun the vice.
Finally, a fourth defense of poetry, and this you'll recognize from Aristotle.
Sidney claims that poetry unites the universal truth or abstract precept of philosophy with
the concrete example or physical act of history.
So remember that Aristotle told us that poetry is basically history plus philosophy.
It has all the particular concreteness of history mixed with the universal abstractness
of philosophy.
You bring them together.
You may remember the phrase, concrete universal I used.
Sidney agrees with the idea that poetry is a concrete universal.
And as such, he says, it has the power to implant itself in our memory and judgment.
Think about Esop's fables and Jesus' parables.
One of the reasons people never forget those is because they are an abstract truth embodied
in a nice, memorable form.
And in fact, poetry wants to be memorized.
How can you use it if you don't memorize it?
In other words, poetry is so beautiful, you remember it, and when you need it, you think
back on it.
Unlike the precepts of philosophy that are abstract and we forget them, poetry is something
we remember.
Just think about preachers.
Almost all preachers, if they want to incite goodness in their parishers, they tell stories
because we remember stories.
They're embodied in a kind of a flesh and we remember them.
Again, along with this idea of the concrete universal, Sidney reminds us again that historians
are bound to recount a particular event just as it is, even if that event debases virtue
and encourages vice.
Again, history has got to stick to quote the facts.
And again, as I said, in our world, virtue and vice are so often intermingled that the
historian, without wanting to, may end up encouraging vice because he tells us the way
things are.
The poet, again, is free to alter the particular so as to embody more fully the universal that
is sought.
Poetry is allowed to change things and make them new, and so give us a perfect example
of vice or virtue.
Now for Sidney, the perfect example of this is the parable of the U-Lamb that Nathan the
Prophet used to convict David of his sin.
Many of you will remember that King David committed that sin where he committed adultery
with Bathsheba and had her husband, Uriah, put to death.
Many of you know that.
Now, Nathan is a prophet and Nathan's job is to come up and convict David of his sin.
But how is Nathan going to do it?
God tells him, go do it.
If he comes up and says, King, you're an adulteress and an adulterer and a murderer, David may
get man and kill him.
So what does Nathan do?
He tells a story.
He goes up and he says, oh, King David, I have a case for you.
I want judgment.
Here's the case.
There's a rich man and a poor man.
The rich man has countless flocks and sheep and cattle.
The poor man has only one little U-Lamb, and he loved that U-Lamb.
He fed it milk from a bottle.
He slept with it.
He loved it.
One day a stranger came through the town and went to the home of the rich man and asked
for dinner.
But the rich man, rather than killing one of his multitude and his flocks and serving
it to a stranger, took the U-Lamb from the poor man, killed it, and served it to dinner.
And Nathan says, oh, King, oh, Lord, what should the judgment be?
And David immediately jumps up in anger and says, that rich man should be killed.
He had no pity.
And Nathan turns on him and says, Sire, you are that man.
Remember this if you ever need to teach somebody.
It's a way to do it because what happens is that Nathan, I'm sorry, David accepts the
story, and once he accepts the story, he's got to accept the truth that comes with it.
I suppose we can say Nathan tricks him, but he does it for a higher reason.
Again, he's very smart.
Nathan the prophet is, in many ways, a poet.
All right.
I have given you the four defenses Sidney gives in favor of poetry.
But since he's writing a systematic rhetorical defense, in addition to defense, he must also
do what's called rebuttal.
As you all know, in rhetoric, in a debate team, there's a point where you've got to
answer the criticism of your opponent.
And so Sidney, being very systematic, does that.
He now goes on to give us four arguments made against poetry, and he rebutts or answers
those arguments.
All right.
The first argument against poetry that he's going to rebut is the old-fashioned one that
poetry is unprofitable.
There are many better ways to spend our time.
As I mentioned to you in the first lecture, this is something that's not only leveled
against poetry, it's leveled against the humanities in general.
Oh, they're useless.
We don't need them.
They're unprofitable.
What is Sidney's answer to that?
Sidney's answer is, wait a minute.
Poetry is not unprofitable.
Actually it is the most fruitful of all knowledge.
Why?
Because it has the power, through teaching and pleasing, to move its hearer to virtuous
action.
And what do we just see earlier?
Poetry does that better than either history or philosophy.
And again, if poetry is the best vehicle for encouraging virtue and getting away from vice,
then it is very, very profitable, especially if it does it better than philosophy.
I mean, if we're going to run a society that works, we've got to have people that yearn
for virtue and want to forsake vice.
Well, poetry has that effect, and it does it more effectively and efficiently than anybody
else, so poetry is profitable.
Number two, the second argument against poetry is that poetry is the mother of lies.
And we still hear that today.
Oh, poetry is all lies, OK?
We even hear sometimes real, real conservative people, they don't want to teach their kids
about Santa Claus because they think it will confuse them, right?
I mean, to me that's kind of crazy.
But again, this idea that, you know, if we tell stories to our kids, they'll grow up
and think, oh, mom and dad lied to me.
Oh, no.
All right?
First of all, the way Sidney answers this, he says, no, no, poets never lie.
Because they never claim that their poems are the truth.
The way he puts it is, poems never lie, because they never affirm it.
They never claim to be the truth.
They claim to be poetry.
They claim to be a fiction, although a higher fiction that has meaning.
But again, poets never claim that what they're saying is truth in the sense of history being
truth.
In fact, he says, poetry is like the stage.
The stage offers an illusion, an account of what should or should not be, not what is
or isn't.
And Sidney says, only fools confuse illusions with reality, right?
Even children know.
I've got a little boy who's four named Alex, and he tells me about his imaginary friend.
But every so often, he'll say, of course, I'm just using my imagination, daddy.
I mean, even he, under five years old, knows the difference between illusion and reality.
Sidney's saying, come on, we're not fools.
We know that when we go to a play, we know that's an illusion on the stage.
Well, we know that with poetry, too.
So don't say poetry lies.
A lie is when you claim something is the truth.
That isn't.
That's a lie.
Poetry never does that.
Poetry never affirms or claims to be the truth.
Notice here, we're seeing that tactic I've spoken up before, where you create a separate
sphere for poetry.
Poetry is different than philosophy.
Again, that's another way of handling Plato, if you remember.
All right.
The third criticism is that poetry entices and leads to sinful behavior.
Have you ever heard people say that?
A lot of people say that about the stage, particularly, oh, that's going to make people
commit sins.
We don't need this poetry.
And a lot of times, people that want to censor things that kids read in school are afraid
that it will lead them to some kind of sin.
I really like Sidney's answer to this.
And if you're ever on a board trying to go against censorship in the school, remember
what Sidney says.
It's very simple.
He says, it is not, I'm sorry, it is not poetry itself, but the abuse of poetry that
leads to sin.
Like most things in our world, poetry is neutral.
It can be used for good or it can be used for evil.
And just because some people take poetry and use it for evil doesn't mean that poetry
itself is evil.
Indeed, Sidney says, if we are to accept the argument that poetry leads to sin and must
be thrown out, then you know what?
We have also got to throw out the Bible, for the Bible has often been perverted into a
source for heresy and sin.
I mean, of all books, about the Bible has been used for more sin than any other book.
People distort it for cults and heresies and all the terrible things people do.
Does that mean we should stop reading the Bible?
Actually, there was one point in history when the church outlawed the Bible was kind of
funny because they were afraid.
But you know, Sidney's point is a well taken one here.
Again, it is not poetry itself, but the abuse of poetry that leads to sin.
So the right thing to do is make a right use of poetry, not throw the baby out with the
bathwater, as we say today.
Finally, Plato kicked out the poets from the Republic.
How do we answer that?
And you know what Sidney says?
Sidney says, for him, this argument is the hardest one to answer because he says that
he honors Plato above all people.
Sidney says, I love Plato.
He's formed so much of my thought and I hate to have to contradict him, but I have to because
if I'm going to defend poetry, I've got to defend that attack that Plato kicked them
out of the Republic.
Well, here's his answer.
First of all, he reminds us again that it was the poets who taught and guided the philosophers.
Poets came first, philosophers came second.
And you know what he realizes?
Just like Longinus, Sidney discovers in Plato's attack on poetry, he discovers again what
we call an anxiety of influence between Plato and Homer, the need to kill off your predecessor.
And he reminds us, and it's true, that seven cities strove for the honor of being Homer's
birthplace while the city of Athens voted to banish Socrates.
All right, nobody knows exactly where Homer lived.
He's almost surely from what we call the Asia Minor coast, modern Turkey today.
And there were seven cities and islands all along Asia Minor that all fought to say, we
are the birthplace of Homer.
That's how much everybody loves Homer, loves the poet.
They all are fighting to say, no, he belongs to me, no, he belongs to me, no, he belongs
to me.
Think about what happened to Socrates.
You all know the story.
Socrates was brought to trial, and really what they wanted to do is banish him.
But Socrates refused, and so they forced him to drink the hemlock and die.
And we must remember that Plato witnessed the death of Socrates.
We know that he was horribly moved and disappointed and crushed having to watch his friend, his
mentor, his everything die.
In fact, he memorialized Socrates in the great apology to try to capture the essence of him.
So there's a real anxiety of influence here.
Philosophers are thrown out, and a lot of cities threw philosophers out.
But everybody loves poets.
It's an anxiety of influence.
Another answer to Plato, I didn't really talk about this in lecture two, but one of Plato's
critiques of poetry, the central critique, is that poets like Homer were the origins
of scandalous stories about the gods.
Most of you are familiar with Homer, the Iliad and the Odyssey.
All those stories about gods committing adultery and doing nasty, peevish things.
Well, Plato said, we can't have our guardians being taught these scandalous stories about
the gods, so throw poetry out.
Well, Sidney's answer to that, and to me it's a little bit contrived, but he says, hey,
Homer didn't invent those stories about the gods, he just imitated them.
Maybe that's a little contrived, but that's also an answer to Plato.
Finally, and here is where Sidney brings in the Christian point of view that I spoke
about early in this lecture.
He reminds us that St. Paul in Acts chapter 17 affirms that it was the pagan poets rather
than the philosophers who came closest to foreseeing the truths of Christ.
Now this takes a little explanation here.
In Acts chapter 17, many of you will recognize this as I tell you the story, Paul is journeying
through Athens, and he noticed that there are idols all over the city of Athens to all
sorts of gods, and it really upset him to see all this idolatry.
And he noticed with a little humor that one of the idols said to an unknown god, like
the two of the unknown soldier, and so what Paul did is he went up to the Areopagus where
all the wise men of Athens met, and he spoke to them, and he said, oh, you wise men of
Athens, I noticed that you worship an unknown god.
Now I'm going to proclaim to you who that god is.
You don't know him, but I'm going to proclaim him to you.
He is Christ.
And what he says, and I love this, Paul says, as some of your own poets have said, we are
his offspring.
In other words, as St. Paul defends Christianity and the truths of Christ before a pagan audience,
he actually quotes pagan poetry.
And three times in the epistles of Paul, he quotes pagan poetry to back up Christianity.
He doesn't quote pagan philosophers.
He quotes the pagan poets.
And again, what Sidney does with this, he says, wait a minute, it is the poets who come
closer to the Christian revelation than the philosophers.
And an example I would give, he doesn't give this one, but the best example would be Virgil.
Virgil lived and died shortly before Christ, so he couldn't have known about Christianity.
But many people in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance considered Virgil to be a proto-Christian,
because there is so much in the Aeneid.
Aeneas is almost described as a Christian hero.
All the virtues Aeneas must learn are the virtues that St. Paul himself must learn as
he becomes, he'll quote, super-Christian.
And there's a story in, many of you know that Dante, a Christian poet, chose Virgil as
his guide through the inferno.
Why choose a pagan poet as your guide through a Christian world?
Well, it's because people saw Virgil as someone who prepared the way for Christianity.
Again, I can go into that more, but basically the idea here is that it was in their poetry
that the pagans came closest to an understanding of the incarnate God.
And Sidney makes much of that.
Finally, to finish up this defense, he reminds us again that Plato says poets speak by divine
inspiration.
Well, again, maybe we should listen to them.
Finally, Sidney concludes his essay by putting a curse on all poet haters.
He says, may they never win love for want of a sonnet, and may they be forgotten for
want of an epitaph.
And there's that neoclassical wit I talked about, the power of poetry.
If you don't have poetry, you're never going to win love, and no one's going to remember
you because you won't have an epitaph.
So again, in a very serious essay, Sidney ends on a sort of witty, comic end, and that's
very, very neoclassical.
All right, in our next lecture, we will conclude our unit on neoclassicism by looking at the
theory of John Dryden and Alexander Pope.
