Lecture 9 – Burke on the Sublime and Beautiful
With Lecture 9, we begin our third, and probably most difficult unit, philosophical roots
of Romanticism. Although lectures 10-12 will all focus on German theorists, Kant, Schiller,
and Hegel respectively, this lecture will focus on British theorist Edmund Burke and
on his influential philosophical inquiry into the origin of our ideas of the sublime
and beautiful. Our analysis of Burke's inquiry will be prefaced by two distinctions vital
to this unit. First, the distinction between the ontological orientation of Burke's predecessors
and the epistemological orientation of Burke and his successors, and second, the distinction
between subject and object. Now, I want to say this is a difficult lecture, and you may
want to listen to this lecture twice because it really sets the foundation for the whole
unit. I'm going to begin by giving you a big statement, and then I'm going to slow
down and go through it step by step. Here's the big statement. With Burke, we shift from
an ontological, mimetic, objective approach to literature to an epistemological, pragmatic,
subjective approach. Now, that's a mouthful. Let's slow down and sort of take that definition
apart word by word. First of all, what does ontology, ontological is the adjective, what
does ontology mean? It means in Greek, literally, the study of being. And ontology concerns
itself with determining the essence of things, whether that essence be natural or supernatural.
Ontology, the studying of being, it's interested in the essence of things, what they are, what
they're made of, what the nature of them is. Now, you'll remember that mimetic theories
are those that are concerned with the relationship between the poem and the universe. And mimetic
theories are ontological in their approach because they're interested in what the poem
is. The poem is an imitation, they say. That's an ontological concern. Aristotle's goal
to define precisely the proper nature and essence of a well-constructed plot, that's
an ontological concern. What is the plot? What is the essence or nature of the plot?
What is plotness? That is an ontological concern. Indeed, the Platonic Aristotelian debate over
Mimesis is really a debate over the ontological status of a work of art. In other words, they're
both asking, what is a poem? That's the question they're asking. Now, according to one, it
possesses its own substance and integrity. That's Aristotle's answer. Plato's answer
is that no, it's just a shadow. But see, the debate, again, is over the ontological status
of a poem. What is a poem? What is its nature or essence? Now, although neoclassical theory
is partly pragmatic, remember the link between the poem and the audience, neoclassical art
is partly pragmatic because it is concerned with the responses of the audience with whether
or not they've been taught and pleased, so it is partly pragmatic. But still, even neoclassical
theory works within a philosophical framework that is essentially ontological. They're
still trying to figure out what a poem is. Think about it. The rules of decorum that
are laid down by Horus and Dryden and Pope are less concerned with audience response
than with what a poem should be. Issues of decorum are, again, ontological because we're
talking about the essence or nature of the poem. Even Longinus, who does define the sublime
partly in terms of its effects, he's pragmatic in part. Still, even Longinus is really concerned
with the actual, physical, metaphorical and linguistic qualities of a sublime poem. He's
still, and let me put it this way, neoclassical theorists are interested in audience response,
but audience response functions as only one criterion of what makes a work of art great.
They are still more interested, finally, in the thinness of a poem. What is its essence?
Again, audience response is one criterion, but it's not the most important one, finally,
for neoclassicists. They are part pragmatists, I would say. We will see at the end of this
lecture that Burke's approach to the sublime is very different from Longinus's, and we'll
get to that at the end. But let's continue on my definition. Now you see what ontological
and memetic is. Now let's contrast ontology with epistemology. Ontology means the study
of being. Epistemology, again, another Greek word, means literally the study of knowing.
Epistemology is concerned not with the thinness of things, but with how we know and perceive
that thinness. Not with the object, but with how we perceive or know the object. That is
an epistemological concern. Now, pragmatic theories in their purest form are epistemological.
When they're interested in the audience and the response of the audience, in its purest
sense, that's epistemological because we're interested in how the audience knows and receives
and perceives what they're looking at. Epistemological theorists seek to explore not just whether
or not a poem pleases. They want more than that. They want to study the mental processes
by which that pleasure is perceived and known. Not just saying, I'm happy, but how does it
work? How does that happiness register in my brain? How am I perceiving that? That's an
epistemological concern. Now, this word mental processes, it also goes by the name of mental
faculties or modes of thought. They use all those different terminology, but all of them
refer to the way our mind, our brain, perceives things. Now, listen carefully. For the true
epistemological pragmatist, beauty does not so much define a quality that inheres in a
given poem or painting as it describes a certain kind of mental response that occurs within
the mind of the person who experiences that poem or painting. If I look at a painting,
if we can see it back here, if I'm only concerned with the painting and the essence or thickness
of the painting, that's an ontological concern. But I'm not interested in the painting. I
am interested in my mental response to that painting. And so this is radical. For an epistemologist,
beauty does not reside in that painting. What they mean by beauty is the way I perceive
that painting. What's going on in my mind, that is beauty. My response to the work of
art is beauty. Get that down, because that is a key for this whole unit, and I will repeat
myself later on, but get that idea down. It doesn't reside in the object, the poem or
the painting, it resides in my mind. All right, let's do a little more terminology.
The difference between subject and object. At the core of all epistemology and any theory
that's epistemological, we've got to make a distinction between subject and object.
Now we use those terms all the time, but we use them very loosely. I'm going to teach
you the philosophical meaning of subject and object as it works in Burke and particularly
as it works in German philosophy. What's the difference? Philosophically speaking,
a subject is a conscious self that perceives. I am a subject because I perceive the world
around me. That's a little confusing, isn't it? Because sometimes we refer to the subject
of a poem. That's why I want you to be philosophical. Philosophically, a subject is conscious and
it perceives the world. On the other hand, an object is an unconscious thing that does
not perceive, but is rather perceived. So the work of art is an object. It's not conscious.
It doesn't perceive anything. I perceive it. Now a lot of times feminist critics will say,
to a man, don't you objectify me. What they mean by that is sometimes, like when a man
stares at a woman, they call it the male gaze and undresses her with his eyes, right?
What he's doing is turning that woman from a subject into an object. In other words,
he's ripping away from her humanity and treating her as an it. That's really what it means
when we say, don't objectify me. We're really speaking philosophically in that sense.
Now, when epistemologists define their response to art as purely subjective, it's not objective,
but it's subjective. What they mean is that the experience of art has nothing to do with
the poetic object per se, but exists wholly in the mind of the subject. A subjective response
to art, what I just said about epistemology, is a response that's subjective because it
only has to do with what's going on in my mind, my mental processes. It doesn't have
to do with the object. And so these are epistemological, pragmatic, and subjective approaches to art.
Now very important, this philosophical use of the word subjective should not and must
not be confused with its modern use to signify a personal, relativistic belief. When I say
subjective, I don't mean relativistic. I don't mean I like vanilla and you like chocolate.
That's what subjective has come to mean in our day and age, but they do not mean that.
And we'll understand that more as we go along. But I want you to see a difference. Subjective
does mean in the eye of the beholder, so to speak, in my mind, but it doesn't mean relative.
All right, one more little bit of terminology before we move on. Beginning with Burke and
Kant, Kant will be the next lecture, it becomes standard to refer to this subjective response
to art as an aesthetic response and to refer to those who would define group standards
of aesthetic taste as aestheticians. Now sometimes when we use the word aesthetic, we use it
loosely to mean having to do with the arts. I mean, we use it that way loosely. But technically
aesthetic has to do with a subjective response. Philosophically speaking, if we speak of
an aesthetic response, we mean an epistemological, pragmatic, subjective response. That's really
I should say philosophically what aesthetic means. It's that subjective response and
aestheticians want to set up standards for these subjective responses. So let's keep
all these words in mind. Now that we've got a vocabulary, let's go into the work itself.
And I'm going to deal mostly with the introduction to Burke's philosophical inquiry into the
origin of our ideas of the sublime and the beautiful, we'll just call it the inquiry
from now on. In this work, Burke lays the groundwork for understanding how we perceive
both art and the greater world around us. In other words, since they're epistemologists,
they want to figure out quite scientifically how we perceive the world. Now, we begin here.
For Burke, the groundwork of all perception and thought is the senses. In other words,
I'm saying Burke is an empiricist just like John Locke. What is an empiricist? Someone
who believes that all our knowledge comes via our five senses. It doesn't come from
revelation. We're not born with some prenatal memory. It comes through the senses. Burke
in this sense is an empiricist. He believes everything comes through the senses. And he
believes that unless you're blind or deaf, all of us have equal access to sense perception.
We all have equal access unless there's some kind of physical impairment. And according
to Burke, the senses are the great originals of all our ideas. So we all have access to
senses. Senses are the origin of everything. Therefore, Burke concludes, it is possible
to arrive at a universal principle of judgment. Even though judgment is subjective, because
it all happens via the senses and because we all have access to the senses, therefore
we can set down universal standards of judgment. That's really a paradox, universal subjective,
but that's what Burke's going to do. In fact, Burke argues that if we are unable to establish
fixed principles of taste and general laws for that mental faculty, we call the imagination.
If we can't do that, if we can't establish fixed principles and general laws, then his
inquiry is absurd and all aesthetic judgment is mere whimsy. If, in other words, subjective
means relative as it does today, why even write this? What's the point of literary theory?
If you can't set down standards, if it is, as we say today, I like chocolate, you like
vanilla, then what's the point of critical theory, really? If everything is relative,
that's kind of a funny thing about postmodern theory, but if everything's relative, why
do theory? We'll get to that in the final unit. But again, so important to understand,
subjective aesthetic is not the same as relativism. Now, you could argue and probably should argue
that these ideas open the door for relativism. Maybe Burke has a lot to answer for, but he
himself is not merely relativistic. He believes you can set down fixed laws. And what I want
to do in this lecture is to trace how Burke moves from universal sense experience to universal
principles of taste. How do we go from this subjective response in the senses and whatnot
to a universal principle of taste? And you will notice that this movement is typical
of epistemological theory. And interestingly, it betrays a desire for order and system that
is as strong as that of Aristotle or Horace or Longinus or Pope. In other words, they
are epistemologists and subjective, but they're still interested in order. Epistemology doesn't
mean I feel good about art. You can still set down rules and regulations, so it's still
very systematic. Again, that's kind of an oxymoron or paradox, but we'll see how Burke does it.
All right. Burke begins here. According to Burke, all people perceive external objects
in the same way. We all recognize that sugar is sweet and tobacco is bitter. And he argues
we find more natural pleasure in the sweet than in the bitter. Now, he doesn't admit
that habit can alter these perceptions. I don't think anybody really likes black coffee
the first time they drink it because coffee is very bitter, right? Same thing with tobacco.
It's very bitter, but through habit you can come to like the bitter, but you won't start
going around saying, ah, this black coffee is sweet. If you say that, you've lost your mind,
okay? And so what he's saying is habit can never abolish our knowledge that tobacco is not sweet
and sugar is not bitter. Now, if we start going around saying sugar is bitter and tobacco is
sweet, then that means we're crazy or our senses are impaired. That might happen, but that's an
exception to the rule. Most of us know what is sweet and know what is bitter. That's important
because we all perceive objects in the same way. Now, the senses are the base. Based on
the senses are the two powers of imagination and judgment. Senses are at the bottom, radiating
out of senses are imagination and judgment. And Burke spends a lot of time defining what
these things are. First, let's look at imagination. Imagination is also called sensibility. Same
thing. According to Burke, imagination or sensibility, what it does is it takes the raw
material, offered it by sense perception and then recombines that material in a new way.
That's what the imagination is. It takes the senses and recombines them. Now, although
the imagination can be quite inventive, it cannot produce anything new. It can only vary
what is given it by the senses. So imagination is not prophecy or revelation. Imagination
is stuck with the senses. All it can do is take what is given it and recombine it in
a new, fanciful way. And so, he concludes, whatever affects our imagination powerfully,
whatever brings us pleasure or pain, must have a similar effect on all men. Now, that's
a huge leap, a huge assumption, but it is central, absolutely central to Burke and the
epistemological aesthetic project. Again, since all of us, okay, since imagination
is based on the same raw material and cannot invent anything new, then we all should take
pleasure and pain in the same things. Now, these assumptions have been under attack
in the modern world, and we'll get to that really in our lecture on Kant. But again,
this is a faith that underlies the whole philosophical system, not only of this lecture, but the
next three that will follow in this unit. The faith, once again, that although we all perceive
things separately, somehow we all perceive them the same.
All right, one more thing about imagination. Imagination is linked primarily to immediate
perceptions and has about it an almost childlike quality. The imagination is something that's
direct and intuitive and childlike. That is to be distinguished from judgment, that other
thing that's based on the senses. Judgment is a higher critical faculty that is closely
linked to reason. Judgment is gained through an increase in understanding brought about
by a long, close study of the object of sensation. Now, both judgment and imagination are based
on the senses, but imagination is more direct and intuitive and childlike, whereas judgment
is more a higher critical faculty. It's studies. Still, the judgment also rests on the senses,
and therefore judgment must also be common to all men.
All right, we've got our senses. Based on the senses is judgment and imagination. Then,
based on judgment and imagination is what he calls taste, or what we might call aesthetic
taste. And remember, he wants to set up rules for taste. So maybe an easy way to put it
is imagination plus judgment equals taste. Now, since taste is based on judgment and
imagination, which are based on the senses, therefore, taste too must be common to all
men. But there are some exceptions, Burke says. If our imagination is bad or deficient, it
will affect taste, and if our judgment is deficient, it will affect our taste. Let's
look at what we call a deficiency in judgment and a deficiency in imagination, because that
will affect our taste. Let's first look at the deficiency in imagination or sensibility.
There are some people, Burke says, whose natures are blunt and cold. These people are deficient
in imagination or sensibility. Sometimes, these people have seared their imaginative
faculties through hedonism or avarice. Remember what Longinus says, the sublime is killed
by hedonism and avarice. In other words, if we're always seeking after money and material
things, our imagination will become blunted. And if our imagination is blunted, we will
end up suffering from a lack of taste. We won't have any taste. Now, that's to be distinguished
from people that are deficient in judgment. If you are deficient in judgment, in other
words, if you haven't studied long and hard, you will have bad taste. Bad taste is a deficiency
in judgment. No taste or lack of taste is deficiency in imagination. Let me give you
an example. You've all heard of Yanni. Yanni is wonderful to listen to. But if you say
that Yanni is just as good as Bach or Handel, then you are suffering from bad taste. Why
bad taste? Because there is some link between those people. They have these sort of long,
sonorous periods, lots of repetition. But of course, Bach and Handel are infinitely
more subtle than Yanni. So if you think they're the same, you've got bad taste. You have taste,
but it's not very refined. A popular example would be Harry Connick Jr. He's wonderful.
But if you say he's just as good as Cole Porter or George Gershwin, again, you've got bad taste.
Lack of taste would be these kids who can go from listening to Bach to listening to rap
music and see no difference. I mean, if you can't tell the difference between those, then
you don't have bad taste. You just have no taste at all. In other words, your whole sense
of understanding and perceiving things has been blunted. And I say, and this bothers
me, more and more young people, I think, are growing up with no taste at all because of
this sort of being hit over the head with constant noise and all this stuff that hits
them in the media. I think it really kills their taste. They no longer have any subtlety.
And so that's the difference between no taste, a lack of imagination, and bad taste, a lack
of judgment. Another thing about taste. Taste, according
to Burke, differs from person to person, not in kind, but in degree. Not in kind, but
in degree. Now, what am I saying? That is to say that the principles of taste operate
the same in all men, if the same in kind, but some, due to a keener sensibility imagination
or greater knowledge and discernment, have a fuller or more refined sense of taste. So
it's all the same in kind. We all have access to the senses, but some of us who have increased
our imagination or refined our judgment will have a little bit better taste. So we'll be
at a higher degree. Now, you know what's interesting about this? You might say that
Burke is both strongly democratic and highly elitist at the same time, right? He's democratic
because he says it's the same in kind. We all have access to the senses. That's very
democratic because we all have access, whether we're a peasant or a king. But it's a little
bit elitist because, again, some people are believed to have a more refined sensibility
than others. So isn't that interesting? Again, that's sort of a paradox. All right. Before
talking about the sublime and the beautiful, which will be my last point, I want to lay
down a few more additional distinctions between imagination and judgment. These distinctions
are important to Burke and will come up again and again in the next several lectures. Some
more differences. Imagination tends toward synthesis, whereas judgment tends towards
analysis. In other words, imagination brings things together. It discovers and even creates
unity in the midst of difference. There's a bunch of things and imagination brings it
together into a synthesis. Judgment, on the other hand, is more analytical. Judgment discerns
subtle distinction in what appears to be uniform. Analysis is more scientific, right? It cuts
down in vivisects. It looks for differences. Imagination brings together. Analysis draws
apart into distinctions. Imagination affords more direct, unmediated pleasure than judgment.
I mentioned before that the imagination is more childlike and it's less self-conscious.
Judgment is more conscious. It's studies. It looks. It's not unmediated. It's mediated.
Still, and this is important, although Burke asserts that sensibility is essential to taste,
Burke finally gives preference to judgment as the true foundation of taste. They're both
important, but he thinks judgment is a little more important. Now, the reason I'm making
a big deal about this is I'm calling these lectures the philosophical roots of romanticism.
And indeed, this is the root of romanticism, but there's a big difference. We will see
in later lectures that the romantics will eventually shift this preference and will
privilege imagination over judgment, synthesis over analysis, unmediated over mediated.
But Burke, even though he's a root of romanticism, is still living in the 18th century age of
reason and enlightenment. And so it's no surprise that he prefers analysis and reason to imagination
and sensibility. In Kant, that will also be the same case. Kant sets the way for the romantics,
but he himself is very 18th century. Now, in lectures 11 and 12, when we look at Schiller
and Hegel, who are later Germans, they will be a little bit more romantic. But keep this in mind
since this is an analysis. All right. Finally, the sublime and the beautiful. Burke, as you might
imagine, defines the sublime and the beautiful in totally epistemological terms. In other words,
for Burke, beauty and sublimity are not qualities of the object, as they finally are for Longinus.
Rather, they are faculties of perception that can be categorized. The sublime and beautiful is
something that happens in here, not in the painting or in the poem. Again, very important
distinction. That sounds kind of strange to us, but that's what epistemology is, at least in
aesthetic terms. Now, in other words, what Burke does is he defines the sublime as that which
inspires in us feelings of terror. Sublimity is defined by the impact that has on us by the way
we perceive it subjectively and epistemologically. Dark, gloomy, massive objects evoke in us an
overwhelming feeling of power and infinity. Feelings that fill us with terror. This is what's
going on in the mind in the mental faculties. Terror produces in us a mental, emotional response
that Burke calls astonishment. The sublime has this effect on us, you know? We're just like,
whoa, we're thrown into a state of suspension. And in that moment, everything is suspended
and our mind is totally filled by an object or thought. When you look at the pyramid,
it just overwhelms you or maybe Niagara Falls. You're just overwhelmed. Your mind is just,
that's the sublime. That experience of astonishment and being overwhelmed is the sublime. Now,
interestingly, according to Burke, the sublime is not only experienced through our eye and our ear,
but believe it or not, it is also experienced through the senses of taste, smell and touch.
There are such things as sublime sounds or sublime tastes. And interestingly, here's the
empirical thing. We can perceive the sublime through all five of our senses. Indeed, though
sublimity is a mental experience, it manifests itself in our body by causing our hands to clench
and our muscles to constrict. When we're in the presence of the sublime, we're like,
we're scared, we're terrified. However, and this is important, for it to be sublime,
there cannot be any actual terror. If we're really in danger, that's not the sublime,
that's just terror. And by the way, Aristotle says the same thing about catharsis. If there's any
real danger, there's not a catharsis. We're running. So the sublime, we're scared, but we're not
running away. Everything clenches up and we feel that. Now, on the other hand, the beautiful is
that which inspires in us sentiments of tenderness and affection. And so, whereas the sublime is
more masculine and is closely aligned to pain, the beautiful is more feminine and is linked to
pleasure and love. The way that Burke describes it, the beautiful is domestic rather than martial,
having to do with war, like the sublime. According to Burke, small, smooth, bright things cause
a softening and relaxing of the body. When we're in the presence of the sublime, we do this.
When we're in the presence of the beautiful, oh, how cute. Also, beauty, like sublimity,
can be perceived by all the senses. There are beautiful sounds and beautiful smells in the
same way. Now, I have given you a very fast overview of what Burke takes like 150 pages to do.
And I would really encourage you, if you enjoyed this lecture, to get a copy of the
philosophical inquiry and read it, because he is incredibly systematic about the sublime and the
beautiful. I mean, he tells us everything. I mean, like I said, write down the sounds and smells,
what is sublime and what is beautiful. And so, it's really, really an interesting read. So,
I would encourage you, if you get a chance to read that, that you'll get some of the joy of
criticism if you read Burke's inquiry. All right, that gives us the foundations for epistemology.
In our next lecture, we will move on to Immanuel Kant and see how he refines what Burke begins.
