In this lecture, which most students will find the most challenging of the series, we
turn our focus to one of the most influential and difficult thinkers of all time, Immanuel
Kant.
If Burke's inquiry helped introduce epistemology into the world of aesthetics, then Kant's
critique of judgment transformed that introduction into a full-blown science.
Through a close analysis of Kant's critique, we shall explore Kant's central assertion
that aesthetic judgments constitute a subjective universality.
Having defined fully this epistemological concept, we shall then proceed to unpack a
series of key Kantian distinctions.
Now as we said in the last lecture, Kant is going to pick up where Burke left off.
And so, at the very outset of his critique, Kant is going to assert that the judgment
of the beautiful is purely subjective.
In other words, just as we saw in Burke, Kant is going to argue that beauty and the judgment
of the beautiful has nothing to do with the beautiful object per se, but with the way
it is perceived by a subject.
Please remember that from the last lecture.
We're not talking about the object, but the way it is perceived by the subject.
Kant agrees totally with Burke in that area.
Now, according to Kant, the judgment of beauty or judgments of beauty are not cognitive.
They are not logical.
They are not rational.
Instead, they are aesthetic.
Let me go on a slight tangent here and tell you something about Kant.
Kant, I would say, is the epistemological version of Aristotle.
Aristotle was an ontologist, and therefore Aristotle wrote a treatise on every single
discipline.
On the nature of every discipline, he wrote a treatise.
Well, Kant says, why do Aristotle all over again?
What he does is he writes a treatise on every single one of our mental faculties.
You see, that is an epistemological project.
And so, instead of writing a treatise on poetry and philosophy and ethics and politics
like Aristotle, he writes a treatise on reason, on understanding, on imagination.
In other words, he tries to categorize and define the various mental faculties or modes
of perception that we as human beings use.
I think that will help us to understand Kant.
Now, reason and imagination, those as modes of perception, those are logical, cognitive
rational.
But the aesthetic judgment is, again, aesthetic or purely subjective.
That's what distinguishes it as a mental faculty from reason or understanding.
Now, let's put it more specifically, whereas cognitive judgments, reason and understanding,
presuppose fixed ideas and work to establish fixed concepts.
Aesthetic judgments work through our feelings and neither rest on any concept nor seek to
generate any.
You see, the cognitive mental faculties are interested in concepts and setting up concepts
and setting up criteria and ideas.
The aesthetic judgment is not interested.
It works with feeling and it doesn't try to generate any concepts.
Aesthetic judgments are also free of all ends or purposes.
What Kant adds to subjectivity is this idea that the subjective is totally free.
It doesn't seek any kind of end.
It doesn't seek any kind of concept.
It doesn't seek any purpose or goal.
It is absolutely and purely free and subjective.
In fact, what Kant says is that should an aesthetic judgment seek an end, that end would
actually be an end in itself.
In other words, aesthetic judgments are ends in themselves.
They're full and complete and they don't seek something else like reason or understanding
often do.
If the aesthetic judgment were to seek a purpose, it would be a purposeless purpose.
Kant loves to use these crazy phrases.
Let me put it this way.
If somebody were to go up to Kant and say, Mr. Kant, aesthetics and poetry is useless.
Do you know what he would say?
Exactly.
You got it right.
It is useless.
It has nothing to do with ends or purposes or concepts.
It's purely free.
Notice, I said one way to answer Plato is to create a separate sphere for poetry and
the aesthetic.
That is what Kant is doing to the end degree.
He is not only making a different area for poetry, but poetry uses a whole different
mode of perception, one that is aesthetic, that has to do with judgment.
Let's continue what we're doing here.
That is to say, both subject and object are perceived as being complete and perfect within
themselves.
In the aesthetic judgment, there are no ulterior ends or purposes.
It's an end in itself.
That phrase comes up a hundred times in the critique of judgment.
Now, Kant being very systematic and a good logician, one of the ways he helps to define
the beautiful is by distinguishing it from other things.
So first he distinguishes it from the pleasurable, and then he distinguishes the beautiful or
the aesthetic from the good.
First let's look at the difference between the beautiful, that's the same thing as the
aesthetic, and the pleasurable.
Whereas the pleasurable is an interested emotion that seeks some kind of gratification
from the object, the beautiful is purely disinterested.
It seeks nothing from the object and makes no demands on it.
A very loose analogy would be the two Greek words for love, eros and agape.
Eros is physical love.
You want to possess the beloved.
That's the pleasurable.
Agape is selfless love, right?
You don't want to possess anything.
You don't want to control it.
You want to love.
And so, very loosely speaking, the beautiful is more like agape, whereas the pleasurable
is more like eros.
Indeed, the beautiful is so unconcerned with any kind of gratification that it is even
unconcerned as to whether the object exists or not.
It can be a fiction.
It can be a unicorn.
But that's okay because the point of the beautiful is not to possess the object.
It's not seeking gratification.
It is pure and free and an end in itself.
All right, let's distinguish the beautiful now from the good.
Whereas the good seeks beauty as a means to some higher end, the beautiful accepts it
unconditionally as a finished thing in itself.
Let's look at something like an icon, religious sculpture or religious painting, an icon.
If you're interested in the good, you're interested in how that icon can lead you to God, which
is another end.
And if you look at it aesthetically, you're interested in it as an end in itself, not
where it can take you or what it can do for you, but as an end in itself.
That is the beautiful.
All right, we're working our way up to the central definition in all of Kant.
Although the judgment of beauty is purely a subjective, Kant says, it is paradoxically
universally felt, and therefore it constitutes a subjective universality.
This is as important to Kant as it is to Burke.
Remember, Burke said the same thing.
It's subjective.
We all feel it by ourselves individually, but it's universal.
Now for Burke, you'll remember his proof of subjective universality is that since imagination
and taste is based on senses and the senses are universal, therefore taste is universal.
Now I think Kant would agree with that, but Kant comes up, I think, with a much more subtle
in-depth answer to this.
Let me explain what he bases the subjective universality.
According to Kant, what allows the aesthetic subjective judgment to be felt universally
is the very fact that it is purely subjective and therefore untainted by any ulterior interests
or inclinations.
When we're looking for the aesthetic, there are no agendas.
There are no political agendas.
There's no goals.
There's no, you know, hidden agendas.
They say no kind of thing we're looking for.
We're not trying to prove anything or anything.
It's just, it's free.
And so what he says is, since, number one, the beautiful does not work in accordance
with any concepts, two, as it is free and disinterested, in fact, three, I'm sorry, two, and then three,
it is even indifferent to the existence of the object, then it must also be free of all
prejudice and external restraint.
And what he's trying to say is that if we all feel it freely, without any prejudice
or restraint or agendas, then we all must feel it the same.
Now, this notion of Kant, which is absolutely central to his aesthetic, is attacked in modern
day.
According to modern theorists, this is ridiculous because there's no such thing as a purely
free disinterested response.
To modernists, everything is political.
There's nothing that's free from a political agenda or ideology.
So they throw that out.
Postmodernists say not everything is political, but everything is relative.
There is no such thing as universality.
So I want you to know that Kant has taken a lot of beating in the last hundred years
for this idea.
But whether you agree with Kant or not, we must understand this concept because it is
absolutely central to Kant.
Whether we agree with it, he agrees that it's both subjective and universal, and it's universal
because it's free from all agendas and ideologies.
Now, let's put it this way.
Why is it so important?
Why do we need this paradox?
For Kant, the aesthetic realm, if it's going to be free, has got to be subjective.
It's got to be subjective or it won't be free.
If it's objective, it's not going to be free.
So to be free, it must be aesthetic.
But if that realm is to offer itself as a field for critical analysis and systematic study,
it must be universal.
So in order to be free, it's got to be subjective.
But in order to allow us to set up rules and regulations as the systematic Kant wants to
do, it's got to be universal.
And again, Kant is like Burke.
If it wasn't universal, if I can't set up any criteria, then why do it?
It's useless.
I told you I'm going to be using some Christian analogies.
Let me use the analogy of Christ.
According to Christian theology, Jesus is 100% man and 100% God.
Just like for Kant, it's 100% subjective and 100% universal.
Now in Christianity, Jesus must be a man or he can't die.
But at the same time, he must be God or his death will not be universal for salvation.
So oddly, there's a little link there.
In the same way Jesus has to be both, so does the aesthetic have to be both, subjective
and universal.
Now, according to Kant, typically, taste is not universally valid, for taste is linked
to pleasure.
The charm of the object gratifies the taste and monopolizes its focus.
So often when we talk about taste, we're gratified.
That means there's a purpose or an end and therefore it's not pure.
However Kant says or he posits, there is a pure, higher kind of taste that is more aesthetic.
And that's a taste that focuses on form.
Now why is taste that focuses on form free and aesthetic?
Well the reason is that according to Kant, a poem's form may be studied as an end in
itself, as a purposeless purpose.
And as such, it can lie within the realm of the aesthetic judgment.
We are saying form as opposed to content.
The content of a poem, the moral if you will, is something that changes with each age.
But for Kant, the form is something that is pure and eternal.
It doesn't change and the form of the poem has no agenda.
It's an end in itself, it's a purposeless purpose and therefore it is good fodder if
you will for the aesthetic judgment.
So formal taste is aesthetic.
Now this formalist element in Kant may be traced back to Aristotle's preference for
plot over character.
Think about it.
Plot is much closer to form whereas character is much closer to content.
And so Kant is, in this sense, an Aristotelian.
He too will privilege plot because plot is linked to form and form is pure and eternal
and therefore aesthetic.
I hope we're following all these links here.
Now this idea, it starts in Aristotle, Kant picks it up and we're going to hear it again
in Unit 5 when we talk about the new critics, that's Lecture 17-20.
They too will pick up on this idea of poetry as a self-enclosed aesthetic artifact, something
that is an end in itself, that is perfect and pure, again, has no ideologies, no agendas,
it's not seeking something, no ulterior motives.
I'm repeating myself but partly because Kant repeats himself again and again.
In fact, right now I want to remind you of something and I'm going to do this because
Kant reminds us of this incessantly in his critique.
And what I want to remind you of is that although it sounds like I'm talking about beauty as
residing in the object, I want you to remember that whenever I talk about beauty, I'm still
talking about the subject.
In other words, it's hard to talk about this.
It sounds as if I'm saying beauty is in the object, in the form of the object, but remember
this is still epistemology.
Finally, beauty resides in the subject.
And again, Kant was trying to find a new way to talk about this because whatever way we
say it, it sounds like we're talking about the object.
It's hard to talk about subjective response but that's what Kant is trying to do and again,
he reminds us again and again that even though he sounds like he's being objective, he is
being sub-objective.
All right, we've talked about taste.
Let's look at the way Kant defines the word imagination.
You're going to notice he's going to rehash all of the terminology from Burke but give
it his own slight edge or point of view.
Now for Kant, imagination is a spontaneous, independent mental power which is enlivened
and set free by aesthetic ideas.
So like Burke, he agrees that the imagination is spontaneous, it's free and again, it starts
to recombine things.
In fact, just like Burke, Kant ascribes to the imagination the very power to recombine
sense data into new forms and new associations and that's got to do with the spontaneity.
The imagination grabs the data and goes wild with it and makes new forms.
So in this sense, Burke and Kant are similar.
Now Kant goes so far though to say that in poetry, the associational powers of the imagination
are most set at liberty.
In other words, imagination pops up in all the arts but Kant felt that poetry sets the
imagination most free, maybe because words are so malleable but anyway, he felt that
the imagination and its power of association to make new associations was something that
reigns supreme if you will in poetry.
Alright so far, I have focused only on aesthetic, on subjective, on feelings but Kant says
that although again, his aesthetic is grounded in concept free feelings experienced by the
imagination, he does admit that understanding and reason do play an important role in judgment.
He's kind of contradicting himself but what he's trying to do is develop.
So we're going to see that understanding and reason do have something to do with taste
and aesthetic.
Let's begin here.
Kant makes a very influential distinction between pure beauty and dependent beauty.
Now pure beauty presupposes no concept of what the object ought to be.
In other words, pure beauty is purely free, purely subjective, purely aesthetic.
And in fact, I would link this concept of pure beauty to a later 19th century concept
that we call art for art's sake or in Latin, ars gratia artist.
The most famous art for art's sake person was Oscar Wilde and those people that lived
at the end of the 19th century, they had a belief that art was self-subsistent and an
end in itself, no purpose, no motive, anything.
Art for art's sake, art as an end in itself.
And these people were very influenced by Kant's notion of pure beauty.
The difference though is art for art's sake, somehow we always link it with that sort of
moral decadence that we think of Oscar Wilde and all, that's not in Kant, Kant's a pretty
straightforward kind of guy, definitely not in Oscar Wilde.
But there's a similarity there between pure beauty and this art for art's sake school.
All right, let's contrast this now from dependent beauty.
According to Kant, dependent beauty presupposes a concept of perception, I'm sorry, perfection
against which to measure the object.
In other words, dependent beauty adheres to purposes that are external to the object.
In other words, dependent beauty starts to move its way into concepts.
I think the best example I can give you is that dependent beauty is the kind of thing
that would presuppose rules of decorum or dictums to teach and to please.
In other words, dependent beauty does have some kind of criteria.
It wants to follow decorum or it wants to teach and please.
There's some kind of concept that regulates the beauty.
Now, one of the things that Kant notes that I think is very interesting is he notes that
much of the disagreement among critics rises from the fact that they are comparing two
different kinds of beauty.
In other words, one critic is talking about pure beauty, the other one's talking about
dependent beauty and they don't realize they're at counter purposes.
The pure beauty critic is talking about form, form, form.
The dependent beauty is talking about the moral or what it's about or what it teaches
us and those are different kinds of beauty.
They're both kinds of beauty, but one's pure and one's dependent.
So again, I think he's right here that sometimes there's disagreements because we're talking
about a different kind of beauty.
Now, as soon as dependent beauty starts to form concepts like decorum, it moves out of
the realm of the imagination and into the realm of the understanding.
And for Kant epistemologically speaking, understanding is a mental faculty that forms concepts.
The aesthetic mental faculty is only interested in feelings, direct response.
But when as soon as we get into understanding, we become interested in concepts.
I'll talk more about this a little bit later, but keep that in mind.
All right, that's the beautiful.
Let's move on to the sublime because he has something to say about that as well, just
as Burke did.
Kant makes a distinction between two kinds of the sublime, between what he calls the
quantitative sublime and what he calls the qualitative sublime.
Now, first, his general definition for sublimity is that which is absolutely great, which inspires
in us feelings of limitlessness and infinity, pretty much the same as what Burke said.
Remember, again, sublimity is an epistemological response, it inspires in us limitlessness
and infinity.
Now, the quantitative sublime, and Kant also calls this the mathematical sublime, occurs
when we come into the presence of wild, chaotic objects that cannot be absorbed.
In other words, it's too much force, it's mathematically too much force, or quantitatively
too much force, and we're overwhelmed.
Their greatness surpasses the power of our intuition to grasp them.
In other words, it's so powerfully, so overwhelming that our imagination can't hold it all.
And Kant says that when this happens, when our imagination is absolutely overwhelmed
by the quantitative sublime, you know what happens?
We are forced to turn to reason to help us out.
Now, here's a distinction, beauty turns to understanding, the sublime turns to reason.
Let me explain the difference between understanding and reason.
Whereas understanding merely converts sense data into concepts, reason takes these concepts
and transforms them into higher laws.
Let me explain a little bit more clearly.
Imagination only has to do with feelings.
We feel things spontaneously and we don't think about them.
As soon as we start to think about our feelings, we've moved into the realm of understanding.
Because once we start thinking about our feelings, we start making concepts, we start
making correlations, we notice parallels, we're using our understanding.
So when we start thinking about our feelings, that's understanding.
But when we start to think about our thinking, that's when we get into reason.
In other words, when we take those concepts and form them into higher, more general laws,
we are into the realm of reason.
Now, the beautiful turns to understanding, the sublime turns to reason.
All right, that's the quantitative sublime.
Let's look now at the qualitative, or what Kant also calls the dynamic sublime.
If the quantitative sublime occurs when we can't absorb the object, the qualitative sublime
occurs when we feel awe or fear before an object of overwhelming power.
That's the qualitative sublime.
Kant, by the way, just like Burke, reminds us that if there's any actual danger, it's
not sublime anymore, it's just terror.
So he agrees with Burke on that.
Remember, again, sublimity, there can't be any actual physical danger.
Now, in the qualitative sublime, just as in the quantitative sublime, what happens is,
again, our imagination finds itself inadequate to stand up against such power and might.
And so, just as before, it turns to the higher faculty of reason for help.
So in both the quantitative and qualitative sublime, our imagination is so overwhelmed
that it is forced to turn to reason to help it out.
Now, in a moment, I'm going to explain the sort of upshot of that.
But before I do that, I want to make one more distinction between the sublime and the beautiful.
Okay, this is a distinction that Kant makes.
Kant tries to explain to us that both the beautiful and the sublime consist in what
he calls a free play of two different mental powers.
In the case of beauty, first, Kant describes the subjective experience of beauty as a feeling
of harmony in the free play of imagination and understanding.
What beauty really is is when our imagination and our understanding are in a sort of harmony
and they work together.
That's beauty.
That's the subjective experience of beauty.
On the other hand, sublimity manifests itself in terms not of harmony, but a disharmony
or struggle between imagination and reason.
So beauty, epistemologically speaking, is a harmony between imagination and understanding.
Sublimity is a disharmony between imagination and reason.
I would argue that this distinction, in this distinction, Kant offers us a mental justification
for Burke's assertion that beauty causes us to relax while sublimity brings tension,
right?
Tension, disharmony, relaxing, harmony.
All right.
Now I want to come back to what I mentioned before, and that is what is the upshot, what
is the ramification of the sublime when we're forced to turn from imagination to reason.
Kant builds on the mental disharmony induced in us by the sublime to posit a fascinating
theory as to why the sublime moves us so powerfully.
And by the way, the critique of judgment is an incredibly difficult work to read, but
I believe it is worth plowing through the critique just to get to this end that I'm
going to explain to you now, because I think this is awesome.
This is something that blew me away the first time I read it.
Let's build up to it.
Now, first of all, Kant admits that our experience of the sublime, at first, gives us a sense
of displeasure, right, because there's a mental disharmony between imagination and reason.
So at first, there's a sense of displeasure because our imagination can't handle it,
can't stand up to the magnitude, and the mind turns over.
So at first, there's a displeasure, but, and here's the trick, eventually, that displeasure
turns to pleasure.
When we realize what this surrender from imagination to reason, what this surrender signifies or
means, and this is what Kant says, our experience of the sublime, that moment when imagination
turns over to reason, that moment reveals to us that, finally, cognition or reason is
supreme over sensation or imagination, and that, therefore, we are supra-sensible creatures.
At that moment when imagination turns over to reason, we realize that at heart we are
not sensible creatures tied to the earth, but we are supra-sensible tied to reason.
Kant says that in that moment, we learn with great joy that there is a faculty within us
that is greater than nature, that can surpass both her majesty, quantitative sublime, and
her might, qualitative sublime.
That is to say, we, and I'm sorry, and if that is true, if that discovery is true, that
there is something within us greater than nature, do you know what that means?
That means that our final destination and end is greater than that of nature.
If there is something in us greater than nature that can take over, that means that there
is something within us that, again, is greater than nature.
That is to say, we are not only rational but spiritual creatures, endued with purpose
and an ability to endure and transcend pain and terror.
Isn't that wonderful?
Instead of this epistemological response, Kant sort of proves to us that there must
be something more to us, something more than mere animal physical nature.
There must be something greater in us, again, something that goes beyond nature.
And that suggests once again that we have a purpose separate from that of nature.
We are not just a member of the animal species.
There is something more to us.
There is an ability to transcend the pain and suffering that's related to nature and
the physical.
You know, I like to call this dazzling moment of insight the Kantian catharsis, because
this really is that catharsis as clarification, that aha moment when we say, wait a minute,
there is something inside of me which is greater than nature.
To me, that revelation is just wonderful when you get to the end of the critique of judgment.
Finally, and this is something similar to what I said in Burke, although I am presenting
Kant as a philosophical source of romanticism, we must remember that Kant himself, like Burke,
lived in Pope's age of reason.
So again, he still is privileging reason over imagination.
Indeed, only an enlightenment thinker could posit as the source of our greatest emotional
experience the knowledge that we are rational, right?
Only an enlightenment person could say, oh, the greatest thing is the world is when we
realize we're rational and not just emotional.
So again, he is at the source and at the heart of a theory that will become romanticism,
but like Burke, he still is living in the enlightenment and reason is more important
for him.
Now, as I mentioned before, when we get to the romantics, they will raise imagination
above judgment, synthesis above analysis.
Also let me say that in the next two lectures, Schiller and Hegel, again, because they are
later theorists, they are already moving towards romanticism.
And so in the next lecture, we will turn to Schiller and see how he takes Kant's beliefs
and sort of romanticizes them.
