Lecture 11 Shiller on Aesthetics
In this lecture, we shall study closely the work of a follower of Kant, who, though he
carefully preserved the epistemological slant of his master, turned that slant in a new,
more fully romantic direction, that is, towards the fusion or synthesis of subject and object.
Through an analysis of his letters on the aesthetic education of man and on naive and
sentimental poetry, we shall divine Friedrich Schiller's central aesthetic goal, to bring
back into unity the emotional and rational side of our being.
Now Schiller was born a generation after Kant.
He is very much a Kantian, Kant is very much his master that he looks up to, but what Schiller
does is basically to romanticize the ideas of Kant.
First, let's look at the similarity.
In one hand, what Schiller does is simply expand on the epistemological theories of
Kant.
Let's look at some examples of that.
First of all, for Schiller, as for Kant, beauty remains a subjective experience that is free
and indifferent.
He still believes it's subjective and he still is into this idea of freedom, of an end in
itself, a purposeless purpose.
He gets that from Kant.
Another thing, he agrees with Kant that the free play of mental powers is still to be
put at center stage.
Remember, beauty is that harmony between the imagination and the understanding, whereas
the sublime is a disharmony between imagination and reason.
He still believes in that free play of mental powers.
And finally, he still tends to privilege aesthetic form over didactic content.
Like Kant, he tends to be a formalist and go for the form, which is something that doesn't
change and is free.
However, even though there are these similarities, Schiller gives these theories a new romantic
focus and end.
And so, while Burke privilege judgment over imagination, analysis over reason, and whereas
Kant privileged the disharmony of the sublime over the harmony of the beautiful, Schiller,
who's really quite a romantic at this point, champions both synthesis and harmony.
We're starting to move into what is really romanticism, when you start privileging synthesis
and harmony, rather than difference and judgment and whatnot, you're moving into romanticism.
Now, the ideal for Schiller.
What Schiller is seeking, finally, is a fusion or incarnation of subject and object.
You see in Kant, the subject and the object are divided from each other, and never the
twain shall meet.
Schiller begins what is really the romantic project, if you want to call it that, and
that is to bring the object and the subject together in a fusion, a synthesis, or we might
use the word marriage.
Now, as you might guess, this gives a mystical, spiritual bent to Schiller that is not really
there in Kant.
Kant is more logical and rational.
But when you start talking about marriage, the two into one flesh, bringing together,
you're really moving into an arena that is, again, mystical and spiritual.
You want to bring the two together.
Now, part of the reason that Schiller can do this, or at least attempt to do it, is that
nature takes on a greater and a different importance in Schiller than it does in Kant
or Burke.
For Kant and Burke and other traditional epistemologists, nature is pretty much a dead object.
But in Schiller and the later romantics, they believed that nature too seeks a kind of perfection.
So the object and the subject are both moving towards each other.
And again, there's the need to heal the division, to bring the two together.
This romantic view of nature that we talk about is the romantic belief that we can bring
together the mind, the subjective mind, and nature.
In fact, Wordsworth and Coleridge in their poetry speak of what they call the marriage
of mind and nature, or the marriage of the subject and the object, bringing them again
together in a synthesis or a marriage.
All right, that's a little bit of background.
Now let's get more specific and look at Schiller's great work, The Letters on the Aesthetic Education
of Man.
And this really is a collection of letters.
And I should say that those of you interested in education, you must read this because
this is not only important to aesthetics and poetry, it's very important to education
because he's talking about what an education should do, and he's thinking particularly
of the humanities.
Now in his Letters on the Aesthetic Education of Man, Schiller looks back with awe on the
classical age, but not for the same reasons as the neoclassicists did.
Remember they also love the ancients and look back with longing and nostalgia to the classical
world.
Schiller did that too, but for a different reason.
The reason that he looks back is that Schiller believes that the ancient Greeks had a natural
humanity that we have lost.
It's different than nature and rules and decorum.
He looks back because he believed that the ancients, particularly the Greeks, possessed
a fullness that could fuse imagination and reason.
The ancient Greeks, he believed, were not cut off and fragmented as so many of us are.
Like the Thoreau says, we live lives of quiet desperation, this idea that we're sort of
cut off from ourselves, we're divided and fragmented.
Our imaginative, intuitive side is cut off from our speculative, rational side.
Those different parts of the soul or psyche that Plato talked about in our modern world,
they're cut off from each other.
But Schiller believed with some nostalgia that in the ancient world it was not like
that.
These people were unified.
They had a kind of integrity that we have lost.
Now, when I make this distinction between imaginative, intuitive side and speculative,
rational side, we're back to Apollonian and Dionysiac.
That idea that Nietzsche formed, but we can look at it anachronistically because it really
helps us to understand.
Now, remember, the Apollonian side is that rational, cool, stoic side of the self, whereas
the Dionysiac side is the more wild and irrational and ecstatic side.
Once again, Schiller believed that in the ancient world, those two sides were one.
Another way in our century that we talk about the Dionysiac-Apollonian split, we often talk
about the split between female and male.
We talk about the split between east and west, and finally between religion and science.
We tend to divide these things.
Schiller believed that, again, in the past they were together.
Now, interestingly, T.S.
Eliot would later term this division of the two sides of the human psyche.
He would call it the dissociation of sensibility.
But there's a difference.
For Eliot, the dissociation of sensibility started about 1700.
For Schiller, it started all the way back at the end of the Classical Age.
Now, what did Eliot mean by the dissociation of sensibility?
He believed that in the 17th century, the great metaphysical poets, particularly John
Dunn, were great because their poetry and their philosophy was both imaginative and rational
at the same time.
And if you ever read poetry by John Dunn, it's very rational and scientific, and yet
it's profoundly emotional and passionate at the same time.
What Eliot argued was, after the 17th century, there was a dissociation of this sensibility.
It broke up.
So what he said is, first we got the 18th century, which privileged reason and analysis
too much.
Then we get the 19th century romantics, and they go to the opposite extreme, and they
only talk about passion and imagination and emotion, and forget about reason.
Now, as you can guess, T.S.
Eliot was hoping that he in the 20th century would bring them back together, maybe he was
successful or not.
But I want to bring that up because that idea of the dissociation of sensibility is really
partly what Schiller's talking about, except, as I said before, he sees that breakdown
is occurring really even during Rome's period.
I mean, once we leave the Greeks behind, we're losing that wholeness, that fullness.
Now Schiller's final aesthetic goal is for these two sides to be reintegrated.
That's the goal for Schiller.
Bring those two sides of our soul, our psyche, back into one, and that's his aesthetic goal
because he thinks that beauty and poetry and whatnot can affect that.
Now, let me develop more of this idea of these two split sides.
In another essay that Schiller wrote called On Naive and Sentimental Poetry, Schiller
develops this distinction between ancient and modern, but here he calls it The Naive
and the Sentimental.
Now, what is the naive?
The naive, which is linked to the ancient world, is what is simply and directly tied
to nature.
It rejects all that is artificial or clever, and it is uncorrupted by civilization and
society.
There's a simplicity, a directness, you're part of the world, you don't feel cut off
from nature.
Oftentimes, we, in a technological age, are cut off from nature, not in the naive.
Everything's simple and direct.
Now, whereas the naive is direct, it's unreflective and unmediated, it's direct and spontaneous,
the sentimental is complex, artistic, and strongly self-conscious.
You see, in our sentimental age, we don't just experience things directly.
We really think too much.
We're too strongly self-conscious.
We can't have fun because we're always asking, are we having fun yet to use the old cliche
that's popular these days?
Now, the only place Schiller says that we can still see the naive is in children.
In their simple capacity for wonder and in their ability to accept nature as it is.
We as adults have lost it.
Children still have that sense of naivety, direct love of the world, just unquestioning
spontaneous acceptance.
Now, Schiller wants, of course, to restore the lost unity of the naive.
That's his project.
But, he's not going to do it simply through backward-looking nostalgia.
The answer is not to forget everything and go back to the naive.
We can't do that, just like we don't want to become children again.
What he does instead is try to move forward to a higher unity, move from naive to sentimental
to a higher kind of naivety.
Now, according to Schiller, it is the role of culture, education, and beauty to achieve
this fusion.
They all work together.
What he calls culture, education, and beauty, their final goal for Schiller is to restore
this lost unity.
Let's go back to the letters on the aesthetic education of man.
Another distinction.
Schiller here makes a distinction between the sensuous and formal drives.
It's similar to what we've been talking about, but I want to explain that as well.
Schiller has a way of making distinctions and then trying to bring them together.
That's partly his method.
What is the difference between the sensuous and formal drive?
Well, according to Schiller, the sensuous drive is linked to material life, to matter,
to body, and to change.
In other words, the sensuous drive is the world of becoming, what Plato called the world
of becoming.
It's linked to the physical, to body, to things that change and decay.
The formal drive, on the other hand, is more rational.
It is linked to the preservation of personality, to the spirit which remains the same.
We might link that to Plato's world of being.
Things are preserved.
They stay the same.
They don't change and decay.
To use our terminology again, our sensuous drive is Dionysiac.
It is ecstatic and it leads us to be swept along by sensation, causing our personality
to be suspended.
Think about it.
When you get ecstatic or drunk or something, you sort of leave your personality behind
and you enter into the world of change, the world of flux, the world of becoming.
Well, if the sensuous drive is Dionysiac, you can obviously guess that the formal drive
is going to be Apollonian.
The formal drive seeks a higher, more abstract harmony, free from the restraints of time
and space.
Again, like the Apollonian, it rises above.
It's not chained to things like change, to things like matter, to time and space.
It rises above.
That is the distinction, again, between the Apollonian and the, I'm sorry, and the Dionysiac
or the formal and the sensuous.
Let me give you a few more distinctions.
The sensuous drive deals with particular cases, with concrete things, and with the objects,
using that phrase philosophically.
The formal drive, on the other hand, takes us into the world of the general law, of the
universal, of the subject.
And so if we can make those analogies we all did in our SATs, sensuous is deformal as particular
is to general, as concrete is to universal, as object is to subject.
Or another way to do it is to think of it as the distinction between the body and the
spirit.
All right, now, listen carefully, because this is where people get confused.
You would think that because sensuous deformal is body to spirit, you might think that sensuous
deformal is also form to content, because, right, the form of the poem is on the outside
like our body's on the outside and the contents on the inside, but here we have to be counter-intuitive.
Actually the sensuous drive is linked to the content of the poem, whereas the formal
drive is linked to the form.
Why is that?
The reason is because it is the form of a poem, rather than the content, that is actually
the more timeless, abstract element.
It can be studied coolly and rationally.
So form is linked to formal drive, is linked to soul, is linked to universal, because it's
again that formalist idea of the sort of cool, rational, abstract form.
So again, that's kind of counter-intuitive, but that's the way it works.
Now, here Schiller is being like Kant again, because he's treating form as an aesthetic
end in itself.
Again, remember we said he's a formalist, he's linked to form, linked to the formal
drive.
Now, this is where he breaks again.
We might expect, you might expect me to be saying that Schiller, like Kant, is going
to advocate the subordination of the sensuous drive to the dictates of the formal drive.
You're probably expecting me to say that, because that's what Kant would say.
But this is where Schiller breaks.
Instead of wanting to privilege one over the other, he treats the two drives, sensuous
and formal, as two distinct, but equally valid and vital modes of thought that need to be
synthesized.
And this is what makes it romantic.
We want to privilege the one over the other, but bring them together.
We need both Apollonian and Dionysiac.
We need both formal and sensuous, and we want to bring them together into a synthesis.
Now, according to Schiller, the greatest task of culture and education is to allow these
two drives to operate together, or in other words, to reintegrate feeling and reason, or
in Eliot's term, to heal the dissociation of sensibility.
I think you see all these ideas are coming together.
Schiller deals with them in different ways.
Now, he gives us an answer.
Out of the fusion of these two drives, the sensuous and the formal, emerges what Schiller
calls the play drive.
That's what he calls the synthesis of the sensuous and formal drive.
He calls it the play drive.
Now, very important.
By calling it the play drive, Schiller does not mean to be derogatory.
He's not making fun of it.
Oh, it's childish.
It's the play drive.
Indeed, man, he insists, is only fully human when he plays.
And this is a notion that both the Romantics and Freud would posit as central to human development.
Right?
Freud taught us that it's important for children to play.
It's also important for adults to play.
Play is something that makes us fuller beings.
So again, so often people look down on play as childish.
Rather than thinking of play as childish, let's think about it as childlike.
Right?
We want to be childlike, but not childish.
Let me give you an example that I'm going to talk about in a later lecture, but I'll
mention it now.
Matthew Arnold says that he's really upset by the fact that in the English language,
the word curiosity has a bad connotation.
We think curiosity is like children.
It's curious George.
But what he says is that in the French language, curiosity is an adult thing.
It's kind of like the play drive.
It seeks to bring together, to explore.
And so again, just because we say play or in terms of Arnold, because we say curiosity,
we don't mean childish.
We mean something higher, something childlike.
Now according to Schiller, the play drive, by simultaneously fusing and transcending
the other two drives, sets us free from both the physical restraints of nature and the
moral restraints of reason.
The sensuous drive links us to nature and to all the restraints of our body.
Well, the play drive, since it transcends the two, frees us from that.
The formal drive ties us to the moral restraints of reason.
We've got to fit these abstract laws.
Well, the play drive also frees us from that.
That's not to say the play drive is immoral, but it's more amoral.
It tries to transcend all these things.
I must just butt in here with a little tangent here.
It always has bothered me that because of Hitler and fascism, we always identify the
Germans with regimentation and strictness and no freedom.
I find that a terrible irony because it was the German philosophers, Kant and Schiller,
who gave us the philosophical definition of freedom.
These German romantics believed in freedom, and it's just such a terrible irony that we
move to this regimentation of Hitler.
Please remember that, oddly enough, it was the Germans who taught us philosophically what
freedom is.
I find that very interesting and a terrible irony.
All right, let's come back now to the play drive.
According to Schiller, the play drive is profoundly incarnational.
Again, this is the Christian side of Schiller coming through.
I think you all know that the word incarnation in Christianity refers to this belief that
in Jesus, God took on human flesh, John 1.14, and the word became flesh and dwelt among
us, incarnation in the carne, in the meat, in the flesh.
Now, sometimes we use the word incarnation in a strictly Christian sense.
Jesus is the incarnation of God, but we can also use it in an aesthetic sense.
Whenever you take something that is pure and a form and embody it in a body, that's a kind
of incarnation, and that's the kind of synthesis or fusion that Schiller is looking for.
He wants to get what he calls a living form.
In other words, it's a form and it's perfect, but it's living and changing.
So what we're doing is bringing together being and becoming and fusing them together.
Again, just like Jesus is the eternal God that doesn't change, and yet he's a man who
changes and decays and dies.
Well, that's what art should be, that's what aesthetic should be.
According to Schiller, the play drive affects a marriage between sensuous and formal, between
objective nature and subjective mind, between the concrete and the universal.
It is a marriage, and you know, in the Bible, marriage is a mystery.
It's a shame, we don't really see that anymore, but marriage in the Bible, and both for the
Jews and Christians, is the two becoming one flesh.
It is mystical, and that's how St. Paul treats it.
It is a mystery, a higher fusion.
We are not two anymore, but we're one.
We've come together as something higher.
Let me make one more biblical analogy.
Many Christians read the Bible, and they think that what the Bible teaches is that when we
die, we become pure spirit, like the angels.
This may shock you, but that's not what the Bible teaches.
That is actually a very platonic notion that says, throw out the body and become pure soul.
In the Bible, the only people that are pure soul are angels.
Beasts are pure body.
Beasts are both, and the Bible tells us that in heaven, we will receive resurrection bodies.
Now they won't be simple physical bodies like these, but they still will be bodies.
So even in heaven, the Bible says, we will be both concrete and universal, both physical
and spiritual.
And again, think about Jesus as resurrection body.
So it's kind of interesting.
So I think Schiller is understanding a Christian ethic rather than a platonic ethic.
Well, in the same way that the spirit is joined to this glorious resurrection body, in the
same way, the end product of the play drive is not an abstract, bodiless idea, as it would
be in Plato, but a general timeless form imbued with a particular dynamic life.
So again, the play drive is eternal, and it's pure, and it's perfect, and it's formal,
but it is also dynamic and changing and full of life.
It is a living form.
Now, in that divine, transcendent moment of play, Schiller says, the universal lifts
the concrete up into itself.
The form consumes the matter.
They're brought together.
It's as if the universal carries the concrete up, and we can say the other way, the universal
comes down into the concrete.
That's the fusion we're talking about.
Now, according to Schiller, the play drive, and everything I've said about it so far,
is basically equivalent to beauty.
Everything I've said about the play drive so far can be related to beauty, because
both of them are aesthetic.
They're ends in themselves.
They're free.
So let's move on now and talk about what Schiller claims is the role of beauty, and
we're still in the letters on the aesthetic education of man.
Schiller ascribes a unique role to beauty, and I should say that everything he says about
beauty here, again, I think we can say about the humanities, because he's really thinking
about the humanities.
All right.
What does he say about beauty?
Just like Kant, Schiller says that beauty is indifferent.
It is neither useful nor didactic.
It teaches us nothing, and it supplies us with no particular knowledge.
This is the same thing with Kant.
If someone came up to Schiller and said poetry is useless, it doesn't teach us anything, he
would say exactly.
That's what beauty is.
It is a free end in itself.
It doesn't teach us anything.
It's not didactic.
What then does it do?
According to Schiller, beauty provides us instead with a totality, a perfect wholeness.
Within that whole, we find all faculties existing in a higher harmony.
It's that higher synthesis of the play drive, something that transcends both the sensuous
and the formal drive.
And Schiller says that to experience that wholeness is to enter into a pure aesthetic
mood, a state of suspension beyond the confines of time and space.
I hope you've all had that experience several times in your life, where you're experienced
a great work of art, whether it's literature or opera or whatever or painting, and suddenly
you feel yourself transported, taken again to a higher mode of being, sort of like what
we said about the sublime in an earlier lecture.
But it takes us to a higher realm.
Maybe we might call this a form of aesthetic salvation, if you will, but we're lifted
up to a higher, better place.
And you know what he says, Schiller?
In this mood, this aesthetic mood, we experience true freedom, true play, and true unity.
We reach the ultimate.
We're taken somewhere where everything comes together.
Again, that's a kind of a catharsis, again.
Now, further, although beauty and the sublime, Schiller says, we are empowered to give form
to that which is formless and hence terrifying in nature.
In other words, we find things in nature that are formless and terrifying.
We can't deal with them.
Beauty allows us to take that formless terror and put it into a form that can be dealt with.
And when we do that, we gain an epistemological, super-sensible victory over nature that frees
us from our deepest fears.
Let me explain.
Remember, in Kant, that moment in the sublime when we turn over to reason and we realize,
hey, I can handle it.
There's something in me that's greater than nature?
Well, Schiller's saying a similar thing.
Let me give an example with my children.
I mentioned my little children before.
Sometimes little children are afraid of something, afraid of a shadow.
Well, you know what's a great way to handle that, Schiller would say?
Take that terrifying shadow and put it in a story.
Make it aesthetic.
Tell them a story about how the shadow is defeated by a hero.
And what's happening is that the aesthetic is allowing us to overcome our fears and
we realize we can handle it.
Now, remember, there can't be any actual danger.
If there's a real dinosaur in your kid's room, you better run.
But if they're just afraid of dinosaurs in general, you can put it into an aesthetic
form and help the child to deal with his fear.
We can handle it.
Again, we can rise above nature and our own fears.
Still, and this is important, a difference between Schiller and Kant is that Schiller
is careful, as Kant is not, to hold on to physical reality.
The contemplation of form, Schiller says, must not be cut off from the feeling of life.
Finally, Kant takes us away into the abstract.
That's his orientation.
He wants to go into the abstract.
Schiller reminds us, as romantics in general do, that you can't forget the physical.
We don't want to just go back to Plato's world of being.
We want a higher fusion.
And again, that's what makes Schiller more romantic than Kant.
Finally, Schiller's aesthetic, perhaps unconsciously, perhaps consciously, turns Plato on his head.
Are we getting used to this by now in the series?
Turning poor Plato around and around in his grave?
Let me show you how it works.
First of all, Schiller tells us that beauty proves to us that feeling and thought can
occur together.
The experience of beauty shows us that we can bring together those sides of our psyche.
Our feelings and our thoughts can be brought together.
Therefore, Schiller reasons, and education in beauty, or art, is best able to lead us
back to that original naive unity we have lost.
We want to get back to that unity to be whole creatures.
Beauty is the best able and the most effective at bringing us together.
Indeed, for Schiller, beauty and the play drive, as it most fully fuses concrete and
universal, body and soul, is better suited than philosophy to heal the disunity within.
Philosophy can't heal the disunity because philosophy exacerbates the disunity by being
too abstract.
Only beauty, poetry, art can balance those two sides of our psyche.
And so we end up with this.
It is the poets and not the philosophers who are best qualified to form whole, integrated
citizens who will not just know justice, but live it out.
So again, we've turned plate on our head because now it's poetry, not philosophy, that makes
ideal citizens for an ideal republic.
Because for Schiller, ideal citizens are people who have this unity.
They're not all irrational or orrational.
They are whole and unified.
And again, it is beauty and poetry that does this.
Only poetry can heal that disunity.
Philosophy can't do it.
As I said a moment ago, philosophy exacerbates it.
To close with a paraphrase from C.S. Lewis, although beauty may possess no survival value,
it does give value to survival.
Lewis says that about friendship, but we can say it has no survival value.
For the way I tell my students, it doesn't help you to live, but it does give you something
to live for.
It gives value to your survival.
Remember that next time a scientific person teases you for your love of the arts.
All right, in our next lecture, we will turn to Hegel and we will see how Hegel continues
the romanticization of Kant.
