Lecture 12, Hegel and the Journey of the Idea
In our 12th lecture, we shall take up one final German theorist who completed, as it
were, Schiller's romanticization of Kant.
Through a close analysis of the introduction to his philosophy of fine art, we shall see
how Hegel affected what is perhaps the greatest inversion of Plato by positing a platonic
form, the idea, that rather than remain pure and untainted in the world of being, seeks
to enter into our world of becoming.
If Schiller moves Kantian epistemology in the direction of romanticism, then we might say
that Hegel, another Kantian, both extends and consumates that movement.
Like Schiller, Hegel seeks in art a higher fusion of subject and object.
He's still looking for the fusion, the synthesis, the marriage.
He says, Hegel, that true art mediates between form and content, between idea and image.
Like Schiller, he believes art seeks a full incarnation, one that will offer the greatest
degree of intimacy and union between the universal idea and the concrete image.
For an intimacy calls up again the marriage metaphor of two into one.
He doesn't want to just arbitrarily throw together concrete and universal.
He wants there to be a real intimacy in this marriage or synthesis he is seeking.
Also like Schiller, Hegel ascribes to art a key cultural and educational function.
True fine art, Hegel says, is, like religion and philosophy, one of the modes through which
divine spiritual truths enter into our physical world of change.
In other words, art, like philosophy and religion, is a vessel or a vehicle of divine truth.
Art, then, is prophetic, and that's going to be a key romantic idea.
Poet as prophet, art as prophecy.
Now, that phrase fine art that we use a lot today that goes back to Hegel,
and that's what Kant meant by pure beauty, the fine arts.
Art, Hegel says, is a cultural storehouse of the wisdom of the ages.
Best example of that would be proverbs.
Notice how proverbs sum up and encapsulate the wisdom perhaps of a whole culture or a whole society.
That's what art does. Art, again, is a cultural storehouse.
In addition to storing this wisdom, art also functions as a key to unlocking the treasures of long dead civilizations.
Hegel says, sometimes it's the only key we have.
The only thing we know about a long dead civilization may be their poetry.
What we call their bells, letras, their poetry, their drama is sometimes the only key we have to understanding them.
Let me give you a perfect example of this.
If you want to understand British, high, high middle-aged British culture, like around the 14th century,
you can read history books and you can look at all different things,
but if you really want to understand and get into the life of the high middle-ages of Britain,
you know how you do it?
You take out your chaucer and read the general prologue to the Canterbury Tales.
That will tell you more about the middle-ages than anything, I believe,
and it will not only tell you fact-wise in terms of history,
it will give you the spirit of that age, of what it would be to live in the 1390s in Britain.
So, again, art is a key to understanding culture.
Finally, like Schiller, Hegel also turns Plato on his head, here he goes again,
converting the arts into a higher form of education, a journey from division to wholeness.
And this idea of journey is key to all romanticism.
We'll see it again in the British Romantics, our next unit.
The idea of, see, in Plato had the idea of the journey or the education of the philosopher.
The Romantics have an idea of the journey or education of the poet.
In fact, Wordsworth's great poetic autobiography, the Prelude,
has, at his subtitle, the growth of a poet's mind.
So they're interested in a journey, in an aesthetic journey, from division to wholeness.
In this area, however, Hegel goes far beyond Schiller to enter into a more direct dialogue
with the very essence of Platonic thought.
The timeless idea, the divine beauty, the spiritual truth,
what exists up in the world of being, what finally Hegel calls the idea,
that lies at the core of all great art, dwells in the world of being.
He would agree with Plato that the ideas, the art, all those images, and other images, I'm sorry,
but the ideas all exist in the world of being.
They're up there in the forms.
So in that sense, Hegel would agree with Plato.
In that sense.
But what he does in the philosophy of fine art is a difference.
Whereas Plato's forms remain apart from and untainted by our world of becoming,
Hegel's idea seeks a sensuous incarnation.
In other words, it wants to become incarnated in our sensuous physical world.
So he takes Plato's forms and brings them down.
In fact, he says they have a desire to journey from being to becoming.
The way Hegel expresses that is the movement from the idea to the ideal,
he calls the ideal.
In the introduction to his philosophy of fine art,
Hegel delineates a thrilling, platonic journey of the idea
through various artistic modes and genres
as it seeks full and final expression in our world.
It's quite exciting.
I mean, to him, the idea is on a real journey, like an adventure by sea.
And it moves its way through different artistic genres and modes
to find a full incarnation.
And in a moment or so, I will trace that for you.
Now, what the idea, sometimes we can just say idea with a capital I,
what idea seeks is not just a well-executed artistic form in which to dwell.
It's not just looking for a dwelling place.
Instead, it's looking for, again, an incarnation
in which it is expressed in and through a concrete image.
There's that intimacy I was talking about.
He doesn't just want to find a concrete form to dwell in.
It wants intimacy. It wants a concrete universal.
Let me give you a metaphor.
For Hegel, the relationship between the form and the meaning,
you know, the idea and its embodiment,
should not be like clothes to the body.
If you think about it, my clothes are merely a covering to my body.
They are not linked in any intimate way with my body.
That's not what He wants.
He wants a relationship that's like the body to the soul.
Because my body is not just a covering for my soul.
They are intimately related.
My soul expresses itself through my body.
That's the kind of incarnation He wants.
Body to soul, not clothing to body.
Imagine, if you will, a liquid that has the desire and the power
to create its own container.
Try to wrap that around your mind.
A liquid that actually forms its own container.
That's what Hegel is looking for.
That's the intimate, sensuous incarnation that he's looking for.
Now, this is something unique to Hegel.
He argues that if it is to achieve this incarnation,
the idea must not be fully abstract, like Plato's forms,
but they must partake already of some concreteness.
This is unique to Hegel.
He says that the idea, even when it's in the world of perfection of being,
must already have a little bit of concreteness to it
if it hopes to become concrete in this world.
Now, this carries us to something unique about the philosophy of Fine Art,
because Hegel's aesthetic basically offers us a Christian reworking of Plato.
Now, I should say here that the Christianity of Hegel is a hotly debated topic,
whether he was a Christian or not a Christian, what he believed or what he didn't.
I don't know what the answer is. I'm not going to even try.
But I will say that in the philosophy of Fine Art, he is at his most Christian.
In fact, the introduction to the philosophy of Fine Art is filled with Christian illusions,
and I'll try to explicate some of those for you as we go through.
Now, an example right away.
Hegel links the journey of the idea to several key theological
and philosophical distinctions of Christianity.
For example, his assertion that I just told you,
that the idea must already partake of the concrete
if it is to successfully incarnate itself,
is strongly linked to two central Christian doctrines,
the Trinity and the Incarnation.
You know what the Bible teaches?
Okay, what the Bible teaches is that even before Jesus became incarnate,
even before he became a man, Jesus of Nazareth,
he already existed in what theology or Christology calls a pre-incarnate state.
In other words, we speak of the pre-incarnate Christ.
The best example, many of you know the story of Meshach, Shadrach and Abednego
when Nebuchadnezzar threw the three children into the fiery furnace.
And remember, he looked in there and said,
did I not throw three?
Yet I see four people now, and one of them looks like a son of God.
Well, many Christians believe that that is a pre-incarnate manifestation
of the second person of the Trinity, Jesus.
So again, I really think that Hegel's probably getting this idea from Christianity.
Again, in the same way that Jesus was pre-incarnate,
the idea is also pre-incarnate.
This is very different from Plato.
Plato would not accept this idea of a pre-incarnate form.
It has nothing to do with the physical, it's the world of being, it's pure.
All right, as the idea travels on its incarnational journey,
it moves through three distinct stages,
each of which is linked to a specific artistic medium.
And this is where we get the philosophy of Finor,
because as the idea goes on its journey, it goes through different artistic medium.
I find it quite exciting.
Again, let's work through this journey.
The first phase of the journey, and the oldest phase,
is what Hegel calls the symbolic.
In this phase, the symbolic phase,
the idea has not yet found its own formative principle.
It cannot shape its own container yet,
and so it seeks a more general form.
The liquid has not gained the power to create its own container,
and so rather than try to form a container,
it just seeks a general form that it can sort of dwell shadowy in,
if I can make that word.
Now the best example of symbolic art is the ancient temple.
Here it was believed that the spirit of God, or the gods,
dwelt, but in an indeterminate form.
So whether you're a Greek pagan, or a Jew of the Old Testament,
you believe that God dwells in the temple.
Now there's not a direct incarnation there.
God is not the temple, but His spirit dwells in the temple.
Of course, for the Jews, first He dwelt in the Ark of the Covenant,
and then eventually in the temple itself.
Now, as you might guess, the defining artistic medium
of the symbolic phase is architecture.
Because architecture is something that rather than embodying
or incarnating something, it just expresses it.
Think about how Gothic cathedrals express the glory of God
in a very abstract way, or, I'm sorry, Hegel would say,
in a very symbolic way.
Through the medium of raw matter, of huge, roughly hewn stones,
both the early pagans and the Jews sought to express
the majesty of divinity.
Again, that was the closest way they could capture divinity
in these huge stones, sometimes stones not formed by human hands,
as it sometimes says in the Bible.
In this phase, in other words, full incarnation is not yet possible.
We can't have a full incarnation.
The best that can be achieved is to create what we might call
a divine space where the congregation can gather.
So they gather at the temple, at the architecture, at the temple,
and there they commune with the spirit of God.
It's not a full incarnation yet, but it's just there.
All right, from there we move to the second phase.
And the second phase is the classical phase.
In the classical phase, the free and adequate embodiment
of the idea is finally achieved.
We move beyond this sort of raw matter and huge stones
to really find an incarnation, a free and adequate embodiment,
that's what Hegel calls it, a way to express itself in a form
that's, again, where there's more intimacy there.
In other words, what happens is that something in physical nature
is found that is compatible with or fitted to the spiritual idea.
The result is a concrete spirituality, a mystical fusion
in which the idea appears and is revealed in a sensuous guise.
That's the full incarnation we're looking for in the classical.
The perfect embodiment has been achieved.
Now, the defining artistic medium of the classical phase
is not architecture, but sculpture.
In the classical statues of Zeus and Athena,
the full presence and power of the gods stands before us in eternal repose.
For the ancient pagans, a lot of times the statue of Athena
was believed to be really an embodiment of Athena.
It's still true for much of Hinduism today.
You come in the presence of the statue
and you are really in the presence of deity
in a more concrete way than the generic temple.
What happens is that you've got the temple,
all the congregation is there, and suddenly with a flash,
God enters the temple and takes on a discernible shape, the statue,
with which the congregation can commune directly.
Now, to make the Christian analogy that Hagel does,
if we link the symbolic phase,
well, let's say, let's link the symbolic phase
to the first person of the Trinity.
The first person of the Trinity is God the Father.
And the Bible says that God the Father is Spirit.
He is a spiritual being whom no one has ever seen.
So God the Father is like the symbolic phase.
But the classical phase is like God the Son,
the second person of the Trinity,
that incarnate God who became flesh and dwelt among us.
And in the same way, symbolic to classical is a move
from God the Father to God the Son,
it is also a sort of a move from the Old Testament to the New Testament.
Think about it.
In the Old Testament, God's power is loosely expressed
in images like the eagle or the burning bush.
God is not identified with the burning bush.
His glory dwells there in a symbolic way.
In the classical New Testament, however,
God's presence enters physically into our world,
again in the person of the incarnate Christ.
Now, an interesting way is that Hagel shows us
that the incarnate Christ might be seen as the perfection
of pagan anthropomorphism.
In other words, all those pagan statues
where they try to anthropomorphize
or give a human body to God,
Christ is the fulfillment of that.
Let me make another distinction that may help.
A distinction between symbolic and classical.
Jews and Muslims would be symbolic.
Christians would be classical.
Let me explain why.
I think many of you know that Muslims like Jews
do not believe in representation.
Particularly Muslims, you do not make any pictures of God.
You don't even make pictures of Muhammad.
You have a blank face.
That is symbolic.
The idea is that you can't put God in a human body.
And both Jews and Muslims agree that Jesus wasn't God
because God doesn't have a son.
God doesn't come into the world.
He's pure.
He's transcendent to use the philosophical word.
Christianity, on the other hand, is classical.
Christianity does have icons and statues of Christ
because we believe that since God took on a human flesh,
then we can also make representations of him.
Now, there is one exception.
Radical Protestants, those iconic class
who went around and broke things.
In a weird way, radical Protestants
are a little bit like Muslims, right?
Because all they want is the word.
They don't want any images.
And so sometimes, without realizing it,
radical Protestants almost become like Jews and Muslims
in their suspicion of embodiment or pictures,
icons that have an orthodoxy.
In Catholicism, you have statues.
So again, if you think about it,
the difference is between transcendence
and the Christian idea that although God is transcendent,
at one point in history, he became imminent.
In other words, he entered into our physical world of change.
All right, you're all wondering what the third phase is.
The third phase is the romantic phase.
Now, if the symbolic phase
aspires to a full ideal fusion
and the classical achieves that fusion,
then the romantic phase seeks to transcend it.
It's like the play drive. It seeks to transcend it.
In the romantic phase, there is a desire
to break down the perfection,
completion, and rigidity of the classical form.
See, classicism is like neoclassicism,
very, very decorous, frozen, everything perfect
and balanced and orderly.
Romantic comes along and wants to break down that rigidity.
I come to music again, listen to Bach,
where everything is so balanced.
Then try to listen to Wagner or Tchaikovsky and Chopin,
and you will notice that they're always trying
to break out of the form, break out of the envelope.
That's romantic as opposed to classical.
What the romantic wants is a shedding of all limits,
because what happens is that we want to move to a higher level,
just like the play drive. There's the fusion, if you will.
Romantic is the fusion because romantic wants to move
to a higher level.
Now, when this happens, Hegel says,
the idea gains self-knowledge and becomes self-conscious.
The idea is a subject, and so it is capable of self-consciousness,
and the idea becomes self-conscious.
It's not just frozen anymore, it becomes almost a living thing.
Another way of putting it is that romantic art is art transcending itself.
Isn't that a wonderful phrase? Art transcending itself.
Through it, we see, as we did in Kant and Schiller,
the triumph of the rational soul over the external world.
However, as in Schiller, but not as in Kant,
this triumph is more a higher fusion
than a complete overthrow of nature.
In other words, rather than abandon or eliminate the world,
the idea creates its own inner world.
So this is not a Kantian escape to abstraction.
It is, like in Schiller, a higher fusion.
We don't want to get rid of the body and the world and nature.
We want a higher fusion, like the play drive, that will transcend it.
Just so, let's come back to my analogy to Christianity.
Who's the third person of the Trinity?
The third person of the Trinity is the Holy Spirit,
and he's like the romantic phase.
There's a verse in the Bible where Jesus tells his disciples,
it is good for you that I go away.
Because if I do not go away, the Spirit cannot come.
And the Bible teaches us that once Jesus returned to the Father,
the Holy Spirit came down.
And a lot of kids that I know that come to my Bible studies,
they always say, oh, I wish I could have lived in the time of the disciples and known Jesus.
And I say, no, you don't want to.
It's better to live now because, according to the Bible,
since Jesus has left, now the Holy Spirit lives inside of us.
And what happens is wonderful in the Bible.
What happens is we become the temple because the Spirit lives inside of us.
But the Spirit cannot come until Christ goes away.
The classical has to be broken down to release the romantic.
And so, again, the third person of the Trinity, the Holy Spirit,
is linked to the romantic phase.
Another aspect, another point about this.
The higher fusion of the romantic phase does not restore the classical repose of Eden or the Golden Age.
Like Schiller, Hegel is not just saying, let's go back to Eden or the Golden Age.
Golden Age is the classical version of the Judeo-Christian Eden.
It doesn't go back.
Instead, like Schiller, it looks ahead to that greater city, the New Jerusalem,
where physical and spiritual will be united.
In the Bible, the New Jerusalem is like Eden, but it's on a higher level.
And the Bible is interesting because we start in Eden and we end up at the New Jerusalem.
And the New Jerusalem is like Eden, but again, it's a better place.
And so, we end up where we started, but on a higher level.
So it's kind of a circular journey, but it takes us to a higher level.
And if you know your Bible, you will know that the New Jerusalem, the Bible says,
will be heralded by the great marriage of Christ and the Church.
You know, the Bible is a comedy. It doesn't end with death, it ends with a marriage.
The great marriage of Christ, the bridegroom, and the Church, the bride, will be linked together.
And is that not the perfect fusion?
The fusion of the ultimate Creator, the subject, who is God, and we, who are the created,
will be fused together in this marriage.
Isn't it wonderful? Sublime.
This is romanticism, the higher marriage, the fusion that we're seeking.
All right, you're wondering what the mediums are of the romantic?
Well, romantic arc works through three mediums, painting, music, and poetry.
And it's in that ascending order.
Painting is the least romantic, music is the second most, and poetry is the most romantic,
or the most art transcending itself.
Of these three, like I said, painting is the least ideal.
And the reason it is the least ideal is because it's so physical.
Because painting is very physical, it's still linked to the concrete world,
and so it's not as free as the romantic phase would aspire to.
But it's the beginning.
Painting is more free than sculpture because you're allowed to have more dimension and whatnot
and break out in colors and whatnot.
Music is more ideal than painting because it is free from all physical constraints.
However, it's still, Hegel says, music must still heed fixed laws and quantity.
So there's still rules that must listen to.
I think you all know that Pythagoras was not only a mathematician, but a musician.
Music is very mathematical in a way.
And so because music has to still follow these fixed laws, it's not purely ideal.
For Hegel, poetry is the freest and most ideal of the arts.
Hegel calls it the universal art of the mind, which is to say it's most free.
And in it, Hegel finds a fully abstract, subjective spirituality that is able to create its own inner world of ideas.
So again, it is the perfect fusion of the two.
Poetry deals with words.
It's not linked to concreteness at all.
It's not linked to rules and regulations.
It's absolutely free to transcend itself and to move to a higher level.
Now, I, as someone who studies and teaches poetry, I love what Hegel says here.
But I must be honest and tell you that most romantic aestheticians would disagree with Hegel.
They would posit music as the freest, most unmediated of the arts.
And I've got to say I agree because, you know, poetry still has words and there's a mediation between us.
But music, something like Mozart, goes directly to you.
It breaks down all language barriers and goes directly to the heart.
So I would really think, as most people would say, that music is more ideal.
Heck, poetry has rules too.
It's called meter and rhyme, at least in traditional poetry.
But it's just interesting to note that Hegel says poetry is the most romantic or the most free.
Finally, this movement from symbolic to classical to romantic forms a classical example or a perfect example of Hegel's dialectic.
Now, in the dialectical thought of Hegel, many of you have heard this word before,
you begin with an idea, what he calls a thesis.
Over time, that thesis creates its own opposite, what he calls the antithesis.
Eventually, those two, the thesis and the antithesis, collide and struggle to form a new and higher fusion known as the synthesis.
So we move from symbolic thesis to classical antithesis to romantic synthesis.
That's a classic example of the Hegelian dialectic.
Now, later, Marx would rip the Hegelian dialectic out of its proper sphere in the world of transcendent spiritual ideas
and re-inscribe it in a fully material physical world.
Marx calls it dialectical materialism.
And this is one of my soapbox things too.
I really get upset when people blame Hegel for Marx.
Yes, they both believed in dialectic thesis, antithesis, synthesis, but there is a huge difference.
And by the way, Marx admits this, that there's a big difference because Hegel's dialectic exists in a transcendent world,
a world of ideas, of supernatural forces, of freedom, whereas Marx is a materialist.
All he believes is in the physical world.
Marx was a complete atheist. He didn't believe in anything spiritual.
So please do not confuse the two.
Maybe a good way to point this out, something I said in Schiller.
Hegel's dialectic is all about freedom.
Marx's dialectic is all about determinism, how we are determined by material forces.
Marx is the beginning of the German idea of Germans as regimented and deterministic.
Really, to blame Hegel for dialectical materialism is like blaming the Bible for supplying Marx
with his key belief that all of history is moving unstoppably toward a state of perfect community and brotherhood.
I can't think of two more radically different metaphysical systems than Christianity and Marxism.
But Marx takes one of his most important beliefs right out of the Bible.
The Bible is eschatological.
That word eschatology means a study of the end.
The Bible believes that all of history is moving unstoppably towards the New Jerusalem, towards this perfect world.
Well, interestingly, isn't that what Marx believes too?
He believes everything is moving unstoppably towards perfect communism, towards a state of perfect freedom.
Now, this idea is Christian, but Marx secularizes it.
See, in the Bible, everything is moved along by spiritual forces, by God.
Whereas, for Marx, everything is moved forward by material, historical, economic reasons.
So again, we've got to be careful here when we talk about the dialectic.
I would say that to blame Hegel for Marx, let me give you one more example, is like blaming Wagner for Hitler.
When the ring cycle is perhaps the greatest indictment of the corruption of power ever written.
I get really upset when people blame Hitler on Wagner, blame Wagner for Hitler.
Now, Wagner was a fairly irascible fellow from what I've learned.
But still, if any of you have ever listened to the ring cycle, it shows you how power corrupts and absolute power corrupts absolutely.
If Hitler understood the ring cycle the way Wagner meant it, he would have never become the dictator he did,
because he would have realized it can only lead to his own destruction.
That's what happens again and again throughout the entire ring cycle.
Power corrupts and destroys itself.
Now, I would say that Nietzsche can be blamed a little bit for Hitler because of the will to power.
But again, Wagner, I don't think he should be blamed at all.
Finally, in the last few minutes, let me say that there's also a difference between the Hegelian dialectic and the Platonic dialectic.
Remember the Platonic dialectic works through question and answer and tries to rip away all the veils and get at the truth?
That's a little bit different than the Hegelian dialectic.
Now, again, there is an idea of sort of struggle and whatnot, and maybe that's why I'm not really sure etymologically why we end up with the same word dialectic because they're very different.
But again, the Platonic dialectic is more unpochalyptic, ripping away the veil,
whereas the Hegelian dialectic is more of a movement towards a higher synthesis.
Well, that takes us to the end of this unit, and I hope you've kept up with me.
This was a very difficult unit.
In the next lecture, we will begin our fourth unit on British Romantic poetry,
and we will begin by looking at the Ur text of Romanticism, Lyrical Balance.
I'm Tom Rawlins, president of the teaching company.
We hope you've enjoyed the lectures on these tapes.
To order more courses or to receive a copy of our most recent catalog, call 1-800-TEACH-1-2.
That's 1-800-TEACH-1-2.
Or visit our website at www.teachco.com.
Thank you very much for listening.
