Hello. I'm Tom Rollins, President of the Teaching Company. These lectures are part of the Great
Courses on Tape series. The Great Courses on Tape cover a broad array of university-level
disciplines. The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long. By listening
for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in just weeks. Browse
our catalog or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just 30 minutes
a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world. The lecturers are
university professors carefully selected by the teaching company and its customers for
intellectual distinction and teaching excellence. The lectures on these tapes are titled From
Play-Doh to Postmodernism, Understanding the Essence of Literature and the Role of the
Author. The lecturer is Professor Louis Marcos. Professor Marcos specializes in British romantic
poetry, literary theory and the classics. He received his BA in English and History from
Colgate University and earned his master's degree and PhD in English from the University of
Michigan. He is a member of Phi Beta Kappa and has gone on to win teaching awards at both the
University of Michigan and at Houston Baptist University where he has taught since 1991.
Each of Dr. Marcos lectures is outlined in the course guide that comes with these tapes. The
course guide also includes a glossary, timeline, biographical notes and bibliography. You may
find it useful to review the outlines before and after listening to the lectures.
Lecture 13 Wordsworth, Coleridge and British Romanticism
With lecture 13 we move into a new unit, British Romanticism. After a brief introduction to the
period that will contrast the Romantics with the century that preceded them, we shall move
on to analyze the great poetic, theoretical experiment that most consider the ur text of
British Romanticism, lyrical ballads. We shall explore both the unique plan of lyrical ballads
and the implications of that plan for literary theory. All right, in this unit, unit four,
we shall consider the contributions of the British Romantic poets. Our text will be Wordsworth's
preface to the lyrical ballads, Coleridge's biography of literary, Shelley's defensive poetry,
and Keats' letters. After an initial lecture on lyrical ballads itself, that's this lecture,
we shall then devote one lecture each to Wordsworth, Coleridge and Shelley. Rather than devote an
entire lecture to Keats, what I will do is consider Keats' theories in relation to those
of Wordsworth, Coleridge and Shelley, so he will be fitted in the additional lectures.
All right, let's talk about the Romantics in general now. Like Pope and Dryden,
all four of our theorists in this unit, again, Wordsworth, Coleridge, Shelley and Keats,
were poets before they were critics, and thus their theory is a reflection of their own poetic
technique. In other words, they're not like the last unit we did. Those were philosopher critics,
Hegel and Kant particularly. Schiller was actually a great poet, but our four Romantics are more
like Pope and Dryden because, again, they were poets, and when they wrote their criticism,
they were writing it again out of their own experience, so it gives a little more,
perhaps, practicality or pragmatic touches to their theory. Now, there's a difference, though.
They're like Pope and Dryden in the sense that they're poets, however, there's a big difference.
The Romantics treated the poet rather than nature or the rules of decorum as the source
and touchstone of art. When we looked at Pope and Dryden, especially Pope, we noticed that they were
theorists who were very interested in nature and decorum and following those rules. In this lecture,
we're going to see our poet critics following the idea of the poet. In addition,
we're going to find that all of our poets fashion, excuse me, a new social role for the poet,
very different from the 18th century. All right, another introductory matter. We should notice
that all four of our Romantics altered the epistemological theories of the Germans. In other
words, what we looked at in our last unit. Now, they are epistemologists, but there's a difference,
whereas the German epistemologists were still pragmatic theorists and, you remember,
interested in the relationship between the poem and the audience. The British Romantics were what
we might call expressive epistemologists, and you'll remember expressive theorists are interested
in the relationship between the poem and the poet. Another difference, whereas the theorists of the
last unit betray an 18th century or enlightenment orientation, and that was particularly true
in the case of Burke and Kant. Remember, I said they're proto-romantics or pre-romantics, but
they're still very much 18th century enlightenment interested in reason and analysis. The Romantics
often define themselves in opposition to the age of reason. They borrow some ideas from it,
but basically they are a kind of a revolution, a reaction against what was going on in the century
before, and that's actually fairly typical in all areas of intellectual history. Now,
though they're still interested in mental faculties, epistemology, they replace the 18th
century emphasis on analysis with a new focus on synthesis. And in addition, they privilege
imagination over reason and judgment. And of course, we talked about that in quite in detail
in the last unit. Now, you'll remember I said with Schiller and Hegel, we're already moving in that
direction. And I should say now to be clear, I did break chronology last unit. I just should tell you
that Hegel really comes after the British Romantics, but to get some consistency, I put him with the
Germans, but he really comes after the Romantics. All right, before moving on to lyrical ballads,
I want to survey one more thing. There are three competing events for the cause or origin of
Romanticism that I just want to run through quickly. Three possible origins for Romanticism.
The first possible origin is the publication of Rousseau's Confessions in 1781 with its
championing of the individual and its radical notion that the personal life and ideas of a
single individual is matter worthy of great art. The great Jean-Jacques Rousseau, although he lived
and died in the 18th century, really is one of the great origins of Romanticism. He was one of the
first people to dare to write an autobiography. Now, you all know there's a famous autobiography by
Augustine called the Confessions, but I want you to think about it. The only reason Augustine could
justify writing an entire book about himself is that his autobiography is really what Christians
call a testimony. In other words, it's there to give glory to God. I was a sinner, now I'm a saved
Christian. Jean-Jacques Rousseau makes no excuses. He is writing an autobiography because he thinks
that himself, he himself, is matter worthy of great literature. That is a radically new idea
that you could spend a whole book writing about yourself. And Jean-Jacques Rousseau actually
delights in his individuality. He says, I am unique. No one else is like me. When they made me,
they broke them old. This is a radical romantic notion that says the individual rather than society
or God or anything else should be at the center. So that's one of the origins or causes of Romanticism.
The second one that is often discussed is the beginning of the French Revolution, the storming
of the Bastille in 1789. And that event not only offered the hope of both internal and external
freedom, but promised more radically that internal dreams could affect and even alter the external
world. In other words, the French Revolution not only showed that we can throw off our chains,
that we can change the world, but what it showed more radically is that an internal vision that
people have, a vision of freedom that they can take that internal vision and project it onto the
world and change the world in accordance with their dreams. That's very romantic, as you'll see in
this unit. Finally, the third origin, and that is what we are most interested in this lecture
and in this unit, is the publication of lyrical ballads in 1798. And what it was followed with,
in 1800, there was a second edition of lyrical ballads to which Wordsworth added a preface.
Now, in this lecture, we're going to look just at lyrical ballads 1798. In the next lecture,
we will look at the preface itself, because the preface in some ways really caused the revolution
even more than lyrical ballads, but we're going to split them up. Now, why is lyrical ballads a
third source? Because it championed new subjects for poetry and a new approach to those subjects,
and that changed literary theory really forever. And that's what I want to do in this
lecture, is show you how lyrical ballads did that.
All right, Wordsworth and Coleridge planned together lyrical ballads, and they wanted to
make it a new kind of poetic volume. Now, as some of you may know already, the friendship between
Wordsworth and Coleridge is one of the most wonderful in all of literary theory. I would say
that it was one of the most artistically stimulating friendships, perhaps of all time. It was unique,
and the two men really played off each other and helped each other in terms of strengths
and weaknesses, and together did some great things. Again, it was a wonderful friendship,
and it was very fruitful in terms of poetry and theory. Now, the origin of lyrical ballads,
Wordsworth tells us about it a little bit in his preface, but if you want to really learn
the origin of lyrical ballads, you want to read chapter 14 of Coleridge's biography of
literary theory. That is his autobiography. If you want to follow it, it's wonderful reading.
It's actually excerpted in critical theory since Plato. All right, in 1797, Wordsworth and Coleridge
were neighbors in the beautiful Lake District in the northern part of England, and they would
spend lots of days discussing and talking about poetry and life, and they would do what British
people up there love to do, take long walks along the beautiful grass they have in England,
and they would walk, and they would talk, and they let their mind run free. And out of these
conversations, they conceived the idea of composing a series of poems of two distinct,
but complementary kinds. And neither one of them remembered who first came up with the idea, but
they said, hey, let's do something new. We're both going to write different kinds of poems,
but they will complement each other in a special way. And I want to tell you now the two different
kinds of poems they wanted to write and how they complemented. Now, the former kind of poem,
which Wordsworth would end up writing, would select its objects from nature, from the common,
mundane, everyday world of the countryside and its inhabitants. In short, these poems would focus
on things that are so familiar that we often overlook them. Things whose very commoness
renders them invisible. In other words, everyday things, things from nature, the rustic farmers
that lived in the Lake District, not rich people, not aristocrats, but common everyday things,
not only common people, but common objects of nature. That would be the source or object of
the poetry. However, this is what makes it unique. Rather than merely copy or record these things in
a straight mimetic fashion, rather than just, you know, describing the object, the poet would throw
over them an imaginative coloring that would allow his readers to see them afresh. In other words,
the trouble with everyday things is that we see them so often, we take them for granted. We don't
even notice them anymore. They lose their mystery and their wonder. We've got a cliche, kind of a
tired cliche, to stop and smell the roses. Here we might say we need to stop and see the roses.
We miss the mystery of it. The best example of this comes from painting, the great romantic painter
Vincent Van Gogh. I think you've all seen some of his pictures of sunflowers. There are some pictures
of flowers over here, if you want to look. But in his sunflowers, we've all seen sunflowers before.
But believe me, the first time you see this painting or any of his paintings of flowers,
you think to yourself, my God, I've never seen a sunflower before. I missed something all along.
Well, the same thing Van Gogh does in his painting is what Wordsworth is going to do in his poems.
By lending these objects, these things, these common things, a charm of novelty,
the poet wants to evoke a sense of childlike wonder in his reader. A feeling more often
associated with the supernatural than with the natural. Again, he wants us to see it afresh
as if we've never seen it before. The way a child sees the world. Every time a child sees the moon
in the evening, it's a whole new experience. It's beautiful. It's excited. They grab their parents
and they tug. Look up there, isn't that magical? Well, that's what Wordsworth wants to restore in us.
Not childish, but childlike. Now, this process by which the veil of familiarity is suddenly
mystically ripped away from everyday objects is known as defamiliarization. Now, what do I mean
by the veil of familiarity? We all can understand the veil of mystery. There are certain mysteries
like death, which we can't fully pierce through because they're a veil of mystery. But the veil
of familiarity means that again, when something becomes so familiar, we see it every day,
we don't see it anymore. And so it's as if a veil has covered it. We're missing it. We're not seeing
it. Defamiliarization means suddenly, through poetry, our familiarity is ripped away and again,
we're forced to look at it as if for the first time. Most men, Coleridge says, are like what God
says of the Jews in Isaiah 6. We have eyes, but we do not see. And we remember they have eyes,
but do not see ears, but do not hear. They're like their idols. Well, a lot of times that happens to
us. We see it, but we don't really see it. Defamiliarization opens our eyes to the wonders
around us. It is apocalyptic. It rips away the veil or the covering to allow us to see
the true mystery that lurks behind. Now, as I've said, Wordsworth was responsible for this portion
of Lyrical Ballads, and he composed a series of poems centered around such humble, rustic characters
as Simon Lee, Goody Blake, and The Idiot Boy. Believe it or not, those are the titles of some
of his poems. They're very common, rustic people, not the kind of people that an 18th century poet
would think worthy of writing any kind of serious poem about. Very simple, rustic characters, usually
illiterate or barely literate, but despite their commonness, Wordsworth's poems infuse them with
dignity, power, and mystery. Romanticism is much more democratic. It sees the dignity
in the common. 18th century, again, look towards the aristocratic, towards the refined. So that's
what Wordsworth does in his portion of Lyrical Ballads. One way to put it is he takes natural
objects and makes them seem almost supernatural. All right, the latter kind of poem that Coleridge
did would select its object from the realm of the supernatural. Let's go the other way.
Wordsworth takes the natural and makes it supernatural. Well, what Coleridge does is go the
opposite way. Coleridge takes the supernatural, and the poem that you all are familiar with
is The Rime of the Ancient Mariner. That's Coleridge's main contribution to Lyrical Ballads,
and it is a poem richly suffused with supernatural characters and events. It's a magical, mysterious
sea journey that, again, it takes place in this world, but it's really in another world. It's a
place of mystery, something out of the Arabian Nights or something. However, just as Wordsworth
presents his natural objects in such a way as to stimulate an almost supernatural response,
so Coleridge presents his supernatural world in such a way as to render it almost natural.
That's what I mean when I say they're complementary, as opposed to simply opposites.
Now, Coleridge accomplished this poetic feat by uncovering behind the supernatural veil of his
tale, dramatic and emotional truths. In other words, yes, the story of the Mariner is supernatural.
It's not really part of our world, finally, but the dramatic and emotional truths, what's going on
in his psyche as he goes through this journey, are real. They're realistic, and we can identify with
them, and they do seem very real and natural. And our recognition of the psychological truth
of the Mariner's journey compels us to give to the poem our willing suspension of disbelief.
I bet many of you have heard that phrase before. This famous Coleridgean phrase signifies our
ability to temporarily suspend the claims of reason and logic, and to enter through the power
of the sympathetic imagination into the life and heart of the poem. In other words, he writes it
in such a way that he gets us as readers to say, all right, I know this is not real, I know it's a
fantasy, but I'm going to forget about that now, or I'm going to suspend that, and I am going to
move into the poem. Sympathetic imagination, because I am going to move towards the poem,
as when we're in sympathy with a person, we move towards that person. So we are going to allow
ourselves to just accept the poem as true, because in fact, dramatically and psychologically it is.
So we're going to suspend all that logical mathematical side of ourselves, and just enter
in to the world that Coleridge creates. Now, another aspect of this, Coleridge tells us that
to inspire in its readers this moment of what he calls poetic faith, the poem must invite them
into a higher realm of illusion rather than merely delude them with fanciful images and events,
distinction between illusion and delusion. Illusion is when we are pulled into it and we say,
ah, what a beautiful world, it's not real, and yet it is real. It's an illusion, like the illusion
of the stage. Delusion is when we suddenly feel like we're being manipulated and fooled. The best
way I can give you the distinction is to distinguish in terms of movies. The best example of illusion
would be the Star Wars films, three of them, now four of them. They take us away to write a long time
ago in a galaxy far, far away. Now, those movies are totally fantasy, but we buy into their illusion
because they're so real, the relationships and what not going on seem so real to us that we
move into those movies and accept them. Delusion, an example of that would be those horrendous
Batman movies. I don't know if any of you even bothered to see those, but those movies are so
phony you feel manipulated and deluded and maybe some teenagers buy it, but I certainly don't buy
those worlds as real. I don't really think the director believes in it and therefore I don't
believe in it. I feel deluded and so I sit there and watch and maybe I'm entertained by special
effects, but I'm not moved at any emotional level as I would be in Star Wars or other good movies.
I should say, by the way, that in general, Lucas and Spielberg are probably our great movie directors
of illusion. In so many of their movies, they pull us right into a new world and get us to join them.
Walt Disney, too, would be experts at illusion. All right, now that you've got the idea of the
basic plan, let me tell you about the implications of lyrical ballads for the history of literary
theory. Why is it so important? Why is it central? Well, Wordsworth and Coleridge's plan for lyrical
ballads calls for a new kind of mimesis that, rather than simply imitate or even perfect its
object, transforms it into something rich and strange. That is to say, nature or super nature
is merely the occasion for the poem. The poetic act itself, the transformation, is the real point.
In other words, the point of the poems in lyrical ballads, the point is not the object itself.
It's not merely to record the object. I mean, that's interesting and important, but that's not the
key function of the poem. What the poem is really quote about is what Wordsworth or Coleridge do
with that object, how they transform it through their poetic imagination. They change it into
something new. That's what it's about. It's about the poetic process rather than about the object.
It's about the subject, then, if you will. That's the importance of epistemology. In other words,
it is not the rules of decorum that control the art, but the imaginative vision of the poet
that determines the shape and end of the poem. And that's why expressive theories are interested
in the relationship between the poem and the poet, because it's the poet's perceptive powers
that determine what the poem is going to be like. Even more radically, the plan of lyrical ballads
carries out a supreme form of epistemology in which objects or things take their ultimate nature
not from what they are, but from how they are perceived by the poet. This is radical. It is
epistemology. Perception is important, but now, really, the object is not even important at all.
Now, the way we perceive the object is what it becomes. The object now is a mix of what it is
and what we make it. Very interesting. Now, let me explain this. In this, Wordsworth and Coleridge,
I believe, were certainly influenced, even more than by the Germans, by a great poet, William Blake,
and his masterpiece, The Songs of Innocence and Experience. In this work, Blake demonstrates
how the same images and events take on a different coloring, form, and reality when viewed through
the eyes of innocence and experience. The subtitle of his work, Shoeing the Two Contrary States of
the Human Soul, captures perfectly the radical romantic belief that things are as they are
perceived and that we have create the world around us. Let me explain more. In The Songs of Innocence
and Experience, there are two volumes of poetry, but they're meant to be linked together. And
oftentimes, there will be a poem in The Songs of Innocence that has a parallel in The Songs of
Experience. For instance, there are two poems called The Chimney Sweeper, one in Innocence,
one in Experience. They're both about the horrible reality of these little boys that were
forced to clean chimneys. It was a terrible job. It was social manipulation. Most of them died young
from all kinds of cancer, horrible diseases. But in the world of innocence, even though there is
horrible exploitation, the focus of that poem is innocence. It's how the childlike innocence
and faith can rise above the horrors of social exploitation. In the version in Experience, though,
all we see is the exploitation and manipulation. In other words, the world, the reality, the event
is exactly the same. But because the perceptive point of view in each poem is different, it makes
everything else different. So things are not as they are, but as they are perceived, we create
the world around us. Now, let me give you the easier example, the example I always give to my
undergrads. Whenever I try to explain this, I always choose two unsuspecting girls in my class
and I use them as guinea pigs. I say, all right, Jane and Mary, let me tell you a story.
Two of you are now in Houston. It's about nine o'clock in the evening and you're about to walk
out and go home and it's raining. Same exact setting, but there's a different background to
this. Jane, just before you walk out that door to go home in the rainstorm, your boyfriend of many
years has just proposed to you and you're excited because you've been waiting for this. It's a beautiful
ring and you are just on top of the world. Mary, on the other hand, before you walk out into the
rainstorm, your boyfriend of four years has just broken up with you in the nastiest, most dogish
kind of way and you are just horrified by this. All right, you're both walking into the rainstorm.
Now, I want you each to write a poem about the rain. Same rain, same time of day, same place.
Well, I'm sure their poems would be very different. Jane's poem would probably describe the rainstorm
as cleansing, purifying. She might talk about Jean Kelly singing in the rain. Everything's
beautiful. The world is fresh and new and reborn every morning, right? Like morning has broken.
What's Mary's poem going to be like? How is she going to describe the rain?
Dark, oppressive. It's going to feel, every rain drop is going to feel like a knife in her back.
Now, what are we saying here? It's the exact same rain. It's the same rainstorm.
Shouldn't their poems be the same? No. Why are their poems different? Because each of them
is working out of a different perceptive mood. The state of their soul is different.
Jane is in a state of innocence. Mary is in a state of experience, a more cynical state.
And so there, the world that they see, the rainstorm is now going to be colored by what's
going on in their soul. Another example, whenever you're mad, we always say that you're seeing what?
Seeing red. It's as if everything you see is covered by the color red, right? That is what it
means things are as they are perceived. I like to call this the externalization of the internal,
because what happens is you take something that's inside you and you externalize it or project it
on to the world. Now, this concept, the externalization of the internal, things are as they are
perceived, lies behind the romantic faith that, to quote Blake, if the doors of perception were
cleansed, everything would appear as it is infinite. That's something that Blake says, and Blake was
most radical in this idea. In other words, if we could just see it right, everything would be beautiful.
Now, I should say that this romantic thing has a dark side to it, because it very easily can
fall into what I like to call the abyss of solipsism. Now, what is solipsism? Solipsism
is the belief that really the whole world is a projection of you. Kind of like a child that's
autistic. They live in their own little world. It's as if the world is the way they see it,
or when a child plays peek-a-boo, right? They cover their eyes and they figure if they can't see you,
you can't see them. That egocentrism, I mean, it's very dangerous to fall into this solipsism
where you think that, again, the world doesn't really exist. The world is a reflection of you.
Many people don't know this, but the religion of Christian science. Now, most Christian scientists,
I don't think, really follow this. Most of them are just like regular Christians. But the real
doctrine of Christian science is actually a little bit more eastern than western, because pure
Christian science, Mary Baker Eddy, what she believed is that disease is not really a physical
thing. It's bad perception. And so if we can just think of ourselves as well, we'll be well,
because sin, even sin and disease and evil are just bad perception. We don't see the world,
all right, which is almost kind of a Hindu concept. Again, I think most Christians,
scientists probably don't really follow that. They probably are more like regular Christians.
But interestingly, this system is very close to Blake, this idea that you can change the world
by the way you perceive it. Now, this new, more radical epistemology places the poet
and his perceptions at the center of literary theory. Poetry is now to be regarded as self-expression,
as a journal of the unique perceptions of an individual. See now, what poetry really is,
is self-expression. It's what's inside of here that's coming out. And so now when we read a poem,
what we want to learn about is the poet and his unique perceptions of the world. All right,
one more thing that lyrical ballads change. Lyrical ballads shifted old 18th century notions of decorum
that declared certain subjects unfit for serious poetry. You'll remember that for
the neoclassuses and also really the classicists, poetry should be written about serious people,
aristocrats, kings, knights, princes, all of that stuff. Well, the rustics treated by Wordsworth
would have been subjects for comedy in the 18th century. Wordsworth, though, enobles them to tragic
hypes. You see, nobody in the 18th century would write a serious tragic poem about Goodie Blake
or the idiot boy. They might write a comedy about that, but not something serious. This is a big
change in the subjects for poetry. Lyrical ballads also breaks with the neoclassical world by mixing
the realms of the real and the ideal. Indeed, it often sees the ideal in the real, the supernatural
and the natural, and vice versa. In other words, a break into quorum. We're mixing things. We
shouldn't be mixing real and ideal, supernatural and natural. We should keep those things separate.
Wordsworth and Coleridge have no problem breaking into quorum. That's one of the aspects of
romanticism. Finally, not only does lyrical ballads often take children as its subject,
it privileges their naive sense of wonder, their freshness and innocence over the refined
urbanity and studied wit of the 18th century. Let's move away from this elitist idea, this idea
of refinement and urbanity. The whole city court life of the 18th century is in many ways rejected
by the romantics. They want to move to a new way of seeing the world. Again, not childish,
but childlike. They want to see the world afresh and with wonder like a child does. And again,
that is a big break from the 18th century, which the romantics was artificial and unnatural.
All right, in our next lecture, we will move on and look at Wordsworth's preface to lyrical ballads.
