Lecture 17, The Function of Criticism, Matthew Arnold and T. S. Elliott
With this lecture, we begin a new unit, Objective Criticism. We shall offer first an overview
of the main theorists of this unit. We shall then analyze closely two seminal essays that
laid the groundwork for objective theory, Matthew Arnold's The Function of Criticism
at the present time, and T. S. Elliott's Tradition and the Individual Talent.
In this unit, we shall consider a theoretical shift from the poet to the poem itself. In
other words, we're going to move from expressive theories interested in the relationship between
poem and poet to objective theories, that's the fourth and last of our perspectives, which
is interested in the relationship between the poem and itself. And you'll really understand
what that means by the end of this unit. Now, this shift, this shift to objective criticism
or objective theories, begins in the critical essays of Matthew Arnold and T. S. Elliott.
That's what we're going to do in this lecture. Now, although Arnold the poet was strongly
romantic, Arnold the critic sought to replace the romantic focus on feeling with a renewed
focus on ideas. Matthew Arnold is a fascinating character because his career breaks smoothly
into two halves. The first half of his career is all poetry. At a certain point, he stops
writing poetry completely and begins to write prose. His poetry is all exceedingly romantic
and melancholy and overwrought, and he was never able to move beyond that. So finally,
it's as if Arnold gave up on the poetry and turned to criticism. And whereas, as I mentioned,
his poetry is romantic, his criticism turns away from romanticism in many ways, wants
to go back to ideas, sort of like a return to the 18th century in some ways. Arnold as
a Victorian sage who attempted to set aesthetic standards for his age, harkens back to the
systematic theories of Pope and Burke. So we go back to this neoclassical idea of the
critic setting a taste, a kind of refined aesthetic taste. Arnold is going back to that
idea of the critic and of the poet as well. Now, Elliott, writing half a century later
and Elliott will take us into the 20th century, continued this de-romanticizing of theory,
moving away from romantics. In fact, Elliott will argue that poetry is essentially a de-personalizing
process, and we'll see that in the second half of this lecture. Now, again, in this
lecture, we shall consider the theories of Arnold and Elliott in two ways, both in their
own right, critics just in their own right, but also I'm going to look at them as precursors
of what we're calling here objective theory. Alright, that's this lecture. Then in lectures
18 and 19, we shall turn our focus to the full flowering of objective theory in the
20th century American school of new criticism. Through a close look at essays by I. A. Richards,
John Crow Ransom, W. K. Wimpsat, and Cleanth Brooks, we shall explore the new critical
belief that each poem is a self-contained, self-referential artifact. We will see in
lectures 18 and 19 how they turn the poem into its own little universe. That's pure
objective theory. We shall also discuss how the new critics created a special aesthetic
space for poetry that would preserve it from all external forces. In other words, the new
critics are what we might call neocontians. Just like Immanuel Kant, they want to create
a separate aesthetic place. It's a different kind of thing, poetry. We'll see that as well
in lectures 18 and 19. Finally, in those lectures, we shall discuss the battery of new tools
and methods that the new critics taught us to use when explicating poetry. New criticism
is very practical and pragmatic. It gives us rules and methods and tools. That will be
lecture 18 and 19. Finally, in lecture 20, we will turn or take up the archetypal theories
of Northrop Frye. Although Frye, like the new critics, kept his eye on the internal structure
of the poem, he delved even deeper to uncover vast mythic networks. In the last lecture
of the unit, we'll widen our perspective to look at this large-scale mythic view of poetry.
In studying Frye's theories, we will also view him not only in the context of objective
theory, but in the context of Christian typology and allegory. And that is something I skipped.
That's a medieval thing. I'm going to go back to it now because it's linked to Northrop
Frye. Finally, in all four lectures of this unit, you might want to watch for this, we
shall focus on how theorists since Arnold have increasingly emphasized the importance
and centrality of criticism itself. Starting with Matthew Arnold, the critic comes into
his own and he's only gotten more and more important as we've moved to the end of our
century. Alright, let's turn to Matthew Arnold. In his seminal essay, The Function of Criticism
at the Present Time, Arnold argues for the central role of the critic in fostering great
literature. Arnold begins his essay by asserting that criticism is a positive, noble task.
In this, he agrees with Alexander Pope, but he's even more full about this. Even today,
a lot of people look down on critics. For many people, critics are like parasites. They're
like lawyers. I hope I'm not offending any lawyers, but a lot of times people look down
at critics as, again, sponges sort of. Well, it was even more so when Arnold's time. He
wants to say criticism is positive and noble. Now, like Pope, he does agree that finally
the creative faculty is superior to the critical. But still, he insists strongly that criticism
is a worthwhile endeavor. It is worth doing. It is good. It is noble. Here's a little explanation
he gives. Matthew Arnold says that all people have the need to exercise what he calls free,
creative activity. Indeed, he says, the exercise of this power, free creative activity, constitutes
man's greatest joy. Now, if you're thinking back to lecture 11 and Schiller, this idea
of the play drive in Schiller is very similar to free creative activity. Our need to sort
of expand our mind, to synthesize ideas, to move out, to think, that's called free creative
activity. Now, the problem is that not all men exercise this power through the production
of literature. Very few of us are great poets. And so if the only way to exercise free creative
poetry, which is the greatest joy of man, is through, I'm sorry, free creative activity,
is the only way to get to joy, then there's going to be very few happy people, because
very few people are poets. So what Arnold tells us is that for many people, criticism
functions as their main outlet of mental play. Not everybody's a poet. Sometimes criticism
can be a way to exercise free creative activity. Now, Arnold distinguishes carefully between
the creative and critical faculties, shows us the difference. Now, whereas the creative
faculty most expresses itself in the synthesis of existing ideas, it is the critical faculty
that creates these ideas. Let's see how this works. Critics create new ideas, you know how
they do it, through analysis and discovery, by seeing objects as they are. So critics
use analysis and they look at the object and want to see it as it is. They're very clear
minded, almost scientific in a way. Isn't that different than poets? Romantic said poets
are interested in synthesis and they're interested in perception, in how things are perceived
by poets, not as how they are. So now Arnold's doing something interesting. Criticism is analysis,
poetry is synthesis. Now, the critic is not to be disparaged as he so often was by romantics
and why did romantics spurn critics? Because they privileged synthesis and subjective perception
over objective analysis. So, you know, even Wordsworth later in Knife said, I shouldn't
have wasted my time with criticism. I'm glad he did waste his time with criticism. But
even he turned, that's sort of a romantic thing, almost a romantic myth, turned away
from analysis. Now, if you're listening carefully, notice what else he does. What he's saying
now, if the critic does analysis to prepare the way for the poet, then the critic is the
one who offers raw material to the poet. It's almost like the critic is the primary imagination
and poetry is the secondary imagination, if we want to think it there. So, it's the critic
who comes up with new ideas. It's the poet who uses those ideas. Let me explain more
fully the way Arnold does. Arnold carries this distinction between critic and poet into
a wider aesthetic view of history by distinguishing between two epics or ages in what we might
call the life cycle of a culture. There are two different epics. The first epic is called
an epic of expansion. Well, there's really no first and second here. But an epic of expansion
is one in which a culture is rich with new and fresh ideas. It's an epic of expansion
because ideas are expanding. They're lively. They're full of life. They're vivacious. Now,
during such epics, poets are needed to harness this intellectual energy and convert it into
great works of art. Let me put it in Shelley's way. Poets are needed to embody the zeitgeist,
right, to embody the spirit of the age. Now, Arnold tells us, unfortunately, that such
epics are rare. Very few epics. In fact, Arnold really only identifies two, and most people
would agree with him. The first is Periclesian Athens, the Athens of Pericles, in other words,
the 5th century BC, the age of Escalus, Sophocles, and Euripides. The second one, you might guess,
is Elizabethan England, the age of Shakespeare, the British Renaissance. Those are really
the only two he sees as full-fledged epics of expansion. Oddly, Arnold, unlike Shelley
now, did not consider the Romantic Age, that which was born of the French Revolution, to
be an epic of expansion. He didn't think. He thought it almost was, but it failed. Instead,
he considered his age, and remember, he's still thinking of himself as a Romantic until
we really think of themselves as Victorians, he considered his own age to be an epic of
concentration. An age in which ideas are stagnant, and the free exchange of ideas is
stifled. So if you think about concentrated in terms of stifled, like a swamp or something,
that's what he means by an epic of concentration. There's no new ideas. They've grown stagnant
and cliched and old. Well, you might be thinking now. You might come up with the idea before
I say it. Just as poets are needed to harness the energy of epics of expansion, just so
critics are needed during epics of concentration to help create and foster a free flow of ideas
that will initiate a new epic of expansion. So see, in epics of concentration, poets can't
do anything because there's no new ideas. You need the critic to create new ideas through
analysis and objective observation. I think it's a fascinating idea. Now, for Arnold, great
literature is the product of a creative fusion between a great poet, quote, the man, and
an epic of expansion, quote, the moment. Just being a great poet is not enough. You've
got to be a great poet living in an epic of expansion because if you're not living in
an epic of expansion, there will not be the raw material for you to write your great poetry.
All right, let's be a little bit critical of Matthew Arnold. I think it's very possible
that the reason he invented this idea was because he wanted to give us an excuse for
why he wasn't a great poet, right? He tried to be a great poet and fail. His poetry is
still worth reading, but he's not on the level of a Wordsworth or anything. Maybe what he's
doing is saying, hey, the reason I couldn't be a great poet is because here I am stuck
in this epic of concentration. So let me turn to criticism and do something. Now, even if
it's true that that's his motivation, I still think the system makes a lot of sense and
really works. I think there are ages when poetry flourishes more because there's new
ideas. Again, epics of concentration need the analysis of criticism, whereas epics of
expansion need the synthesis of poetry. Again, it is not enough to be a gifted poet without
the fresh ideas available in an epic of expansion. The poet will lack the necessary raw material
for great art. What is the upshot of this? The upshot is that poets and critics are interdependent.
They need each other. Without the critic, there can be no poet. Without the poet, there's
not much reason for the critic. So they are interdependent. A notion and this notion helps
set off a steady increase in the role and status of the critic. Now, I would say and
I'll say this later, I think we've gone a little bit overboard. We've made the critic
too much. Arnold would still say that the critic is the handmaiden of the poet like
Alexander Pope did. But again, he opened the way and nowadays criticism sometimes takes
itself more seriously as greater than poetry. All right. If criticism is so important for
Arnold, what is criticism? Well, Arnold luckily gives us a very famous definition of what
criticism is. And I'd encourage you to memorize this because this is a great definition. Criticism
to Arnold is a disinterested endeavor to learn and propagate the best that is known and
thought in the world. There's two parts to that. The disinterested part and the part
about the best that is known and thought. Let's look at the disinterested part first.
Now, the word disinterested as opposed to uninterested signifies a critical approach
that is removed, objective and free from all political agendas. It's not uninterested.
It doesn't say I don't care. Disinterested means that again, it's above these things.
It doesn't worry about political agendas and ideologies and rises above. It's objective
and removed. Notice this has a little bit of touch of Kant here. This idea of poetry
or well, basically what Kant says about poetry, he says about criticism, but it is aesthetic
criticism after all. Criticism is free from all agendas. Criticism, Arnold says, constitutes
a higher kind of curiosity, a free play of mind that follows the flow of ideas wherever
that flow may lead. Now, you'll remember again in my Schiller lecture, I actually got you
thinking about Arnold when I said Arnold got upset because in his day in the British language
curiosity had a negative connotation as something childish, but in France it's got a good reputation
as something intelligent adults do. Well, here's where this comes from. Curiosity is
a good thing. It's linked to the free play of mind. It is criticism. Now, Arnold was
upset with the critics of his day because he felt that they were too partisan. We've
heard a lot about partisan politics these days, haven't we? They only engaged in as
much free play of mind as their party platform allowed. In other words, there were lots of
great journals in Britain during this time, but some of them were Tory journals and some
of them were with other different parties, okay? Tories and wigs. Excuse me. Just like
we have Republican and Democrat, they had Tories and wigs. A little bit different, but there
were two main parties and each party had journals that were linked to that party. And so what
happened was, if you were writing for a Tory journal, you would only allow as much free
play of mind as fit in with the Tory political agenda and the same thing with the Wig agenda.
For Arnold, criticism has got to rise above any kind of party politics or partisan ideologies.
Again, it's linked to this British negative view of curiosity. They think, ah, that's
just childish. Criticism has got to be pragmatic. It's got to be linked to a party. No, true
criticism has to be free. It has to be free to explore. If it's linked to a platform,
it's not free. For Arnold, what I'm saying, criticism has a value that transcends pragmatism.
That's very contient. Indeed, it even transcends narrow national boundaries to interest itself
in the culture and traditions of all Europe. In other words, criticism not only cannot
join the bandwagon of Tory or Wig, it also cannot get involved in any British jingoism
that says Britain is better than France, better than Germany. Criticism must truly be disinterested
and treat all European literature with equal respect.
Now, in addition to propagating new ideas to inspire poets, the job of the critic includes
identifying, again, the definition, the best that is known and fought. And that's why
the critic has to be free to explore all of Europe, because England doesn't have the
sole authority on the best that is known and fought. You've got to go out now. This tends
to be pretty European. We could expand it to Asia or something, but he's thinking in
a European context here. You've got to be open to all the literature throughout Europe
if you're going to identify the best that is known and fought. Now, by the best, what
Arnold means is what we today call the canon or the great books of the Western world. You
know what I mean? Those by Homer and Dante and Shakespeare and Chaucer, etc., etc. In
other words, the canon, the great books which have traditionally formed the core of humanistic
studies. Until fairly recently, everybody accepted this was the Western tradition and
this is what we should study. Now, Arnold firmly believed that these works in the canon and
canon is like the canonical books of the Bible. That's where we get the word the canon. Arnold
firmly believed that such works were aesthetically superior and that they could be shown to be
so, to be superior, by objective, disinterested criticism. In other words, he believed that
you could prove that certain books belonged in the canon through objective, non-political
criteria. He basically believed it was self-evident. It was obvious. And most people, I think,
feel that way too, but many critics today, modernists and post-notters, they totally
disagree, modern and post-modern, totally disagree with Arnold. They view the canon as a product
of socio-political forces that determine what is acceptable and what is not. I'll use the
phrase you all know. Everything's in the canon, not because it's great, but because
it was written by dead, white, male heterosexuals. We've heard this before in that vernacular
there. In other words, what modern and post-modern people often say is that those things are
not in the canon because they are aesthetically objectively superior, as Arnold claims, but
because they're politically correct to that time period. So, as you can imagine, Arnold
is a huge bugbear of modern and post-modern theory. And guess what? Eliot is also a bugbear
because Arnold and Eliot are at one in their view of the canon. In fact, they helped to
sort of organize the canon. People knew what it was already, but they helped to get it
as a system sort of in school. So Arnold and Eliot are, in many ways, out of favor because
of their canonical view of literature and just Western tradition in general. Well, let's
turn to Eliot now. In his very short but very influential essay, Tradition and the Individual
Talent, Eliot develops Arnold's canonical views while extending the anti-romantic move away
from subjective feeling. If Arnold is a little bit anti-romantic, Eliot is very much anti-romantic.
He continues it. And remember, we're jumping about 50 years now. We're now into the 20th
century. Eliot, in this essay, replaces the romantic emphasis on spontaneity, originality,
and novelty with a new focus on history, culture, and tradition. Again, nowadays, most of us
take for granted that poetry is self-expression and originality is an end in itself. Well,
Eliot is sort of a break. We've kind of gone back to romanticism. Eliot is between the
romantics and us, and Eliot tried to take us back to a more traditional view where history
and culture and tradition are the bedrock of poetry and aesthetics in general. Rather
than break with the traditions of the past, Eliot argues, the real great poets carry the
past inside them as a living, timeless tradition that is ever contemporaneous. True poets,
Eliot says, don't break with the past and say, oh, I'm original and novel. They carry
the tradition inside of them. In fact, they believe the tradition is contemporaneous with
them. It's like Homer and Shakespeare are contemporaneous with them, ever true, ever
real. Great poets, in the Eliot sense, are conscious both of the pastness of the past
and its presentness. I love reading Eliot's prose because Eliot, being a poet, always
has these witty little pithy statements like that. Not only the pastness of the past, but
its presentness. The past, the tradition, is a living thing to great poets. They realize
great poets, Eliot says, that their own poetry only has full value when it is viewed within
the context of all the poetry that has come before. In other words, it only has meaning
within the tradition, within the canon. Once we break away from the canon, in a way, it's
not great literature anymore because the tradition defines that. Again, this is a very traditional
conservative way to look at literature. Indeed, Eliot says, great poets privilege what he
calls the mind of Europe over their own individual minds, that's very anti-romantic, for their,
quote, historical sense, teaches them that if they know more than the dead poets, it
is only because the poets are what they know. None of this pride, oh, we know more than
Homer. Yeah, we know more than Homer because we know Homer. That's the only reason where
it's smarter, quote, or more progressive than him because we have Homer in our bones.
I like that the way he states that. Alright, another thing Eliot does in terms of this
anti-romantic move, he alters the expressivist belief that poetry is self-expression. I've
said many times now that that's often taken for granted now. Eliot tries to move away
from this idea of poetry as self-expression. Indeed, he says that the poet is not the source
of poetry, but a site for the creative process. Poets are not the origin, like in expressive
theories, the poet's not the origin, but the poet is a site, a place where poetry happens.
In a wonderful famous metaphor, Eliot says that the poet is a catalyst that facilitates
the fusion of external emotions without himself being involved in the emotions or affected
by the fusion. I bet you all know what a catalyst is from high school. You have two
compounds, let's say a sodium and chloride or something like that. You put them together,
nothing happens. Then you take a little piece of metal and you stick it in there and all
of a sudden a reaction occurs. The two of them go whoosh, they form a new compound, but
then you know what to do. You take the catalyst out and nothing has happened to it. It started
the reaction, but it is unchanged. Eliot, and this is very scientific, isn't it? Eliot
is saying that's what a poet is like. The poet is the place where a poetic thing or
process happens, but he's not really a part of the process, which is what the romantic
would say. Poetry, that is, is not the expression of a strong personality, as it was for the
romantics, but it is the continual extinction of personality. The poet actually has to move
away from his personality so it won't get in the way of the poetic process. And again,
it's an artistic process rather than a subjective perception. Or, to give another famous quote,
the poet is a medium and not a personality. He's a person where something takes place,
not a personality. Now, here is where I said Keats' negative capability is going to come
in important. This is a little bit like Keats' negative capability, that the poet has to
push away his personality and just receive. So it's a little bit like that, and I think
Eliot's playing on that idea. Now, the key to that process, that artistic process, is
not the creation of new emotions. Poets do not create new emotions out of nowhere. That's
not the role of poetry, as some people would say. Rather, poetry is a fresh fusion of these
emotions with objects, experiences, and states of feeling. In other words, what happens in
the poetic process is that the poet allows the same old emotions to fuse with new objects
and experiences and ideas to create a new whole. Now, this artistic fusion, this artistic
process, Eliot calls it a concentration. Don't confuse it with epics of concentration. This
fusion, this concentration, he expresses it, Eliot expresses it, in a famous phrase from
another essay he wrote called Hamlet and His Problems. Now, that essay has been kind of
forgotten except for one thing. In that essay, in two sentences, he defines this phrase called
the objective correlative. So like negative capability, he spends two sentences, and we
spend the next 20, 50, 100 years at fingering it out. Now, you know what I believe? I believe
Eliot knew that was going to happen. I think he wanted to have his own negative capability
that we keep talking about it. I think he's self-conscious, I don't know. But anyway,
what is an objective correlative and what does it have to do with the artistic process?
Alright, an objective correlative is an external object, situation, or chain of events that
parallels or correlates to an internal emotion. Now, let's think about it. Much of poetry
is about emotion. I mean, Eliot would say yes. But emotions are abstract. You can't
see them, smell them, taste them, touch them. So how do you put emotions in a physical form?
Poetry is physical in a way. Well, what you do is you find something objective that correlates
to that emotion, and now you've found a way to concretize it. Well, what happens in the
poetic process is that the emotion is fused together with the objective correlative, and
as a result is externalized and concretized. Again, the poet functions as the site of this
fusion of external and internal, site, medium, catalyst, all the same idea for Eliot. Now,
I want to end in the last two minutes by giving you an example of an objective correlative.
This is not Eliot's example. This is my own because I think it's better than the example
he gives in the Hamelin essay. Alright, think about Homer's Iliad. The Iliad is supposed
to be about what? The wrath of Achilles. That's supposed to be the theme of the Iliad. That's
the beginning of it. Now, the wrath of Achilles really refers to when Hector the Trojan kills
Achilles' best friend, Patroclus. Many of you know the story. Well, when that happens,
Achilles wants to rush into the battle and kill every Trojan he sees, especially Hector.
There's a problem. At this point in the epic, Achilles has no armor. Hector stole the armor
from Patroclus, who was wearing Achilles' armor. We won't get into the plot. But basically
what happens is that Achilles wants to go in, but he can't go in yet, but he's full
of anger. Well, Homer's got this problem. How am I going to express this wrath of Achilles?
How am I going to concretize it? You know what he does? Achilles can't fight, so what
he does is he walks up to the battle front, to the front of the battle, and lets out a
roar, a battle scream. And his battle scream is so terrifying, Homer says, that immediately
about seven or eight Trojans throw themselves on their own spears and die. Man, I wish people
got that wild when I threw a tantrum. Now, is that not an objective call? What better
way to capture physically the insanity of his wrath than the fact that his mere scream
will kill people? You know, there's another example that's even better a little bit later.
Once he goes into battle, Achilles is killing all these people and throwing them into the
river, and he throws so many bodies into the river, the river gets choked with blood, and
the river starts fighting Achilles. And there's a scene where Achilles is fighting the waves,
a wonderful objective correlative for the madness that goes on when we're caught up
in wrath and anger. That's an objective correlative.
Alright, as I promised, in the next lecture, we will move on to look at the American School
of New Criticism.
