Lecture 20, Archetypal Theory, St. Paul to Northrop Fry
In this lecture we shall consider an old theoretical orientation
that received a stunning rebirth in Northrop Fry's critical masterpiece,
Anatomy of Criticism.
First, we shall define the early Christian concept of typology
as it was developed in the Epistles of St. Paul.
Second, we shall discuss how Dante and the medieval church
expanded Pauline typology onto four levels of meaning.
Finally, we shall turn to the Archetypal theories of Fry
and explore how Fry went beyond the new critical interest in poetic structure
to lay out a complex and compelling system to help explain
and categorize the wider patterns and forces that underlie all great poetry
from the Hebrew prophets to T. S. Eliot.
Before moving on to modern and postmodern theory, our final unit,
let us pause to consider an old theoretical orientation
that received a stunning rebirth in 1957.
This is something I skipped over in my earlier lectures
and I want to pick up on a gap.
Alright, in his numerous New Testament epistles,
St. Paul employs a unique way of reading the Old Testament
that has strong affinities with literary criticism.
Many people don't realize this, but in many ways St. Paul
was one of the early first literary critics.
He's not as old as Aristotle, of course, but really,
and a lot of us don't realize the influence of St. Paul as a literary theorist
because Paul had a certain way of reading the Old Testament.
Jesus, interestingly, also had a way of reading the Old Testament.
Jesus, in some ways, is also a literary theorist, as we'll see.
And I want to explain how this works
because this is also behind traditional literary theory in the West.
Alright, this theological, theoretical approach to Scripture
that I'm discussing is known as typology.
According to a typological reading of the Bible,
many of the people, events, and symbols of the Old Testament
are significant not only in themselves,
but as types or figures of things to be revealed later.
That is to say, they do not achieve their full meaning
until they are viewed in the fuller light of the life, death, and resurrection of Christ
and the New Covenant or Testament that God makes with the Church.
So again, many people don't realize the word Testament means Covenant.
The Old Testament is the Old Covenant
between God and the Jews mediated by the law.
The New Testament is the New Covenant
between God and all people mediated by Christ and His sacrifice.
Now, at least a Christian way of reading it
is that everything in the Old Testament or Old Covenant
points forward towards the New Covenant and Christ.
Now, the best way to explain this to you is to give you examples.
First of all, keep in mind what Jesus said at the Sermon on the Mount.
I come not to abolish the law, but to fulfill it.
That's a very typological way. Let me give you some concrete examples.
All right.
Joshua, who led the children of Israel over the River Jordan
and into the Promised Land, is a type or prefiguring of Jesus,
who leads the Church through the River of Death into the Promised Land of Heaven.
Y'all know the story?
After Moses died, Joshua continued to carry
or to lead the children of Israel over the River Jordan into the Promised Land.
Well, Joshua in Hebrew is Yeshua, and Jesus is the Greek version of Yeshua.
So Jesus is the same name as Joshua.
So not only did they have the same name, but Jesus did what Joshua did,
but on a spiritual, typological level.
He leads his people, not the Jews now, but the Church, over the River Jordan.
And many people don't realize it, but on those old Negro spirituals,
the River Jordan means death.
Remember Old Man River?
Show me that stream called the River Jordan.
That's the old stream I would love to cross.
It means to die, as it does in pilgrim's progress.
So you cross over the River Jordan into the Promised Land,
but the Promised Land, spiritually or typologically speaking, is now heaven.
So Joshua is a type or prefiguring of Jesus.
And Joshua does not even have his full meaning as a symbol until we get to Jesus.
Another example you'll all be familiar with.
The near sacrifice of Isaac by his father Abraham is a type of the crucifixion,
where God the Father sacrificed his beloved son.
You all know the story, God tells Abraham,
take your son Isaac and sacrifice him to me.
Abraham takes him to the top of the hill, he ties him down,
he's about to set the wood on fire and he's got the knife there,
and all of a sudden God stops him and instead provides a ram in the thicket
to take the place of Isaac.
Well, in the New Testament, God now is the Father,
and he must sacrifice his son Jesus,
but this time there is no ram in the thicket.
Why? Because Jesus is the ram in the thicket, the Lamb of God.
So there's an example of typology that is not just a simple parallel,
it actually deepens and increases in its meaning and its symbolism
as we come to the New Testament.
Best example I can give you.
When Jesus reworks and redefines the meaning of Passover at the Last Supper,
he engages in a supreme act of typology.
Keep in mind Paul's phrase,
Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us.
Let me explain this.
All right, you all know the story of Passover.
God is going to send the angel of death to go over Egypt
and kill the firstborn of everything.
That will include Egyptians and Jews.
But God tells the Jews that if they take a perfect lamb, sacrifice it,
take the blood of the lamb and spread it over their doorpost.
When the angel of death comes through the city,
it will see the blood of the lamb and literally pass over the house and move on.
So the Jews are going to be saved,
not because they're better than anybody, but because of the blood,
the blood of the lamb.
What is Jesus showing us at the Lord's Supper?
All right, according to Christian theology,
we are all set to die because of sin.
The angel of death is coming for us, judgment is coming for us.
But if we take the lamb of God, Jesus, the perfect lamb who was sacrificed,
if we take his blood and spiritually put it on our forehead,
when we come before God at judgment day,
God will see the blood and we will literally pass out of judgment.
Not because Christians are better, but because they have the blood.
I come from a Baptist school.
Baptists love to use the phrase covered by the blood,
which sounds a little bit eerie, but it's a perfect typology.
Literally, the blood of the lamb is what causes us to pass out of judgment.
I find that to be a very deep aspect of the New Testament,
and I love reading Paul's epistles,
because they taught me how to think critically, really, in a way.
One last example that I just thought of now.
Elijah was a prophet who lived out in the wilderness,
always wore crazy clothes and long, wild hair,
and attacked all the powerful politicians of his day.
Who's he a type of?
John the Baptist.
John the Baptist dressed the same way, lived out in the wilderness,
and in the same way, attacked the political people of his day.
So Elijah is John.
At one time, Jesus actually says,
John the Baptist is Elijah in a way.
So that's typology.
All right, now, although Pauline typology is specifically spiritual,
it can be adapted for use in a more secular, aesthetic setting.
You can have typology that has nothing to do with religion, per se.
Indeed, whenever a literary critic attempts to uncover the deep patterns
that undergird a work of art, he is engaging in a form of typology.
If you look for deeper patterns or deeper meanings and you see links and parallels,
that's typology, even if you're not mentioning God or Christ or anything spiritual.
A typological theory of poetry rests on a firm faith
that great poems are not haphazard in structure,
but are both meaningful and purposeful.
Kind of like Aristotle says,
necessity, probability, inevitability, it's meaningful.
There's a pattern. It's going somewhere.
That's what it means to look at literature in general typologically.
All right, as the church fathers, particularly St. Thomas Aquinas,
studied Pauline typology, they gradually expanded it to encompass multiple levels.
Typology is just two levels. They're going to expand it.
Indeed, during the heyday of the medieval church,
nearly every verse of scripture was believed to work on four separate levels of meaning.
These levels are known as the literal or historical level,
the allegorical, the tropological or moral level, and the anagogical.
And again, especially if you ever read St. Bernard of Clairvaux,
he'll take the Song of Solomon, some verse you would think is unimportant,
and show you four levels of meaning.
Write an entire sermon on one verse extracted from there.
It's wild. It goes crazy after a while, but it's fascinating to read.
Now, in the 14th century, Dante, who was very much a Thomas or an Aquinian,
adapted this fourfold approach to scripture to serve as one of the key groundworks for his divine comedy.
In fact, in a famous letter to one of his patrons,
Dante explains this theological and aesthetic approach, the fourfold meaning,
by offering a fourfold reading of the verse when Israel out of Egypt came.
And that's his example, and I'm going to use that as my example
to show you how the four levels of meaning work.
This phrase, when Israel out of Egypt came, it comes from one of the Psalms,
and Dante quotes it in an early canto of his purgatorial or purgatory.
This is how he explains this verse on the four levels.
When Israel out of Egypt came, taken literally the first level,
that verse refers to the Exodus, right, when Israel out of Egypt came.
That's literally or historically or Old Testamentally the first level of meaning.
The second level, the allegorical level of that phrase,
signifies how Christ freed us from sin.
The allegorical level is really equivalent to the typological level.
The allegorical meaning is, in a sense, the New Testament Pauline meaning, if you will, to put it simply.
So allegorically or typologically or New Testamentally,
that phrase shows us how Christ freed us from sin.
He takes us out of bondage to sin into freedom salvation.
All right, tropologically or morally, that's the third level,
this verse describes the conversion of the soul from its bondage to sin to its new freedom in Christ.
The moral meaning is sort of an internal meaning, having to do with our soul, what happens inside of us.
And so there is also a movement inside from bondage to freedom.
Finally, the allegorical level, and in Greek that means to lead upward,
allegorically that verse prophesies that final glorious moment
when the human soul will leave behind the body's long slavery to death and corruption
and enter the true promised land of heaven, there's a mouthful.
The allegorical level has to do with final meanings, with heaven,
because in the same way that Christ saves us from bondage to sin in this world of salvation,
he's going to take us out of bondage to this world itself into the freedom of heaven.
That's the allegorical level. Isn't that wonderful? Four levels of meaning.
And Dante's Inferno, many of the verses in that wonderful work,
all exist on four levels of meaning.
All right, very important distinction.
For Dante, these four levels should not be viewed chronologically,
as I'm sort of presenting them for ease, or even in ascending order,
but as occurring simultaneously in what Brooks, in our last lecture,
Cleanth Brooks called a pattern of resolve stresses.
So I showed it to you in ascending order, but it's really happening all at once.
That's why it's complex.
Now, Dante calls this, he doesn't originate this word, he calls it polysemist meaning.
In Greek that means literally many signs or many significations or many meanings.
For Dante, meaning is polysemist because it works on many different levels.
Now, I would argue that the new critical focus on the ironic balance of internal tensions
has affinities with both typology and the four levels of meaning.
In other words, the way they focus on irony and tension and balance between different meanings,
I really think there's a strong touch of typology and the four levels of meaning, the way it works.
So the new critics have a touch of it, it's stronger and fry, as we'll see in a moment.
However, what is missing in new criticism, the focus of which tends to be isolated poems,
is a greater system of aesthetic forces and patterns.
You see, most new critics only want to look at poems individually.
They don't want to talk about poetry in general or lots and lots of poems.
So what's missing, see, typology, the way I've described it, it's kind of a wide level, isn't it?
It sort of takes in lots and lots of meanings across history.
So the new critics do not, I would argue, sound the full possibilities of typology
because they're so focused only on individual poems rather than on wider patterns and forces of thought and ideas.
Well, as you might guess, in 1957, I'm going to argue this need was richly met by Northrop Fry.
Northrop Fry comes along, I think, and takes new criticism and takes it to new heights that brings in typology.
Northrop Fry, interestingly, was a Canadian critic and also a minister,
and so we at least have Canada represented in our lecture series here.
All right, in his work, Anatomy of Criticism, Northrop Fry lays down a critical foundation
that combines the objectivity of new criticism with the polysemus approaches of typology.
He's going to bring these two together.
Let me mention right now that if you want to experience the pure joy of critical theory and literature,
you want to read this work.
Anatomy of Criticism is one of the masterpieces of theory, and it's well worth reading if you get a chance.
All right, also before I talk about Anatomy of Criticism, I want to make a disclaimer here.
Northrop Fry synthesizes a great deal more than new criticism and typology into his vast and systematic critical structures.
Everything is in there. You can have a series almost on that book.
Indeed, he quotes and borrows from nearly every theorist mentioned in this series,
especially the systematic ones like Aristotle and Coleridge.
They're all there in one way or another.
He also, though, incorporates the myth studies of William Blake, the poet of Carl Jung, the psychologist,
and Sir James Fraser, the one who wrote The Golden Bow, the cultural anthropologist.
All of that's in there. We don't have time to talk about that, but I mean, there's so much in there.
But for the sake of brevity, we shall only consider those elements that have direct bearing on the concerns of this series
and especially this unit.
I've got a fairly narrow focus here. I would encourage you to read the whole work and have fun with it.
All right, Fry shares with new criticism the desire to keep his focus on the object.
I think it's fair to call him an objective theorist. I think in that sense he belongs in this unit.
When analyzing literature, Fry says, we can either take an outward centrifugal approach that draws us away from the poetic object
towards history and biography and other things, or we can take a centripetal approach that draws us into the poem.
Now, I think you're familiar with those words centrifugal in Latin means literally to flee from the center,
run away like a centrifuge, makes everything fly away.
So centrifugal meaning takes us out of the poem.
We're spinning out of the poem towards external things like biography and psychology and other things.
Centripetal in Latin means to run or to walk towards the center.
Centripetal meaning therefore takes us into the poem, into the internal meaning like a whirlpool inward.
Now, like the new critics, Fry opts for centripetal internal meanings,
and he dubs the poem a literary verbal structure that exists in and for itself.
Literary verbal structure, a famous phrase from North or Fry, one that the new critics would certainly agree with.
That's what poetry is.
A literary verbal structure self-contained.
Its meaning is internal, centripetal, moving inward, and the critics should also move inward.
All right, according to Fry, the poem does not have a meaning, a paraphrasable core, apart from itself.
Its meaning is wholly inward and verbal in this sense also.
He agrees with the new critics.
You can't extract the meaning.
It's all inward and verbal and instruction.
Unlike the statements of science and theology, Fry tells us, which seek a direct meaning that is descriptive, assertive, and free from ambiguity.
That's what science wants.
The statements of poetry, Fry says, are subtle, elusive, and ironic.
So in many ways, Fry would agree in some ways with the new critic idea of the ontological essence of the poem as ironic, as an ironic structure.
And again, I think the above point should be sufficient to show you Fry's agreement with the new critics and why I can put him here in objective theory.
But North or Fry does not stop with new criticism.
He continues to move beyond.
Indeed, Fry constructs a wider archipel view of poetry that places each poem at the center of a web of meanings that are equally verbal and inward.
He doesn't just take the poem by itself.
He looks at each poem within a giant web of meanings that takes in all of poetry.
That's why he's wider and fuller than the new critics.
Now, what's an archetype?
That's the Carl Jung aspect there.
Fry defines an archetype as a symbol which connects one poem with another and, by so doing, helps...
Excuse me.
It is a symbol which connects one poem with another and, by so doing, helps integrate our literary experience.
Archtypes are associative clusters, words or images or rituals that carry with them a wealth of connotative meanings and emotions that far exceed their denotative, scientific, descriptive meanings.
Archtypes are images or words or rituals that are loaded with meaning, full of connotations.
When we say the word shepherd in the West, that carries all sorts of connotations, not just somebody that takes care of sheep.
It calls up the Lord as my shepherd from the Bible, or Jesus saying I am the good shepherd, or just the whole idea of nurture and watching over the flock.
So archetypes, again, they're like packages. They carry a lot of meaning with them.
And the interesting thing about archetypes, especially the way Fry talks about them, is archetypes can be grouped into groups of archetypes.
So we have pastoral archetypes which include images like shepherds or gardens.
You say the word garden in a Western context, it carries all sorts of connotations.
Both the Garden of Eden, but also the Garden of Gethsemane. So those are all pastoral.
There are cyclical archetypes, the sun, the moon, the harvest that have meaning for lots of people, even cross-culturally, really.
What about social archetypes, funerals, marriages, scapegoats? What about heroic archetypes, quests and dragons?
I think the best way to explain it is to refer again to the Star Wars trilogy.
Now, you know, those movies are not really that great, but I think the reason they work and are so popular is because they are incredibly archetypal.
George Lucas read a lot of Joseph Campbell before writing, making those movies, who was very much an archetypal critic.
And think about how many archetypes there are in there.
Alright, you've got the son who's on a quest to find his father.
But then he also has to overthrow his father, Darth Vader, in an edible thing.
You've got the whole idea of Luke Skywalker as a prince in disguise, the myth of blue-bloodedness.
He is a Jedi knight in disguise. You've got the separated siblings, Luke and Leah, who don't know their brother and sister.
I mean, all of these archetypes, the whole idea of a quest of proving yourself.
I really think that's why that series works on such a deep level, because it speaks to these archetypes, to these things that have meaning to us, even cross-culturally.
Those movies are popular in other countries, in Asia and other places.
Alright, for Northrop Fry, and what makes them a little different than all other archetypal critics, is that for Fry, these archetypes do not so much link poetry to the external world,
as they link one poem to another in a complex series of literary illusions.
So, he's not so much an external archetypalist, if you will.
For him, archetypes are very internal.
They still do draw you into the poem, rather than drawing you outside of the poem, and they link poems to each other through illusions.
Northrop Fry believed that poems don't so much make illusions to the outside world, as they make illusions to other poems within the tradition.
Elliot would agree with this idea.
The idea of the tradition alluding to itself and forming a sort of whole or a unit.
And thus, though archetypal critics, like New Critics, do isolate poems from the external world, they do insist that those poems be studied as a part of all great poetry,
as a part of the total human imitation of nature that we call civilization.
I love that quote from Fry.
Again, the archetypal critics in the tradition of Fry try to take poetry and set it again in a wider context, in terms of all these archetypal illusions,
and they want to see how it works on a wider scale.
Indeed, according to Northrop Fry, each poem that we study, when viewed in its archetypal context, becomes a microcosm of all literature.
Now, how's this for an organic view?
Remember we said the idea of the seed that contains the entire apple and the entire apple grove?
Well, for Northrop Fry, each poem is like a seed that contains the whole microcosm of poetry itself.
I find a wonderful view, and it's no doubt that Fry is a minister because he's got this sort of, you know, eschatological, this wide view that you get in the Bible.
All right, this now will carry us into the typological, polysemous nature of Fry's theory.
Why did I give you all that background? How is he linked into that on a higher level?
All right, let's go back to typology for a moment.
In the Christian typology of Paul and Dante, meaning exists and works on a multitude of levels,
and yet all these meanings emanate finally from a single transcendent God whom John calls the Logos or Word.
In other words, for Christian critics that are typological, all these meanings are all different, but they are all unified finally in the mind of God, the Logos, the Word of God.
There is a unity that pulls them all together and that gives them a sense of consistency.
God is in control of all of this.
So in other words, all these multiple levels of meaning still move together towards a kind of unity.
In the same way for Fry, although a poem exists both on its own literal, objective level,
and it also exists on a number of different mythical, archetypal, elusive levels,
still for Fry there is a final center or nodal point from which all meaning radiates.
In other words, Fry has this wonderful image that all of poetry points back to some kind of central meaning.
And again, that's kind of a spiritual, transcendent way of looking at things.
Everything points back to a center, a nexus.
Now, raising Coleridge's view of poetry as an organic whole to a new level,
Fry asserts that all great poems, though whole in themselves and complete in themselves,
are also parts of a greater whole of what Fry calls a self-contained literary universe.
I love that phrase, a self-contained literary universe that contains all of poetry within its end.
Now, though the poet may be unaware of that center,
the poet himself, writing the poem, may be unaware that he's being inscribed within this literary universe,
it is the role of the archetypal critic to reveal that hidden yet transcendent center
through a process that is nothing less than apocalyptic.
What am I saying here?
We are moving from the romantic idea of poet profit to Fry's idea of the critic profit.
Now, it's the critic who carries out the apocalyptic, the uncovering.
It is the critic who rips away the veil and allows us to see the greater universe of meanings behind it.
And again, sometimes the poet himself does not know what his poems mean.
That's one reason by way to not worry too much about authorial intent,
because sometimes the poet doesn't even know what he's doing, that he's part of this tradition sometimes.
So it's up to the critic to uncover it for us.
Let me make another parallel to Christian typology.
According to typology, the Christian whose eyes are opened to the full significance of the polysemous meaning of Scripture
will see that man's little schemes do not control biblical meaning, but are themselves controlled by it.
In other words, we realize that it's not we who are interpreting the Bible,
but it's the Bible who is interpreting us, or what is interpreting us.
What happens is when we realize the full typological meaning of Scripture,
we realize that God and the Bible are greater than history and greater than nature,
that God is in control of this entire complex web of history.
My wonderful wife, to cheer me up, in the pockets of all of my shirts,
put a little note, like a little Scripture verse, to encourage me.
And the one today was, be still and know that I am God.
And then she put on the bottom, God is in control, so I wouldn't get nervous as I presented these lectures.
What she's doing is this very thing.
She's trying to say that all these things are happening on so many multiple levels,
but there is a controlling factor here.
God is in control.
Now, how do we bring this into aesthetic language?
For Fry, the archetypal critic, in a flash of insight, sees or realizes that the forces of nature and history
are not the containers of literary meaning,
but are themselves contained by the transcendent vision of the poet.
In the same way that the reader of the Bible sees that God is above nature and history,
Fry sees that poetry, and especially that self-contained literary universe, is above history and nature.
This is the true Kantianism, this ascetic sphere that transcends and is above history and nature,
and is unsullied by historical forces that's pure and above.
There's a Kantian catharsis for you that takes us above nature to this perfect world.
Now, Fry is perhaps the late, the last great systematic theorist to express such a strong faith
in an absolute transcendent meaning for poetry.
Maybe it has to do with the fact that he's a minister.
I don't know, but he has a strong faith in transcendent absolute meaning.
In our final unit, we shall see how that faith is problematized, if not demolished,
by a variety of modern and postmodern theorists.
So those of you who like Fry and most of the people in this series believe that poetry has the ability to rise above,
to transcend, to break out of history and natural forces, to be something pure and timeless.
If you believe that Shakespeare was not for his age, but for all time,
if you believe that, then raise your right hand and say goodbye,
because we're leaving that behind as we move into our last unit.
Fry, even though he's pretty modern, 1967, very much modern, is the last major critic in many ways
to really have this faith in poetry as aesthetically pure.
And so, now that's a preparation for our next unit in which we will explore modern and postmodern theory.
Thank you.
