Lecture 22 Structuralism, Ferdinand de Sassure to Michel Foucault
In the preceding lecture, we saw how the theories of Darwin, Freud, Marx and Nietzsche set the groundwork for modernism.
In this lecture, we shall trace a key theoretical offshoot of modernism, called structuralism,
by tracing its birth in the linguistic studies of Sassure, its development in the literary
studies of Bart, and its full flowering in the historical studies of Foucault.
Now, let me say now before I begin, this is going to be a very, very difficult lecture,
and a very compact lecture. You will probably want to listen to this twice,
and I encourage you to consult the glossary, because there's a lot of vocabulary and a lot
of terminology that will make this difficult. But stick with me, I think we'll get the main ideas
across. All right, as the main offshoot and theoretical embodiment of modernism, structuralism
also inverts and decenters establish binaries. They're modernists, they switch things around,
they invert them like our forefathers of modernism we saw in the last lecture.
Now, what structuralism does is it privileges structure over logocentric meaning. Now you'll
remember, logocentric meaning is transcendent and originary. They don't privilege that.
Instead of privileging originary ideas, they privilege structure. Now, we might be confused
already, because you might say that the new critics are structuralists, because they're
interested in the structure of the poem. But when structuralists use the word structure,
they mean something much more material and physical. Remember when I told you in the last
lecture, Marx says the economy forms the base, or structure, sometimes called substructure,
of society. That's what they mean by structure. So, unfortunately, words change their meaning.
So, what they're saying is that the structure, the base determines things, not some logocentric
origin or transcendent idea. The famous Marshall McLuhan that many of you will probably remember,
he said, the medium is the message. That had, it has a new critical touch, but I think it's
closer to the structuralist. The medium, the structure is what tells you the meaning,
not the originary meaning. Actually, very few people really understood what Marshall
McLuhan meant. I'm not sure he did, but I think he was working within structuralism,
is my reading, at least, of him. All right. However, after decentering, structuralism actually
re-hierarchizes, setting up a new system as elaborate as that of Plato or Kant. So, they say
they're breaking away from the old metaphysics, but all they're doing it is turning it on its head.
So, in other words, it's still very structural, it's still hierarchical, but now the hierarchy,
I suppose, goes from the bottom to the top instead of the top to the bottom, but it's still very
much a system, and it's very elaborate, and it's like Plato or Kant. Now, the system of structuralism,
this is one of the things unique about it, is that it takes in all areas of thought and study.
Structuralism is interdisciplinary and can be applied to history, psychology, anthropology,
literature, linguistics, even math and sciences. So, in other words, structuralists find structures
everywhere. Marx found them only in the economic base. Structuralists find them everywhere. That's
the way they view all of the world, not just society, like Marx did. Now, let's use Marx as
an example, though. The system of Marxism is so systematic, so pervasive, that it can answer
all questions, whether political, metaphysical, or aesthetic. One of the reasons that the people
in the former Soviet Union, after it broke down, had a very hard time readjusting, is because the
structure of Marxism answers all the questions of life. It's a little bit different than capitalism.
I don't think capitalism answers all the questions of life, but Marxism, or that the structure of
Marx, answers everything. It is a full system that goes in all different ways. Now, I would say,
it is no coincidence that the century which gave us structuralism also gave us an era of
totalitarian systems from both the right and the left. You might say that once you get rid of the
logos, once you tear it down, you've got to replace it with something. If you kick human nature out
the front, human nature comes in the back. You've got to find a metaphysics somewhere. There's got
to be an origin, and so what happens is that God and all those other lo-goi, that's the pluriphalogos,
all of those are replaced by the state, finally, by the structure of the state, whether it's Marxist
or fascist. Now, structuralism originated in the linguistic studies of Ferdinand de Sassour
and the anthropological work of Claude Levy Strauss. Later, it was adopted to literature by
Roman Jacobson and Roland Barth, and finally, Michel Foucault took structuralism and carried it
into history. That's just to give you an idea of the interdisciplinary. I don't have time to talk
about all those figures. I am boiling it down to Sassour, Barth and Foucault. Those are the three
figures we will discuss in this lecture. Let us begin with Sassour. According to Sassour, no ready-made
ideas exist before words. Listen now, a word or what he calls a sign does not unite a thing
with a name, but a concept with a sound image. All right, now let's explain that.
The old logocentric metaphysical idea said that behind our words are real ideas, things, forms,
realities, essences, right? So what a word is, is some kind of pre-existent idea, and then the
word we give it is a name. So in other words, when we use the word justice, when a logocentric
uses the word justice, he believes there's a real idea, a pre-existent idea of justice,
what Plato would call a form in the world of being. And that idea, that pure logocentric idea,
is what's behind the word justice. That is what the Bible seems to suggest when Adam names the
animals. There's this idea that there's this reality. And you know, many people in the Middle
Ages believed that there was a language of Adam. They believed that Adam's language was perfect,
that somehow the words he chose summed up the essence of the animal. So Sassour says that's not
what language is. Language unites not a thing and a name, but a concept with a sound image. Now he
called that concept a signified, and he called that sound image a signifier. In other words,
the letters t-r-e-e or the sound tree, that sound, that's the signifier. And what it signifies,
the signified, is a tree itself. And if you mix together signifier and signified, you come up
with a sign. The word tree is a sign. The sound tree is a signifier, and the object with branches
is the signified. Again, these terms signified and signified come up again and again in modern
and postmodern theory. It's not that hard, really. A word is a signifier, and what it refers to is
the signified. It's probably the easier way to think about it. Now, the big difference is not
only does he believe that that signified has no pre-existent status. It's only justice because
we call it justice, but there's no idea of justice behind our word. There's just a concept that we
made up through the word. Even more radically, Sassour says that the relationship between signifier
and signified is arbitrary. There's no essential link between the word and the concept, and his
proof is a good one. He says if it were not, there would only be one language in the world.
There's nothing essential about the word tree that should connote or signify that thing with
branches. Interestingly, if we want to bring in this logo-centric metaphysics, the Bible has
an answer for that. The logo-centrum has an answer for that. You know what they say? The reason language
is arbitrary is because language is fallen, hence the Tower of Babelnith. In other words, it says
language used to be pure, but our language is fallen. But in its pure sense, language is pure.
Well, Sassour says there's no such thing as pure language. There's no such thing as a language
of Adam. Everything is arbitrary. Signifier and signified are just because of what we
smacked onto it. There's no essence there. I'm just kind of summing up now. Neither platonic
forms nor transcendent truths lurk behind the words we use. They are merely arbitrary,
man-made concepts. To look back at a metaphor I used in an earlier lecture, the relationship
between a word and what it means is not the body to the soul, but clothing to the body. The word
is just an arbitrary clothing to the body, which is the idea. All right, we've got that idea. Now,
Sassour doesn't stop there. He is a structuralist. He's interested in structure. So he's not so much
interested in every individual word or what he calls signs, but he believes that each sign is
part of a greater system of signs. And he's interested in the system or structure of signs.
Each sign fits into the structure. And he believes very mathematically that that structural system
goes in two directions, vertically, up and down, and horizontally across. Kind of like that Cartesian
system of math. You know, we have the different quadrants and you've got up and down. You can plot
things. It's that kind of thing. It goes vertically and it goes horizontally. And structuralists
make a distinction between vertical meaning and horizontal meaning. And I've got to give you a
few more terminology. It enforces a lot of difficult jargon here. All right, first of all,
this system, let me make one more point about the system. I'm sorry, one more point about the system.
That system of language is deeper than thought. It's underneath us. It's deeper. It creates our
ideas. And so Sassour has a word for that. He calls it the Lang, L-A-N-G-U-E. The Lang is the name of
the whole system of language. Now, structuralists like Sassour distinguish the Lang from what he
calls a parole. A parole is a specific instance of speech or writing. And as a structuralist,
Sassour is not very interested in parole. He's not too interested in individual words or poems
or anything. He's interested in the Lang. He's interested in the structure. Okay, now let me
come back and define vertical and horizontal. A few more terminology. Vertical meaning, he says,
is paradigmatic and synchronic. What do those words mean? First of all, paradigmatic relates
to why one sign was chosen instead of some related synonym. So paradigmatic, our word paradigm,
why did you choose this sign instead of another sign that has the same meaning?
Again, that's what paradigmatic means. Synchronic means sort of, it means with time or together
with time. And synchronic meaning relates to how the sign interacts with the existing structure.
An easy way to put that is that synchronic meaning is when you take the system and you
freeze it and you just look at it. You look at how the whole system works. Now, horizontal meaning
on the other hand, let's get through this terminology, is syntagmatic and diachronic. Now,
you can recognize the word syntagmatic has the word syntax in it. And so syntagmatic is interested
in relating how the sign functions in terms of the syntax and grammar. So whereas paradigmatic
is interested in like metaphors, why we choose one word over another vertically, syntagmatic is
interested in how each word or sign interacts with in terms of the syntax, the grammar, which is
going across as we speak or as we write the sentence. That's syntagmatic. What does diachronic mean?
Well, that's a Greek word like synchronic and it means through history. I guess it's a simple way
to put it. And diachronic is interested not in freezing the system, but in the evolution
through time of the system, how the system changes from time to time. Now, Sosor and Bart will see
our synchronic. They want to freeze the system. At the end of the lecture, we're going to look
at Foucault, who is diachronic. And I think you'll understand better when I give you examples.
One more example of vertical and horizontal that might be easy to think of. Think of a musical
score. Those of you who know how to read a musical score, if you look at it diachronically or
horizontally, you're looking at the melody line, right, that goes across as it moves,
as the melody moves. If you look at it synchronically or vertically, you're looking at the orchestration,
right, where the harp is and where the violin is, where the trumpet is. That is a way of looking
at it synchronically, if that'll help you to make a picture. All right, another aspect of
the Lang or the structure. The meaning of each sign in the structure arises from the differences
that set it apart from other signs within the overarching system. Structuralists are interested
in difference, not in sameness. And therefore, they reverse the romantic privileging of fusion
over efficient synthesis over analysis. They want to go to a scientific, positivistic approach.
Let me explain what I mean by differences. For a structuralist, the only reason the word cat is
cat is because it's not bat or mat. In other words, the word cat in and of itself has no meaning
only as it's different from something else. An example I like to use from modern day,
are you all, do you all know how your CDs work? CD is binary technology. Everything in a CD in
a compact disc is written in a one or a zero. And the only difference, what is a one? A one is not
a zero and a zero is not a one. That's almost very structural, believe it or not, the binary way
that we can store an entire symphony in ones and zeros. We can break it down into the differences
between ones and zeros. All right, let me reiterate something I said before. For sosoor,
all meaning or value emanates from this system. Just like Marx, the system is primary and meaning
flows up out of the system. And this system is socially and culturally derived and it moves
upward from the material, not downward from some higher logos. So just like we saw in our
fathers of modernism, structures at the bottom, if you want to say, and it moves upward towards
meaning and art and consciousness rather than downward. So that's why I did the modernist
lecture before structuralism because it's an outgrowth of what I said in the previous lecture.
Now, according to sosoor, society creates the system. The system is not a divin that fell from
heaven. Again, logo centrism didn't come out of the out of the head of God or played or anything.
It was created by society. And the system creates meaning. It creates meaning. It does not express
pre-existent ideas. It's not like there are pre-existent forms that are expressed in the
structure. The structure is what creates the meaning. All right, I'm going to put it in another way
that maybe will help. So sosoor structuralism struck the final blow at the long-held faith
in the purity, integrity, and eternality of meaning. And let me show you how it works.
In the beginning, you have ontologists like Plato. Remember ontology, the study of being?
And ontologists like Plato believed in the real existence of ideas and asserted the transcendent,
timeless qualities of these ideas. Ontology believes that, again, there are forms that are
the source or origin of our ideas. That's ontology. Well, later on, epistemologists like Kant and
others, though they kind of abandoned this faith in ontology, but they replaced it with a belief
in the equally transcendent qualities of subjective mind. Remember how I showed you in the last
lecture that a logos can be the transcendental ego, you know, who we are. And so epistemologists
sort of reject ontology in a way, but they replace it with epistemology. So now meaning
goes inward. So there's still meaning. There's still a source for things, a fixed source. Well,
as we move into our century, the new critics, although ontological in name, really shift their
faith to linguistics, to the timelessness of language. Now, again, the new critics,
they're pretty much ontologists, but really, as I tried to show a couple lectures ago,
I really think they're putting their faith, not so much an ontology, but in linguistics, in words.
And so what am I saying? We're moving down from ontology to epistemology to linguistics. It's
almost as if we're losing a little bit of faith each time in the origin of things. Well, Sossour's
theories of the arbitrary nature of language disrupted even that feeble faith in language,
setting in motion both the structuralist abandonment of absolute truth and the postmodern
deconstruction of language itself. So along comes Sossour and says, you know, even language is not
a trustworthy thing. Even language is not an origin. Language itself is just a structure,
just a system. And by the way, I'm using the word structure and system pretty much interchangeably
here. Now, this last phase, I mentioned the postmodern deconstruction of language. I'm going
to save that for the next two lectures. Right now, we're going to talk about the death of absolute
truth, then we'll get to the deconstruction of language itself in the next lecture, in the
next two lectures, really. All right, let us move on now to Bart and Foucault. Bart and Foucault
adopt or adapt structuralism to the study of poetry and history. Let's begin with Bart.
Bart views man himself as a structural being. No longer is man by nature a political animal,
like Aristotle said, but now man is a structural being. Like Nietzsche, Bart's concern is with
the human process by which men give meaning to things. Again, meaning does not exist or
pre-exist. We give meaning to things, as we saw with Nietzsche before. I created that idol of
Athena. I may have thought later it fell from the sky, but I created it. So Bart is interested,
basically, he's not interested in what things mean anymore, but how they mean, how we as human
beings create meaning. A nice way to sum it up, man is not endowed with meaning, rather he
fabricates or creates meaning. Let me give you an example that many of you will be familiar with.
You all know the big catch word for a sartre and existentialism, existence precedes essence. Well,
logocentrism says essence comes first, and out of essence, out of logos, comes our existence.
Bart is very much like a sartre here, in that he is saying our existence comes first. First,
we are here, and then we create our own essence. We create our own meaning. That is not to say,
sartre is not exactly a structuralist, it's a little bit different, but he would share that in
common since he is a modernist. Now, Bart explains to us what the structuralist activity is. In other
words, what does the structuralist critic do? How do you take structuralism and put it to work
in terms of analysis of literature or anything else? Well, the structuralist activity renders
a work intelligible. In other words, makes a poem make sense. In other words, how do they render a
poem intelligible? That's a phrase they often use. It renders it intelligible not by seeking out its
hidden meaning, as maybe a fry would or something, try to figure out what it means. Rather, this is
how they do it. They dissect and then recompose or articulate the object in accordance with man-made
and culture-made rules of association. That calls for a little explanation as well. You take the
work, the poem, let's say, you break it down, and then you, again, the fancy word is articulate
or recompose. In other words, what Bart is saying, what the structuralist are saying is, you can't
look at poetry as a thing in itself, as some kind of pure Kantian ending itself. What you've got to
do is take the poem and break it down and then articulate it within the structure or system
that created it. That's how you can figure out what it means. And again, he's not even interested
in what it means. He's interested in how it means, how it functions. And so, a work of art doesn't
even exist within a system or a structure. It functions there. And that's what Bart wants to get
to. He wants to get to the way that object, that poem, or that painting, or that symphony, whatever
it is, works or functions in the midst of the system. Now, while Bart's concern, like Sosur, is to freeze
a given system of meaning and look at it synchronically, structuralists like Foucault prefer,
after Karl Marx, a more diachronic approach. You'll remember those words. Bart is finally
synchronic, like Sosur, because he wants to freeze the system. He wants to take the object,
articulate it within the system, and then freeze it and look at it. That's a synchronic way of doing
it. And traditionally, structuralism is synchronic. But there are some that are a little more radical,
if you want to say, that are diachronic. And Foucault tends to be more diachronic. Let me
explain how. Foucaultian structuralism combines three aspects of modernism. I want you to see
how it works together and how we get Foucault. Very, very influential thinker. First of all,
Foucault does sort of borrow Bart's synchronic attempt to dissect and then articulate all thought
within the boundaries of an all-encompassing structure. So to a certain extent, he's doing
the structuralist activity. He is breaking down and then articulating within a system.
But he adds other elements to that. First of all, he adds Karl Marx's diachronic view of history
as class struggle and his materialist view of structure and superstructure. Now, we talked
before about this idea that there's the structure, which is the means and modes of economic,
and then the superstructure, which is art and philosophy and ideology. What I didn't quite
say then, what I'm saving for now, is that Marx believed in what he called dialectical
materialism. Right? He believed that you move from one economic mode to the next, from the feudal,
you know, I'm sorry, from the slave to the feudal, to capitalism, finally to communism.
And so what Marx believed is that it's diachronic. There's not just one system,
that economic system is ever changing. And every time the economic system changes,
so does our philosophy, our theology, and our art. That's diachronic. Finally, he adds in
Nietzsche's concern with power, or the fancy word for power is hegemony. It's a good jargon word.
The power or hegemony, I'm sorry, Nietzsche's concern with power and the genealogy of such things
as truth and knowledge. Remember that Nietzsche said that again, there is no such thing as
absolute knowledge we created. That's why Nietzsche wrote something called the genealogy of morals
because he's interested in the way these ideas are created, how they are fashioned, man-made.
Now Foucault is interested in all those ideas, and he puts it together into his system. Foucault's
method is to dissect and then articulate historical events within a structure that is modeled not
on relations of meaning, but relations of power, within that is a power network. No more just
meanings and whatnot. For Foucault, borrowing from Marx and Nietzsche, the structure is based
on a power network, power here and there, and it's a network that's always changing.
Let's follow through. Now this network, this network of power, this system, this structure
for Foucault forms a discourse that determines what can be thought and said at any given moment
in history. Now what is a discourse? We can say discourse or we can say discursive structure,
basically the same thing. The discourse is the structure, but the discourse is what determines
what we can think or say. It's like the economic means and modes. It determines not only what we
say, but even what we think. We can only think what the discourse gives us, what those power,
those network of power forces that underlie us, whatever they tell us, that's what we think.
That's what he calls the discourse. It's a word that's real big these days. Now according to
Foucault following Nietzsche, truth is one of the products of the discourse and not vice versa.
It's the discourse. It's that network of power relations that determines what truth will be
at any given time in history. And so again, truth doesn't determine the discourse. The discourse
determines truth. The founding fathers didn't create capitalism. Again, I'm using that very
loosely. Capitalism created the founding fathers, and the same thing with democracy.
All right. When the discourse or discursive structure changes during a period of historical
transformation, so does truth. Here's the diachronic aspect. Every time the power network
or discourse changes, so does truth. And Foucault has written many books showing how our views of
things like punishment, insanity, and even sexuality change determined by the discourse.
Every time the discourse changes, our view of what sexuality, what is good and bad sexuality,
of what insanity means, changes with the discourse. Important distinction. For Foucault,
this discourse is not primarily negative or repressive. It's not a system of thou shalt
not. Most of you listening to me are probably thinking, oh, the discourse tells you, no, no, no,
no. For Foucault, the discourse is actually positive. It forms what he calls a productive
network, which runs through the whole social body. So the discourse doesn't just tell you
what not to do, it tells you what to do, what to believe, what to create. So he sees the discourse
as creative, not necessarily destructive. Let me give you some examples of discourse very quickly.
Let's think of the modern American democratic discourse, which says that experts,
authorities, even presidents can be wrong, but the people must always be right. The big Clinton
scandal that's been going around, it's not important. In other words, it's okay to say
Clinton's wrong or right. Nobody cares about that. But don't say the people are wrong. If the people
say it's okay, it's okay. If the people or majority say it's wrong, it's wrong. And this is why I think
in our democracy, polling is becoming more and more and more important because our discourse
tells us that the people must be always right. Why is it you've got a man who spends his whole
life studying the law, and then he got 12 bumpkins deciding whether you're guilty or innocent? The
jury. That's a discourse that says, don't listen to the authority, listen to the vote or the will
of the people. They know what is truth. They know what is justice. I would call that the American
discourse. Let me give you another one that's a little more complex. Another would be the medieval
medical discourse, which labeled female herbalists as witches. Some of you may be familiar with this,
you know, and maybe it's still true to a certain extent today, but way back in the Middle Ages,
not even that far actually, you know, medicine was very much a male thing. Not only controlled by
men, but controlled by a male analytical cut-up way of looking at things, right? This idea of,
you know, of amputation and all that stuff. That was a very masculine discourse. Well,
there were a lot of women who used herbal remedies, right? They knew about teas. They knew about herbs.
They knew other ways, more, if you want to call them feminine ways, of healing people or at least
making them better. Now, that threatened the male scientific discourse. And so what did they do?
They labeled those women witches. They weren't witches. They were just, today they would be
called practitioners of holistic medicine. And by the way, this discourse is only broken down
recently. This is probably true at the beginning of the century. That's another discourse, maybe
a little bit more fun one to deal with. Now, Foucault, what is Foucault's role as a critic?
Because we're interested in that. Foucault's role as a critic then is to uncover the fine meshes
of the web of power that lie deeper than the institutions of the state. Foucault's doing
something apocalyptic too, but what he's uncovering is the discourse. Because you see, we don't think
about the discourse. Just like we don't think about the lang. We don't think about the linguistic
structure. We just speak. We don't think about our discourse. Foucault wants to expose the discourse
and show us how it works. He's not going to change it. He can't do that. But he's going to show us how
it works and how it's dynamic and changes. So that's the new role for a critic, to show us
how the discourse works. Finally, for Foucault, absolute truth is but one of many discourses
or ideologies around which a society can be structured. I had a Foucaultian friend in graduate
school and over his bed, he had a banner that read Truth, Colon, and Ideology. He was a Foucaultian
because he believed that absolute truth is just one way to structure reality. You can structure
reality around lies or around anything else. Truth is just one way of structuring reality.
It should not be privileged over anything else. That'll show you the radical side of Foucault.
All right. In our next lecture, we will move from modernism to post-modernism.
