In this lecture, we shall consider the origins of deconstruction in the theories of Derrida,
particularly as they were first presented to America in his famous or perhaps infamous
lecture, Structure, Stein and Play in the Discourse of the Human Sciences.
Jacques Derrida reads the history of western metaphysics as a continual search for a logos
or originary presence. Derrida says, yes, all of western metaphysics is logo-centric,
and he finds out a problem. He says, we keep trying to find a logos and origins. We can't
get that out of our system. Now, he says the reason it is so much a part of philosophy
is the reason is that this logos, if you can find it, it promises to give meaning and purpose
to all things, to act as a universal center, a transcendental signified that all signifiers
can be referred back to. In other words, we want the logos because we want a center, we
want something that is the origin of everything, and we want what he calls again a transcendental
signified. Now remember, a signified is what the word refers back to, the signifier returns
back to the signified. A transcendental signified would be something that all the signifieds
themselves point back to. We want something that will put a capstone, that will be the
top and the origin and everything, that will be like a God sort of, that will answer all
questions and be behind all references, all signification. He says, we desire that. Now
behind this search, Derrida says, is a desire for a higher reality, a full presence that
is beyond and thus not implicated in the play of structure. We want presence. We want to
know there's something there, and we want to know there's something there that is pure
and undefiled, not just a God that is there, but like a consciousness, a personality, that
we have something inside of us that is a presence that's real, that's undefiled. We yearn for
that, we're hungry for it, and we reach for it, something that is not caught up in structure.
Now he claims, Western philosophy since Plato has simply renamed this presence and shifted
this center without ever breaking from its centering impulse, and that's sort of what
I told you in lecture 21. In fact, I borrowed that a little bit from Derrida, kind of use
it against him maybe, but I borrowed a little bit because I think Derrida's right that
even though different philosophers have different names for the logos, it's basically the same
centering impulse. Now actually Derrida says that is what metaphysics is. The Derrida metaphysics
is looking for a logo, so he would say he's not a metaphysician, we might call him that,
but he's saying he's not a metaphysician because he doesn't want a logos as we'll see. Now
here's the fun part. Derrida says that even the structuralists, the modernists, have sought
a center, a fixed locus, or presence, or origin. In other words, they haven't really
de-centered, they keep saying we de-centered, we got rid of the center, no they didn't.
Their de-centering is just that juxtaposition, they just brought the margin to the center
and came up with a new center. Now structure forms the center rather than logos, but they're
still thinking in a centering way, and so they're not really any different, is what
Derrida is saying. They, the structuralists, have broken from the old metaphysic, okay,
but they still use its terminology and its binaries. Though they sometimes reverse the
binaries, they still think in terms of them. And that's part of logo centers, and if you're
thinking in terms of binaries, in a way you're still looking for a center. Maybe that center
is not God anymore, maybe that center is actually physical, but it's still a center. And you're
still thinking in terms of binaries, one privileged over the other. Derrida, and here comes the
word, would deconstruct all such attempts to posit a center, or to establish a system
of binaries. He would replace it instead with a full, free play of meaning. Let's look at
that carefully. The word deconstruction simply means that we're going to take this centering
impulse and deconstruct it. Take the binary and break it in half. That's on a simple level
what deconstruction means. Break down the old metaphysic, break down the old binary
way of looking at things. Again, instead of that, what Derrida once again is what he calls
a full, free play of meaning. He doesn't want to be put into any system, Derrida. Now interestingly
this is a little bit like that play drive of Schiller again that we looked at in Lecture
11. But the difference is, or what Derrida would say the difference is, is that Schiller's
free play is really not a free play, because Schiller is still trying to keep a metaphysic,
keep some kind of belief in God, a belief in transcendence or whatever. So it's not really
a free play because you still have sort of counters or measures that you've got to stay
within boundaries, if you will. Derrida says his play is a full free play of meaning because
it's got nothing to stop it. There's no presence, there's no center, there's no logos to stop
that free play of meaning from going in any direction. So again, Derrida is saying maybe
people before me said they were looking for a free full play. Maybe they said they were
breaking the old metaphysic, but they really weren't. That's up to me. And that's why it's
another paradigm shift from modernism to postmodernism. Modernism switches the binary, deconstruction
wants to break the binary. Maybe that's an easy way to describe it.
All right. Derrida's theories, as I've presented them, were first made public in a 1966 lecture,
it was at Johns Hopkins, and it was called Structure, Sign and Play in the Discourse
of the Human Sciences. And basically, this lecture is generally accepted as the birthday
of deconstruction in America. Deconstruction was in Europe a little before us. It always
comes to America after Europe. But that's the birthday. That's basically when deconstruction
begins in our country. A little bit about terminology. Deconstruction, postmodernism,
and poststructuralism are all used pretty much interchangeably. I mean, if you want
to really be precise, postmodernism and poststructuralism is equivalent and deconstruction is a form
of postmodernism or poststructuralism, but they're still used fairly interchangeably.
Now in this essay, Structure, Sign and Play, Derrida ironically spends more time attacking
and deconstructing modern theorists than he does the traditional ones. So the fun thing
about it, I mean, if you're somebody that's not crazy about modernism or postmodernism,
you may actually have fun, because he doesn't even bother attacking Play to recont directly.
He attacks all the people from the left. So Sur, I mentioned Levy Strauss, you know,
but all these other people, he deconstructs them. So it is a little bit of fun. It's
kind of like, I don't know if you know this, but Karl Marx, he did not agree with any other
Marxists. I mean, any other Marxists, he said, no, you're wrong, you're wrong, you're wrong.
There's only pure Marxists. It's kind of funny. Well, Derrida, he's not really irascible,
actually. He's kind of a fun fellow. But he has fun breaking down all the pretensions
of the structuralists. And you know what it's like? I think one of the reasons deconstruction
is so popular, I'm being a little critical here, but part of the reason they attacked
Socrates and put him to death was because all of Socrates' followers were using his
techniques, his Socratic dialogue, to go around and break down all the ideas of their elders.
What's more fun for a college student than to go up to some authority figure and use
reason and logic to show them that they're a fool? I really think this is why deconstruction
is so popular amongst graduate students, particularly, because it's fun to, it's the
anxiety of influence again. Isn't it the edible thing? It's fun to deconstruct people.
You get into it. It's a lot of fun. And again, sometimes, I mean, Derrida's pretty
wild, but sometimes his followers are even more deconstructive than he is. And again,
it just reminds me of those sophists. And I'm going to actually link deconstruction
to sophistry because it has fun breaking down arguments.
All right. In his lecture, Derrida identifies three forerunners to what he's doing. Nietzsche,
Freud, and Martin Heidegger. We haven't talked about him, but he's a famous philosopher.
Now the funny thing is, even these guys get deconstructed, but they get deconstructed
less than the other ones because he really likes them. Let me show you how they're the
predecessors or forerunners of Derrida, at least the way he explains it. First, Nietzsche.
Nietzsche is a predecessor of Derrida because he, Nietzsche, did away with such concepts
as being and truth, showing them to be arbitrary and in constant play. Not only did Nietzsche
show us that there is no absolute truth, he actually showed that truth itself was constantly
changing and in play. And that's an idea that Derrida is going to agree with. And so, you
know what's interesting? Nietzsche is really the true father of modernism and postmodernism.
He is an incredibly important figure in Western metaphysics. I mean, you can love him or
hate him, but without him, things would be different. I mean, that's true, maybe a very
philosopher, but particularly Nietzsche. He sets the groundwork for modernism, as I described
it in the last two lectures, and the groundwork for deconstruction, the next two lectures,
these two lectures. All right. What about Freud? Freud did away with the faith that
the subjective self or consciousness can function as a logo-centric presence or a transcendental
signify. In other words, if Nietzsche kills ontology, Freud kills epistemology, to mention
something I mentioned before. In other words, Freud shows us that, you know, even our consciousness
or our self can't function as a logos. Even that is broken down. So again, Freud finishes
what Nietzsche starts in that sense, or they're doing it fairly similar. Now, a way to put
it is that Freud demystified that nostalgic, romantic turn inward that would seek to posit
itself and its ego as a fixed, stable center. It's easy for romantic-minded people, and
in some ways, Freud is a romantic. He's an anti-romantic, but he's also a romantic.
And you know, there's that romantic thing that says, well, nothing else is true. There's
no God. There's no truth, but there's me. Well, Freud does away with that faith that
me, my ego, can form a fixed, stable center, as it does often times for a lot of artists.
You know, a lot of artists reject everything, but they have recourse to themselves as the
center of all meaning, and that's how they fix and stabilize meaning. They make themselves
into the transcendental signify. In other words, all meaning eventually goes back to
them, and that's what gives it the unity. Well, Freud problematized that by saying,
you know, no, we're the product of unconscious forces. Finally, Heidegger did away with the
metaphysical concept of being as presence, of any eternal, pre-existent I am. Heidegger
is very hard to explain, but again, the basic idea here is that there's no more presence.
Even we ourselves, we don't carry some kind of presence with us. I think the easiest way
to understand this is to have recourse, once again, to Sartre's idea of existence preceding
essence. Even though we are, we be or something, we're a being, we don't carry an essence with
us. That essence is produced as we act in the world, as we create. Our existence gives
way to essence. Maybe it's the easiest way to understand that in a nutshell. So again,
the reason these three people are forerunners, again, is because all of them are breaking
down all possibilities for a fixed center or stable origin or again, transcendental
signified. Now, in the rest of the lecture, I want to show you that what Derrida is really
doing is breaking from Western metaphysics. And to break from Western metaphysics means
to break from two things, Platonism and Christianity. Because the Platonic mindset and the Christian
mindset, especially as they were brought together in Augustine, that's why he's so important,
is that's really the Western tradition. Well, Derrida breaks both. I want to show you how.
Let's start with Plato. All right. In rejecting Logocentrism and its earliest proponent, Plato,
who sort of invented Logocentrism, Derrida has reaffirmed the foundational tenets of
Plato's nemesis, Gorgias the Sophist. Plato's great enemy, the one that Plato had to disprove
or outdo was a Sophist named Gorgias. Now, according to Gorgias, he had these three
propositions. Some of you may be familiar with these. Gorgias's three propositions were,
number one, nothing exists. Now, he doesn't mean there's no matter. He means nothing,
no presence exists is really what he means in the Derrida sense. Nothing exists. Number
two, if it exists, it cannot be known. Number three, if it can be known, it cannot be communicated.
Now, those are his three propositions. And again, much of Platonism, we might say, is
an attempt to answer that. Well, I'm going to show how deconstruction goes back to those
three propositions of Gorgias. Let's go through it. First of all, Gorgias's first proposition,
nothing exists. In place of that, Derrida argues that there exists no pure, undifferentiated
presence, no norm, no center, no touchstone against which all other imitations can be
shared. I think that's pretty clear. Nothing exists. There's no logos. There's no center.
The other ones are a little more difficult. All right. Proposition two, if it exists,
it cannot be known. Even if it does exist, let's say there is a logos. It doesn't make
a difference because it cannot be known. Here's Derrida's version. And Derrida doesn't say
this. This is my critique or way of explaining Derrida. I should say, I think if he saw this,
he probably would agree. But I want to say this is my critique. Derrida asserts our inability
to find a clear way back to any originary presence or even any controlling system of
logic. So for Derrida to, even if there is a logos, a transcendental signified, we can't
get there. There's no way to get back to a pure origin, to a transcendental signified.
Even if it exists, it's impossible to get back. Now, Derrida expresses this inability
in a word that he coined, Différance. Now, in French, that's D-I-F-F-E-R-E-N-C-E. Derrida
spells it A-N-C-E at the end. The way the shorthand is to say Différance with an A.
He invented the word. Now, this word is a pun and it's untranslatable, but I'll explain
to you the way it works in French. Now, the word Différance with an A is actually a pun
that plays on two French words, the French word for difference and the French word for
to differ. That's how he made that word. Now, I'll explain why that's important in one
moment, but let me show you the other reason. Okay, Différance with an E and Différance
with an A are pronounced exactly the same in French. And so, what he does with that
word is he breaks down one of the oldest binaries of speech writing. It was believed,
as I mentioned earlier, that speech was pure. You know, it's closer to the logos, whereas
writing is a kind of a dirty thing. It's a physical thing. Well, what he shows is,
wait a minute, if speech is so pure, if I say Différance, you don't know which one
I'm talking about until I write it down. So, that word is a little, it's almost like
a one-word poem that breaks down this faith in that binary. All right, let's come back
though to the more important difference and defer. All right, like the structuralist,
Derrida does privilege difference over sameness. He agrees with it. He agrees that meaning
comes out of difference. Remember, it's cat only because it's not bat or mat. He agrees
with that idea of difference. However, and here's the change, he does not share their
faith in structure. Derrida argues instead, here comes the word defer, that every time
we think we have found a center, it always points back to some other center or signified.
And thus, meaning is perpetually deferred. In other words, I've got a signifier and I
trace it back to a signify, to the origin of it. But you know what I find? I find out
that that's really not a signify, it's another signifier. And so I follow that to another
signify, which itself is a signify, and I never get out of it. In other words, every
time I think I've found the meaning, it's just another signifier pointing somewhere
else, being going back, and we never get back to meaning. Meaning is perpetually deferred.
Not just difference, but it is perpetually deferred. We can't get to a source. In fact,
whenever we try to get to the center or meaning of a text, we end up trapped in an aporia.
That's the word he used. It is a Greek word, and it means wayless. Aporia is a state of
suspension in which meaning is always already deferred. That's a little jargon, a little
Deridian jargon, always already. In other words, it's now, but it's always been. In
other words, whenever I try to find a center, I end up in an aporia, wayless. I'm lost,
I'm caught, I'm in a state of suspension, and I'm frozen. I can't go anywhere because
I can't get back to meaning. That's the word aporia. That's actually used quite often
in theory these days. There's no way to get back. I should mention, by the way, that Keats'
idea of negative capability actually is a little bit linked to aporia. Now, I certainly
don't think Keats would be a deconstructionist, but there's a touch there. I mean, what we
thought of as negative capabilities like aporia were suspended, so it's interesting. There's
a link there. All right. Proposition three. If it can be known, it cannot be communicated.
So let's say there is a logos. Let's say we can know it. Even if we can know it, we can't
communicate it. Now, for this, we find the echo of this in Derrida's insistence that
there has been a breakdown of signifier and signified. The big question for deconstruction
is, can writing as a system of arbitrary signification capture or even express meaning? The answer
for the deconstructionist would be no. In other words, signifier and signified are
not only arbitrary. They're completely broken down. You really can't get from one to the
other. They're really, really arbitrary if you want to put it that way. We can't get
back to meaning. Language does not embody or incarnate meaning. We can't get there.
Now, if you're thinking, in this step-by-step affirmation of Gorgias' proposition, we see
again the progressive rejection of ontology, epistemology, and linguistics. Think about
it. Nothing exists. That's a rejection of ontology, the study of being. If it does exist,
it cannot be known. That's a rejection of epistemology. What is epistemology? The study
of knowing. If it can be known, it cannot be communicated. That's a breakdown in linguistics.
Let's come to the Christian part. We've seen how Derrida rejects the Platonic metaphysic.
Now let us see how deconstruction marks a rejection of Trinitarian and Incarnational
Christianity. Now again, I must pause and say, please, when I say it is anti-Christian, I
do not mean it's anti-moral or anti-ethical. C.S. Lewis told us this in Mir Christianity
that our word Christian has come to have no meaning. Christianity used to have a meaning,
a certain metaphysical meaning about Christ and all that. Today it means somebody you
like. So again, when I use it, I use it in the C.S. Lewis part. In other words, Christianity
has a certain metaphysic, the Trinity and the Incarnation particularly. Although Derrida
himself is a pretty ethical man, he rejects the metaphysic of Christianity. And indeed,
deconstruction is incompatible with the Christian belief, as we've seen before, that in Jesus
of Nazareth, perfect manhood and godhood combined. Or to put it metaphysically, that God is
wholly transcendent and wholly imminent. The Christian belief, again, is that God is transcendent
outside the world. Let me explain to you how Christianity is different. Jews and Muslims
and Daists, they believe in a transcendent God. They believe in a God that's perfect
and outside of the world and created everything. Eastern religions in general, Hinduism, Buddhism,
and Fucianism tend to believe in imminent. In other words, God is part of this world.
Even the sort of new age we call today tends to believe in imminent. What makes the Christian
metaphysic unique, and this is the one way it's unique, or maybe the only way it's really
unique, is that they believe that God is completely transcendent. But at one moment in history,
God became imminent in the person of Jesus of Nazareth. So let's think of it this way.
At one point in history, a signified, indeed the transcendental signified, came down and
became a signifier. I like to call this redemptive logocentrism. If Plato is logocentrism, Christianity
is redemptive logocentrism because it says you can bring the two together. We've kind
of seen this before, but I'm trying to explain it to you in a different way today. Well, again,
for Derrida, that's the ultimate illusion. There's no way you can bring the two together.
Signified and signified have nothing to do with each other. There's no essential link
to it. Now, in the same way that Plato answered Gorgias, the Bible also offers an answer to
Gorgias. I'll show you some. This is kind of neat, the way it works. Think of the prologue
to John's Gospel, John chapter 1 verses 1 to 18, right, the prologue. All right, Proposition
1 for Gorgias, nothing exists. What does John 1 once say? In the beginning was the word
and the word was with God. We all know that, right? That is, in a way, an answer to nothing
exists. It says, yes, something does exist, the logos. Okay, if it does exist, it cannot
be known. John 1 14, another famous verse, and the word became flesh and dwelt among
us full of grace and truth. In other words, not only is there a logos that exists and
is transcended, at some point it came into the world and was known. That's that incarnation
idea we've talked about so often in this series. Finally, if it cannot, if it can be
known, it cannot be communicated. All right, what is John 1 18, the end of the prologue?
No one has ever seen God, the only son who is in the bosom of the father, he has made
him known. And you know the Greek there can also mean he has communicated or he has narrated
him. So again, the logos for both for Plato and for Christianity exists, can be known,
and can be communicated. Let's bring some of these ideas together. Deconstruction, therefore,
is both anti structural and anti incarnational. Not only does it reject metaphysically the
fusion of divine and human, not only does it reject it in that theological sense I've
been talking about, but it rejects it. It rejects the possibility for higher transcendent truth
or meaning to be incarnated in any form, any aesthetic form. So in the same way that there
is no whatever theological incarnation, there also can be no aesthetic incarnation. Do you
see how, again, what Derrida is doing is something very different. This is a completely
new metaphysic. In fact, it's not a metaphysic at all. Again, Derrida would say. Again, this
Christian idea, see, it isn't interesting that Jesus is referred to as the word. And
that's why there's such a link to aesthetics, because there's an idea not just that God
became flesh, but the word, the logos became flesh. So again, we're really speaking in
aesthetic terms here. The same thing. And this is another weird thing about the Bible.
I'm not sure how this came about, but not only is the phrase word of God used for Christ,
it's also used for the Bible. Logo. So what is it? Uh, I've got logo, uh, whatever. Logo
stay. That's what it is. The word of God. Now, again, this idea that the Bible is divine
and human is again another answer to Gorgias and something that goes against deconstruction.
All right. Hopefully you've got that idea now. Now I want to bring it back and say something
kind of funny here. Okay. What I'm going to argue is that the reason it took Gorgias
2,500 years to come back in the form of Derrida is that obviously the platonic and Christian
system that I've been trying to lay out for you must be very strong and supple. And revisionist
history aside, that is the foundation of Western civilization, Bible and Plato, basically,
and you know, throw in Homer along with Plato. That's the foundation of Western civilization.
And again, I think that those metaphysics have been so strong that they've been keeping
Gorgias in check. Indeed, we might say with a smile in our face that Plato and Augustine
trounced poor old Gorgias so severely that it took him a couple of millennia to recover.
So again, there's a little bit of fun there. All right. Now I've been kind of tough on
Derrida partly because Derrida is tough on everybody else. So I think he can take it.
But now I want to be fair at the end here because Derrida is not thinking the way I'm
thinking. Let me explain. Okay. For somebody who is a Platonist or a Christian or works
within that metaphysic, the Deridian idea of Aporea is tantamount to being in Dante's
dark wood of error. I mean, for a lot of people, you'd say, my God, if Derrida is right, I
might as well just hang myself right now. I mean, to a lot of people working within
that metaphysic, the traditional one, they'd be, Christ, forget about that. But, and this
is where I'm going to be fair to him. For Derrida, Aporea is not a negative state. He's
not running off and killing himself. He's excited about it. He thinks it is not negative.
It should not call for a nostalgic longing for meaning or presence as it does in Rousseau.
He spends a lot of time deconstructing Rousseau. Although Rousseau is important to modernism
too, Rousseau always had this nostalgia trying to look back and he particularly saw himself
as a center or origin. Derrida says, no, deconstruction should not make us look back
and say, oh, I miss the good old days when meaning meant something. No, for Derrida and
his deconstructionists, deconstruction is positive, and deconstructive Aporea particularly
is positive. It marks, as it does in Nietzsche, the joyous affirmation of the play of the
world and of the innocence of becoming. See, for Derrida, like for Nietzsche, this is
affirmative. It's good. It means there's free play. You get rid of play, you get rid
of the Bible, you're free, right? I mean, and, you know, these things do put boundaries
in our life, right? They tell us what to do and what not to do. But here, it's deconstruction
sets us free. So again, I want to emphasize that for Derrida, this is great. This is positive.
And it frees us in two ways, deconstruction and Aporea. It frees us first from being bound
by any fixed truths or origins. That's obvious. We're not bound by them anymore. But even
more, it frees us from any guilt we might feel over the absence of meaning. See, a lot
of people don't believe there's truth anymore, but they feel guilty about it. Like Woody
Allen, I haven't done anything, but I feel guilty anyway. We feel guilty like there should
be some kind of truth. There should be an origin. There should be a logos. What Derrida
is saying, the logos is not there. And don't long after, don't feel guilty. Just accept
the world with an affirmation. And that's one thing I've got to respect about Derrida.
He's pretty straightforward. Now, in this affirmation, I believe Derrida is much like
the existentialist Jean-Paul Sartre. We've mentioned several times, who felt that the
absence Sartre did, who felt that the absence of a higher plan or purpose in our lives did
not render life meaningless, but made our choices even more vital. You would think if
somebody believed what Sartre did, why doesn't he hang himself? No, for Sartre, that's good.
That means we're free and that it's our choices that make the world. So again, for Sartre,
like for Derrida, this is positive. It's maybe hard for a metaphysician to believe that, but
it's positive. Let me end with an example to kind of tie things together with Oedipus
Rex, with Oedipus the King. There's that scene in Oedipus, I told you way back when, where
for a moment, Oedipus and also Jocasta think that they have escaped their fate. And they're
all excited and they raise their fist up at heaven and say, huh, why do we have to listen
to screaming birds? All those prophecies are foolish. We are just sports of chance, groping
in the darkness. Now, the way you read that will show you whether you're a traditionalist
or a deridian, a deconstruction. A traditionalist, when they hear that, they're terrified. They
say, wait a minute. If the prophecies are wrong, if everything's just a sport of chance,
if we're in the dark, then life is meaningless, right? We're in the dark wood of error. But
another way to read that is the deconstructive way to read it is, wait a minute, that means
we're free. Nobody tells us what to do. All right, everything's dark, but at least it's
my darkness and I choose it. Now, Sophocles goes with the first one. Sophocles says, no,
we've got to go back to what he called ananke, necessity. We've got to go back to the rule
of law and fate and prophecy. But Derrida would have a different interpretation, very, very
un-oristatailing. He would say, no, that's good. We're sports of chance. You know, both
Derrida and C.S. Lewis would say we live in the shadowlands. For Derrida, that's good.
But stay in the shadowlands. For C.S. Lewis, it's only good because the higher reality
is yet to come. So again, I hope we can understand Derrida and deconstruction. In our last final
lecture, we will look at varieties of postmodern theory.
