Welcome to the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing.
Well, welcome to the Simons Institute
and this program on quantum Hamiltonian complexity.
So I thought I'd start off by providing
some kind of an introduction to the field of quantum
Hamiltonian complexity, because it's rather new.
And even the people who are working in it
will work on one part or another of it.
And so it's always good to have a reminder.
And of course, hopefully, some of you
are also new to the field and would just
like to learn about it.
So let's make sure.
Sorry, I seem to have a problem here.
Let me just see if it's the, oh yeah, it was just me.
Thanks.
OK, so sorry.
So let me start from the basics, which
is where we start from in quantum computing, which
is this remarkable fact about quantum systems, which
is that the state of an n qubit system, it requires two
to the n parameters to describe, rather than order n, which
is the case for a classical system.
So if it's an n qubit system, the state
is a superposition over all possible two to the n n bit
strings, each with its private amplitude, alpha sub x,
which is a complex number.
So another way that we usually think about it
is, of course, that the state is a unit vector in a two
to the n dimensional complex vector space, the Hilbert space.
OK, so that's, of course, the starting point
of quantum computation.
The other starting point of quantum computation
is the fact that nature guards these resources extremely
closely by making sure that when you actually
try to access the quantum state, you only see n bits of information.
So you actually see x with probability alpha x
magnitude squared.
And so this exponential superposition
is sort of hidden behind the scenes.
And so this is, of course, the basis of quantum computation,
both the possibilities and also the frustration of it,
the possibilities because there's
this exponential amount of resources, the frustration
because you cannot really get at it until you work really hard.
OK, so now the main question in quantum computation
is, what do these exponential resources
combine with this limited access tell us about computation
and what can we compute with it?
And there's the flip side of this coin,
which is, what does it tell us about physics?
The fact that you have this very strange description
of exponential power and limited access,
surely this has a lot to say about what's possible
and what's not possible in physics.
And of course, this goes back to the very foundation
of the field of quantum computation.
I mean, these were questions that we really did think about
and talk about back then.
But back then, there were a few missing pieces.
So first, we didn't understand quantum computation that well.
We didn't have many techniques around.
And then a lot of things happened since then.
So the field of condensed matter moved forward
and started thinking about highly entangled states
and topological order.
Possibly somewhat influenced by ideas in quantum information
and quantum computation itself.
And then, of course, the technology
moved forward a lot to the point where
people have been implementing rudimentary quantum devices.
And so questions about those have arisen.
And of course, there are new techniques in quantum information
and quantum computation.
And this has led to the birth of this new area called
quantum Hamiltonian complexity, where there are interesting
things to say about the implications of these basic
properties of quantum mechanics for physical systems
themselves.
So let me try to outline some of these basic questions.
So one direction you can go with all this is you can say,
well, if quantum states have this exponentially large
description, how is it possible to do physics at all?
I mean, how can we mirror classical beings
with polynomial computing power, with limited amount
of information processing power?
How can we possibly comprehend?
Oops, sorry.
How could we possibly comprehend the possible states
of quantum systems and much less understand their properties?
And so one possibility is that, in fact,
this exponential description, maybe in order
to get quantum states which have this exponential description,
you actually have to engineer them.
Because obviously, engineering quantum computers
has proved to be a very challenging task.
So you could maybe imagine that there
are natural classes of quantum systems for which you can actually
describe them very succinctly, classically,
and you can understand them well classically.
Surely that must be the case, because after all physicists
do study quantum systems, and to study them,
you've got to have a classical description of them.
And so that's the first theme.
So are there natural classes of quantum states
which can be described very succinctly
and work with much more which we as classical beings
can actually work with?
So another way of sort of imagining this,
thinking about this question is, well,
you have this exponentially large Hilbert space,
exponential dimensional Hilbert space.
So could it be that there's a small corner of it
where many natural quantum states sit?
And this small corner is sort of easily described classically.
So this is the corner that we can understand
as mere classical beings.
OK, so that's one thing.
The second theme, as I said, had to do with testing quantum
systems.
So again, here the issue is that, as we saw,
quantum systems, they have exponential power,
exponential descriptions.
But on the other hand, we have limited access to it
as classical beings.
So now imagine what this means for what
happens when you actually implement a quantum system.
And now say that you don't, for various reasons,
you don't entirely trust this quantum system.
So you might not trust it because, well,
maybe it's being used in quantum cryptography.
So cryptography and trust don't go together.
Or maybe you don't trust it just because, well,
whenever you build some device, you really
do need to test it.
So how do you test something which
is exponentially more powerful than you are?
So one way we can think of this whole issue of testing
quantum devices is, well, let's get it down to the basics.
So let's think of it as a black box
where since we must interact with it as classical beings,
let's imagine that the input and output are digital.
And let's make them binary just without loss of generality.
And let's say that just to underline this fact,
the input is in the form of one of two buttons, label 0 and 1.
And the output is in terms of one or two lights,
each label 0 and 1.
And so that's how we communicate with the device, which
might be exponentially powerful, which is supposed
to be performing some functionality.
And so how do we actually verify that it
does have that functionality?
Or it's internal to this device.
What's going on is what we expect.
So now you might be thinking, where on the earth
do you get a black box in real life?
Well, there are companies that do sell black boxes.
And we do want to test what's inside
or that they do behave according to claims.
OK, so now this theme of untrusted quantum devices,
as I said, comes up in many, many contexts in cryptography.
And actually, in this field called
certifiable random number generation,
so this notion that you can use quantum mechanics
to generate true randomness.
But now if you want to actually test,
how do you certify that the output is actually random?
In testing whether a claimed quantum computer is truly
quantum, like with a deviant machine,
and even in testing quantum mechanics itself.
So I'll say a little more about this as we go along.
OK, so now what I plan to do in this talk
is talk about these two themes and to underline
what are the interesting features from our viewpoint
about this and why this was an area that precipitated
this actual special semester here at the Simons Institute.
So OK, so let's start by talking about this whole notion
of the description complexity of quantum states.
So do quantum states, do natural quantum states
somehow have exhibit exponential complexity,
or could they be described more succinctly?
OK, so the kinds of quantum states
we'll focus on are ground states of local Hamiltonians.
So this is one way to specify a physical system
by specifying the Hamiltonian or the energy operator.
So let's say we have a lattice of particles.
Let's say each of them could be, it's a two level system,
or a qubit, or it could be a D level system, or qubit.
And we have interactions between these particles
represented by terms of this Hamiltonian.
So each term of the Hamiltonian describes the interaction
between neighboring particles.
And now what we'd like to understand
is what is the ground state, the lowest energy
state of this system look like?
So this is sort of the central problem in condensed matter
physics, to understand lower energy states or ground
states of local Hamiltonians.
Because properties of this ground state
determine the properties of materials.
So what we'd like to know is, does this ground state
necessarily have a polynomial description?
And if not, then can we somehow restrict the class of
Hamiltonians to some natural, you know,
fairly general but natural class, where we can get this
polynomial description?
Now, there's a trivial answer to this.
The trivial answer is that each of these terms of the
Hamiltonian is sort of local, and it has a constant sized
description.
It has a constant sized description.
And the number of terms in the Hamiltonian is
polynomially bounded.
So of course, you can describe the Hamiltonian and then say,
if the ground state is unique, you can sort of say, it has
a polynomial description.
Because you just say, I mean the unique ground state of
this Hamiltonian.
OK, so it's a very precise answer, and it's as useless
as it's precise.
So the actual question that you want to solve is, we want a
polynomial description that allows you to compute
interesting quantities efficiently.
So what are these interesting quantities?
You want to compute the ground state energy and two point
correlations or any local observables involving small
numbers of particles.
And so in some sense, one way you can describe quantum
Hamiltonian complexity is it's an area, or at least a good
part of it, fraction of it, lies at this intersection of
condensed matter physics and quantum complexity theory.
So now there's a very basic reason why quantum
Hamiltonian complexity lies at this intersection.
And this basic reason has to do with the correspondence
between the basic problems in the two fields.
So in condensed matter physics, the basic problem is you're
given a local Hamiltonian, and you want to understand its
ground state.
In complexity theory, the basic problem is you're given a
constrained satisfaction problem, like satisfiability,
and you want to understand if there's a satisfying
assignment, or if there's a solution, what's the best
solution to this constrained satisfaction problem.
It turns out that these two problems are very closely
related.
In fact, the local Hamiltonian problem is a
generalization of the constrained
satisfaction problems.
It's a quantum generalization of that, or that's the
classical restriction of the local Hamiltonian problem.
And so once you realize this, you actually realize that
there's a dictionary that allows you to translate between
these two settings.
Because the energy of a state corresponds to the number of
unsatisfied clauses of an assignment here.
So states here correspond to assignments.
Energy corresponds to the number of unsatisfied clauses.
Ground state corresponds to the solution to this constrained
satisfaction problem.
But of course, even though there's this dictionary, the
actual motivations are quite different.
On this side, you study these problems because you want to
understand these properties of ground states, and therefore
the properties of materials.
Here you want to study these constrained satisfaction
problems to understand because these are interesting
computational problems, and we'd like to do
combinatorial optimization on them.
OK, so now let me just try to describe this local Hamiltonian
problem a little bit more closely.
So each term of this Hamiltonian, so imagine that
each term involved maybe not just nearest neighbors, but
let's say it was k local.
So here I've drawn a two local Hamiltonian because you have
two particles interacting with each other.
But you could have a k local Hamiltonian where you had k
particles interacting with each other.
And then if these particles were qubits, so if they were
two level, then each term of your Hamiltonian would be a
2 to the k by 2 to the k Hermitian matrix, describing
the interactions among these k particles.
Now, the way we think of the Hamiltonian is that it assigns
an energy penalty to the state psi.
The total energy is the sum of the energy penalties
assigned by each term.
And the ground state is the minimum energy state, or the
eigenvector.
So when we write out just to, I'm sorry, this is probably
just to make sure that everybody's on the same page,
the Hamiltonian would now be, if there are n particles, it
would be a 2 to the n by 2 to the n Hermitian matrix.
Each of these terms h sub i is tensed with the identity.
And then you add them up.
And so the entire complexity of the local Hamiltonian comes
from the fact that these terms of the Hamiltonian don't
commute with each other.
And so when you're looking for the ground state of this
Hamiltonian, you're looking for something that you're
looking for the minimum eigenvector of this Hermitian
matrix, which of course is the sum of these terms which
don't commute with each other.
Now, let me just spell this out a little more in detail
just to make the correspondence more clear for the
computer scientists and maybe also for the physicists here.
So if you look at the constraint satisfaction problem,
three satisfiability, so there you're given a Boolean
formula on n variables x1 through xn, which is a
conjunction of clauses, c1 and c2 and cm.
So you have m constraints, each of which consists of a
clause which is a disjunction of three literals.
So you might have a clause such as x1 or x2 or x3.
And now, OK, so why is this a special case of the local
Hamiltonian problem?
So this would be a three local Hamiltonian problem.
So the n bits correspond to their special cases of n
qubits.
A clause x1 or x2 or x3 corresponds to a term of the
Hamiltonian which is diagonal.
So now everything's going to be diagonal in the
computational basis.
And the only assignment which is going to be assigned a
penalty is the one that doesn't satisfy this clause, which
is x1 equal to x2 equal to x3 equal to 0.
And so this term of the Hamiltonian would look like
that.
It would assign an energy penalty of 1 to, if you had
all 0's assignment, to these three variables and 0
otherwise.
And so now, of course, what you would do is tensor this up
with the identity on all the other bits.
And then you add this up over all the clauses.
And that's your Hamiltonian for this problem.
But of course, since all terms of the Hamiltonian are
diagonal in the computational basis, we know that all
truth assignments are going to be eigenvectors.
So eigenvectors are going to correspond to just n bit
strings.
And each such eigenvector will have eigenvalue, which is
going to be the number of unsatisfied clauses.
And so the satisfying assignment would be an eigenvector
with eigenvalue 0.
OK, so that's the correspondence between
satisfiability and local Hamiltonians.
Now, as I said before, there's this dictionary in
translating local Hamiltonians to constrained
satisfaction problems.
So the next part of the dictionary lies in realizing
that the Cook-Levin theorem, which says that
satisfiability is NP-complete, it has a
corresponding theorem on this side, which was discovered
by Alexei Ketayev, who showed that approximating the
ground energy of a local Hamiltonian is QNA-complete.
So it's complete for the corresponding complexity
class quantum Merlin Arthur.
And for our purposes, what this means is that there's no
sub-exponential size classical witness for
QMA-complete problems.
What does this mean?
So what it says is, if I give you a local Hamiltonian and I
ask you, could you tell me what the, figure out what the
energy of this, the ground energy of this local
Hamiltonian is?
This is a pretty hard problem.
But in fact, this QMA-completeness is telling
us that it's hard in an even more extreme sense.
It's so hard that even if somebody were to solve the
problem for you, even if there was an untrusted party who
actually knew the answer to the problem, and they were
willing to help you, but you don't trust them, then
there's nothing short of, if they were to say something to
you which is short of an exponential amount of
information, then there's nothing you can do with it.
Then that information would just be completely unconvincing.
OK, so the point is that if you're given a classical
satisfiability problem, and even though satisfiability is
hard, we don't know any sub-exponential time algorithm,
if somebody were to solve the problem and say, I know a
satisfying assignment, they could just hand it to you,
and this would be n bits of information which would be
completely convincing.
For this QMA-complete problem of local Hamiltonians, where
you're trying to approximate the ground state energy, the
claim is that there is no such short classical
description that's going to convince us.
If there's somebody who knows the answer but you don't
trust them, there's nothing they can say which is short of
exponential size that would be convincing.
OK, so a witness for whatever the energy is.
So there's no effective short description of the state
which allows you to do even simple tasks.
So far, what I've pointed out is that there's this very
basic connection between the central problems in condensed
metaphysics and in quantum complexity theory.
Now, the other reason to study this correspondence is that
there are very beautiful questions that arise here.
And some of these questions are open questions.
And some of them, there's a lot of progress and so far.
So let me describe some of these questions and some of the
progress that has been made.
So one of the crown jewels in complexity theory is the
PCP theorem, which says that not only is it
satisfiability NP complete, but it's also NP hard to even
approximate the minimum number of unsatisfied clauses.
So it's very hard to tell given a three-sat formula
whether it's completely satisfiable or whether there
are no more than, let's say, 7 eighths of the clauses are
7 eighths plus epsilon fraction of the clauses are satisfied.
So this was a really remarkable theorem.
We could ask, is there a quantum analog of it?
And it turns out people have been trying for some time, but
we don't really know what the answer to this question is.
And so the interesting thing is this is one of the rare cases
in complexity theory where we have a question who's not
only do we not know the answer, but we don't even know which
way to actually guess.
So people who've been looking at this question have guessed in
different directions whether one should have a quantum
version of the PCP theorem or not.
Now if there was such a quantum version of the PCP theorem,
then we'd have actually quite an interesting interpretation
which very, very loosely you could sort of say, this is
sort of asking the question, can quantum systems exhibit
this kind of exponential complexity even at high
temperature, even at room temperature?
OK, so yeah, as I said, it's sort of a very rough
connection, but let me sort of say that.
So let's say that you had a quantum system at room
temperature, so now it's in a Gibbs distribution.
So now the claim is if you could sample from this Gibbs
distribution, so if you can sample from this Gibbs
distribution, then you would be getting a
relatively low energy state.
So in other words, if there's a quantum PCP theorem, so
already we understand that for the quantum systems for
which it's currently hard to approximate the ground energy.
But now if there's a quantum PCP theorem, it says, given
this question of approximating the ground energy, you can
translate it into the following kind of question.
So we are going to take this Hamiltonian and we're going
to massage it into a new Hamiltonian, and it's going
to have the property that if the ground energy of this
original Hamiltonian was low, then the new Hamiltonian has
going to have very low energy, ground energy.
But if the ground energy in the old Hamiltonian, the
original Hamiltonian, was a little bit higher, then here
the ground energy is going to be extremely high.
So now you massage the Hamiltonian, you prepare the
system, and you sample from the Gibbs distribution.
And now you check to see, now you have this gap, right?
So you're either in case one, ground energy is this low,
case two, ground energy is this high, and you check to see
what kind of sample a few times from the Gibbs distribution.
And if you ever see a sample whose energy is lower than
this one, then you know that you're in this lower case.
So you've made a distinction between this
energy and that one.
So does that apply to any for your normal time
transformation like effective?
Yeah.
But it's not clear.
That's all implementable as a physical.
Like do you use, I don't know, finite field arithmetic to
look at the P to P theorem?
It's as long as you have a polynomial time
transformation.
Polynomial time is enough.
I mean, implementability, I see.
OK.
Polynomial time, we think of as, yeah.
OK, so let's go back and, you know, so this, so far we
talked about the hardness of finding quantum states.
So, you know, the Q and A completeness really showed us
that in general, ground states of quantum, you know, of
Hamiltonians are very hard.
You know, even approximating the ground energy can be a
very hard task.
But let's go back to this question.
Are there natural classes of quantum states for which there's
a polynomial description?
So it's obvious that if you are going to be looking at ground
states of local Hamiltonians, we have to restrict them further.
So why do we believe that it should be possible to do so?
Well, here's one reason.
It's because actually physicists have been doing this
for some time, for some special systems.
So in particular, there's this heuristic called DMRG from
about 20 years ago, which has been extremely successful in
computing ground states and low energy states of one
dimensional quantum systems, quantum systems on a line with
nearest neighbor interactions.
OK, so what this heuristic does is it actually computes an
approximation to the ground state, and it represents it in
a particular kind of format called a matrix product state,
which is a special case of a kind of tensor network, which
we'll hear about in this workshop.
And so there's this succinct polynomial size description of
the quantum state from which you can actually compute local
observables, energy, correlations, et cetera.
OK, so now how can we understand the success of this
algorithm, and how do we actually try to understand what
kinds of Hamiltonians we should be able to solve?
So it turns out that the way to understand this question is
to understand something about entanglement.
So the main obstacle to describing quantum states
succinctly is quantum entanglement.
So if you take a quantum system and you divide it into two
parts, A and B, then entanglement is the quantum
analog of correlations between the two sides.
So if you think of the quantum state, it's a superposition
over all the classical configurations.
The probabilistic analog of that is a probability
distribution over all the n-bit strings.
And then entanglement between A and B is really the
quantum analog of correlations between the left side and the
right side in the probability distribution.
So it turns out you can actually quantify the amount of
entanglement between the left and the right side of the
system.
And the way you quantify it is by saying, if you measure
this left side of the system, then the number of bits of
entropy you get in the distribution, that's a measure
of the entanglement between A and B. Now, of course, the
number of bits of entropy you get depends upon which
measurement you perform.
And so you must perform that measurement which gives you
the minimum possible amount of entropy.
So you choose a basis in which to measure the system.
And you choose that basis in which you get the minimum
possible entropy when you do the measurement.
And that's a concrete measure of how entangled the two sides
of the system are.
So what matters for the purposes of what I'm saying is
that there's some precise measure of entanglement that we
can put.
And OK.
So now it turns out that there's a really beautiful and
sweeping conjecture about how entangled ground states of
local Hamiltonians are.
So and it's almost completely general.
So it requires one condition here, which is that your local
Hamiltonian has to be gapped.
So what does gapped mean?
So gapped means that the ground state energy and the energy
of the first excited state, they must differ by a
non-negligible amount.
So this is like the quantum analog of satisfiability,
if you have a satisfying assignment and then the next
possible not satisfying assignment is going to violate
at least one clause.
So the gap here would be 1.
And so gapped local Hamiltonians are the quantum
analog where the gap is at least some constant.
Not necessarily 1.
It could be 0.5 or 0.01.
But it has to be bounded by a constant.
So now for these gapped local Hamiltonians, the claim is
that the ground state is not very entangled.
And the way that's formulated is by saying that if you were
to take the system and partition it into two parts
arbitrarily, so you partition the particles into those
inside this volume and those outside, then the claim is
as far as the ground state is concerned, the entanglement
between the inside and the outside grows proportional to
the area of this boundary rather than the volume, which is a
number of particles inside this part of the partition.
So actually, this is a longstanding conjecture in
condensed matter physics that somehow it had its origins in
the holographic principle in cosmology.
But it was really precisely formulated only about a decade
ago using ideas from quantum information.
But the important thing to remember here is, of course, a
law is a conjecture.
So even though this is a beautiful sweeping conjecture,
so by the way, I should say one other thing about this
conjecture.
So even though precisely stated, it's only talking about
the entropy scaling like the surface area, morally it says
more.
Morally what it talks of, it's really saying is that the
entanglement really sits close to the boundary.
It's local.
And so if that is the case, then you should expect to get a
succinct classical description where you describe the
quantum state by describing the entanglement at the boundary.
And then once you describe the entanglement, you are free to
describe the quantum state inside and outside sort of
separately.
And so there are these beautiful structures called
tensor networks, which Zef will actually speak about on
Saturday morning, which actually give you a precise way of
doing this decomposition and actually describing states
succinctly.
OK, so now what do we know?
Yes?
Yeah, so I'm way out of my depth there, but maybe Patrick
would be there.
Actually, I should just skip this, but unless you want to
add a.
I think there's a long story to tell.
That's probably a good answer.
How does it not contradict to QMA hardness?
So if you will have a concise description of the solution,
then how can it still be QMA?
Right, so Mario's question is, why does this area alone not
contradict QMA hardness?
And the answer is this gap condition.
So it turns out that the QMA hard instances have a gap, a
spectral gap, which scales inverse polynomially in n, in
the number of particles.
And so this is a special class of Hamiltonians.
But it's a very interesting class of, it's a pretty
general class of Hamiltonians.
And so it's a way of distinguishing and saying, well
look, if you're going to be completely general about it,
you get QMA hardness, but maybe there's a very large class
where you don't get it.
And here's a very principled reason why you might be able
to avoid this kind of hardness.
But on similar lines, this intuition you gave earlier
about the complexity of higher temperatures and so on.
Where does m versus m squared relate to that?
The gap of m versus m squared.
You know, the search for quantum PCB theorem that it
implies potentially.
That's a different kind of gap.
So let me try to address this.
Let me say something that's clarifying, and then hopefully
it addresses what you're saying.
OK, so let me just talk about the scaling of these gaps.
So let's say m is the number of constraints, or the number of
terms of the Hamiltonian.
Now, when we say a gaped Hamiltonian, so what are we
saying?
We're saying the spectrum of the Hamiltonian goes from, let's
say, 0 to m.
Because let's say that each term of the Hamiltonian has norm
1, so the maximum energy can be m, and let's say it's
frustration free, so the minimum energy is 0.
Now, saying that it's a gaped Hamiltonian means that the gap
is a constant, so maybe 0.1.
So the energy ranges from 0 to m, and say the ground state has
energy 0, and the first excited state has energy 0.1 or
something.
Now, what would it mean to say that there's a quantum PCB
theorem?
To say that there's a quantum PCB theorem would mean that
what we'd be saying is we can approximate the ground energy
to within an additive factor, within 1 over polynomial in m.
And that's what we are trying to do.
That's the task that we are given.
And what we're saying is, look, if the energy, so we are
trying to say, we are trying to narrow down the energy to
being either below or above this inverse polynomial
interval.
We are trying to say, is the energy below this amount or
larger than this amount?
And these two are separated by an inverse polynomial.
Now, what we are trying to do there is to say, OK, so we
don't know how to solve this problem, but what we can do is
we can map this problem into another one.
So we can create a new Hamiltonian where if this
ground energy used to be small, then the new one will be
small.
If this ground energy used to be slightly larger, inverse
polynomial larger, then the new energy would be constant
times m, where m is the total norm of the Hamiltonian.
So now the gap becomes not constant like 0.1, but it
becomes the difference between, say, 0 and 0.2 m.
So this new Hamiltonian is not local.
Which one?
Certainly.
If there were a quantum piece here, it would not be local.
It might be local in a, so one would expect it to be local
in terms of a k local, meaning every term involves only k,
some constant number of particles, but one would not
expect it to be local in space, so like a two-dimensional or
three-dimensional.
This is local in space.
This is also local in space.
Yes?
I mean, the area alone.
Well, actually, so that's a very good question.
So what Sanjeev asked is, for this area a lot to hold, do
we need for it to be in two-dimensional or
three-dimensional space?
And the answer is, as far as we know, it might even hold for
completely general graphs.
So in other words, think of the terms of the Hamiltonian.
So let's say it's too local in the sense that it's really a
graph rather than a multigraph.
It would hold also for multigraphs, but let's say
it's just graphs.
And now, let's say the interconnection pattern is
completely arbitrary.
Then you could still define the surface area of a region.
It's the number of edges that you cut.
And as far as we know, the area law still holds that.
And of course, but what happens there is if you're
trying to prove the area law in an expander, it's of course
very easy, because in that case, the surface area is
proportional to the volume, and so you don't have anything
to prove.
So it could be that its scales, it's just
completely arbitrary.
But it's very unlikely as the.
It may be, yeah, there may be count examples, and so, so.
And in any case, the area law doesn't imply a
succinct representation.
That's right, that's right.
So that's right, that's right, yeah.
So.
Is it possible to classify PCB theorem?
I'm sorry?
Is it possible to classify PCB theorem in theory?
No, so the classical PCB theorem, about which, by the
way, there's going to be a, you know, Lucaturasan will
speak on Friday.
So no, so for that, you need some kind of expander graphs.
So, you know, that was the point that Sanjay was
raising that.
Yeah, because you can, you could actually come up with
some sort of approximation algorithm, you know, to some
extent.
Yeah.
You want to say something about, there's sort of these two
things.
One is when you have a promise gap, and the other is where.
Yeah, no, I don't want to.
Yeah.
I want to, in response to the question of, doesn't area law
imply a succinct representation?
Yeah.
I guess my work with Fernando Brandao implies it does in
a very weak sort of sense, and I'll mention that later on.
Great.
Okay, so I should say that, you know, there's, okay, so, by
the way, I realize I'm running into one of the things that I
wanted to say about this workshop, which is that we will
try to have, you know, have discussion, Trump's schedule,
although I wasn't expecting to run into that particular issue
in this lecture, and maybe I still won't, but in general,
in this workshop, you know, if you have questions, you know,
that's what it's meant for, and so you should really ask,
and as speakers, you should, you know, I hope, speakers will
also be very comfortable about letting discussions continue.
Okay, so in terms of, in terms of the 1D, in terms of the area
law, there was this, you know, real breakthrough by Matt
Hastings about six years ago where he proved, gave a rigorous
proof of the 1D area law, the area law for 1D systems where,
you know, for 1D systems, what it says is if you cut the
system at some point, then the entanglement entropy across
this is proportional to the area, well, what's the area here?
It's just one, so the entanglement entropy is a constant,
and that's what he, that's what he showed.
And then there's been a, there's been a lot of further work on
this, on this subject and including getting, not only getting
much better parameters for this constant, but also, also, you
know, this has been the subject where, I guess, you know, from
both sides, from physics and computer science, we've sort of
beaten the path using machetes and, you know, till we met in
the middle and can actually talk to each other and exchange
techniques.
And in addition, there's also, you know, a polynomial time
algorithm for approximating ground states of gapped 1D
Hamiltonians, so this seems to, you know, go towards explaining
somehow this result from condensed matter physics about
DMRG, right? So, so now, yeah.
I'm sorry.
An exact meaning, just exactly the ground state.
Yeah, so, you know, the actual ground state could be
extremely complex, right? So, to describe it exactly, you might
actually need the exponential amount of information, but what
you can show is that they are, you know, given, if you want to be
arbitrarily close, then, then, then you get, you get very good
approximations where the, where, you know, the, the issue is how
much entanglement is there, you know, across, so, so, well, you
can bound the entanglement entropy, but, but that doesn't
mean, you know, even though the entanglement entropy is bounded,
it doesn't mean that there, there, there aren't tiny, tiny terms
which, which contribute very little to the entropy, but if you
want the exact answer, you have to keep track of everything.
And so you have to, you have to truncate somewhere, and then,
you know, that, that contributes to your error.
So, so you pick an error, a level of approximation, and then,
the area law kinds of results tell you that you can truncate
somewhere, and then that, that's what leads to a given level
of approximation.
That, that's right.
Yeah.
So it, it, it depends.
Yeah.
And I guess you could, there are two main completeness results
that say you cannot improve on your.
That's right.
So, so.
There's no gap, no constant gap.
Right.
Right.
If, if, yeah.
So, his, his algorithm depends on the gap in the error.
If you, if you say, can I have an algorithm that depends only
very weakly on the gap in the error, like polylogged dependence,
then the answer is no, because of these two main completeness
results.
The gap, the gap case, one neat gap case.
Because that's true, if you leave the gap.
No.
Fix the gap, right?
Then have the error be zero.
Then, can you exclude the point of law?
No, then you don't know.
Yeah.
That's right.
Okay.
So.
Um, so now the, you know, the, I think the exciting part of it
is not just the fact that, that we have these techniques that,
you know, at this point, we really have a dialogue between
physics and computer science on this.
But, but not only that, we also have some very beautiful
open questions, you know, some far-reaching open questions.
So, so some of these open questions have to do with,
how do you make a transition to two dimensions?
So, um, so in terms of the area law, the results we have
currently in, in, in rigorously proving area laws, they are
right at the cusp of being able to prove something non-trivial
about two-dimensional systems.
So, in fact, if you, if you can, if you could make even a
small improvement, a tiny improvement in, in the parameters
of the 1D bound, you would get a non-trivial result for
two, two dimensions.
And so that's, that's a very enticing open question which is,
you know, waiting to be, to be worked on.
The, the second very interesting question is algorithms for,
for computing to the grand states.
So, this is really the holy grail in, in cadets matter
physics, you know, to try to understand two-dimensional
systems.
And, um, there's a, there's, oops, so, so there's a, um,
okay, so, there's a lot of recent work on, on, on,
trying to do classical simulations of 2D quantum
systems, um, uh, you know, using this tensor network
approach, uh, you know, various kinds of tensor
networks, uh, peps and mirrors and so on and, and,
um, but, um, but the new thing that, that's also been added
to the mix is that now, for, for one, for one-dimensional
systems, we actually have some, some tools and rigorous
techniques and, and, uh, you know, um, it, it should be
very exciting to put all these together and see where this,
this goes.
So, so this is the other reason why, uh, you know,
this, this semester is, uh, you know, is so timely
because, because all these things are, you know,
you know, are happening there and, um, this is an
opportunity to bring all the people together from
different parts, different disciplines, uh, working on
these problems and, and putting, putting their ideas
together.
Okay. So, um, so let me, let me spend the last question.
Yeah.
So, these, uh, empirically successful algorithms.
Yeah.
So two questions.
One is how do they know whether their simulation was
successful?
Do they have theorems that they verify or whatever?
And second, uh, the systems that they're studying,
are these synthesized, synthetic systems like randomly
generated or what?
No, no, no.
Because there you might be able to prove.
No, no, no.
In fact, um, okay.
So, so these, uh, so the, the, the successes are mainly
in 1D for 1D so far, right?
So 2D is, is really the frontier and, and the, the
successes here are relatively, you know, this is sort of
the beginnings of, so there's a lot of effort there
and for 2D systems, but, uh, but I think it's fair to
say that so far the most, you know, 1D is considered
sort of well-sold and well understood and 2D is
really the frontier.
No, but how would you even know that you've done it
right?
I mean, what's the right answer?
Oh, I see.
Yeah, yeah.
So I think that, uh, the, the answer is physicists know.
Yeah.
There's something exactly, so you can do it on a system
that you have an exact solution for using some
complicated method.
Okay.
Like, uh, some special symmetry or something.
And then if your algorithm doesn't take advantage of
the symmetry of the right answer, then you deal with
it.
I see.
So, so the other thing I should say about DMRG is that
it doesn't always work.
And in fact, what you, you know, often to make it
work, what you, what you have to do is you have to
start with an initial, uh, initial, um, uh, configuration,
an initial state, which you have to guess based on
the physics.
So, you know, if you just start off with any old
configuration, it won't converge and it won't give
you the right grand state.
And so, so you have to have some physical insight,
which says, you know, here's, here's what the
solution might look like, or here's, here's some
approximation or rough, uh, good starting point.
And then, then you use the algorithm to, to find,
find it's way.
And then the second question was, yeah, on
synthetic data, you know, randomly chosen H's and
so on.
Uh, I think it's, that's easier to prove theorems
about.
Yeah, but I, I think it's, um, my, my understanding
is it works well in practice on, on, on interesting
systems rather than on, on synthetic data.
It may not work actually.
Okay.
So, so let me just say a little bit about untrusted
quantum systems, uh, untrusted quantum devices.
So, where you, you have a device, you, um, quantum
device, it's supposed to be doing something and then
you want to verify it.
Does it really do what, what, what, what, what's
claimed?
Um, um, and, uh, you know, as I said, um, one way you
can model these untrusted devices is as black
boxes, which are potentially exponentially powerful,
certainly much more powerful than the classical
tester who is trying to test these systems.
And then you have limited access, you know, say,
say binary classical access.
You want to, okay.
So, so now this is again a place where, where it
touches on, you know, very fundamental constructs
because, you know, the place where we see, um,
computationally bounded verifiers trying to test
something, you know, talking to an untrusted, much
more powerful system is an interactive proof in
complexity theory.
Um, and so, um, so what, what we should think of
is a, is a polynomial time classical verifier.
This is the experimentalist or tester.
And then, and then we have a very powerful quantum
system.
But very powerful now is no longer infinitely
powerful as it would be in interactive proof
systems.
Now the very powerful is quantum polynomial time.
And so, so results from interactive proof systems
like IP equal to PSPACE no longer apply.
And so the question is what's, what's the power,
you know, how, what can you convince Arthur about,
you know, what can Arthur sort of convince himself
of in, in conversation with a quantum polynomial
time?
So, so there are, there are very interesting results
which I guess Anne will talk about today, which is
so there, there are these, these papers which talk
about what happens if you, if you augment the
verifier with, with a small amount of extra
quantumness.
So some constant number of qubits of quantum
storage and a quantum channel to Merlin.
But other than that, you know, you have, you know,
Arthur with the small augmentation other than that
is classical and, and is interacting with Merlin.
And so it turns out in this, in this case you can
actually verify anything that Merlin is, Merlin says.
Now there's, there's one other setting in which you
can, you can explore these questions which is quantum
multiplayer games.
So in this setting you have Arthur who is, who is
polynomial time bounded.
And then you think of Merlin as these quantum
systems but, but more than one quantum system which
are entangled with each other and which are not
allowed to communicate with each other.
So you put these quantum computers in two different
rooms and you make sure they can't talk to each
other but you make sure that they are also entangled
with each other.
Now, you know, this kind of quantum, quantum
multiplayer game in, in a, in a very elementary form
go back to, you know, the, the very early history
of quantum mechanics with the, with this EPR
paradox or spooky action at a distance, you know,
this initial understanding of entanglement.
And then with, with this beautiful result of
John Bell, which, the Bell's inequalities which,
which, which are these so-called tests for
quantumness, you know, which actually tests that
two systems are, must be quantum because, you
know, because, because, because a classical
Arthur interacting with these two systems or
maybe, maybe Arthur now is split into two parts.
One part is interacting with one system and the
other with the other one.
These are very far apart.
They can't communicate with each other.
The two, two quantum systems and, and just the
classical interaction with these systems is
completely incompatible with any classical theory.
Right?
So, and it, it, so what quantum mechanics predicts
about these, about these, the probability
distributions on these interactions is, is
completely incompatible with, with, with classical
theories.
So it turns out that, that you can, you can use
these, these, these kinds of tests for quantumness to
do device independent quantum cryptography to
certify random numbers and to actually certify that
these quantum systems behaved exactly as they
were supposed to, according to protocol.
So, again, this is some, you know, something that
we'll hear about.
I'll talk about also the general outline of the
workshop.
Finally, let me, let me say that one can, one can
get arbitrarily philosophical, philosophical with
this, these, these questions.
So, you know, you can, you can take them to the
limit by asking about how you could possibly test
quantum mechanics.
So, so here's, here's one way you can think about
it.
So, you know, this exponential growth of, you
know, the exponential complexity of quantum states.
This is at least, at least from where I said it's
the most counterintuitive aspect of quantum
mechanics.
And, and then, you know, if you, if you look at it
from this viewpoint that the thing that you want
to do, the thing that physicists do always is
to test the limits, you know, the theory in the
limits of, of very high energy or very small
scales or very large velocities.
And each time you test physics in these, in, in
these limits, something interesting happens.
And so you could ask, well, is something
interesting going to happen when we test physics
in the limit of high complexity?
You know, in, in, in the limit of large numbers of
particles, well, not even that large and see whether
it really does exhibit this kind of exponential
complexity.
And, well, when you, when you think about this,
you, you immediately realize that, in fact, there's
a problem because, because this high complexity
which you want to test also precludes you from
doing a test.
Because if you were going to use the standard
scientific method, what you would do is you would
first, you know, design an experiment, you'd sit
down and calculate what the outcome should be.
And then you'd go perform the experiment, hopefully,
and then, and then check to see whether the
outcome was exactly what you predicted within,
within experimental error.
But then, you know, the high complexity actually
is a, is a barrier to actually calculating what
the outcome should be.
So how, how would be as classical beings
possibly carry out this, this method of, of testing
quantum mechanics at this, at this level.
And so, well, this, you know, this, this general
outline that I talked about, about, about interactive
proofs, if you could implement it in, in a
completely unrestricted form.
So, so far, we have implementations where either,
either you augment Arthur with some amount of quantum
bits, or you rely on Merlin being two separate
systems entangled, and you actually make use of
properties of quantum mechanics.
But, but let's say that we actually went back and
solved this basic question.
You know, is it the case that a polynomial time
verifier interacting with a quantum polynomial time
untrusted prover can verify everything about it?
You know, that, that quantum polynomial time is
equal to quantum interactive proofs with quantum
polynomial time verifier, provers.
In that case, you would actually be able to verify
quantum mechanics because, you know, whatever
experiment you wanted to verify, you would
actually, instead of, instead of first calculating
the outcome of that experiment, what you would do
is you would have a more civilized interaction
with your, with your, you know, with your
physical apparatus, where you'd sit down in the lab
and you'd carry out a conversation going back and forth,
you know, with an interactive proof.
And at the end of that interactive proof, you'd
be convinced that, that in fact the, the apparatus
was behaving according to whatever property you
were, you were, you were testing, you know,
whatever theory you wanted to test.
A couple slides ago, I thought you said the VQP
was QPAT.
Oh, sorry.
Did I say that?
I, I should have put a star there.
One more back.
Two back.
Okay.
So, oops.
You know.
One more.
No, I didn't.
You said yes.
You said yes if Arthur has.
Yeah, yeah.
If, yes if Arthur has.
Or yes too.
Yeah.
So that, that.
So when I say QPAT, I mean without this.
So I think this would be called QPAT star.
Right.
So if you have those extra quantum bits.
Okay.
So, so let me, let me just summarize and, and wrap up.
Oh, sorry.
Okay.
Okay.
So, so, so just to summarize what quantum Hamiltonian
complexity, you know, investigates is implications
of these, the, these two properties, the exponential
description of quantum states and the limited access.
You know, what does this tell us about physics,
about the physical world?
The, now, what, what makes this an interesting field is,
is a, is a number of, number of things.
Now, what, what makes this an interesting field is,
is a, is a number of, number of coincidences.
The first one being that the central questions of
condensed matter physics and quantum complexity theory are
in some, at some level of abstraction,
they are the same question.
Right.
That there's lots of recent work on these frontiers.
So there's, there's an emerging common language and we
really can talk to each other.
But there are also a lot of very interesting questions
which some of which we know and some of which we actually
don't know.
You know, so each side really needs to talk, talk to
the other in order to actually formulate the, the best
questions and how to put these techniques together.
And so this should really be an exciting semester,
hopefully a party.
And, okay.
And then there are these, there are all these exciting
open questions which are, well, I, I sort of highlighted
the biggest ones, but then there are lots of,
lots of other, other questions as well.
I guess just before I finish, I'll, I'll take two minutes
to walk you through the program for the, for the, for the
workshop.
So there, I guess we have three and a half days and we
have a broad theme for each day.
So the, the, so today's talks are broadly on quantum
multiplayer games and untrusted quantum devices.
So, so Anne Broadbent will, will, will start, start us
off with talking about how to delegate at quantum
computation or how to test if a quantum computer is quantum.
Yaryan will talk about untrusted quantum devices and
more greater generality.
And then we'll follow up with a mini crash course by, by
Thomas.
So, so let me just say a little bit about the, you know,
ambition for these mini crash courses.
So, so what we did was we singled out five different
basics, which, which are very basic and where, you know,
which it would be, it would be good to, to, to understand
these in, in some depth and, and the, the charge to the
speakers was to make this, make these mini crash courses
sort of the, you know, to, to have them be not, not, not to
start off with the, with the absolute basics, but to, to
provide this, this kind of sophisticated basic picture
that, that, you know, that you would like to have about, about
that subject if you needed to use it, but you don't really
want to work in it.
So, you know, so for example, if you were, let's, let's take
the example of quantum information theory.
Let's say you are, you know, you cannot avoid knowing
something about quantum information theory no matter
what you work on in this, in this, in this subject.
But let's say you are not really interested in quantum
information theory.
You don't want to read a paper on the subject.
You know, what is it that you should know so that, so that,
so that you have a picture of it and you, you have a working
knowledge of it?
You know, at the level that, you know, because when, when
somebody really knows this, knows the area, they keep
drawing on a certain picture, simple picture and a few
simple facts, which if only you knew you could actually
get through 75% of what they do.
And so the, the hope is that that's what these, these
courses will actually, these mini crash courses will
actually convey.
And so what, what Tom will talk about is mini crash course
on quantum multiplayer games.
Sorry.
Tomorrow we'll have the, the day we'll focus on quantum, on
area laws and quantum information theory starting with
Daniel Nagai and Zef Landau talking about area laws and
Ashwin will give us a mini crash course on quantum
information theory.
And then we'll have an app, applications of quantum
information theory in two different areas and quantum
Hamiltonian complexity by Aaron Harrow and, and to, I
guess quantum gravity by, by Patrick Hayden.
On Friday we'll focus mostly on the quantum PCP theorem.
So with again a mini crash course on what you, what you
should know about the classical PCP theorem by
Luca Trevesan.
And Tom Avide recently wrote a, co-wrote a survey paper on
what, what we know about quantum p, the quantum PCP
theorem.
And so he'll tell us a lot about that.
Aaron Harrow will talk about STP hierarchies.
And then there's another mini crash course on quantum
error correction, which is very related to the quantum
PCP theorem.
And then the last day, sorry, the, on, on Saturday we'll
have a half day with the, with the, it's, it's
unfortunate that this mini crash course on tensor
networks comes so late, but, but it's really quite
fundamental to understanding how to not, not just do
similar quantum simulations, but also it's a, it's a
very nice language in which to think about quantum
states.
And then we'll have talks about quantum simulation by
Daniel Nagayan from Presco.
So just, just before ending, let me, let me just say one
more thing that, that there's, there's a, there was a
reading group last semester where, that, that CERV
organized with a number of people where, where they, you
know, on quantum Hamiltonian complexity, where they, they,
they've actually put together a document which, which I
hope is going to be useful to many of you.
It's, it's a survey paper on quantum Hamiltonian
complexity.
It's been posted on the, on the website for, of the, of, of
the program on, on, if you go to Simon's or Berkeley or
ETU, you'll find it there.
So please take it.
Oh, sorry.
Yeah.
So it's, it's, it's on the bootcamp page.
So, so you have to go all the way there.
It's posted.
Okay.
Thank you.
Thanks very much.
Yeah.
Yeah.
There was a point you made in, you know, in the spring workshop
and then, you know, like, just why, what's the matter
people focus on the ground?
Why, why would they focus on the ground state?
Well, actually, perhaps I should say the ground state is
proxy for ground and low, low energy states.
And, you know, I guess, I guess you would, you would want
to go back to this, you know, so, so if you're at low
temperature, then you're in, you know, somewhere in that,
in that region.
Right.
But if you're not at very low temperature,
why don't you stand at your point for a while?
So I, I mean, they have some reason for this.
They expect to be in a thermal state, which is the
some part of the ground state and some some of the
other states.
Do you want to really understand what's going on there?
Like, how will the system behave at two different
temperatures?
Will it be superconducting?
Will it be magnetizable?
And you need to know parts of this thing.
I think it's easier at temperature than at temperature.
Ground state is sort of no harder.
Yeah.
And when you cool it down, it can get stuck.
You need to do annealing or whatever.
For example, aerial laws are known for temperatures
away from zero.
In the classical case, there are known situations where
the complexity of approximating, you know,
it's easy for a while.
It's temperature rise.
I think it's hard.
I think it's easy again.
There's all kinds of phenomena.
I don't see that being expressed.
I guess maybe there's another way to talk about it.
You know, so one thing, condensed metaphysicists are
very interested in these days is highly entangled states
of matter or typological order.
Then you really want to study sort of low temperature, right?
Yeah, no, for those systems, yes.
But if you're interested in simulating physics, then I...
But this would be...
No.
Maybe this is the kind of physics one wants to simulate.
Maybe.
It's a related question.
Do you know if ground state complexity tells you
about dynamical complexity?
So if you have a K-local Hamiltonian
and you know the ground state complexity,
can you get to this exponential fluid space
starting from a particular initial state?
So let me try to at least say what I understood
of the question and then answer it.
So maybe you're saying, well, so let's say
you found the ground state, but now you want to simulate
the dynamics in the neighborhood of that ground state.
And how hard is that?
And so if you look at some of these, you know,
the work of Vidal, for example, with Miraz,
and so initially, you know, he used those sensor networks
to find the ground states, but then actually,
he says he can actually use it to simulate dynamics
in the neighborhood of the ground state,
and it works actually extremely well.
So I don't think there are any rigorous results there,
but it seems to work well in practice.
Okay, so shall we stop for a coffee break
and then resume in 20 minutes?
Thank you.
