Yeah, we're just like backups. We love net net Netflix
quality productions. Okay, well, in which case, let's kick
off. So we've we've had a couple of technical problems
with the stream. So now we're going to go pre recorded
instead, which is absolutely fine. So we're going to talk
about quite a few things today. Now, one big theme, I think
is talking about an activism and the kind of compatibility
between the free energy principle and an activism. We're
going to talk about. Now we have to be very careful how we
pronounce this words auto poetic. Is that right, Maxwell?
That's right. Yes. Amazing. So forgive me when I get it
wrong. I'm going to get it wrong. I'm sorry. So we're
talking about auto poetic and activism, which of which, of
course, was the brainchild of Varela. And there's an
interesting paper that came out, which was actually quite
critical of FEP. We're going to talk about some of the points
in that paper. And that was called laying down a forking
path tensions between an action and the free energy principle.
And in that paper, there were a few areas. So there was the
definition of auto poesis, historicity. So we're talking
about temporal sequence invariance and non steady state
equilibria and what it means to be a Goddick. There was this
critique about the non stationarity of distributions.
And also really interesting discussion about internalism
versus externalism, because of course, the the inactive view
is is is a form of externalised cognition, which is this very
interesting view that you have cognizizing elements outside
of the mind in the environment around you. So we'll talk about
that as well. We'll touch on goal directedness and also
structure learning, which is a really, really exciting thing
in in any any Bayesian cognitive framework. Now on the call
today, we have obviously, first of all, Professor Karl
Friston, the inventor of the free energy principle and active
inference, a man who requires no introduction whatsoever.
Professor Friston, welcome to the show.
Great to be back.
Fabulous. We also have Dr. Maxwell Ramstead, one of the top
scholars in the free energy principle and the active
inference literature. Of course, we've had Maxwell on very
recently, but welcome back Maxwell.
Always a pleasure, gentlemen.
Amazing. And we also have a new face. Professor Buckley, would
you like to introduce yourself?
Yeah, yeah. So yeah, my I'm a faculty member at the University
of Sussex, but I also work with versus with Maxwell and Karl. So
I have a background originally in physics in postgraduate in
physics, and then moved into cognitive robotics. I was kind
of working in behavior based robotics, and an activism somewhat
early on my my PhD, moved into kind of theoretical neuroscience,
and kind of really got interested in the free energy
principle about eight or nine or so years ago and wrote a review
on it. Originally, you know, wanted to challenge it and
then eventually fell in love with it and now think it's the
right way to go for it for what we want to do. So I came as a
skeptic and then have been bashed into into into place. Do you
think now this is is the correct way to think about things?
Amazing. Well, let's let the bashing commence. Well, we'll
move straight on to the subject of an activism. So there is this
paper laying down a forking path tensions between an action and
the free energy principle. And the name is very hard to
pronounce it as Esquiel de Paolo. Paolo.
Okay, thank you so much. Now, just just to be fair to them,
because Maxwell, you did actually couch FEP as an activism 2.0,
despite the inactivist rejection of information methods. And maybe
we should start by defining an activism. And also, there's some
similarities with this other idea called ecological psychology.
So why don't why don't we just start by framing some of these
ideas up?
That sounds good. Yeah, I think that's a great idea.
Did you have like a pre prepared definition you wanted to
share? Do you want us to riff on this?
Well, why don't why don't we start with Varela's an activism?
So there are some so it's in terms of philosophy, there are hints
of existentialism and phenomenology and eastern influences
and focus on lived experience and stuff like that. One of the and
the core things is that they reject information processing and
computationalism. They focus on actions and interactions.
It's a very embodied tradition. So why don't we just kind of
start with that?
Okay, yeah, that's a great way to set it up. Well, I mean, we should
probably just add a little bit of context and a few caveats
before launching into this. So I think Chris and I are of the
generation that was trained in the inactive embodied tradition.
I would describe myself as a reformed inactivist. I don't
know if Chris, you resonate with that I still believe in
activism. Yeah.
So these, the inactive approach is one of the so called four e
approaches that have become very popular since the 90s. And I
would argue is, at least in in the more philosophically
informed corners of cognitive science and neuroscience, basically
the dominant theoretical paradigm right now. So it we have to
say there's a this is a broad church of approaches that go
from a more kind of minimalist recognition that cognition
involves bodily processes to the more radical approaches that
you were describing earlier that just wholesale reject
information theory, the computation, the computational
metaphor for mind that mind is basically a kind of computing
device. And yeah, the inactive approach grew out of
auto poetic theory. They're distinct. It's important to say.
So auto poetic theory was developed by Maturana and Barrela
sometime in the 1980s and 90s. And it was a very mechanistic
approach to mind. I mean, you know, some of the early kind of
flagship papers in this tradition are what the frogs I
tells the frogs brain and this kind of stuff. So you know, hard
nose kind of systems biology type thinking. And I mean, there
was basically a break in the literature where due to Barrela
in a lot of ways, the emphasis moving from kind of mechanistic
models to phenomenology to a kind of more dynamic, coupling
interactive kind of mode of explanation. So yeah, the inactive
approach is basically committed to this idea, fundamentally that
cognition is basically bringing about a world, a structured
world of meaning and significance through adaptive
appropriate actions left in the world. So the the slogan is, you
know, yeah, exactly constructing this meaning, you know, laying
down a path and walking, I think is the the slogan, the poetic
slogan form that's so popular. Yeah, and in its more radical
inclinations, this inactive approach says, dynamical
systems is really the way to study systems that have mind. And
so the kind of the background assumption there is that there's
a fork in the path in the road somewhere, you know, where we
have to choose between information theory and dynamics. And
yet they obviously go down the dynamics path. So I think that's
a setup. And before launching into criticism, I should say that
we as a community, genuinely appreciate and benefit from
friendly critical engagement. So I just want to caveat all this
by saying that the criticism comes from a place of wanting to
build community from a place from our hearts, basically. And
yeah, although I'm going to be saying a lot of critical stuff
about the inactive approach. In my heart, I'm an inactivist, I
think just that the a lot of the, a lot of the methodology and
explanatory constructs that are leveraged in the approach are
problematic. And in particular, you see this come out when
the free energy principle comes into play. So
So Chris, do you want to add anything to that that definition?
Yeah, I mean, I guess it's like, I see, I'm going to use this kind
of phraseology was in in one of Carl's books, which is a low
road and a high road and activism. I basically was brought up a
low road and activist rights. So this is kind of rejection of
representationalism in cognitive architectures. It was a
move away from good old fashioned artificial intelligence to
embedded and embodied agents. So this is kind of the origin in
Rodney Brooks's behavior based approaches to robotics. And
those are the kinds of ideas I still embrace. And then there's
the kind of high road and activism, which kind of embraces
auto pieces and operational closure at its heart. I mean,
to me, I mean, if you're if you're a high road and activists,
they are the same thing, they are they come from the same place.
But I think there's a kind of there is a there are messages
to take from an activism and the low road, which are super
important for cognition, right, without kind of going into the
depths of the auto poesis. Just in terms of like the language,
I think, I think there is a split between dynamical systems
theory, which is kind of the origins of descriptions of
automatic systems and information theory, but that that
community has begun to embrace, you know, a little bit of
information theory, but it tends to has been done through kind
of phenomenological models, simple models, rather than kind
of have this kind of theoretical angle or deep theoretical basis
in something like Bayes that like we do, right? I mean, I to
that paper, I read it before we come to me, it doesn't seem, you
know, some of the language is quite dismissive. But to me, it
seems an opportunity to see whether we can reconcile these
frameworks. And I think they've done a nice job in pointing
where there are maybe things we can express better within the
free energy principle that kind of address things like
operational closure. I feel that this community sometimes feels
like it has to be divided. But I'm very much an inclusive
person. So some really nice dialogue between people in an
activism and what we do in the active inference and the free
energy principle.
Interesting. I mean, I'll bring Professor Friston in in just a
second. But I was reading this very interesting paper by by
Maxwell, written in, I think it's 2019, multi scale integration
or internalism. And I was 21. Okay, so it's the multi scale
integration paper. And you know, of course, this this an active
philosophy is all about externalism. So you know, you
actually have these cognizing elements outside of of where
the brain is. And in a way, it's, there's this Helm-Hopsian
sharp separation between the organism and the environment,
which is perhaps embraced by neuroscientists. But the
interesting thing about the free energy principle is, is I
think it maintains some vagueness about this notion of
whether it's an internalist system, where you have strong
representations and predictive power about what's going on in
the world around you, versus being this kind of dynamical
externalist, inactive type system. And in that paper,
Maxwell, you are saying that well, actually, we can integrate
the two views because you can have these nested boundaries. And
as Professor Friston has said, human minds, the reason we have
this temporal depth of planning and sophistication and
representation building and so on, is because we're at the top
of the stack. But there's many, many layers below us where
perhaps it is more of an inactive externalized form of
cognition. So we can kind of speak to both worlds. But
Professor Friston, perhaps you could come in on that.
Yeah, I was frightened, you were going to ask me well, if I had
anything to add about inactivism, because I haven't, I'm here
to find out whether I'm an inactivist or not. So at the
end, it's only come tell me whether I'm an inactivist, I'd
be very grateful. There's probably some nuanced version of
it, like a moderate, epistemological inactivist
retrying. So I think, in that last point, Tim, I think is a
really interesting one. And in fact, I just reviewed a paper
synthese yesterday, I think, touching upon this issue from a
philosophical perspective. But very simply, the free energy
principle basically will accommodate both perspectives. It
rests upon an externalist view of the universe as a random
dynamical system, that just by equipping that system with a
partition that separates something from everything else,
then induces an internalist explanation for the way that
thing makes sense of its universe. So there is a necessary
enmeshing of both the externalist and the internalist
perspectives. You put it another way, the internalist
perspective is entirely licensed in terms of the
interpretation of self organization as a process of
inference. And you're with that an explicit commitment to a
certain kind of representationalism. But that only
inherits from the way you start from, which is an
externalist view of the thing in an external world with with a
particular metaphysics here described in terms of random
dynamical systems. And it's interesting, also, you pick up
on this fork in the road, which I confess, I completely, I do
not understand. You know, all interesting information theory
read as probability theory, that is used in physics inherits
from dynamical systems. You know, we're talking thing
ranging, things ranging from the master equation through
to Schrodinger's wave equation, the Fokker-Planck
equation, Comer of Ford equations, all of these are
information theoretic treatments of dynamical systems. So I don't
really understand the nature of this fork. So I probably should
now pass you back to me.
Well, can I follow up on that, Chris? And then maybe I don't
get it either. And so what what confuses me about it is, one of
the the brilliant things about the free energy principle, to me
is this exact connection between random dynamical systems of a
certain degree of complexity, let's say approaching
auto poetic, right? And in this behavior that they must
manifest in order to be what they are, right, which is which is
this balancing between between, you know, uncertainty and
prediction and that sort of thing. So to me, they're hand and
glove. And so I guess my question to you, Chris, since you were
going to jump in there is, what is the source of this conflict?
Like, is it a fear that if it's linked, if you link the
information and dynamics in this certain way that they have to
conform to this principle that we're all going to be put out of
work, or we're not going to be able to study the things we want
to study or just do you mind if I just quickly interject with a
little bit of context? Okay. Just to I wanted to elaborate a
little bit on what Carl said, because I think there were some
things in here that might move in what Carl said that might not
be clear to the audience of the bears repeating. The first is
that there's this idea that Markov blankets kind of seclude the
organism from the environment. This is sort of like the
Helmholtz style story where our relationship to the environment
is in some sense only indirect and we are separated from the
environment by our Markov blanket. The important thing to
point out is that just definitionally, the Markov
blanket comprises the set of degrees of freedom that separate
and couple systems together. So it's not the veil, it's the
interface. So that's the first thing to point out. So a radically
internalist interpretation of the free energy principle doesn't
work, because you actually need external states to be in play
for the math tour. If there are no external states, then there's
nothing to track. And there's nothing beyond the Markov
blanket. So you don't get the story started, like it doesn't get
off the ground. If you don't assume that there are these
things that the particle in question that the thing that
you're interested in is a tuning to and that so there needs to be
something to couple and to be separated from for the story to
get off the ground. So yeah, it's a if you write down your
dynamical systems equations, it's always the generative model
that we keep talking about is defined over your internal
blanket and external states. So that's the first point. What
Carlos is the other the other way around to which is if you're
empty of all internal states, and every single state you have
can be influenced from the outside. Well, there's less to
talk about. Well, then you're not a thing, strictly speaking,
right? That so you know, it's it's definitional to what it is to
be a thing to have this kind of interface between that thing
and other things. So that's a first point. So the internal
states as your point as you're pointing out do play an
asymmetric role. So the FEP says if you have this boundary,
then the internal states are going to parameterize the
belief about external states. So you do get this kind of
internalist looking thing going as well. So the there is a I
think a a kind of reconciliation of internalism and
externalism under the free energy principle. This is what the
2019 paper that you are referring to is about. It's
called multiscale integration. And that's precisely the idea
that things that look separated at one scale can be integrated
within, you know, the auspices of an overarching structure at
the scale above and so on and so on and so on. We're separate as
individuals, but we're coupled in this active inference
community. And, you know, arguably, there's an intentionality
also at play there. Same thing for ourselves, right? Our
cells are separate because they have their individual
boundaries, but then they're integrated on the time scale
of me as an organism and so on. So that's that was about
internalism and externalism. I wanted to speak quickly to the
split between dynamics and information theory. Whenever I
talked to my friends in high end mathematics about this, they
are always as perplexed as you know, Keith and Carl, you are
because it's a nonsensical starting point. To do dynamical
systems theory seriously, you at some point are going to need
to appeal to information theoretic measures. So for
example, distances in state space. So, you know, the
inactivists are all thought, you know, they like to appeal to
dynamical systems theory and stuff, but the systems that
they're considering are usually extremely simple, with a few
degrees of freedom that are coupled together. But if you
want to do like, you know, grown up, dynamical systems theory,
then you're going to need to appeal to things like information
length to describe the really the metrics on your state space,
you can't avoid that. Similarly, when we're talking about
information, we're talking about dynamical, you know, the
dynamic time course of the these coupling. So we're interested
in the dynamics of information, these things are not actually
separable. The idea that they are comes from philosophy,
actually, it's a set of papers from the basically late 80s,
early 90s by Van Gelder, and Port. And at the time, you know,
dynamical systems theory was a new thing in cognitive science.
And what they were saying was, Hey, there's this approach that
we can take, it's dynamical systems, it's not computational.
And basically, it moved from there to there's an there's this
alternative approach that's mutually incompatible. And that
shift kind of happened slowly by a self referential literature.
So, you know, this is where I'm going to be a bit critical. You
can really do the historiography and trace these claims back to
I mean, basically Van Gelder and Port, and to some extent
Gibson. But these folks, they don't offer a formal argument,
right? Like, they're not saying here's a proof that dynamical
systems and compute computational approaches are like
incompatible. They're just starting with this gut feeling
that hey, maybe there's something different here. And then
that turns into I would argue, splurrata sizes or like hardens
into like an a priori dogmatism, crystallizes that isn't
necessary. Yeah, exactly. That is just based, like I was saying
on this kind of circular, you know, we're just citing other
philosophers who cite other philosophers who are making this
stuff up at the bottom. So, yeah, I mean, I kind of feel like
this is a problem with the philosophy literature is like,
you know, taking just conceptual arguments from other
philosophers, maybe a bit more seriously than they should,
without really taking the time to do the proper historiography,
looking where these claims are originating, and then asking
the question, is there any real warrant for this kind of
separation? So yeah, I've been going around recently saying
that yeah, this split between dynamics and information theory
is mostly in people's imaginations. There's no
mathematical basis for it.
And Chris, you wanted to jump in. No, no, thank you wanted to
jump in earlier and maybe talk about your personal journey
that might come into play here.
Yeah, I mean, Maxwell's, you know, said some really
interesting stuff there. I mean, I guess I take a slightly
less hard line on that, right? I mean, I think it's a historical
thing. So Tim Van Gelder, we're looking at deterministic
dynamical systems theory, like this is in the absence of
noise. And unless you do ensembles of systems, it's not
there's no clear pathway then to information theory. And then
initially in models, when in the 80s and 90s, typically, yeah,
deterministic dynamical systems theory, looking at
bifurcations and so on. And then, but obviously, the richer
the richer set of descriptions is stochastic
dynamical systems theory. And that's when information theory
becomes irreplaceable, right? This become and then they've
come fully in meshed these these descriptions as Carl writes
about so nicely and lots of his work, right? But I think, you
know, I didn't see the forking path as kind of this. I know
in the community that there's a history of using dynamical
systems theory, and there's a sense in which the free energy
is really embraced information theory. I didn't see that
that's as a as a key, the for the key in the fork of the path,
right? I mean, I got to say that it's a way out of my area,
this this kind of depth of philosophy, but it seemed to me
the kind of the problem of operate the definition of
operational closure that seemed to be upsetting to Randall
Behr and is equal to power. And the fact that they don't think
that can be embraced by the tenants of the free energy
principle. I mean, I don't I think they they made a nice case,
I don't think it a priori that's the case. I can't see there
was a hands down argument that there is this forking path. I
still think it's an interesting angle to take to think deeply
about operational closure within the free energy principle is I
know Maxwell has and he's going to tell you the answers to this,
but you know, so I'm just aware of the trickiness in defining
operational closure that's happened in the literature in the
last 20 years. And then really, in an inability to kind of
really get a concrete quantitative description of what we
mean by operational closure. And so, you know, I guess it's to
say that we've simply solved it within the free energy principle
that might that might have put some backs up somewhere. But you
know, Maxwell, maybe can give you a bit more insight to this
because he's thought deeply about how to define a place
closure within the frame. Can I can I can I frame up for you,
Maxwell? So the paper quoted you actually, I think you you said
on one of your papers that there is an analogy, almost a direct
mapping between this concept of organizational closure and a
Markov blanket. And of course, the Markov blanket is this
conditional independence that you're talking about. And you
also called it an interface earlier on. And when they speak
about the definition of auto polices, they say that, I think
the way that you folks in the FEP literature culture is mostly
as a form of autonomy, which is this ability to maintain your
own identity under precarious position, you know, situations.
And they say, well, the Varela kind of definition of auto
polices is very much about structure and organization. So
it's not it's not just maintaining your own identity,
but it's about this self organization and this kind of
generating structure as well. So I wonder just just with those
things on the table, could you, could you
absolutely. So in that paper, I confess that I probably should
have spoken, we probably should have spoken a bit more
precisely. We say the Markov blanket formalism. What we mean
by that is, and I don't think that this was fully appreciated by
the authors at the time. What we mean is Markov blankets and the
generative models, right? Because the claim is, right, let's
remind the audience, just put the terms on the table. A
generative model, right, is our model of the dependencies that
link the states and parameters that make up a given system,
right? So it is our way of talking about basically the
causal, connective tissue or structure that underwrites a
given system. And what the free energy principle says is, if
the underlying system has is disconnected in a certain
appropriate way, then you get this tracking behavior. And
formally speaking, it says, if there's a Markov blanket in
this dependency structure, right, if conditioned on certain
blanket states, then it looks as if subsets of the system are
independent from each other, but also tracking each other,
then you know, you get you get this interesting behavior, like
the if there is this Markov blanket is if there is this
independent structure, then you will get this tracking
behavior. That's what the free energy principle is talking
about. So of course, it's not sufficient to say that things
are carved out in a specific way. And therefore, you know, you
can say interesting things about them. But I think what's
missed in the argument, and this has to do with like, you know,
I think the app, the, the, the, I'll say, provocatively, the
dogmatic commitment to anti-representationalism is like
what when the inactivists read generative model, they mean a
model in my head that I carry around, they hear like a
representation, right? But what's really at stake is the
generative model is the dependency structure. Right? So if
you have the right kind of dependency structure that
generates a Markov blanket, I would say that you have what the
inactivists call operational closure. In fact, you can show
this mathematically, it's I don't think it's appreciated, but
there is a duality that has been rigorously established. Dalton
Shakti Maribel is probably the main proponent of this work,
but you know, Carl has done a lot of work over the last two
decades in this direction. Yeah, I think the the kind of core
idea to remember is that minimizing your variational
entropy with your variational free energy with respect to a
generative model, right? So the usual free energy story, right,
is dual to or equivalent to maximizing your entropy with
respect to a set of constraints. So when the inactivists talk
about constraint closure and all this stuff, you know, Alicia
Gerero's new book, context changes, everything, the
inactivists in the auto poetic tradition really want to go
hard on this and say, Well, what you really need to do is map a
set of constraints, such that the system kind of self
generates. Well, that is rigorously, and absolutely
equivalent to minimizing your free energy with respect to a
generative model, there's no difference there. So we're talking
about the same thing, we're talking about the way that like a
set of structured dependencies generates a thing that's able to
sustain itself over time. And as I was saying, this sustained
over time is a way of describing the interface or
coupling between the system and its environment. So that just
mathematically, we're talking about the same thing.
But let me ask you a question here, because there's, and this
is hopefully because I like Carl, I want to find out if I'm an
inactivist. So maybe, maybe you can help set us up for
considering this, a big bone of contention for them in that
paper, is this distinction that they have in their mind between
structure and organization. And they seem to get upset when any
attempt is made to link organization to structure. For
example, you know, to me, the Markov boundary that say
analogous to a, a animal cell membrane, I understand as a
former person who studied biology, that the molecules of
that membrane are in flux, things come and go, proteins
are added, carbohydrates are removed, etc. I don't have in
my mind a set of molecules that's like they're forever, and
some type of like, you know, stationary structure, like it's
a very dynamic kind of system. But they seem to say, Oh, no,
if you if you equate, you know, a Markov boundary to an
organizational structure, then you're making this, you know,
fallacy of kind where you're associating like an organization
with like the substrate that, you know, manifests that in
reality. Like, can you explain to me like what they were
actually up and about with this organization structure? You
know, maybe Carl, if you could comment on it, when Maxwell
tells us so we can figure out if we're an activist. So I'll just
let me bracket the stuff about stationarity and historicity
for one second. Because I have some stuff to say about that. But
so it comes back to that we'll come back to that question about
that. It comes back to what I was saying about, you know, it's
not just about Markov blankets, it's about generative models. If
you don't appreciate the distinction. And what you think
we're saying is Markov blankets tell the whole story, then
obviously, you're going to, you know, think that we're
conflating structure and organization. When you realize
that what we're talking about is, you know, a Markov blanket
within this dependency structure, right, that then I think you
you move to something else, I would say like what the
inactivist called structure corresponds to these Markov
blankets that we're drawing. And the organization we talk
about, and we harness in the generative model, right, that
remember, the generative model is not my internal
representation in my head, it's the overall dependency
structure of the system. It's what they would call the
organization of the system. So I mean, I would agree that we
shouldn't conflate them. And I would, you know, add that we
don't, there are distinct constructs that map onto these
things. And, you know, I would also point out that Markov
blankets are flexible. We will be putting out work over the
next few months on wandering Markov blankets, like we've got
figured out algorithmically now, we can draw a blanket around a
flame and stuff like that. Now, so we've got all of that
working. And it's not
I've been looking forward to that since Carl mentioned it in
the first, the first interview with him, let's, let's set an
anchor to come back to that because that that's very
interesting. Actually, one comment you made in your
multi scale paper was that these are ontological boundaries by
which I think you are implying that they are not a lens, they
are fixed to some extent. But I want to just stick on this
organization point for a second, though. So in the paper,
they said that essentially the way the FEP couches this is as a
form of homeostasis, which is just about, you know, maintaining
structural properties. And when they spoke about organization,
they said the conservation of organization is what's spoken
about in the classic orthopedic literature. And I think you are
just making the argument Maxwell that that that generative
model is in some sense the conservation of organization. So
is that the missing link? I mean, maybe a professor for us and
you can come in.
Yeah, do you want to take that Carl? I mean, I think that's
right. But Carl will probably comment more eloquently than I
on that.
I don't think so. I think you're being very eloquent.
Thank you.
Do your worst and then I'll chip in if necessary.
Yeah, I mean, I think that's that's exactly right. Like the
Markov blankets don't have to be permanent. They can be
shifting and basically minimizing your free energy with
respect to some generative model corresponds to keeping some
structure in play.
Yep. Actually, this segue is nicely into the stuff about
stationarity and historicity. I think this is the biggest
problem in their paper. They claim that the free energy
principle can't account for historicity, in the sense that
it can't account for path dependency, right? So for our
audience, path dependency is this idea that it's not just your
position in state space that matters. It's also your velocity,
roughly speaking, right? That like the kind of direction that
you're going in, where you came from is just as important to
where you're going is where you are currently. And they claim
that, you know, the free energy, so they make a bunch of false
claims about the free energy principle, which leads them
astray. So for example, they claim that the free energy
principle assumes stationarity. It doesn't. As we've discussed
before, there are different applications of the free energy
principle in the literature. The two main families of
applications are density dynamics and path intervals. So I
drink a lot of coffee. And if you were to sample me at random
during the day, I would say there's a one in 25 chance. Yeah,
exactly. I would say there's a one in 25 chance that I'm
drinking coffee if you just sample me randomly during the
day. If you were to sample me over a week, once per day,
there's a 100% chance that I would drink coffee per day, right?
So there's a difference between looking at the probability of
states of me, you know, Maxwell is drinking coffee, and the
probabilities of paths of me or entire trajectories of me. And
that is a really critical distinction. The free energy
principle started off as a path based formulation. And I think
this is absolutely underappreciated in the literature.
If you look back at Carl's early papers, including the ones
that everyone has read, right? The 2010 unified brain theory
paper in nature. Yet these are all written in terms of paths.
Carl is taking like a sensory path and then writing down, you
know, blanket paths and internal paths. And it's all, it's all
about the way the trajectories of the system are maintained. So
this is a cool idea that was there before and that we're
doubling back down on now, which is that it's really, it's
about blanket paths that make internal paths independent of
external paths. So there's a sense in which like, it's always
been about counterfactual futures. It's, and it's difficult to
argue that, like, you don't account for historicity when
literally the core construct that you're deploying is, like
probabilities of different histories, like counterfactual
futures. But that entire argument about historicity makes no
sense formally, just abs, you know, and again, we appreciate
the critical engagement. This isn't to, you know, bash anyone
specifically. But like, this is a complete non starter
mathematically. Also, when you're doing density dynamics,
right, when you're not considering probability densities
over paths, but rather you're considering probabilities of
states, and you're doing this non equilibrium steady state
stuff. So when you are assuming stationarity, you're saying
like, yeah, there are these kind of regular cyclical
behaviors that I want to model, even in that context, the
free energy principle can handle path dependence, like
literally, I think on page 12 of like Carl's monograph from
2019, on the density dynamics formulations, there are already
terms that contain, you know, expressions that are able to
handle path dependency, that are basically dependent on
changes in surprise in your system. So, so
before we, before we move too far, maybe Chris, you can, you
might be able to steel man what the, the paper was trying to
say there, or
well, I'm just, I'm just, I'm trying to understand, I'm trying
to decide if I'm an inactivist, because Tim's a big fan. So I
want to, you know, give it fair judge anyone, does anybody
want to steel man, you know, where the paper might have been
coming from, in terms of this argument against
historicity?
I can straw man it if you want it.
No, I'm happy to have a go at it. But I mean, so we're a very
broad church at within this community, we we debate within
ourselves about the, you know, the true origins and how we get
these things out. So I actually was worried about this
historicity thing. In an earlier version, we did in, we
published in physics life reviews with a student, a very
talented student of mine. And we found real problems with it
when we were in a state based formulation of the system. And
I know Maxwell feels that that even in the state based
description of probability densities that we can recover
historicity, I guess we still not complete agreement on that.
But what's majorly happened in the in the free energy is this
movement to pass. And I agree with Maxwell, if you go back into
Carl's original work, talking like Carl was not here, but you're
back to Carl's original work, he was framing in terms of paths.
But the presentations in the monograph were to do to do with
states. And when we work through that, we found that the
historicity was hard to to to get back into these systems. But
the path formalization then makes it clear how historicity
because it's built into the system because you're preserving
sets of paths you go to, you know, homeoresis rather than
homeostasis in the descriptions of these systems. And then
there's this kind of nice, elegant way to deal with
historicity. And, you know, and I think so, I don't think
that's a real issue with the free energy principle. So, but I
can imagine, I don't know what technical literature they've
read. But perhaps if they've read the state based formula,
formulation, they had the same worries about those about
historicity. And if they read these new path based stuff that
Maxwell and Dalton are developing, I think those kind
of dissolve. I think that it's a much richer framework now.
So maybe Carl, what were you thinking back then when you did
it as as paths, you know, maybe just give us some some thought
behind your intuition for why you originally formulated it as
you know, path, path integrals for past systems and you know,
what your perspective is on what we've been discussing so far.
Right. I can't really remember. I suppose the obvious answer is
much of this inherits from Richard Feynman's work on the
path integral formulation. Indeed, the variational free
energy can be traced right back to I think probably is PhD
thesis. I haven't actually read the PhD thesis, but I've been
told that all the maths you need is there. So it would be
difficult for me to conceive of a calculus that wasn't framed in
terms of in terms of paths, until you start to try and draw
graphics and explain to people who are not familiar with, you
know, with the notion of, you know, with the path integral
formulation and its equivalence with density dynamics as
articulated say with the Vokker-Planck equation or I repeat
sort of Kolmogorov forward and backward equations. So I think
that is, you know, that's one really important aspect of
historicity and becomes I think even more prescient when you
think about deploying a path integral formulation of self
organisation in the context of 21st century physics, because
what we're talking about now is a move away from 20th century
equilibrium physics with pointer tractors to open systems that
are far from equilibrium. So mathematically, or one
mathematical bright line between the physics of equilibria and
the physics of non equilibria, which is what the free energy
principle is about, or specifically, when non equilibrium
city-state solutions admit a Markov blanket, but returning to
the sort of what is definitive of non equilibria, it is
effectively the, not the historicity, but the itinerancy
you get from solenoidal dynamics, sort of conservative
dynamics that now supplement the dissipative flows that
characterize completely classical physics and equilibrium
equilibria steady states. So if you wanted to define the
difference between an open system or an out of equilibrium or
non equilibrium system from an equilibrium system, the simple
kind of systems that Chris was referring to in his toy models
of your does a free energy principle work in your in this
kind of system, then all you would do is write down the
dynamics in terms of dissipative and conservative or
non-dissipative divergence free components. And that, if you
like, decomposition of the flow into conservative and
dissipative parts is just the Helmholtz decomposition is just
the fundamental number of variational calculus, I think,
or fundamental theorem, which just says that, you know, any
flow, any dynamics can always be decomposed into this sort of
gradient descent that underwrites classical physics or
equilibrium physics, and the a solenoidal divergence free flow
that underwrites classical mechanics. But you put the two
together and you have, by definition, now a mathematical
image of non equilibrium systems. And notice that in
introducing this kind of itinerancy, that is, for
example, you know, heuristically, you know, water going
down a plug hole. So the dissipative part, the gradient
flow would be the the water tumbling down into the depths
of your house. But as it circulates around, technically,
in terms of the information theory around on ISO contours,
the probability distribution, but you know, you can just
visualize the water circular, that's the solenoidal part. And
of course, when you talk about biotic self organization or
self organization, non equilibria, that has that sort of
life like our biotic form, the key characteristic of this
kind of biotic circulation is basically rhythms and life
cycles. So the very fact you're dealing with this kind of
historicity that is inherent in the itinerancy of any system
that is not at equilibrium means that you are you have to
write down or have an understanding or a mathematics
that deals with these with these flows and these life cycles.
Just one interesting twist here is if you take the randomness
out of it, if you go back to deterministic dynamical
systems of the kind, I now understand under the split or
the fork in the road in philosophy. What you do is
you're basically removing from the perspective of the
Helmholtz decomposition, the dissipative part, and you just
left with the conservative part. What is that? That's just
Newtonian mechanics. It's his classical mechanics, which is
why the sun, we rotate around the sun or the moon takes these
orbits. This is just this solenoidal flow in the limit that
you've ignored the randomness that you need that calls for the
information theoretic or probabilistic descriptions of any
world. So that the free energy principle doesn't deal with all
kinds of systems. It deals with systems that have an admixture
of both the dissipative and the solenoidal or divergence free
parts. If you wanted to just do the dissipative parts, you do
quantum mechanics. If you just wanted to do the solenoidal
part, you do classical mechanics and deterministic
systems. But in the middle, you're in the Goldilocks regime
in which you and I operate, we're talking about stochastic
chaos, basically, another description of this itinerancy.
So I think that that's that's, you know, one aspect of
historicity, which, you know, is celebrated in the physics of
self organization. And I keep using the word self organization
because I read auto poesis as self creation, or at least self
maintenance. I now appreciate it is not quite self. It's slightly
beyond self maintenance and in the sense that, you know, to
create your imply something slightly greater that maybe I'm
going to have to ask Chris, it may be related to operational
closure. So I'd like to if somebody just describe for me and
the audience when operational closure is that would be quite
nice. But before you do, there is another important aspect of
historicity, which we haven't mentioned, which inherits from
the deployment of the free energy principle, or perhaps
just the Helmholtz decomposition in using the apparatus of the
renormalization group. And what that brings to the table is a
separation of temporal scales. And as soon as you have that in
play, there's a different kind of historicity, which you have to
accommodate in any given calculus, certainly for open
systems, which means that the kind of steady state solutions
that are non equilibrium set solutions, we are talking about
in the context of a pathological formulation only exist over a
certain timescale. There's always a timescale above that
contextualizes it. And there's always a timescale below that is
much, much faster, where things live for very, very short
periods of time. I think that's another important aspect of
historicity that we're not talking about a unique or
privileged timescale here. So when people talk about
stationarity, or ergodicity, or steady states, they, you know,
one cannot say that this is the configuration of a system at
equals infinity. Because you have to acknowledge that there is no
privileged timescales at this timescale, we will assume that
is a state solution. But we have to be very explicit is at this
timescale. And this does not apply at the timescale above, or
at all the timescale below. And interestingly, just
mathematically, perhaps a naive mathematical or certainly a
physicist's mathematical perspective, and the very fact
you have the separation of timescale basically means that
there are fast, there's fast stuff for fast dynamics and slow
dynamics. And at the end of the day, if you now consider what is
the difference between the flow of states that you would find in
deterministic, deterministic dynamical system, and the random
fluctuations that convert it into a random dynamical system, the
only difference between these things is whether they're fast or
slow. So you can treat the random fluctuations, the noise that
induces a probabilistic description, and all the
information theoretic treatments, as simply the fast things, and
everything else is the slow stuff. So again, speaking to, if
you like, an almost necessary connection between any dynamical
systems formulation that is sufficiently liberal to include
fast and slow stuff, and probabilistic treatments of that
of the kind that Richard Feynman pursued in terms of trying to
work out the probability of the path of the small particle or
electron for his PhD thesis. Anyway, what is operational
closure?
So just go up a definition from Varela, if you want me to read
it out.
Can I just frame you up there, Chris? Because in that forking
paper, there was I actually thought it was a little bit
hand wavy. It's not like in graph theory, where you have very
kind of precise definition. So they had a they had a kind of a
node diagram. And they said it was operationally closed if all
of the black colored nodes had one arrow going out and
connecting to another one. And they had a kind of diagram
just showing an organism. But what's the official definition,
Chris?
Yeah, so this is a definition from Varela, as an autonomous
system is that is that organization is characterized by
processes such that the processes are related as a network, so
that recursively depend on each other in the generation
realization of the processes themselves. And two, they
constitute the system as a unity, recognizable in space, in
which those processes exist. So it's kind of this deep
recursive recursivity between the processes, maintaining the
network is necessary for the processes, this kind of
generation of the system's own constraints. I guess this has
been it's always been the kind of slightly ineffable within the
auto put it literature, what this means formally, right?
There's a deep intuition. This is correct. You know, you think
about, as Keith said before, we the matter is changing as as
fluxes changing these processes, but the identity is
somehow staying the same. And that's the organizational
structure that's maintained over time, rather than the
material components of that, that structure. And I do think
you know, that there is a sense that was when we did focus on
these state based descriptions of the free energy principle, I
think that kind of undersold the solenoidal flow that Carl was
talking about, whereas that is, I think it's much more
important to the people in in auto poise is because this notion
of this kind of flow of information and the organization
is dynamic within the equilibrium is important for for that
field. So I think the you know, the new directions they've got
in the free energy principle things that Maxwell and Dalton
are pursuing is to me an exciting opportunity to kind of
reconcile some of the ineffability of these operational
closure ideas in auto poise and this framework, essentially.
Cool, cool. So
Maxwell, do you want to do you want to comment maybe briefly on
that before we move on? Like Chris, Chris called out some of
your work there with Dalton?
Yeah, I mean, in a good way, though, I think what Chris is
saying is that he agrees with the direction. I would just say
that this isn't really new work. And this says that you would
Dalton and I are just doing is extending work that Carl did
20 almost 20 years ago. So I see this as more continuous. You
know, someone might say that I'm being overly generous, which I
might be, you know, by looking at this as like one kind of
continuous development. But yeah, I don't really, I think, you
know, you can think of the state based description as sort of
the asymptotic limit of the path based description, the two are
kind of like deeply connected in some sense. So no, I mean, I
think this is real, this is the direction that we want to go.
There's still some interesting stuff that you can say using the
density dynamics formulation. We just have to be you know, it's
like we were discussing Keith during our MLST interview last
time, this is mind physics, right? So, you know, a hallmark of
physics is idealization. And so, you know, necessarily some of
these constructs are going to be, you know, the map has to be
simpler than the territory, it's like we were saying, right?
You know, otherwise, you get you wind up in a boar has novel
with like, you know, a map the size of Los Angeles that you
can't use. So, you know, for certain kinds of oscillatory
cyclical bio behaviors, the non equilibrium steady state is a
perfectly fine, you know, model of it. You know, I drink coffee so
regularly that it might as well be like, you know, deterministic
and like, you know, orbiting the sun kind of thing. So, you
know, this speaks to the fact that the free energy principle
is what it says on the tin, it's a principle. It's a it's a that
leads to a modeling method. And you know, we make some
assumptions, and we're able to say some things. But the principle
itself doesn't rest on any of these assumptions. Like
stationarity, for example, like you don't really need that to
get it to get it working. All you need is a markup like it in
your random dynamical system and you're sort of ready to go. In
terms of like the formalization of the inactive approach, I
always saw this. So, like Chris, by the way, I think this is
under, I don't talk about it very much, but much like Chris, I
started off recalcitrant to the free energy principle. I found
out about this stuff in around 2014. And it, you know, like I
said, I was trained as an inactivist. And this really
conflicted with my intuitions. And I went into this thinking I
need to and this is also what I think the spirit that motivates
a lot of criticism, you go into this thinking I need to
understand this just enough to be able to know for sure that I
don't need to understand this actually. And, you know, you go
into this. And I, you know, I remember having like a conversion
experience reading Carl's 2012 entropy paper called a free
energy principle for biological systems, which was a path based
kind of formulation and everything and really, you know,
seeing, oh, wow, like, there's no, there's no resisting this,
like this is inevitable. And really getting like, oh, yeah,
this is an inevitable consequence of physics, isn't it? Like
there's no, there's no getting around this. And then kind of,
you know, doubling down in my conversion and then becoming a
part of the community.
So what's funny is I had the opposite experience of you two. So
I when I first saw it, I'm like, this is amazing. Like this is
exactly how it works. And now I've been trying to escape ever
since, you know, I don't like being shackled, like to the free
energy principle. And funny enough, we've talked before about
how, you know, Carl, that the free energy principle is one of
the few principles that applies to itself. It's like, as simple as
it is, it can be and still and still work. The other aspect in
which that's true is, as we've been talking about it maintains
this flexibility, or maybe vagueness, you know, critics
might say, but it maintains this flexibility, which leads to
it inevitably generating all kinds of controversy and debates,
you know, and people arguing about like the limits of that
flexibility, right?
One thing I would quickly point out is like, there's this
sense, I think in the literature that there are like 17
different possible interpretations of the free
energy principle, and that you can make it say one thing and
it's opposite. What I've been going around saying is no, that's
not correct. There's only the free energy principle. And it has
the implications that it does. And there are misinterpretations
of the free energy principle. So for example, you know, I
think this idea that some people in the literature have been
pushing that like the free energy principle is even compatible
with this kind of radical anti realism, this kind of, you
know, like a Descartes demon kind of thing. That's not that
just doesn't follow. It's incompatible with the math, like
the you need, you need there to be an actual world out there to
couple to you for the math to get off the ground. So there there
actually isn't a bunch of different interpretations. There's
just the free energy principle. It's just that it's a lens that
makes you makes you see that a lot of the dichotomies that use
to structure the way we think about things are false. This
comes back to the thing that we were discussing at the end of
our interview, Keith. This is sort of like a, you know, you're
sort of abolishing the distinction between the
super lunar re and the sub lunar spheres, right? So classical
mechanics abolishes the distinction that was popular
as scholastic philosophy, which was, you know, like 1000, 1500
years of like, you know, natural philosophy saying, well, I mean,
if you look at the way things behave, the things out there
beyond the moon in the super lunar sphere, right, they move in
perfect orbits, perfect circles, seems to have nothing to do
with, you know, things here that fall to the ground or rise and
have a beginning, a middle and an end. These seem like
radically distinct spheres of reality. But then Newton comes
along and classical mechanics equips you with a set of
equations that apply equally to things here and things over
there, thereby just abolishing that distinction. And I think
like the free energy principle comes around and does undoes a
lot of these false dichotomies in the same way, like we were
talking about internalism versus externalism, it allows you to
say, yeah, there's something to the internalist story, the
internal states are doing something special, but you
actually need the external world to be there to get the story to
kind of pick up. So I think you get a lot of this. And I guess
my hot tag is that the inactivists need there to
be a bright line in the universe, like a bright red line on the
one. And then what's on each side of the line depends on the
inactivists, right? So like, but the story is always something
like there's physics, there's mere physics on one side. And
then there's the interesting stuff on the other side, there's
biology, or maybe there's mind or there's something like that.
And there is this bright red line, like, yeah.
So Max, Maxwell is saying the free energy principle is the
ultimate shade of gray. I hope you
know, I know Tim, Tim, we wanted to move to a new topic.
Yeah, yeah, I mean, there's there's a few things to touch on
there. I mean, certainly the philosophy of, you know, an
activism versus ecological psychology is an interesting one
because with an activism, we get quite a few philosophical
things bagged on that possibly we may or may not want, for
example, the phenomenology, the existentialism, which is this
idea that you can shape your own experience, this kind of
Eastern philosophy, which is that in some sense, there's no
distinction between you and your environment. And it has been
criticized as being quite ill defined and vague. But I think
Maxwell, you have said that there's much more of a tighter
compatibility with ecological psychology. And that's essentially
that we see the world through affordances. And what that means
is that we see the world as trajectories of actions in our
physical environment that we live in. And philosophically,
that's a realist ontology. So that means there are no
representations, we're taking actions in the real world, and
we know that the real world exists. And now many cognitive
science people, of course, resist to this notion because they
say we need to have representations. And then we get to
this interesting discussion that we're having about this kind
of continuum between this idea that on the one hand, there are
no representations if we are Gibsonian, and we are
ecological psychologists. But on the other hand, we might need
to have increasing levels of representation if we actually
have this temporal depth, if we have these nested Markov
boundaries, and we are sophisticated minds that are
making predictions into the future. Now with that laid out, I
wanted to talk about this notion of goals. Now in a
externalist and activist framework, I think that goals
are not something we should explicitly define. Now when you
speak with go fi people, and they talk about building
cognitive architectures, they say that goals should be
explicitly crafted into the architecture, at least that's
what they would have said 20 years ago, now they're slightly
more refined. And they say, Well, we should have a goal module
in the architecture, but the goals should be acquired
empirically, and there should be sub goals and so on. Now, if I
understand correctly, we were just talking about the free
energy principle has this notion of paths, and we have
beliefs over trajectories of actions into the future. And to
what extent is a belief a goal? Because if you have an almost
infinite number of beliefs, so there's a trajectory to this
future state where I'm rich, but there's also an infinitude of
other potential trajectories. And they are of course constrained
by the physical affordances and trajectories that I can take in
my physical environment. That seems different to having an
intention of wanting to be rich or wanting to play tennis,
because I'm constrained in all of these different ways. So yeah,
why don't we just talk about the dichotomy between beliefs and
goals?
I think Karl or Chris would be better equipped to answer the
latter question. Karl in particular has been thinking
about intentional behavior quite deeply recently. I did want to
quickly comment upon ecological psychology. I have been saying
to the eco psych community that Bayesian mechanics and eco
psych are the same discipline. They're really the same thing.
Vicente Raja is one of the cooler, more technically
proficient people in the eco psych community. And after a few
years of back and forth, we've realized that yeah, we're using
exactly the same set of mathematical tools. The only
framing is the only difference is a philosophical framing is, are
you an indirectist or a directist? Right? So and I happen to
think that these are just kind of semantic quibbles. If you look
at the more contemporary eco psych literature, so the eco
psych people are tend to be much more sophisticated, technically
than the inactive people. And one thing that they have in
common is that they don't reject information theory out of
hand. They want the richer notion of information, like
ecological information or semantic information, some kind
of information that has some relevance to the environment,
you know, the organisms like Melia, it's umvelt, it's, it's
world of life. But they're not rejecting information theory. In
fact, Gibson's original ambition was to apply physics to the
study of perception just straight up. You know, so it's
all about like, you know, energy, the, the energy on the
perceptual arrays and all of this stuff. It's essentially, I
think, the same project from a methodological and
mathematical perspective. The main difference is just an
inactive and a an ecological psychologist, sorry, would say
that we perceive things directly. But then they appeal to
this, these notions of like resonance and whatever, which
you know, to us is just synonym for inference. I guess
it's like it, the difference rests in like, are you centering
on the internal perspective of an organism? Or are you looking
at things as a multi scale stack with the organism kind of
carving out one level? So we had a great session actually with
Michael Anderson's Emerge Lab group, based out of Ontario. And
my, my gut tells me that there will be a kind of strategic
alliance, and maybe even just a merging of these two fields,
moving forward. Yeah, and you know, for the more cynical part
of me thinks that the merger of free energy principle and
ecosystem gives you everything that you might want out of
inactivism, but without any of the, you know, heavy, kind of
metaphysical or philosophical baggage that seems to be, you
know, hindering progress in that field. So that's my thing
about eco psych.
Okay, maybe we can bring you Chris in on the goals thing. So
is, is a goal in end state? Is it a trajectory? Is it a
bearing? And is it, is it, does it exist explicitly in the
externalist view of cognition?
Well, so I'm a kind of more of a practical, computational
person. So I'll leave the philosophy to Maxwell. But I
mean, I tend to take the intentional stats, intentional
standards on systems, where if we can, if it makes sense for us
to describe a system as a goal directed, then we should do so.
And if that helps engineers to build those systems, then they
they should do so, right? But there's a nice kind of, there's
a nice parallel between those are kind of ideas and the original
working cybernetics. So there's the, you know, the good
regulator theorem, which this kind of early work by Conan and
Ashby suggests that any, any control system of a given
environment is a good model of the environment that it controls
just by by necessity from first principles, right? Which to me,
which we suggest that we should, in principle, be able to
describe an intentional structure in terms of the kind of
generative model within within a system, we should be able to
find it if it is a good control system, and it should exist. I
think there's also a more practical thing about shifting
from the notion of reward as this kind of potential function
that's kind of dominated the machine learning area, right? So
we have this kind of monolithic thing of reward and everything
is in in service of that reward to a richer notion of beliefs
about dynamics, which which which affords that kind of, you
know, moves away that potential function to a more kind of
dynamical system so we can get more kind of rich beliefs about
future trajectories and so on. And we know that in control
systems, that's really, it's really important, right? If we
want to control a system, we're doing model based control, we
have to have desires on the futures of those systems, we need
to understand the trajectory and the divergence of the
trajectories over through time, right? So I think it's a much
richer picture, practically, to think about, you know, beliefs
about dynamics rather than reward. And I think there's this
nice parallel between the intentional structure and the
good regulator theory, because I think the good regulator
theorem entails that we should find those kind of intentional
dynamics within our systems, right? With just by a priori
first reasoning.
Yeah, I just want to know if he could explain the good
regulator theorem, because I think that
Yes, the good regulator theorem is really strong resonances
with this. And I think, you know, there was a long, there was a
long time, not Carl, the Carl's exclusive. It's a long time
the people who were reading the free energy literature to think
that they're kind of the roots of the free energy principle was
in Helmholtz, Helmholtzian perception, right, this notion
of Bayesian inference and perception. But there's kind of
a much richer reading to see its roots in cybernetics movement,
and particularly by the works of people like Ross Ashby and so
on. So he basically said, he provided this theorem that
showed that if you want to build a regulator for a given
environmental system that optimally regulates that
system, then it necessitates that regulator is a good model of
that system, right? And there's a kind of you can take that in a
strong way and a weak way and we worried about this for a long
time. But just to diffuse that from its representational kind
of implications, which we worried about for a long time, you
can see this in something like even like the Watt-Gubner, which
is used as his classic inactivist system that doesn't is
nonrepresentationalist. But there are kind of there's a sense in
which the dynamics of the Watt-Gubner needs to mirror the
fluctuations of the the sea management regulating and it's
that kind of coupling and that kind of reflection of those
dynamics, which is important for the regulation of that system,
right? So that kind of you can back out that, you know, I think
this is very nice to line with the intentional stance and it
demands an intentional stance. If you if you if you if you if
you're committed to this notion of the good regulator,
Ferriam.
To riff on your point of the intentional son, I think that
that's a fascinating way of looking at it, Chris. And to
bring you in, Professor, Professor Daniel Dennett had
this notion of the intentional stance, that when we, you know,
we essentially have a mental model of the intentions of other
agents. And we use that to understand their behavior. And
an intention is a goal. If you think about it, it's something
I want to do. But in this dynamical systems framework,
it's not explicitly coded anywhere, it kind of emerges. And
of course, it's a subjective state. So we've spoken about
mental phenomenal states being encoded in our generative
model in our in our free energy framework. And those states will
of course have intentional, you know, representations of the
other agents that we're dealing with. So I guess, the question
back to you, Professor, for instance, how do you goals
kind of get encoded in in this dynamics?
Yeah, that's a great question. I know the answer you want,
because you don't like goals, do you?
I don't mind if they're I guess, I guess the answer is they're
emergent, which is, which is
exactly what I was hoping for that. Yes, they have to, you
know, you have to find a physics where it looks as if there are
goals, and they emerge from a particular kind of self
organization. I think that's that's been beautifully
illustrated just in the previous conversations you've had. And
you know, ranging from the work of Ross Ashby on his homey
stat, which I think would be better nowadays called an
alofstat, but it would be to stick with the homey stat. Of
course, you know, does homeostasis have a goal? Does my
physiology have the goal of maintaining my temperature at
37 degrees centigrade? It certainly looks like that. Do I
intend to do that? Well, I think on one reading of intention,
yes, you know, and certainly on an alofstatic reading of
behaviors that have this temporal depth and are the
consequence of plans into the future, you're putting turning
on the thermostat or putting on clothes. I think then you're
getting much closer to this sort of more anthropomorphic notion
of intentionality, whether I think there are girls, there are
there are endpoints. And so I guess that the question then is,
you know, at what point would these different kinds of
intentionality or goal directed behavior emerge from
self organization? And in what particular kinds of systems would
you expect to see this these these these behaviors? I think
there's some fairly straightforward answers from the
point of view of the physicist, not not the philosopher. So if
you just look at the different kinds of systems that you could
apply the free energy principle to, we've talked about one of
them right at the beginning, when considering Markov
blankets that did not have any have any internal states, for
example, a stone. Yeah, so every state of this thing is just a
Markov blanket, and it is in reciprocal exchange with the
external states. So that would be when the internal states are
empty. Well, there are other kinds of systems that you could
have. Well, you could imagine systems that didn't have any
active states. But, you know, most interesting systems do
have active states. And then you ask about the rounded
contribution of these random fluctuations to the dynamics of
you know, the self organization. And if you just follow the
maths through the pathogenical, in particular, maths of the
dynamics that any system at a particular temporal scale must
have, if it's internal or autonomous dynamics, or the
dynamics, the flows of the internal states and the
the blanket states that constitute a particle or a person,
when they become sufficiently precise. So when we become big
enough, and cool enough, so let's assume that we're bigger than
a quantum scale, but not too big to become classical. So we're
not the size of the moon, but we are roughly your size and my
size, or perhaps the size of a mouse or an insect through to an
elephant or a giraffe. Then you have this interesting
situation of these very precise dynamics, and they're precise
just because we are big. So all the random fluctuations are
averaged away. In this particular case, then you can
you can show that these particular kinds of things or
Markov blankets have a very well defined probability
distribution over paths into the future, specifically the
paths of the active states. So let's assume that there are
certain kinds of particles or creatures that have active
states and they have, you know, they and the blanket states
enshroud a sufficient number of internal states. What would
they look like if they had very precise dynamics? Well, you can
actually work out the probability distribution over the
active states that over their actions, over their movements,
and these could be physiological movements,
autonomic reflexes, they could be physical movements, eye
movements, or for ambulatory movements, indeed even talking.
And it transpires that the probability distribution over
these particular paths of active states has an interesting
functional form when written in terms of the potential of the
log probability, we call that an expected free energy. And that
expected free energy, when you just write it down, passes into
or come can be decomposed into things that people have been
dealing with for centuries, specifically, the expected
information gain, and the expected reward or utility where
reward or utility is scored by the log probability of occupying
an attractive state or rewarding state. And I use the word
attractive state deliberately because it is just part of the
pullback attractor that affords the application of the
pathological formulation. It's just the characteristic states
and this kind of thing occupies. So the the guleness, if you
like, is is inherent in the characteristics of the particle
or person that you're trying to describe. So for certain kinds
of particles or persons, then it will certainly look as if they
are acting with long term vision, namely planning in a way to
return themselves to their attracting set, which you could
look you could now regard as a goal or a rewarded or at least
an attracting an attracting outcome or or state of being. So I
think that kind of particle starts to now show the the deep
intention, you know, it looks as if they are they are doing this
because they intend some outcome. I think the next step,
though, which is the one that you were speaking to possibly done
then it was implying is another, I think, step, which is, but
does the does the internal state know that? You know, am I
aware that I am planning? And of course, that calls upon very,
very sophisticated, so if they exist, internal or generative
models that entail a model of me and the hypothesis that all of
this, these sensations and all the consequences of my actions,
which I am not aware of. You know, I cannot feel all the
sensory, not sensory, all the neuronal impulses that cause my
muscles to contract. All I can register is the consequences of
that through my muscle, my stretch receptors, my proprioceptive
receptors, or if it's in my gut or my autonomic intraceptive
receptors. So I don't know what I'm I can't I can't have I do
have have no access to my actual action. But I can see the
consequences of it and it looks as if I'm planning. So I now have
a hypothesis or a fantasy that I am a thing. And I seem to have
goals. And if I can learn the kinds of goals that I have, then I
can now start to mentalize and have notions in my generative
model about my goals. And then I can notice, oh, you have goals,
or perhaps it's the other way around. Perhaps the first of all,
it looks as if the explanation for this random dynamical system
over here called mom is actually, but she looks as if she
plans, it looks as if she has goals. And then a few years later,
if I develop a sense of self, well, perhaps I'm a thing like
mom, but perhaps I have goals. So I think that you're, you're
from the point of view of Dandenit's intentional stance, I
think we're talking about a very, very particular kind of system
that actually has this capacity to recognize, first of all,
intentional like behaviors, long term planning dynamics in other
things, or things like itself, and then actually transcribe that
and test the hypothesis, well, perhaps I'm a thing like that as
well. Perhaps I'm me.
And what's beautiful about what you just said there, and all
three of you have said this in different different ways. So I
want to dwell on this just a bit, because I think it's a source
of the misunderstanding and or controversy about the free
energy principles. So earlier Maxwell, you had said, you know,
it's really a model about the couplings and the isolations
together, the couplings and the decouplings and the dynamics
between them. You know, Carl, you just said, systems will behave
as if they had intentions, whether or not they really have
intentions or not is kind of a different philosophical question,
but they'll behave as if they had intentions. And Chris, you
brought up, you know, the watt governor, which is, it's, it's
obviously a very simple dynamic system, you know, spinning
centrifuge and, you know, arm bar, like whatever else. And yet,
it's, it's not as though it's a literal model in the sense that
I'm going to have a mathematical, mathematical model for what
the steam engine is doing, but it's behaving as if it were an
effective model of the steam engine, because hey, when it's
slightly out of sync, the arm flexes a little bit, it readjust
it's, you know, the spin changes slightly, things continue to
work because if it didn't have the dynamics that were as if it
had a model, the thing wouldn't function, would just fall apart.
So I guess what we're all, what's all being said here is that
systems at different scales will behave as if they had a model,
even if they don't necessarily have a model in the sense of a
person, like a person might have a conscious model from which
they develop a plan or whatnot, but all these systems of varying
scales and complexity still behave as if they had a model. They
act to minimize the free energy as a consequence of, you know,
being random dynamical systems that are self maintaining.
Yeah, I think that's really eloquently put. And actually,
that's this is this to kind of underwrite some of the worries
we had about the principle, when we first started walking on
working on it as kind of coming from an activist or a low road
an activist, this notion of kind of an explicit
representationalism that you can you can get in these models
where the model is a homomorphic with the environment, right?
And I just just it rankles people who've come from behavior
based robotics and stuff like this. But then to kind of
realize that there's a richer relationship between the
internal thing, external that's been mirrored, right? It
doesn't have to be this homomorphic mapping. And also,
the you know, the actions are deeply involved in carving out
the world that you represent, you live in your own vault. You're
a model of your own vault, you're a model of regulating your
own vault, which is not, you know, it's not just like this
static separation of the of the agent from its environment,
there's this deep coupling, which, which can, you know, which
these kind of mirrorings emerge from. But yeah, I think you
articulated it really well there.
Can we just
I saw Carl, any comments here?
No, I think you did a great job. I agree with Chris, like that.
Yeah.
So I think we've got about 15 minutes left. So we'll do two
more topics. We'll end on structural learning and the
practical implementations of the free energy principle. But I
just wanted to touch on what you were talking about earlier,
Maxwell, which is this notion of the boundaries being
potentially vague, or maybe even observer relative. Now, in
your multi scale paper, you did say, use the word ontological
boundaries, I think. And I also wanted to talk about meaning. So
there's the boundaries of cognition in the physical
world. So we have this dynamical system, and it kind of
converges and we've got these nested kind of hierarchy of
boundaries. But then in a kind of Dennett sense, meaning
emerges gradually and the meaning kind of depends on your
perspective. And the intentional stance also depends on your
perspective. So different agents could look at different
phenomena going on in their physical environment, and they
could describe different meaning in their generative models. So
we seem to have this kind of weird two tier system where no
longer are we even saying that the boundaries, the marker
boundaries are fixed, they are potentially variable. And then
the way that the agents construct meaning is also
observer dependent. And all of this is kind of touching on what
I was saying before with goals, which is that the reason they
emerge is because they are unintelligible, they're extremely
complex. Do you see what I mean? So it feels like the reason why
we need to have this high resolution generative model is
because in principle, it would be impossible for us to
explicitly program it.
So a few quick things about that. I mean, I think you're
you're really identifying some of the key issues. I would first
so with respect to ontology, I would, you know, distinguish
ontology from metaphysics. ontology is just talking about
what kind of things are. So when we say that the boundaries are
ontological, what we're saying is we're trying to capture kind
of features of the map, in some sense. And you know, what we've
argued in a paper recently is that the free energy principle is
metaphorically speaking, a map of that part of the territory
that behaves like a map. So I want to contrast this with
metaphysics in the sense that like this is all of this is a
modeling approach. This is a physics. This isn't saying like
once and for all, these boundaries are here and
crystallized and just, you know, are there independently of,
you know, the way that we are experiencing or sampling or
interacting with the world, like that that kind of metaphysical
stuff is not what's at stake. Yeah, so in the paper you're
referring to, we describe we describe these Markov blankets
as existential boundaries, in the sense that they're both
epistemological and ontological. They're ontological in the
sense that they are definitional of what a thing is, in this
kind of physics based approach, if you can pick out a thing as a
physical thing, then it has to have this blanket structure. And
it's it's epistemological in the sense that it's this
interface, right? Like the thing itself can only know the world
and indeed, we can only know the world, the thing through this
boundary. So like this isn't meant to be a priori. It's
sort of weird. It's in some sense, it's sort of like an app
posteriori. It's like an empirically driven way to
carve up the world.
That's fine. I mean, on that, I think that that answers my
question, because there's always this confusion about whether
we're talking about the map or the territory. And just to be
clear, we are we are always talking about the map when we
talk about these boundaries.
Yeah, the free energy principle is a map of the boundaries you
can think of and a map of what happens when things have
boundaries that it and so yeah, that that that is important to
keep in mind, like we don't want to engage in map territory
fallacies. The free energy principle is a model, it's a
scientific model, and it's a map and it turns out to be
the canonical way of modeling systems that are engaged in
modeling. So if maximum entropy is the canonical way of
modeling physical systems in physics, it's the way of arriving
at the most parsimonious model that generates, you know, some
data set, right? Well, the free energy principle is equally a
canonical way of modeling systems that also in turn seem to
be engaged in this kind of modeling behavior. But yeah,
it's a model, it's a map, you know, this probably is not the
final word. And, you know, we're, we're uncovering some, you
know, mathematical structure underneath the free energy
principle and the principle of unitarity and maximum caliber and
all of this stuff that we're tentatively calling G theory for
now in homage to M theory from string theory physics. So yeah,
you know, as most scientific models, like the progress of
science means that things will probably change. Like again, this
isn't a metaphysics. This is just a cohesive modeling approach
that inherits from the physics of information and self
organization. I would quickly just point out that the these
things like seem intrinsically related to observer
dependence, because they are in some deep sense. Carl's 2019
monograph, a particular free energy principle for a particular
physics ends on this idea that the free energy principle at core
is a metrological statement, where metrological means measure
theoretic or relating to measurement. And it basically
says, Well, things that exist, look as if they're constantly
measuring themselves and like keeping themselves within
certain bounds. So this is and you know, this is even clearer
from the quantum information theoretic formulation, where
like literally what we're saying is that the free energy
principle is a theory of observance, you know, the sort
of the it from bit, right? Like the it's thing this, but from
another perspective, it's observance, which which are kind
of the same thing. I'm sure Carl could say that again, more
eloquently than I. But at a high level, that's how I would
respond to your point.
Maybe Carl would like to give it a go. Yeah, Carl, you could do
that. And then also, since you're trying to decide if you're
an activist, you know, maybe, what other questions do we need
to ask for both of us actually to decide, you know, that we
haven't, that we haven't covered yet?
Yeah, we can we can ask Max, well, and Chris, to.
So just to pick up on that last exchange and come back to the
free energy principle as being gloriously gray. I think I like
that because, you know, the validity of that principle as
a method. So, you know, as a physicist, you would read any
principle as a method, something that you apply to some
thing. I think is is underwritten, not by its
explanatory scope, but by its internal consistency with other
principles that that people do apply. And I'm, that's what is
mentioned one. I think one important example of that, you
know, beyond the principles of least actual variational
principles that underwrite for, you know,
say Richard Feynman's work. I'm thinking of James's maximum
entropy principle. So Max well alluded to that in terms of
maximum caliber. So maximum entropy of distributions over
states just now becomes transformed into distributions
over paths when you move from when you move to the maximum
caliber principle. So the maximum entropy principle is
just a Max Janssen Max entropy principle for a pathological
formulation. And I think that's important to raise. The free
energy principle just is that it is just a constrained maximum
caliber principle or maximum entropy principle. And you may
ask, well, where did the constraints from come from? That's
just the generative model. It's just in the description of the
characteristic states that pull back a tractor that constitutes
the goals of the principle. And I think that's important to
realise the free energy principle just is that it is just a
that constitutes the goals we're just talking about. So, you
know, if you remember, free energy is just the expected energy,
the constraint part plus the entropy. And therefore, when
you're now drilling down on the constraint part, where does that
come from? It's just a description of the pullback
attractor of the characteristic states of the system that you're
trying to try to understand. So I really look at the free
energy principle as something terribly new. It's been
implicit there all the time. It's just people using slightly
different words for different concepts. So I think that's I
kind of why I'm saying this, but it seemed important to say.
And Max, what were you just talking about? Because there was
a link in terms of
were you maybe leading into the metrological aspects, the
self measurement?
Absolutely. I know that was really important. Yes, that's
right. So just looking backwards. What is the the sibling
of the, or the sibling of the free energy principle of in the
past century, in the past few decades, I think that would be
the maximum entropy principle, constraint maximum
entropy principle. Looking forwards, what would be the
bedfellows of the free energy principle? I think that the
that metrological or relational thing is vitally important.
And, you know, I love the work of
Carlo Revelli and his work with, you know,
quantum relational approaches to quantum mechanics, which is
all about relationships. And of course, how do you how do you
quantify a relationship? Well, it's just in terms of the
interaction, the coupling, which is going to be a sparse
coupling, it is just a measurement, it is just an
observation. So inference, measurement, synchronization,
sparse coupling, they're all the same thing. And so I think
that what will hopefully happen is that somebody will write
down a math possibly Dalton will write down a calculus that
says all of these things are just the same way of looking at
it. And I read yesterday, because I had to because I was
reviewing this paper for Synthese, about ontic structural
realism, ontic structural realism. And it seems to me that
that is basically philosophers having discovered the same
underlying fabric that the reality is in the measurement,
but it's the measurement of how we relate to each other via
that measurement of each other or things, measuring other
things, purely in terms of their relationships. So I think
that there is a lot of, if you like, work to be done from the
point of view of free energy principle theorists in consolidating
the links to what has gone in terms of things like maximum
entry principle, and what is to come in terms of, say,
quantum loop gravity or Chris Fields quantum information
theoretic treatment of holographic screens in the
Markov blanket. At each point, the FEP will become grayer
because it will be less easy to discriminate it from
everything else that stood the test of time.
Chris, do you have any comments on that?
You're on mute. You're on mute yet.
You're on mute, Chris. Sorry. So yeah, I think I'll leave it
there. It's a bit too deep into the philosophy for me, and
we've got two experts here, so I'll pass.
Wonderful. And to my point earlier, I mean, we won't go
into it now, but I guess my perspective is it all seems
like epistemology to me rather than ontology, and maybe we
can debate that a little bit later on. But as our uploads
are all quite slow, and I want to check that we secure this
beautiful interview, I'm going to cut it off at this point,
but gentlemen, it's been an absolute honor. Thank you so
much for coming on MLS here. Thank you so much to me.
Genuinely, always a pleasure, gentlemen. This is always great fun.
Beautiful, beautiful. Yeah, I always enjoyed it.
