What do you make of a pantheon that features an elephant headed god, a charming, flute
playing young male deity, a fierce looking female goddess wearing a necklace of skulls
with blood dripping from her mouth, and a meditating yogi with long hair, a trident,
and a serpent.
To the non-Hindu, the Hindu gods can appear quite strange and overwhelming.
First, there are so many of them, and second, they can appear in manifestations that range
from childlike, to loving, to bloodthirsty.
At times, contradictory elements will be embodied in a single deity.
It's worth spending time talking about the Hindu gods for at least two reasons.
First, we must understand the deities in order to understand what Hindus believe in how they
worship.
Second, it's just incredibly fascinating and a lot of fun.
Whatever you believe, the stories of the gods and the forms they take dazzle the imagination.
In fact, reflecting on divinity through the lens of Hindu gods can lead even the non-Hindus
to new insights about the nature of divinity.
The first thing that people notice about the Hindu gods is how many of them there are.
It is sometimes said that in Hinduism, there are 330 million gods.
Indian language has a tendency toward hyperbole, so this is a way of saying that, yes, there
are a lot of gods.
But don't worry, if you learn about 10 or so, you'll recognize most of the deities
you come across in temples and home shrines.
It's clear that Hindus don't shy away from representing gods.
This is an obvious difference between Hinduism and, say, Judaism and Islam, which prohibit
making any images of God.
Hindu temples and homes almost always feature paintings and statues of gods.
Note that in both Hinduism and Islam, the two largest religions of India, people are
tremendously devoted to God and have feelings of reverence and awe.
Why are there such radically different opinions about representing God?
Here's one way to think about it.
If God is infinite, beyond anything we can fully know or imagine, how can we relate to
God?
On one side, there is the response of Judaism and Islam.
Given that God is infinite, don't even try to represent God, because if you do, you'll
end up worshiping the representation, becoming idolaters, and in the process circumscribing
and limiting God, who is, in fact, limitless.
It's better to leave God formless and worship God through the word in an interior way, rather
than through the senses.
Hinduism approaches this question differently.
This divine reality is infinite.
Never stop representing it.
Never think you've got it all in one image.
So the answer is not the avoidance of representation, but endless multiplicity.
From a Hindu perspective, people need to direct their senses somewhere, have a focal point
for their worship, and images help with this.
For Hindus, images are not the actual deity, but rather the place for the presence of the
deity to be felt, a location for the deity to reside.
So Hindus are not actually worshiping the icon itself.
In fact, after many festivals, the statue is disposed of, in some cases thrown in a river,
and replaced with a new one the following year.
But the images do matter, otherwise why have them at all?
One reason is that in Hinduism, there's an emphasis placed on the visual.
Hindus believe that it's important to see and be seen by the deity.
This is known as darshan, the experience of visual connection between the worshiper and
the deity.
When you walk into a Hindu temple, you often encounter brilliant color in ornately decorated
gods.
Your eye, and following that, your mind and heart, are drawn toward the divine.
Most Jews, Christians, and Muslims think of God as a separate being.
While this understanding is also found in some forms of Hinduism, there's another approach
that we encounter in the Upanishads.
In the previous lecture, we learned about the atman, or soul, our true self.
Now there's another important term we must learn, brahman.
This is the word that Hindus use to refer to ultimate reality.
While some might translate that word as God, this can be misleading, as brahman is not
used in a way that would evoke images of a being like the biblical God.
Brahman is often described using three Sanskrit words, sat citta ananda.
Sat means being.
So brahman is not seen as a being, but rather as being itself.
It's the ground of all that exists.
Citta means consciousness.
So brahman is seen as pure eternal consciousness, and ananda means bliss.
So brahman is sat citta ananda, being, consciousness, bliss.
So now we know that we each have a soul, atman, and we know about ultimate reality, brahman.
The Chandogya Upanishad goes on to reveal something very important about our soul in
its relationship to ultimate reality.
In one of the most famous passages in all of Hindu thought, the text states, that art
thou, tat tvam asi.
What it ultimately says is that your soul, your atman, is identical with ultimate reality,
brahman.
So what is our relationship to the divine?
We are divine.
In Abrahamic religions, it can be blasphemous to say, I am God.
But in this form of Hinduism, it is the highest teaching to say, I am the same as the absolute.
As long as we remember that the I in that statement is not the ego, it's not the separate
individual personality, but rather the atman, which is pure consciousness.
When we recognize our identity with ultimate reality, we achieve liberation.
So there's oneness underlying all multiplicity, and we need to see all other beings as manifestations
of the divine.
When you greet someone in India, it's customary to put your hands together and say namaste.
This has been interpreted by some Hindus to mean something like, the divine in me bows
to the divine in you.
So in what ways are Hindus affiliated with particular gods?
How many do they actually worship?
Many Hindus focus their worship on one deity.
So a particular person or family or even village might be focused on Krishna and others on
Durga or Shiva.
You can often tell what God of Hindu worships by a special marking on the forehead known
as Attila.
Attila is usually made with a substance like sandalwood paste or a kundkum powder or clay
or even ashes.
The Attila, which usually has religious significance, can be distinguished from a bindi, the dot
that's usually worn by women on the forehead and which can be formed by a sticker or a
jewel as well as by paste.
The bindi is often worn for decorative purposes or to signify marriage, but sometimes those
terms are used interchangeably.
In most cases, while Hindus will see the God they worship as supreme, they do not see
other gods as false.
For many Hindus, all of the gods are seen as manifestations of the one Brahman.
This is why Hinduism can be seen as polytheistic from one angle, but monistic, emphasizing
the oneness of all being from another.
When you text teach that people fail to see the unity and get caught up in an illusion
of separateness, the everyday world is described as maya, illusion, the play of forms behind
which is the reality of oneness.
Some Hindus worship many deities, for they see different deities performing different
functions, representing different characteristics of God.
They might go to Ganesha when they're about to embark on a trip, Lakshmi if they seek
good fortune in success in business, and Shiva when they face death.
As one Hindu devotee said, they seem like different gods, but they're all just characteristics
of a single God, the one Brahman.
As we can see, there are strong tendencies toward pluralism in Hinduism, the belief that
people who worship in different ways are not wrong, but rather are connected with another
manifestation of the divine, perhaps different than mine, but no less real or legitimate.
And now, we'll meet the deities themselves.
The best way to approach the deities is to talk about three categories, representing
the gods who are worshipped most widely in India, and whose images you're most likely
to see in temples and homes.
Vishnu and his avatars, especially Krishna and Rama, Shiva in his many forms, and Devi,
the goddess, in her many forms.
We'll begin with Vishnu.
Vishnu is seen as the all-pervading Lord of the universe and protector of humanity.
Many Vishnu worshippers were atilic on their foreheads that consist of two vertical lines
joined at the bottom to make a U or a V shape.
If you see something that looks like a V, it's easy to just remember Vishnu, but the
English letter has nothing to do with that shape.
It's said that the shape represents the footprint of Vishnu.
Vishnu is usually portrayed with blue skin, which is said to represent vastness, like
the vast ocean or endless sky or space.
He has four arms, which indicates power, and he sometimes portrayed lying on the coils
of a great cosmic serpent, floating on an ocean with a lotus growing out of his navel.
Vishnu's four arms hold a conch shell, a discus, a mace, and a lotus flower.
The conch is said to represent Vishnu's creative power and is associated with the divine sound
of the cosmos.
It's actually often blown in religious rituals.
And the lotus flower represents purity and liberation.
His associated animal is the eagle Garuda, on whose back Vishnu is often portrayed.
Many Hindu deities are depicted in male-female pairs, and this represents the coming together
of the male and female powers of the universe.
The female power is called Shakti, and it's necessary in order to activate the spiritual
power that resides in the male.
The goddesses depicted with the male gods are often called consorts, although their relationships
differ.
In some cases the couples married, for instance, and Vishnu's consort is Lakshmi, the goddess
of wealth.
One of the most important features of Vishnu is that he manifests himself in avatars in
order to help humanity when we are in need, and there are ten great avatars associated
with Vishnu.
Two are most important and are widely worshipped throughout India, Krishna and Rama.
While worshippers of Krishna and Rama are in this Vishnu tradition, in many cases the
devotional focus is entirely on Krishna or Rama rather than on the god Vishnu.
Krishna is one of the most popular gods.
He's been called the best loved of all Hindu gods.
He takes many forms, and in virtually all of them he's depicted with dark blue skin
and long black hair.
He's sometimes depicted as a small child crawling on the floor enjoying his favorite
treat, butter.
In fact, the mischievous young Krishna is sometimes known as the butter thief, but as he grows
he becomes known as a protector of his people, in one case slaying a serpent who threatened
them.
One of the most common portrayals of Krishna shows him as a cowherd called Krishna Gopala,
a handsome young man playing the flute and often charming and flirting with the young
girls around him.
The love and longing that these gopis, his milkmaids, feel for him represents the love
that Krishna's devotees feel for him.
Amongst these gopis is one, Radha, who becomes his most important lover and consort, and
many beautiful paintings portray Krishna and Radha together.
The theme of divine play, called Krishna's Leelas, is often portrayed in poetry and art,
and there's an essential, sometimes erotic element to these portrayals.
These forms of Krishna show the God's delight, his willingness to playfully subvert convention,
and his loving interaction with his devotees.
The young Krishna shows the divine as approachable, allowing people to intimately connect with
their deity without the formalities and seriousness that so often characterize worship.
If Krishna is the divine in the form of child or lover, Vishnu's avatar of Rama is an exemplar
of the courageous warrior honoring his dharma, doing his sacred duty no matter the consequences.
Rama is the hero of the epic Ramayana.
In this epic, Rama, who's seen as the ideal ruler, is forced to go into exile on the forest.
He's accompanied by his wife Sita, who becomes the paradigm of the loyal, devoted, and ultimately
long-suffering woman, and also by his brother Lakshmana.
In the epic, Sita is kidnapped by the demon Ravana, who takes her to the island of Lanka.
This action-packed epic features a dramatic rescue mission, as Rama, accompanied by an
army of monkeys featuring the loyal and heroic Hanuman, wages a battle against Ravana and
his forces, ultimately defeating him and rescuing Sita.
Because of Hanuman's role in that story, he becomes a popular deity within Hinduism
as well.
Deities in Hinduism are often portrayed in associated groups, and a very common representation
is of Rama, Sita, Rama's brother Lakshmana, and Hanuman altogether.
There are a number of Hindu festivals associated with Rama.
Some celebrate Rama's birth and his marriage to Sita, but the two most popular celebrations
are of his victory over Ravana, in which the battles acted out with music and dance
and costumes, and the festival of Diwali, which is a festival of lights.
This involves a celebration of Rama's return from exile and his coronation.
Shiva is a god who embodies opposites.
Like Krishna, he's represented in many ways, but in Shiva's case, these take forms that
seem contradictory.
Sita is a great yogi, a meditator.
Shiva is an ascetic depicted with long dreadlocks and a loincloth.
And at the same time, he's a family man, with a wife and two sons.
One of his sons has an elephant head, so it's not your typical family.
He also has a terrifying form, one associated with death and dissolution.
I'll do my best to give a sense of his different representations, many of which you see if you
visit a Hindu temple or travel in South Asia.
Let's begin with Shiva as the lord of yoga.
He's often shown seated in a meditative posture on tiger skin, meditating up in the Himalayas.
He's covered in ash, carrying a trident and is garlanded by a snake.
He possesses a third eye and matted hair, which is fused with the rushing Ganges.
The element of Shiva in his various depictions carries symbolic meaning.
His trident is a weapon against evil and ignorance.
Shiva's third eye, if turned inward, gains wisdom and insight.
And if turned outward, it can be the eye of destruction, destroying greed, ego, and lust.
This version of Shiva, as lord of yoga, features prominently in the religious lives of ascetics,
meditators, and holy people.
The Votes of Shiva wear a distinctive tillic, composed of three horizontal lines.
Some Shiva worshipping sadhus, or holy people, undergo remarkable austerities to discipline
their minds and bodies.
In the most extreme cases, this can involve meditating in extreme or tense heat, or standing
on one leg for up to years at a time.
This isn't common, but those who are able to accomplish such austerities are said to
possess great powers and are held in high regard.
Shiva is associated with death and dissolution, and he frequents cremation grounds.
He's associated with the city of Varanasi, or Banaras, the most sacred city to Hindus
in all of India.
The Ganges River, itself considered a goddess, Mother Ganga, flows through Varanasi, and
is the aspiration of many devout Hindus to have their ashes scattered in the Ganges.
In fact, many Hindus come to Varanasi to die, as death in the sacred city, and the scattering
of ashes into the Ganges, assures one of liberation.
Another common depiction of Shiva shows him with his family, his wife Parvati and his
two sons.
One of these sons is Ganesha, the elephant-headed deity who is very popular throughout India.
Ganesha is known as the remover of obstacles, and the guardian of entryways, and praying
to him is said to bring good luck and success, so many people worship him before embarking
on a trip or a new venture.
Also present with Shiva in many of his portrayals is his animal, Nandi the Bull, who stands
at the entrance of many Shiva temples.
One of the best known, visually compelling images of Shiva is as Shiva Nataraja, the
lord of the dance.
He dances in a circle of flames, one foot on the ground and one off, showing that he's
both within and transcending the world.
In one hand, Shiva holds a two-sided drum that beats the rhythm of creation and destruction.
Shiva's dance can be seen as the divine activity that brings the cosmos into and out of existence,
driving the continuous cycles of time.
The final representation of Shiva that we'll discuss is the lingam, which is ubiquitous
throughout India.
A lingam is an object shaped like a pillar that represents Shiva's power.
To many scholars, the lingam is a phallic symbol that signifies the male principle and
its potency.
Many linga are set inside a yoni, a representation of female power, which is shaped like a vulva.
This union of Shiva and the female Shakti energy shows the way that the two energies
are needed to sustain the universe.
You'll frequently find a Shiva lingam in temples where it will be garlanded with flowers
and receive offerings of substances like water and sandalwood paste.
In Hinduism, there's a sense that this female divine power, Shakti, is the active force
of the cosmos, and without it the male deities would be powerless.
The goddess can take many forms in Hinduism, from gentle and loving, to playful and passionate,
to fierce and terrifying.
We've already seen a number of female deities that are associated with the Hindu male gods.
There was Parvati, Shiva's wife, Sita, the loyal wife of Rama, Radha, the passionate
lover of Krishna, and Lakshmi, goddess of wealth and prosperity, who is the consort
of Vishnu.
Lakshmi is identifiable as the goddess from whose hand flows a stream of coins.
Another important goddess is Sarasvati, who is associated with learning and music.
She's depicted with a book that represents the Vedas and a Veena, a stringed instrument.
Two of the most important goddesses are known for their fierceness and intensity.
One of these is Durga, who's portrayed with numerous arms, many of them holding weapons,
riding a lion, ready for battle.
In one well-known image, she slays a demon by placing a foot on his neck and decapitating
him, perhaps representing the triumph over evil and ignorance.
The Durga Puja is a popular, elaborate Bengali festival in which many family members return
to their ancestral homes to celebrate.
At the end of the festival, these huge images of Durga are immersed in the river.
Kali is an instantly recognizable goddess, usually portrayed as dark.
She's called the black one, with a long red tongue and blood dripping from her mouth and
a necklace of skulls around her.
Like Shiva, she's associated with cremation grounds, and she's sometimes shown lying
over Shiva's prostrate body.
Because of her fierceness, she's considered a great protector.
It's difficult for many Westerners to understand the appeal of the terrifying deities in Hinduism.
But we must keep in mind that if God is behind all phenomena, then we have to see even the
fearful aspects of existence, earthquakes, hurricanes, death, as parts of divine creation.
Hindus do not flee from these realities in their religion, but rather, through these
gods, face them directly.
There are many ways to worship the deities.
Some of the most simple involve repetitively chanting the name of the deity, or chanting
a short mantra, a sacred verbal formula, associated with the deity.
This is often accompanied by the movement of mala beads, like a South Asian rosary.
Saying the name of the deity is itself an efficacious act, and when Hindus become devotees
of a deity, they often take new names that consist of the names of the Hindu deities,
or of the qualities that they seek in their relationship with the gods.
We've talked about the importance of the visual dimension of Hindu worship, but sound
can also play an important role, as we can see from the importance of chanting within
the tradition.
And one sound is more important than all others, the sacred Sanskrit syllable om, which represents
the primordial sound of the cosmos, the root mantra that brings all other mantras into
being.
Many Hindu chants begin with the chanting of om, and there is an entire yoga practice
that centers on om.
The rituals that take place in Hindu temples and homes are called pujas, and a large part
of these rituals can be seen as a hospitality ritual, in which the devotee acts as a host
to welcome the deity, who is the guest.
The person will invoke the deity reciting mantras, offer the deity water for bathing,
fresh clothing, and food.
The devotee will anoint the deity with oils and sandalwood paste, and make offerings of
flowers, incense, and light, through a lamp which will be moved around the deity in a
ritual known as arati.
At home, the ritual will be performed by an adult, often the eldest woman in the house,
at the temple by a Brahmin priest.
In the temple, the food that is blessed by the deity, called prasad, is returned to the
devotee to be consumed, so that one takes in the blessing of the god.
The priest will also take the arati lamp to devotees, who cup their hands over the flames
and then move their hands over their heads and faces to bring the light of the deity
to themselves.
If you visit a Hindu temple, you will probably be welcomed to participate in these experiences.
In the main prayer room, which houses the images of the deities, you will be expected
to remove your shoes.
Because there are usually no pews or seats, you will either stand or sit on the floor
to observe the rituals.
The Hindu puja is a full sensory experience.
It features the visual display of the deity's forms, the sound of chanting, drums, and the
harmonium.
It is an instrument like an accordion which often accompanies Hindu chanting, the smell
of incense in the air, the taste of the prasad, the blessed food.
The worshipper can receive the tilak, a mark on the forehead, that represents the blessing
they have received at the puja.
Since I mentioned food, it is important to keep in mind that many, though not all, Hindus
are vegetarian.
India is a center for vegetarianism in the world, and I saw numerous vegetarian restaurants
in every city I visited there.
This is in part an illustration of the Hindu concept of ahimsa, or non-violence.
The belief in rebirth means that we can be reborn as animals, and they as humans.
Furthermore, almost all Hindus refuse to eat beef, as the cow is considered worthy of reverence
and its killing is forbidden, not just religiously but legally in most of India.
The cow is considered to be a giving, nurturing being from whose body, milk, yogurt, and butter
come.
When you bring food to a Hindu family, make it vegetarian just to be safe.
In addition to the worship at temples and homes, there are frequent festivals in India
in which large numbers of people come together to worship.
These festivals can be associated with the birth of a deity, or an important event in
the life of a deity, such as marriage, or a victory in battle.
Some festivals occur in one particular village or area, but others are found throughout India,
such as Diwali and Holy.
Diwali is the festival of lights, and its celebration features lamps, lanterns, and fireworks,
as well as sweets and gifts and new clothes.
It's an autumn festival associated with the harvest.
This is particularly important in an agrarian society.
It's the time when accounts are closed and the new fiscal year begins.
And since it's a time for putting one's finances in order, some Hindus perform special
pooches for Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth.
Diwali commemorates the homecoming of the god Rama after his exile, and there are rows
of lamps that welcome him home, where his crown is rightful king.
The festival of holy is, quite literally, an explosion of color.
This is a spring festival with connections to the color and fertility of the season,
and also to the stories of the gods and the themes of love, sex, and play.
One of the most notable parts of the festival occurs when people throw colored powder and
water at each other.
In many cultures, there's a festival that occurs each year in which the normal order
is inverted, which allows for a temporary release of energy, like a controlled blowing
off steam before the order is reestablished.
Holy can be seen through this lens, for during the holiday, people do what they normally
do not do.
Men sing provocative songs, women will strike men with sticks, and members of lower castes
tease and throw things at people in higher castes.
One event marked by this day is the burning of the demoness Holika, from whom the holiday
gets its name.
It's said that a loyal follower of Vishnu was going to be consigned to a fire, but Vishnu
protected his devotee and made Holika burn instead.
Holy celebrates the destruction of this demoness, and bonfires are lit at night to commemorate
the event.
Other holy stories involve Krishna playing pranks on the gopis who loved him.
It's also said that during this holiday, color was applied to his consort Radha's face to
make her darker so that she'd resemble her lover Krishna.
This is one way to account for the throwing of colors.
India also features many major pilgrimages, including the largest gathering of human beings
on Earth, the Kumbh Mela.
This pilgrimage occurs at three-year intervals, alternating among four different locations,
means that it occurs once every 12 years at a given location.
All the locations are along sacred rivers, such as the Ganges.
Holy men and women, sadhus, along with millions of householders, come from across India to
bathe in the sacred waters and perform rituals.
The pilgrimage can go on for over a month, and some have attracted over 60 million people.
The path of devotion to the gods is vitally important to many Hindus.
At the same time, there are other paths to liberation, from meditative introspection,
to selfless action, to transformative knowledge.
In the next lecture, we'll look at the various yogas, the Hindu paths to liberation, and
we'll also see the forms that Hinduism has taken in the West.
