After the Hong Kong Disneyland was built, the angle of the front gate was shifted by
12 degrees.
The walkway near the entrance was given a bend.
The images of fire, wood, earth, water, and metal were shown on a screen behind a restaurant
bar.
These were all done on the advice of a feng shui master.
The kind of expert consulted almost any time a major building goes up in Hong Kong.
For millennia, the Chinese have thought about how to locate themselves harmoniously in nature,
and Chinese understandings of the workings of the cosmos have influenced all of East
Asia, and increasingly the rest of the world, in countless ways.
Before we study the particular religious traditions of China, Confucianism, Taoism, Chan, and
Pure Land Buddhism, we must look at the cosmological beliefs and folk traditions that have shaped
the Chinese worldview for millennia.
These beliefs are not associated with any one particular tradition, but they've had
an impact on all traditions.
What we're going to study in this lecture is the general religious worldview held by
the greatest number of people on earth.
Despite its remarkable rate of urbanization and modernization over the last century, China
remains a primarily agricultural society.
Chinese values, practices, and understandings of the cosmos arose out of that foundation.
The emphasis on natural cycles and the importance of nature itself, as well as an emphasis on
the family and cooperative labor, have been part of Chinese culture from the earliest periods.
In the traditional Chinese worldview, the universe has regularities and patterns, but
there's no deity or lawgiver in charge of it all.
The most basic pattern involves two forces, yin and yang, which have remained central
concepts in Chinese religion and culture to this day.
The natural world can essentially be understood through the ceaseless interplay of these two
fundamental forces.
Yang is associated with light, sun, day, heat, heaven, and male.
Yin is associated with dark, moon, night, cold, earth, and female.
There are many other associations like high and low, hard and soft, odd and even, and
so on.
It's important that yin and yang not be seen as static opposites, but rather as dynamic
compliments.
Often when we see binary pairs in the west, there's a sense of duality and conflict,
where one triumphs and the other is defeated, good and evil, life and death.
But in Chinese thought, each side of the complementary pair only exists because the other exists,
and each flows into the other in continuous cycles.
This is why when you look at the yin-yang symbol, there's not a firm straight line between
the two, rather there's a curve between them, where one flows into the other, and in the
very heart of each, the other is found.
It's a reminder that there can be no light without dark, no high without low.
A passage from the yin-yang reads,
The sun and moon give way to each other, and brightness is produced.
Cold and heat give way to each other, and the round of the year is completed.
That which goes wanes.
That which comes waxes.
The waning and waxing affect each other, and benefits are produced.
The ideal in Chinese thought is not about one side conquering the other, but rather
achieving the proper balance between the two.
The Chinese ideal is harmony.
In much of Chinese cosmology, the world is understood through patterns and correlations.
For example, with the yin-yang pattern, numerous associations are made, for instance with seasons,
numbers and foods.
A Chinese healer once told me to lay off the strong yang foods for a while.
Living in Minnesota, I think about the continuous movement of seasonal forces.
It's like a cosmic inhalation and exhalation.
The yin starts increasing in autumn, and then peaks in winter at the solstice, at which
point yang begins to increase, and it grows through the spring and peaks of the summer
solstice.
Or to give an example using numbers.
Yang numbers are odd, yin numbers are even.
As heaven is young, the temple of heaven in Beijing is constructed around odd numbers,
so there's odd numbers of steps, while the temple of earth, which is yin, has even numbers.
At the next cosmological level, we move from these two forces to five.
These are the wuxing, often translated as the five elements, but better understood in
dynamic terms as the five processes, or five phases.
They're water, earth, wood, metal, and fire.
Since they refer more to dynamic qualities rather than static substances, we can think
of them as watery, earthy, woody, metallic, and fiery.
These are the different states that things can take, and they're also in a perpetual
cycle of transformation.
Many different associations are made with these five processes, colors, compass directions,
body organs, animals, seasons, flavors, musical notes, and so on.
So in this way of thinking, to explain something is to locate it within a pattern.
By understanding how these correlations work, people can understand how the cosmos functions.
They can act effectively in the world and create and restore balance.
The result can be a better health, an excellent meal, or a beautiful song.
Since the five processes operate in a cycle, we can understand how things change over time
by looking at the stages of a cycle.
There are two basic cycles, the cycle of conquest and the cycle of generation.
In the cycle of conquest, the cycle is driven by one element overcoming the next.
Cycles in the order of earth, wood, metal, fire, and water.
So wood can dig the earth, metal cuts the wood, fire melts the metal, water extinguishes
the fire, and then earth dams the water, and around it goes, each conquering the last.
In the cycle of generation, which is wood, fire, earth, metal, water, wood catches fire.
Fire reduces to ash, or earth.
The earth forms metal, metals melt to liquid, and water nourishes the growth of wood.
Chi is one of the most important Chinese metaphysical concepts.
It's very difficult to come up with a precise definition of chi.
Early associations with chi include breath and vapor.
It's been translated as vital force, vital energy, or cosmic breath.
Chi is thought to be circulating within our bodies, and also throughout the natural world.
Not just in the atmosphere, but all around us and under the ground.
Ultimately it's best to just leave it untranslated as chi.
First let's focus on the chi within our own bodies.
Chi bridges the divide between the physical, mental, and spiritual.
When we get upset and stirred up, there are physical manifestations.
Our complexion changes, maybe turns red.
And this is the chi rising within us.
In fact, the word for angry in Chinese is shang chi, which is to produce or give rise
to chi.
An early text stated, war is a matter of courageous chi.
The first drums excite the soldier's chi.
Traditional Chinese healers believe that chi runs through our body in paths called meridians.
These can be occluded or blocked up, which can affect our energy and cause illness.
One of the benefits of acupuncture on this view is that it opens up the meridian so that
chi can circulate freely.
The proper circulation of chi is a central concern of Chinese medicine.
We can also learn to control our own chi in practices such as qigong.
In such practices, the chi can be harnessed and used for purposes such as healing and
martial arts.
The practice of tai chi chen, popularly known as tai chi, involves a slow flowing series
of poses that combine breath and movement in such a way as to cultivate and harness
chi for health, longevity, or even self-defense.
If you go to China or live in an area with a large Chinese population, chances are you've
seen people performing these movements.
The practices we're discussing deal with chi within the body.
We now turn to a practice related to chi circulating in the natural world around us.
Feng shui, which means wind and water, is known primarily as a system for determining
the best locations and orientations for human structures, or the best arrangement of objects
within a structure like furniture in a room.
Essentially, it's an attempt to bring human activities into accord with the forces of
the natural world.
The Feng shui expert determines the flow and strength of chi in a particular area and advises
people how to locate their homes, businesses, graves, or other structures to fit in harmoniously
with the environment and take advantage of the chi.
The chi should be neither too weak nor too strong for your particular need, which will
differ depending on the kind of structure you're building, a gravesite versus a large
building.
The flow of chi in an area can be determined by the presence of hills and mountains, which
indicate a buildup of chi in the ground, flowing water, which moves the chi, greenery, which
is an indication of healthy chi, and so on.
One Feng shui text reads, chi, unless well kept together by surrounding hills and mountains,
will be scattered.
Only in places where the chi is well kept together, and having a drainage carrying the
water in a winding, tortuous course, there are the best indications of a permanent supply
of chi being found there.
Building a tomb or house in such a place will ensure prosperity, wealth, and honor.
As we saw in the example of Hong Kong Disneyland, companies and architects in many parts of
the world consult Feng shui masters to ensure an auspicious location and arrangement of
their buildings.
Feng shui has also become popular in the West, and owners of homes and businesses often hire
a consultant to rearrange the interior of their buildings to maximize auspicious energy.
Feng shui masters will place objects such as mirrors, plants, and wind chimes in and
around homes to make sure that the right amount of chi is able to flow.
Through our discussion of yin and yang, the five processes, chi and Feng shui, we get
a picture of the basic Chinese cosmology.
The Chinese conception of the cosmos can be understood as organismic, as all parts of
the cosmos are connected with others like an organism.
It's not dualistic.
The universe is seen as an organic whole.
Problems in the world arise not because there's some evil force that needs to be eliminated.
There's no fundamental problem with this world, there's no emphasis on a better world
somewhere else.
Rather, problems arise only when things are out of balance.
The goal is restoring harmony.
Furthermore, the traditional Chinese approach does not aim to understand the natural world
by breaking it down to its smallest parts or dominating and controlling it.
Rather, it tries to determine the world's patterns so that we can fit properly and do
it.
Normally, when we're talking about a culture's cosmology, its understanding of the cosmos,
we'll also talk about cosmogony, the understanding of how things began, creation.
But the early Chinese sources do not focus on the creation of the universe.
This doesn't mean the Chinese weren't interested in origins.
There are so many Chinese stories that explain how particular things came to be.
This can tell us what the Chinese find important.
There are a number of mythological figures who are associated with the act of creation,
and these include Fushi, whose name means animal tamer, who's credited with the domestication
of animals, fishing, home building, and the basic institutions of family life.
There's Shen Nong, the divine farmer, who's credited with inventing the plow and hoe,
settled agriculture and public markets.
And Huang Di, the Yellow Emperor, the first in a series of legendary emperors.
Huang Di is said to have created Chinese medicine, the compass, boats, and carts.
During his reign, Chinese writing was also created, according to tradition.
So at this point, we can step back and reflect on what kind of creation the Chinese emphasized.
The focus was not on the metaphysical issue of the creation of the universe, the abstract
question of why there's something rather than nothing.
Instead, the Chinese are concerned with life here on earth, with culture, with what makes
us human and enables us to live in families and communities.
They focus on things like family, farming, home, and transportation.
It's the creation of these essential elements of human life that the Chinese told stories
about and celebrated.
After Huang Di, there are two more important mythological emperors, Yao and Shen.
Yao is said to have emphasized moral cultivation through ritual and music, and is credited
with creating a central government.
Most importantly, when it was time to choose a successor, he didn't select his own son,
but instead looked for the most worthy man in the empire, which was Shen.
What's established in this account is the link between moral capacity and the ability
to rule.
The best ruler is the most virtuous.
Yao was revered because he put the interests of the people over self-interest, virtue over
nepotism.
So what made his choice, Shen, so moral?
He was a poor peasant whose most defining characteristic was filial piety, the quality
of honoring and faithfully serving one's parents.
Shen also chose the most worthy successor, Yu, who was known for his tireless dedication
and self-sacrifice in controlling the floods.
These great sage-kings, Yao, Shen and Yu, were known for their moral character and their
good governance.
As we look at the heroes of Chinese legends, we can see a significant difference from the
Greek heroes such as Achilles and Odysseus.
In the Greek case, the heroes are known as warriors or adventurers, and their accomplishments
involve difficult journeys and battlefield prowess.
The Chinese heroes, on the other hand, are revered for two reasons, their contributions
to culture and their morality.
These two elements, culture and morality, are the central concerns of Confucianism,
which we'll discuss in the next lecture.
Most Chinese people throughout history have believed in a host of supernatural beings,
and these can generally be arranged into three categories.
This studying Chinese folk religion observed that in many Chinese homes, a member of the
family would perform three rituals involving the burning of incense and the making of offerings,
one in the kitchen, one outside the back door, and one before a set of tablets on an altar,
table or shelf.
These three rituals and these different locations illustrate the three different kinds of supernatural
beings that inhabit the Chinese spiritual world, gods, ghosts, and ancestors.
There are many kinds of beings that can be characterized as deities in Chinese popular
religion.
One group consists of the gods that occupy a great supernatural hierarchy in the spiritual
realm, with different gods having different jurisdictions.
At the most local level is the kitchen god, or stove god, who is usually represented by
his picture over the stove in a family kitchen.
He is the divine representative at the household level.
Not only does he watch over the houses, he also reports back up the hierarchy each year.
So traditionally, Chinese families will feed the kitchen god's sweet rice falls, which
will encourage him to say sweet things about the family, and barring that it will gum up
his mouth so he can't tell what's really been going on.
The next level up is Tu Di Gong, the earth god, who is a neighborhood god that serves
a locality.
He protects the village from ghosts and receives reports on the goings on in the village so
that he can give his reports.
The Chinese relationship with some of their gods, like the earth god, can take the form
of reciprocal obligations.
The people are expected to make offerings to him, and in turn, he is expected to help
them.
If the god delivers, he is rewarded with gratitude and offerings.
But if he fails to deliver, then he can be replaced, just like a human bureaucrat.
In other words, these local Chinese deities are not as much particular individuals as
functionaries.
It's the office that's important, and one earth god can be replaced by another.
Above the earth god is the city god, and then at the highest level of the bureaucracy is
the jade emperor, who is very powerful and cannot be replaced.
Most Chinese would not take their daily problems to the jade emperor any more than we would
take ours to the president, so just as we contact our mayor or local representative,
so the Chinese interact with their local gods more than those higher up.
In addition to this divine bureaucracy, there are other kinds of deities in the Chinese
pantheon, including Taoist gods, as well as Buddhas and Bodhisattvas.
You'll probably encounter a popular trio of gods in many Chinese homes, temples and
businesses.
The gods of longevity, it's an old man with a walking stick and a peach, which is the
fruit of immortality, wealth in the robes of an official, and the god of blessing or
happiness who is holding a child.
Now, the fact that each year the image of the kitchen god is burned and replaced tells
us that the Chinese, like the Indians, do not actually worship the image.
The image is, in a sense, a receptacle in which the spirit of the deity resides.
When an image is painted in China, there's a ritual in which the eyes are painted on,
which then brings the spirit into the representation.
The Chinese pantheon is very syncretic, bringing together the gods of the divine bureaucracy,
divinized historical characters, and powerful beings from Taoism and Buddhism.
In addition, there's another set of important supernatural beings who can play a helpful
role in human lives, although they can also cause trouble.
These are the ancestors.
In most Chinese homes, there's an altar with tablets representing the ancestors, along
with paintings or photographs of the ancestors.
Offerings of flowers, incense, and most importantly, food are made to the ancestors.
And it's essential that the ancestors be fed, because if they're not, they may become
hungry ghosts who will cause trouble for the living.
In general, ancestors are seen as helping the living family members and serving as the
family representative in the spirit realm.
But if an ancestor is angered by being neglected, or if the living family members go against
the wishes of an ancestor, the ancestor can bring bad luck upon a family.
Each year, during the Qingming Festival, Ancestors Day, or Grave Sweeping Day, Chinese families
visit ancestral graves to clean and maintain them, and to offer sacrifices.
This day, which falls in early April, is a national holiday in much of the Chinese world.
Traditionally, the ancestral line in China is patrilineal, going through the male side.
The altar will be set up so as to distinguish between the honored ancestors and the direct
lineage, and the indirect contributors or members of collateral lines.
Traditionally, daughters join the ancestral lines of their husbands.
They're not placed on the altar of their birth family, and it's said, from birth on,
girls are meant to belong to other people.
When a Chinese girl marries, part of the ritual is for her to bow down to the ancestors of
her husband's family, thus accepting her place in his ancestral line.
The final type of superdactyl being is the ghost, or gui.
While the gods and ancestors are generally honored and worshiped, ghosts must be propitiated
and held at bay.
You make offerings to ghosts so that they'll leave you alone.
Offerings to ghosts are left outside the home, usually by the back door, as you don't want
them coming in.
Ghosts can cause bad luck, illness, or even death.
In addition to leaving offerings, you can keep ghosts away by using charms and amulets,
and by placing guardian figures at entryways.
In addition, since ghosts are characterized by yin energy, you can drive them away with
powerful displays of yang, which involve light, fire, and loud noises.
Candles, gongs, and firecrackers are used for this purpose.
On the fifteenth day of the seventh lunar month of the Chinese calendar, falling in
August or September of the Western calendar, the ghost festival is held.
On this day, the boundaries between the realm of the dead and the realm of the living become
more permeable, and the dead pay a visit to our world, seeking food and entertainment.
During the festival, food is left out for ghosts, incense is burned in front of the
door, and joss money, that special money for use in the spirit world, is burned for the
dead and performances are put on.
At these public performances, seats in the front row are left empty for the ghosts.
Where do ghosts come from?
In many cases, ghosts are deceased humans who are not cared for by the living.
If no family members make offerings to that spirit, it becomes hungry, offended, and troublesome.
In China, the relationship between family members does not end when one of them dies.
It just changes.
This is also a reason that Chinese parents consider it so important for their children
to give them grandchildren.
This is the only way the family line can continue, and the only way the proper ritual obligations
to the ancestors can be met.
Not having a family of one's own is considered very unfealial towards one's parents, which
is one reason why Buddhist celibacy and monasticism face strong challenges for many Chinese.
As we'll see in a later lecture.
In addition to deceased family members who are not cared for, ghosts can also be people
who died under mysterious or unfortunate circumstances, such as meeting a violent death, drowning,
or suicide.
The unhappy, restless spirit can dwell in the area near where it died and cause problems
for the living.
Another practice that has been important to the Chinese for well over 3000 years is divination.
Using a range of different techniques, the Chinese have been trying to determine the
course of events, receive guidance for their decisions, and shape the future through divination.
One of the oldest forms of divination used what are known as oracle bones, which involve
writing and cracks made on tortoise shells and cattle bones.
Such bones had been unearthed by Chinese farmers during different periods of Chinese
history, but they were identified as dragon bones and sold to be ground up into special
medicines.
It's painful to contemplate how many of these precious historical relics were destroyed
over the centuries.
Well, finally, in the late 19th century, a Chinese scholar recognized them for what
they were, and efforts were made to excavate, preserve, and translate them ever since.
And now there are tens of thousands of oracle bone fragments that have been studied.
Not only are they important religious objects, but they're also examples of the earliest
Chinese writing dating back to the very first historically established dynasty, the Shang,
which is about 1766 BCE to 1122 BCE.
Now, here's how it would work.
A question would be scratched on the shell, something like, will it rain?
Will our attack succeed?
Will the king's child be a son?
His ancestors so and so been offended.
The questions were posed most often to the ancestors, although they can also be directed
at other deities.
There'd also be a date, and then the name of the diviner and the king.
And a small pit would be made in the shell, and then a heated pointer applied.
This created a series of cracks in the bone, which were read and interpreted by the diviner.
Oracle bone expert David Keatley writes,
The 100,000 pieces of oracle bones and shells contain little but the questions the reverential
Shang kings put to their ancestors and the answers in the form of cracks.
Both reverence toward ancestors and divination practices are still prominent in Chinese religious
life.
But the methods of divination changed over time.
Oracle bones fell out of favor, and the people began to use a classic divination text, the
Yijing, which means the classic of changes, which is still widely used today.
The Chinese have long considered the Yijing to be a text that could explain the workings
of the cosmos, provide wisdom and guidance, and help people understand the way that events
were unfolding so they could act most effectively.
The Yijing is essentially a series of hexagrams.
Six lines, each of which can be broken or unbroken.
Each broken line is a yin line, and each unbroken line is a yang line.
The lines are generated through drawing sticks or tossing coins, building the hexagram from
the bottom up until you have six lines.
Then you consult the Yijing to find the name of your hexagram and the associated commentary.
Some Yijing books try to make these notoriously obstruced readings understandable to the lay
reader.
But for some, the services of a professional diviner are needed for a divination.
Many Chinese also pay close attention to the significance of lucky or unlucky numbers,
whether these are on license plates, measurements, or addresses.
A number's status is related to its sound, which can be a hominin for another word.
For example, though number eight is pronounced ba, it's a very lucky number, because in
some dialects it sounds like the word for prosper or get rich.
The ballroom in the Hong Kong Disneyland, which is often used for weddings, is exactly
888 square meters.
The number four, s, on the other hand, is very unlucky, since it sounds like the word
for death.
Many buildings omit a fourth floor for this reason.
I'll conclude with a brief discussion of the most celebrated holiday, the Chinese
New Year, also known as the Spring Festival, which marks the end of winter.
It usually falls between late January and mid-February.
This is the time of year for cleaning house and giving gifts.
There's a major feast on New Year's Eve, and the sound of firecrackers fills the air
throughout the night.
On New Year's Day, children will receive money in red envelopes, red being a lucky color,
from older family members.
If you want to try to wish someone a Happy New Year in Mandarin Chinese, you say gong
shi fa cai, which is a wish for happiness and prosperity, and the children respond
with the rhyming phrase hong bao na lai, or hand over the red envelope.
Now that we've discussed the important Chinese beliefs and practices related to cosmology
and supernatural beings, we'll turn next to a study of the two most important indigenous
traditions from China, Confucianism and Taoism.
