It has been said that the Dao De Jing, the enigmatic text of the Chinese Daoist tradition,
is the second most translated book in the world after only the Bible.
The first line of this influential text reads,
The Dao that can be spoken is not the eternal Dao.
In other words, the Dao you can talk about isn't the real Dao,
and yet I'm going to try to talk about it in this lecture.
I'm a teacher. What else can I do?
But the text reminds us that there are things that cannot be explained in words,
cannot be captured fully in rational thought or language,
and this is a good thing to remember as we explore Daoism.
I have to begin by pointing out that the word Daoism,
which is used to refer to one of the two most important indigenous Chinese religious traditions,
the other being Confucianism, actually describes a great variety of things.
These are often grouped into two different categories.
The first form of Daoism is represented by a few important texts of the classical period
and the tradition of commentaries and philosophy that gave rise to.
This form of Daoism is often called Philosophical Daoism, or Classical Daoism.
The two most influential texts of this tradition are the Daotijing and the Zhuangzi,
and together they've had a profound impact on all of East Asian religion.
We'll look at both of the texts here.
The second form of Daoism has a sectarian character,
and it consists of a variety of organized churches and sects
with a large canon of texts, priests and priestesses, monks and nuns,
rituals and practices related to physical and spiritual well-being and powers.
This form is often called Religious Daoism or Liturgical Daoism
because of the significance of ritual.
The Daotijing
We'll begin with one of the most well-known texts in Philosophical Daoism
and all of Chinese religion, the Daotijing.
The Daotijing was probably written down sometime in the 3rd century BCE,
but it's most likely consists of a collection of sayings that coalesced over a long period of time.
It is attributed to the author Laozi, who was supposedly a sage who led a hidden life as a librarian,
and who after having decided to leave his job and ride off to the west on an ox,
was persuaded by a gatekeeper to leave behind a record of his wisdom.
Nobody really knows who Laozi was, or if he even existed.
The name itself, Laozi, means Old Master.
While there may have been an editor for this text, it's unlikely that all of the sayings were the product of a single person.
But we conventionally speak of Laozi as a person, and he's become a popular figure in Chinese religion,
often depicted as an old, white-haired man riding out on his ox.
In the later Daoist religious sects, he attains a far more elevated, even Divini status,
gaining the title Great Lord Lao An Hai.
And now let's look at the name of the text.
The last word, Jing, it just means classic.
It was also used in the Yi Jing, the classic of changes.
The other two words are trickier.
The word Dao means way or path, and it has a number of different uses in classical Chinese.
It could mean the right path, the way that things should be done.
On this usage, every school, including the Confucians, has their Dao,
the way they advocate the proper way to be in the world.
Another meaning is more metaphysical.
The Dao is seen as the way of the cosmos, the pattern and rhythm of nature.
That second word, Duh, as you'll recall, also appears in the Analects of Confucius.
The word means virtue.
In the Analects, this had the meaning not only of moral character,
but also that power and influence that one acquires when one possesses goodness.
In the Dao to Jing, the word also has the meaning of power,
but it's not embedded in the moral context that the Confucians give it.
So some prefer to translate the word as power,
drawing on the older meaning of virtue from the Latin Virtus,
which means the efficacy of something, as in the healing virtue of a drug.
Thus, Dao to Jing means the classic of the way and its power,
or the classic of the way and virtue.
The text, which is a collection of 81 short enigmatic, often poetic chapters,
does not contain any clear narrative or structured rational arguments.
Rather, it's evocative, suggestive rather than direct.
Nevertheless, there are a number of important themes that arise in the text numerous times,
and we can piece together the main view of the text by looking at some of these themes.
While it can sometimes be difficult to know what the text is advocating,
it's easy to see what the text is against.
The text frequently takes aim at the human proclivities toward pride, greed, violence, and excess.
It advises us to manifest plainness, embrace simplicity,
do not think just of yourself, make few your desires.
Another passage states,
the five colors blind our eyes, the five notes deafen our ears,
and this is why sages are for the belly and not for the eye.
The first part of the passage warns against getting caught up by our sense desires,
but what do you make of that line, sages are for the belly and not for the eye?
One way to read this is that the text is making a distinction between different kinds of desires.
Some are naturally occurring desires, like hunger.
These have a natural limit, a satiation point.
Like all animals, we get hungry, we eat, we're full.
But the desires of the eye, for example, or of the pocketbook, have no limit.
The desire for money can consume even a person who has all they need.
So the text advises us to return to a more natural state,
where we can be content and not participate in the quest for goods that knows no end.
So we can see that the text advocates a life of simplicity and contentment.
In order to achieve this, we have to do a lot of unlearning.
While the Confucians emphasize acquiring knowledge and following tradition and rituals,
the Daoists advocate returning to a more natural state,
a way of being in greater harmony with the natural world.
In order to achieve this, people have to rid themselves of the learning, ritualized way of acting,
and the overall artifice that they've internalized from their cultures.
Chapter 48 says,
In the pursuit of learning, one does more each day.
But in the pursuit of the way, one does less each day.
The chapter goes on to explain the ideal state that one can achieve when one's able to unlearn.
One does less and less until one does nothing.
One does nothing, yet nothing is left undone.
Gaining the world always is accomplished by following no activity.
As soon as one actively tries, one will fall short of gaining the world.
The ideal state is known as uwe, which can be translated as non-action.
But the text often advocates doing non-action.
So this term doesn't just mean complete inactivity.
Rather, it means no striving activity,
no activity driven by goal-oriented, conscious, intentional planning.
It can be thought of as effortless action.
When people realize the ideal of uwe, effortless action,
they act in a way that is tsuran.
This literally translates as that which is so of itself.
And it's often translated as spontaneous.
It means acting in such a way that is natural to who you are.
This kind of naturalness is the way that the dao itself acts.
The text states, people model themselves on earth.
The earth models itself on heaven.
Heaven models itself on the dao.
The dao models itself on what is tsuran, what is natural.
One chapter concludes that sages enact non-action,
and everything becomes well-ordered.
Well, now we can see why this is so.
If people get out of the way and stop trying to meddle in things so much,
if they don't try to interfere in things with their machinations
and self-interested plans, then what will happen?
Things will unfold in accordance with the natural dao.
Without human interference, the dao can do its harmonizing work,
bringing about order.
So the ultimate goal is to live in harmony with the dao.
And so here we get a hint of what the dao is.
We can think of it as the underlying natural order,
the pulse and rhythm of the natural world,
the creative harmonizing force that gives rise to our world.
The way is said to raise and nurture, nourish and shelter,
and it's described through the metaphor of the mother and female.
The world had a beginning.
This can be considered the mother of the world.
Return and preserve the mother, the text tells us.
It also advises us to preserve the female.
You can probably see why there were far more female leaders,
priestesses, nuns, adepts, in daoism than there were in Confucianism,
which was far more patriarchal.
In addition to the mother and the female,
there are other symbols for the dao and the dao de jing
that illuminate what dao refers to.
One symbol is water, for it flows through things
without confronting them, nurtures things.
And although it's soft, it ultimately triumphs over the hard by wearing it down.
The text says, the highest good is like water.
Water is good at benefiting the myriad creatures without contending with them.
The last concept we'll look at is virtue, dao.
In the dao de jing, this generally refers to the natural power
that one receives from the dao,
the characteristic natural abilities one has.
In other words, it's one's endowment.
If we preserve and nurture what the dao gives us,
instead of wearing it away with striving and effort,
we'll live a long life in accordance with nature.
Some chapters seem to suggest that if you effectively preserve your dao
and live in harmony with the dao, you can avoid all harm.
As we'll see, this leads in later periods to a quest for immortality.
Before we leave our discussion of the dao de jing, we should ask,
what would the ideal daoist society actually look like?
Toward the very end of the book, chapter 80,
the text portrays the ideal daoist community,
which is shown to be a small agrarian utopia.
The chapter begins with the advice,
reduce the size of the state, and lessen the population.
This is the opposite of advice from all the other schools
that were advising rulers on how to increase their populations
during the warring states period.
The dao de jing is advocating opting out of that whole race
and seeking contentment in small communities that live simply and well.
The text doesn't advocate asceticism, only the avoidance of excess.
It is no exaggeration to say that Zhuangzi,
the fourth century BCE daoist thinker,
possessed one of the most distinctive voices of any writer in history
and was one of those rare individuals
whose radical, provocative vision causes us to re-evaluate
our most fundamental beliefs and values.
The book that bears his name is a challenging text
filled with fantastic tales, parody, hyperbole, and humor.
His voice influenced many later East Asian thinkers
from Zen Buddhist sages to Tang dynasty poets.
Because Zhuangzi is a skeptic and the ability of reason and language
to fully capture reality, he's often maddeningly difficult to pin down.
But I believe that his playful slipperiness is driven by a fairly coherent
and often compelling picture of the way human beings and the world are.
The first thing we can say about Zhuangzi is that he's a skeptic about many things,
beginning with language itself.
Zhuangzi is a prospectivist, meaning that he believes that one's view
will always depend on one's perspective,
and there's no position outside of any particular location.
He playfully makes this point by saying,
what is this is also that, and what is that is also this.
That is both right and wrong.
This is also both right and wrong.
So is there really a this and a that?
Imagine that I point at the pen you're holding and I say,
I like that pen.
And you say, you mean this pen?
No, I say, I mean that pen.
If we started fighting over this,
an observer would see how ridiculous we were.
This and that both depend on perspective,
which means they're both right and wrong depending on perspective.
Zhuangzi thinks that all philosophical arguments can be seen this way.
So Zhuangzi knows that language cannot be precise,
but that doesn't mean that it's not useful.
For Zhuangzi, language can be more important for what it does than what it says.
Zhuangzi uses language skillfully to undermine our confidence
in the stability of language itself.
And that's why his language is so poetic, elusive, and playful.
Zhuangzi is not only skeptical about language,
he's also skeptical about our senses and our ability to know what's real and what's not.
In one of the text's most famous passages,
Zhuangzi dreams of being a butterfly.
Suddenly, he awoke, drowsily, Zhuangzi again.
And he could not tell whether it was Zhuangzi who had dreamt the butterfly
or the butterfly dreaming Zhuangzi.
So far, Zhuangzi has been undermining our certainty about everything.
Our language, our judgments, even our sense of reality.
What's left?
How does Zhuangzi suggest that we live?
We find clues to Zhuangzi's ideal way of living in his book,
including a chapter called The Key to Nourishing Life.
In this chapter and elsewhere,
we see depictions of people engaging in all sorts of skillful activities.
In one story, there's a butcher who handled his chopper with a plum
and never skipped a beat.
After being praised by the ruler, the butcher said,
What your servant values is the way which goes beyond technique.
I rely on the heavenly patterns and follow what is inherently so.
Zhuangzi.
All of Zhuangzi's skillful exemplars are able to get their minds out of the way
so that they can be fully absorbed in the activity
and follow along with the natural way of things.
In other words, they have mastered effortless action,
who way.
Zhuangzi talks about the mind's ability
to get in the way of our natural, effective living in the world.
We tend to walk around with concepts, categories, judgments,
and self-centered concerns in our minds,
and these interfere with our ability to live in accordance with the Tao.
One way to get the mind out of the way,
in a sense to get ourselves out of the way,
is through absorption in an activity.
Have you ever become so absorbed in an athletic event,
a musical experience, or just reading a book
that you were completely unaware of the passage of time,
even of the fact that you were doing the activity?
In a sense, you just merged with the activity itself.
Only when something brought you out of it
were you aware that you'd been reading for the last hour.
In a sense, you had lost yourself.
And for Zhuangzi, that's a good state to achieve.
Psychologist Mihaly Csiksimihay
called this experience the flow state.
And it enables human beings to attain optimal experiences.
We're at our best and experience a unique kind of fulfillment
in the midst of such states.
Others call this being in the zone.
And it's during such times that athletes and musicians
often give their best, most spontaneous,
seemingly effortless performances.
In addition to losing oneself in skillful activity,
Zhuangzi also points to meditation techniques
that help get the mind out of the way
so that one can enter into an uwe state.
These techniques are sitting in forgetfulness
and the fasting of the mind.
In these techniques, one lets go of the names
and categories and values that society has given us
and that now fill our minds
so that we can be moved effortlessly by our natures.
There is, it seems, a letting go of one's concept of oneself.
The self-image one's acquired over time
so that nature can manifest itself.
In fact, Zhuangzi says the perfect man has no self.
Zhuangzi's sages accept whatever transformations
nature brings about, including death.
The acceptance of change and transformation
is a major theme in Zhuangzi's text.
He tells the story of a sage who's at the point of death.
When his family begins to weep for him,
his friend says,
Stop! Get back!
Don't be afraid of the change.
The dying man says,
If I like my life for the same reason,
I must also like my death.
And when Zhuangzi's own wife dies,
he shocks his friend by beating on a tub and singing
rather than crying in mourning like a good Confucian would.
Zhuangzi explains that throughout his wife's life
her form went through continuous changes.
Today, there was another change and she died.
It's just like the round of the Four Seasons.
We've now looked at the two major indigenous
religious traditions to emerge in classical China,
Confucianism and Taoism.
There are many deep differences between them.
The Confucians emphasize learning.
The Taoists, unlearning.
The Confucians spell out their arguments
in rational language.
The Taoists use riddles, poetry and ambiguity.
While the Confucians put human beings above all other beings,
the Taoists see us as simply one being among the myriad beings on the planet,
perhaps distinguished primarily by our tendency
to mess things up with our meddling.
The Confucians emphasize duties and responsibilities.
The Taoists, freedom.
Confucians emphasize the importance of remembering.
We remember our ancestors, our past, our traditions.
Zhuangzi values forgetting, letting go so that we can experience
the moment-by-moment transformations of life.
For the Confucians, life can be understood as a narrative of development
with different roles taken on at different times,
rituals acting as passages from one stage to the next.
Zhuangzi, on the other hand, uses the phrase
free and easy wandering or wandering without a destination
to describe how we should move through life.
Throughout the history of China,
both of these worldviews have been embraced by the Chinese
in most East Asians.
It had more often been seen as complementary rather than rivals,
certainly not mutually exclusive traditions.
Confucianism applies more to our lives as students,
members of families, working people, politically involved people.
Taoism applies more to us as natural beings,
beings who are seeking to find our place in the larger natural world and cosmos.
Many Chinese throughout the centuries have tried to combine these traditions
in their own lives in fruitful ways,
and both traditions have flourished for 2,500 years.
There is, I'd suggest, great value for us
in reflecting on both the Confucians and Taoists,
for perhaps each points us to important dimensions of existence
and expresses powerful truths.
Like Confucian remembering and learning,
and Taoist forgetting and unlearning,
both be important for living well.
The Confucians and Taoists have been the yang and yin of Chinese religion,
and many Chinese thinkers have proposed trying to achieve a harmony of the two
rather than the complete supremacy of either.
While the Taoist jing and the Zhuangs have had a tremendous influence on Chinese Taoism,
Taoism is much more than the ideas and values contained in the classical texts.
Numerous sects with their own leaders, texts, practices, and institutional structures
have arisen in China over the last 2,000 years,
and a number of Taoist groups can be found today in China, Taiwan, Hong Kong,
and anywhere the Chinese communities live, including Europe and the United States.
I will talk about some of the broad themes that characterize people and groups
who have identified as Taoist,
and then discuss some of the Taoist practices that you might encounter today.
Religious Taoism features revealed scriptures such as the Tai Ping Jing,
the classic of great peace,
which tells of a celestial master who will be sent to save humanity
and establish an ideal society.
The earliest Taoist groups, which made use of such texts,
can be traced back to the second century of the Common Era.
One important Taoist movement is the Celestial Master Sect,
founded by Zhang Daoling,
who claimed to have received a covenant from the deified Laozi in 142 CE.
The early Taoist groups were organized into units, like parishes,
and they featured practices such as faith healing,
cures for illness through confession and good works,
recitation of sacred texts and meditation.
The connection between physical illness and moral spiritual problems
has been a feature of many Taoist groups.
Over time, many Taoist individuals and groups pursued longevity, or immortality.
As we saw in the Dao De Jing,
there was a sense that if you could harmonize yourself with the Tao,
you could avoid harm and enjoy a long life.
Later Taoists turned this into a pursuit of immortality through a number of practices.
Some of the practices fall under the category of alchemy.
While many people associate alchemy with the attempt to turn base metals into gold,
Taoist alchemists were focused on turning this base body of ours into an immortal body.
There were two forms of alchemy, outer and inner.
Outer alchemy involved the pursuit of an elixir of immortality,
and this often involved using a preparation of mercury
that, ironically, killed many of the people who consumed it.
The other practice was inner alchemy,
which involved meditation and breathing exercises,
including the controlled circulation of Qi
that would harmonize the energies in the body.
In addition, there were sexual and dietary practices that promoted health and longevity.
The sexual exercises were certainly not about pleasure,
as they required men to, as the Taoists put it, retain their essence
and then combine it with the female essence they absorbed,
that's bringing Yang and Yin together.
The dietary methods were based on the belief held by some Taoists
that there existed worms in the body that fed on grains
so you could starve out the worms by abstaining from grains.
Taoist abysses arose and ultimately enjoyed imperial patronage.
Celebit male and female priests, known as Daosher,
meditated, learned texts and conducted rituals,
and there was mutual influence between Taoist and Buddhist monasticism.
One of the monasteries founded in the Tang dynasty,
the White Cloud Monastery, or temple, located in Beijing,
is still a functioning Taoist institution to this day
and is the seat of the Chinese Taoist Association.
It's part of the complete perfection sect, the Chenzhen,
which is over 700 years old.
The school focuses on inner alchemy,
using meditation practices and other exercises to harmonize with the Tao.
It also survives in Hong Kong today.
We can see two strains within religious Taoism.
In one, such as Chenzhen,
there's a focus on the individual who pursues perfection
seen as harmony with the Tao,
resulting in physical and spiritual transformation.
This is the practice of a spiritual elite.
The other form involves priests who conduct rituals for members of the community,
and here the focus is on liturgical skills.
This is the kind of Taoism you'll most likely see
if you observe rituals in a place like Taiwan.
The dominant sect in this variety of Taoism is the Zheng Yi,
or Orthodox Unity sect,
which claims ties to the celestial masters tradition we discussed earlier.
So I'll conclude this lecture by talking about Taoist rituals.
However, it's important to keep in mind
that in Chinese religion, like that of most of East Asia,
there tends to be a lot of religious blending or syncretism.
So at times it's difficult to fully distinguish
what's specifically Taoist about a particular ritual
from the elements of the ritual we'd call folk or popular religion.
One major type of Taoist ritual is called a jiao,
in which a Taoist priest acts as a mediator with the spirit world
in order to confer blessings on a community,
and another major type of ritual we'll discuss is a funeral.
Taoist priests and their acolytes are quite an impressive sight,
as they wear these colorful long robes filled with decorative touches and symbols,
including quite often yin-yang symbols or the yijing hexagrams.
The Taoist priests also wear red or black caps on their head.
When the priests are hired by a village temple committee to perform a jiao,
or hired by the extended family for a funeral,
the priest brings his acolytes, musicians, images of Taoist deities,
and all the necessary tools and decorations.
The images that are displayed may include Zhang Daoling,
the founder of the celestial masters tradition,
and a trinity of Taoist worthy or pure ones,
one of whom is the Deified Laozi.
The others are the Lord of Heaven and the Lord of Earth.
Some of the ritual activities of the jiao include inviting the spirits to attend,
rituals of purification and repentance,
the reading of sacred texts, including the Dao De Jing,
writing documents such as petitions to the deities on behalf of the community,
creating talismans to protect the community,
and thanking and seeing off the gods.
There's also music and dancing,
which means that in addition to all the religious significance of the ritual,
there's also a great deal of entertainment.
Many of the elements that we just discussed are also seen in Taoist funerals.
A writ of parting will be written to release the person's soul from the hell regions,
and the descent into this region to rescue the soul
may be acted out with dancing and an acrobatic performance by the acolytes.
For purposes of delivering the document to the proper deities,
they're often put in the hands of a messenger crafted in paper,
who's then burned along with the writ.
Burning an object is a way to deliver that object to the deceased person,
as is done with the spirit money that they'll need in the underworld,
often to bribe bureaucrats that might impede their journey.
One of the most dramatic elements of these funerals
is the burning of replicas of objects that the living want to send the dead,
so that the dead can live in as opulent a fashion as possible.
Beautiful, detailed paper versions of houses, cars, and appliances
will be burned and sent to the dead.
The Chinese traditions of Confucianism and Taoism
have had a profound influence on Korea and Japan.
Those cultures both have indigenous religious traditions,
Shamanism and Shinto respectively,
that deal with the interactions between the human and spiritual realms.
Korean shamans and Shinto priests differ in some fascinating ways from Taoist priests.
We'll talk about that in the next lecture.
