In an earlier lecture on Indian Buddhism, I discussed some of the ways that the Buddha
is portrayed, meditating or with his hand touching the ground.
And yet there was one image that never came up, the chubby smiling Buddha figure that
comes into the minds of so many Westerners when they think of the Buddha.
Where did that come from?
That representation, technically a bodhisattva, but one that over time came to be called the
Laughing Buddha, is a Chinese expression of a new Buddhist ideal.
An image like that could not have arisen in India.
In this lecture, we'll learn about the new forms of Buddhism that arose in East Asia,
like Zen, and also learn something about the process of religious transformation.
In the first century of the common era, two of the ancient world's great civilizations
came together in a new and powerful way, as Buddhism from India came into China.
As we've already encountered both Indian Buddhism and the two most important Chinese
religions, Confucianism and Taoism, we're now ready to witness the remarkable transformations
that occur when a religious tradition enters a new cultural context.
How did Buddhism change East Asia?
And how did East Asia change Buddhism?
I'll give you a statement from East Asian Zen Buddhism to give you a taste of the changes
in store.
When the Buddha was discussed in Theravada Buddhism, it was as a great teacher who showed
us the path to liberation.
In Mahayana Buddhism, the Buddha achieved an even greater status, as a cosmic being
who far transcended one lifetime.
Now we see a new approach, captured in this baffling statement that you might have heard.
If you meet the Buddha, kill the Buddha.
Something has clearly changed.
There were deep tensions between the Indian Buddhist worldview and the Chinese worldview
in the first century CE.
Both Confucianism and Taoism, despite their differences, had a positive valuation of this
world and provide paths to achieve harmony within it.
Indian Buddhism, which emphasized the suffering that people experience in this world, presented
an ideal of non-attachment and brought to China things that had never before been seen
there.
The institution of the monastery, the practice of celibacy, and the notion of rebirth.
It should be no surprise then that some Chinese strongly opposed Buddhism.
Despite the tensions and debates, Buddhism achieved remarkable success in China.
After less than 500 years, there were tens of thousands of monasteries and over 2 million
monks and nuns.
In some cases, this was because of state sponsorship, at times given by non-Chinese
rulers who, after conquering parts of China, wanted to promote a unifying religion that
was not indigenously Chinese.
One way they did this was to sponsor the creation of imposing works of art, such as carvings
of enormous Buddhas in the sides of mountains.
One example is the Yungang Caves in the 5th century.
They're among the most impressive sites I encountered in China.
The magnificence of the large Buddhas and the beauty of the numerous intricately carved
Buddhas inside the caves must have left a deep impression on the Chinese of that period.
Over the centuries, as Buddhism spread and grew, distinctively Chinese schools developed,
and we can see an expression of this transformation in Buddhist art.
Now we can return to the question of the laughing Buddha.
This form of the Buddha exemplifies an affirmation of this worldly values, joy, the pleasure
of a good meal, and sometimes children.
The figure is sometimes portrayed surrounded by kids.
And he's shown in a relaxed and natural pose, sitting comfortably or perhaps with his arms
outstretched rather than in the disciplined meditation postures of the Indian Buddha.
And his face displays a wide smile rather than that slight smile of equanimity seen on
south and southeast Asian Buddhas.
This is a Buddha that affirms the joys of the world, a Chinese Buddha.
I will focus on the two most popular schools of East Asian Buddhism.
The first is known as Chan Buddhism in China and Son in Korea, but it's known best in
the West by its Japanese name Zen.
The other school, which has been one of the most popular forms of Buddhism in China and
Japan, but not very well known in the West, is Pure Land Buddhism.
Both of these schools are forms of Mahayana Buddhism.
The words Chan and Zen are simply the Chinese and Japanese ways to transliterate the Sanskrit
word Yana, which means meditation.
So the Zen school is the meditation school.
By the time Zen emerged, there were many sutras and schools, and the Buddhist world
had its own power structures, bureaucracies, and complex scholarly programs.
Some monks and teachers started to ask, what was this tradition originally all about?
It all started with a person's experience of awakening while meditating.
Too many people have lost sight of that.
So Zen was a call back to the original experience of the Buddha.
Okay, think of this as an analogy.
Imagine a religion that's centered around the amazing qualities of mangoes.
Fellow mango lovers can easily imagine this.
What if numerous members of the religion spent their time studying the history of mangoes,
reading accounts of people who described the wonderful taste of mangoes, setting up businesses
to sell mangoes, and learning the botanical details of the mango, and yet have never tasted
a mango?
I mean, you'd shake them and say, put down the books, stop reading about other people's
experiences, taste the mango.
That's all you need.
Zen is a way of saying it's not about the sutras, or powerful monasteries, or learning
philosophy.
Just sit, like the Buddhist sat, observe your mind and body, see directly into the nature
of things.
One common description of Zen is as follows.
It's a special transmission outside the scriptures with no dependence on words and letters, pointing
directly at a person's mind, such that a person can see the mind and become a Buddha.
The essence of Zen lies not in texts, it's in the direct experience of the mind.
Nobody else can give it to you.
You must discover it for yourself.
The transmission of the teaching that will enable you to do this is from master directly
to disciple.
Thus, the concept of lineage becomes essential.
You study with a master who has been recognized as awakened and qualified to teach the Dharma
by his or her own master.
In other words, they've received Dharma transmission.
This master, in turn, received it from his or her master, and so on, all the way back
to the Buddha.
Only an awakened mind can recognize when another mind has woken up, so direct mind-to-mind
Dharma transmission is a vital part of Zen.
An important figure is credited with bringing this wisdom from India to China, thus beginning
the lineage of Zen to East Asia in around the 6th century.
His name was Bodhidharma, and there are many great stories about him, although most are
probably more legend than history.
It's said that when Bodhidharma arrived at the Shaolin Buddhist temple, he found that
the monks lacked vigor, so he designed a series of exercises to both increase their physical
and mental health, and also protect them from wandering bandits in the area.
This the legend said was the origin of Chinese martial arts, what would become known as Kung-Fu,
which has long been associated with the Shaolin temple.
After Bodhidharma gives Dharma transmission to his successor, who would now be the second
patriarch in the Chinese line, this starts a new lineage.
The key figure in the Chinese Zen lineage is the 6th patriarch, Huyneng, whose teachings
are said to be given in the most important sutra in Zen, the platform sutra.
Learning of the teachings of this sutra will help us see the distinctive features of Zen.
Huyneng was said to have been an illiterate commoner, and this is significant because
it shows that a great Zen master need not have any formal education.
In the sutra, Huyneng says,
Good friends, enlightenment and wisdom are from the outset possessed by people.
It's just because the mind is deluded that they cannot attain awakening to themselves.
They must seek a good teacher to show them how to see into their own nature.
This one passage shows one of the most important contributions of Zen to the Buddhist worldview.
In earlier Buddhism, there was a sense that people had to practice diligently, often over
the course of many lifetimes, before they could gain the wisdom to become enlightened.
But here, Huyneng presents a radical teaching.
You are already enlightened.
You have Buddha nature within yourself.
You just don't see it because your mind is clouded.
All you need to do to see into your own nature, you have to realize your own Buddhahood.
When I say realize your own Buddhahood, I use the word realize in both of its senses.
You both recognize that you have Buddha nature within, and then you manifest it, make it
real by getting the deluded mind that obscures the pure Buddha nature out of the way.
In addition to these changes in religious thought, there were changes in other areas
as well, such as in approaches to work and food.
In India, there is a long-standing tradition of and respect for begging as a way for monks
to sustain themselves.
When you are in India, it is likely that you will see Indians giving money to and receiving
blessings from wandering holy people.
But in China, the attitude toward begging was quite negative.
Beggars were seen as parasites.
There was a high value placed on productive work.
In Chinese monasteries, the monks began to grow their own food so that they could sustain
themselves instead of relying on begging.
East Asian monasteries are known for their gardens, which are tended by monks, and for
the fact that monks considered the work they do in the monastery from sweeping floors to
building upkeep to tending the garden as part of their meditation practice.
This development accompanied another important change.
Chinese Buddhists, as well as Korean and Vietnamese Buddhists, put a far greater emphasis on vegetarianism
than Buddhists in many Southeast Asian Theravada countries.
The Theravada monks who rely on begging tend to eat whatever is put in their bowl.
While that's often vegetarian, it might also include fish or meat.
But they shouldn't refuse an offering from a layperson as the layperson gains merit from
such offerings.
But Chinese monks, following Mahayana sutras that forbid meat-eating, generally follow a
vegetarian diet.
They have control over their food supply through their gardens, so they aim to follow the first
precept against harming other beings by avoiding all meat, as prescribed in some sutras.
Some Chinese Buddhists also avoid strong pungent plants such as onions and garlic, as these
are thought to excite the senses and stir up passions.
We'll now look at the two major schools of Japanese-en, Wenzai and Soto, both of which
were founded by monks who visited China and then brought the teachings back.
I'm going to emphasize the differences between these two schools in order to show their distinctive
characteristics and sharpest relief, but they also have a great deal in common.
In general, the Wenzai school is known as the Hard School, and the Soto School, the Soft
School.
Wenzai focuses on jolting the mind out of its usual patterns, using techniques to lead
the practitioner to a dramatic breakthrough so they can see into their Buddha nature and
become enlightened.
Wenzai uses techniques like riddles, shouts, irrational language, even physical blows
to move the monk to the point of awakening.
Wenzai Zen features stories of dramatic awakening, the big moment of satori, the Japanese word
for enlightenment.
The rigorous practices of Wenzai Zen made it popular among samurai.
One of the most well-known and important Wenzai techniques is the koan.
Koans are short, non-rational questions, statements or dialogues that are given to monks to meditate
on.
Monks struggle with these koans, creating what one Zen master called a great ball of doubt.
The monks have regular meetings with the Zen master at which they present their understanding
of the koan.
From their responses, the master can tell what kind of progress the monks are making,
and if they've been awakened to their Buddha nature.
The idea is, all of the monks' attempts to solve the koan through reason or usual thought
patterns fail.
The mind finally gives up these rational attempts and experiences a breakthrough.
You might have heard a few of these koans, such as two hands clap and make a sound.
What is the sound of one hand?
Remember, show me your original face before your mother and father were born.
Koans were assembled into collections, and systems of koans were created so that monks
could advance to a new one when they've completed their current one.
Zen emphasizes that the Buddha is not outside of you, but rather within.
Zen master Sherto said, When you attain the insight as attained by the Buddha, you realize
that mind is Buddha, and Buddha is mind.
This notion led some teachers to utter very iconoclastic statements, so as to break monks
of their attachments even to Buddha and Buddhism itself.
Linji said, Don't take the Buddha to be some sort of ultimate goal.
In my view, he's more like the whole in a pretty.
Bodhisattvas and arhats are all so many chains, things for fettering people.
It'd be hard to imagine a similar statement made by practitioners of any other religion
about their founder.
In another story, a master took a wooden Buddha image and chopped it up to make a fire, where
upon a monk asked, What are you doing setting fire to the Buddha?
The master replied, Where is Buddha?
Be advised, don't do that in a Buddhist temple.
Buddhists still show great reverence for the founder, and they treat icons with great respect.
It's just revealing to see that the tradition guards against clinging to even the Buddha
himself through such dramatic stories.
We can now understand the statement with which I began this lecture.
If you meet the Buddha, kill the Buddha.
My way of interpreting it is this.
If you meet the Buddha, in other words, encounter a Buddha somewhere outside of yourself, it's
not really the Buddha.
If you focus on the historical Buddha, or a statue, or text, or an idea, you'll never
see the real Buddha, the awakened mind within yourself.
You have to break free from this attachment to something external, kill that Buddha, so
that you'll discover the true Buddha who's been there all along.
The other major form of Japanese Buddhism, Soto Zen, also puts the emphasis on the Buddha
nature that each person possesses within, but it has a different approach to practice.
It doesn't generally use koans, and it doesn't feature stories in which masters shout at,
or strike, or baffle their students.
It doesn't talk about some dramatic satori moment, rather Soto's all about the practice
of sitting.
Seated meditation is called zazen, and Soto Zen Buddhists emphasize shikantaza, just sitting.
To Soto Zen Buddhists, the emphasis on some big awakening moment itself can produce an
attachment to a future result, focusing on something that lies ahead instead of what's
here right now.
For Soto Zen Buddhists, there's nothing more to do than sit, because the mind that is manifested
during meditation is itself the awakened mind.
So there's no difference between zazen and enlightenment.
Once you're sitting, there's nowhere else to go, nothing else to attain.
This approach to Zen was articulated most powerfully by the 13th century Zen master,
Dogen.
He said, the way is completely present where you are.
To practice the way single-heartedly is in itself enlightenment.
There's no gap between practice and enlightenment, or zazen and daily life.
When you practice zazen, Dogen advised, give up even the idea of becoming a Buddha.
So just be awake, wherever you are.
The ultimate goal is to bring the awakened mind that one experiences on one's cushion
out into one's everyday life.
Zen has become one of the most popular forms of Buddhism in the West.
And there are Zen centers throughout America, Canada, and Europe.
In East Asia, while many families are affiliated with Zen temples and will have priests officiated
funerals, most lay people do not regularly meditate.
Meditation is for the Buddhist monks who dedicate themselves to the practice.
In America, however, it's usually meditation that draws practitioners, so most lay Buddhists
in America do meditate.
In American Zen centers, the focus is on meditation, and meditation instruction will
always be offered to newcomers.
Throughout the week, there will be regular meditation sessions.
So if you decide to visit a Zen center for meditation, make sure to wear comfortable
clothes.
You'll be sitting for a while.
This isn't time to wear the Sunday best.
Always remember to take your shoes off when entering the meditation hall.
When you walk into this room, you'll see round meditation cushions called Zafus and square
meditation mats underneath them called Zabutans.
People walk in, prepare their space, and then sit silently on the cushion, which rests on
the mat.
Now if you can't comfortably sit on a cushion, there are almost always chairs to sit on.
A bell will sound to indicate the beginning of the practice period, and another bell will
indicate its conclusion.
The entire meditation period is usually passed in silence, and sometimes sitting meditation
is supplemented with walking meditation.
And there are also ritual elements to these sessions, such as chanting and bowing.
These sessions will also include a Dharma talk, the Buddhist version of a sermon, where
the master talks about the practice and how it applies to our lives.
The most popular form of Buddhism in Japan is Pure Land Buddhism, and it differs in
some profound ways from Zen Buddhism.
We already know that in Mahayana Buddhism, there are conceptions of the Buddha as a more
cosmic being.
And there are also other Buddhas who either appear in different historical periods or
in different parts of the cosmos.
Pure Land Buddhism focuses on one of these Buddhas, known in Japanese, as Amida.
Amida was once a Bodhisattva who made 48 vows to help sentient beings.
In one vow, he said that he will create a special Pure Land for his followers, and that
any who call his name will be reborn there.
From this vow about calling his name, the primary Pure Land practice developed.
Just like Zen, Pure Land is an example of a practice that simplified or narrowed down
Buddhism to one practice, and in this case, it's chanting.
In particular, chanting the name of Amida Buddha.
This chant is known as the Nembutsu, which means recalling or remembering the Buddha.
In Japanese, the chant is Namu Amida Butsu, which has the meaning of, I pay homage to
Amida Buddha, and has a sense of I take refuge in or rely upon Amida.
Pure Land Buddhists can chant this aloud, either alone or in congregations.
They can sing it, or they can recite it silently in their minds.
In Pure Land theology, human beings are seen as ego driven, foolish, and deluded, so they
can't possibly achieve enlightenment through their own efforts.
So Pure Land Buddhism emphasized the move from self power, thinking we can gain enlightenment
through our own efforts, to other power, relying on Amida's saving vow.
If you perceive some similarities with Protestant Christian theology, you're not alone.
The two most important figures in bringing Pure Land Buddhism to Japan are Honen and his
disciple Shinran.
One characteristic of Pure Land practitioners, even the great teachers, is their tendency
toward humility.
They embrace other power, Amida, through what they call Shinjin awareness in trusting or
faith.
Honen said, I give up my own foolish plans of salvation and devote myself exclusively
to the practice of the Nembutsu.
The school that developed around Honen's teaching is known as Jodo Shū, the Pure Land School.
His disciple Shinran is associated with the Jodo Shinshu, or True Pure Land School.
This is known as Shin Buddhism, and it shares a great deal with Honen's approach, but develops
some new ideas.
Shinran said that since there's nothing we can do to bring about our own salvation,
there is no need for celibacy or following monastic discipline.
None of that will matter.
In fact, since there's nothing we can do to bring about our own salvation, the question
is raised, why even chant Nembutsu?
Shinran explained that you don't chant to get anything.
That would be self-interested, after all.
Rather, one chants out of gratitude for what has already been done, the extension of Amida's
saving vow to all beings.
In one experience is Amida's compassion.
The desire to call upon Amida with the Nembutsu will arise spontaneously in one out of gratitude.
Shinran writes,
The moment you entrust yourself so that the mind set upon seeing the name arises within
you, you are brought to share in the benefits of being grasped by Amida, never to be abandoned.
Many people, upon learning about Pure Land, think, so all I have to do is chant?
It's incredibly easy.
Actually, although the practice itself may be simple to remember, moving away from self-power
isn't so easy.
In fact, some find the act of fully opening up to other power, entering into a relationship
of complete entrusting, to be very difficult.
So how do Pure Land Buddhists think about the Pure Land?
As with every tradition, interpretations will vary greatly among believers.
On some interpretations, the Pure Land is a beautiful paradise where the person goes
after death.
And there is a tradition in Pure Land of placing great importance on the moment of death.
There are many images of Amida Buddha, flanked by bodhisattvas, coming to meet the dying
person and then guiding them to the Pure Land.
However, many Pure Land believers say that the Pure Land is a state of being, something
that can be experienced in the here and now through faith.
Shinran wrote, the person of Xinjin, faith, already and always resides in the Pure Land.
Pure Land Buddhist services will look quite familiar to people who attend Christian church
services.
They are congregational and people sit in pews or on chairs rather than meditation cushions
on the floor.
There will be more Buddha images than one will usually find in a Zen temple or meditation
center, especially images of Amida.
There may be a scroll with images of Pure Land Patriarchs going back to India and China
and certainly featuring Honen and Shinran.
The service prominently features chanting, especially the Nembutsu along with passages
from sutras and other chants.
The priest, who is usually married, will give a sermon and there will be social time as
well.
Most within the community and family are important in Pure Land Buddhism.
One Pure Land practitioner said, the warmth of the home is like a piece of the Pure Land.
You might have noticed recurring themes in my discussion of religion in East Asia, syncretism,
this practice of combining religions in various ways, and pluralism, the belief that truth
can be found in multiple traditions.
Those of this religious identity is understood very differently in East Asia than it is in
the West.
We saw that throughout history, most Chinese have not felt obligated to choose one religion.
They've had connections with Confucianism, Taoism, Buddhism, and Folk religion.
In both China and Japan, most people can be said to have multiple religious affiliation.
Japanese religious affiliation is a really interesting topic.
To begin with, when most Japanese people are asked if they're religious, they say that
they're not.
The numbers affirming religious belief are less than 40% in most polls, compared that
with Americans who average over 90%.
Japanese indicate very low levels of belief, which has led some scholars in the West to
say that the Japanese are not religious.
However, the majority of Japanese homes have either a Butsudan, which is a Buddhist altar,
or a Kamidana, a Shinto altar, in their homes, and many have both.
Most Japanese visit Shinto shrines.
Many are registered at a Buddhist temple.
The Japanese practice many rituals at New Year's over 80% visit shrines or temples.
And holidays like Obon, the Japanese festival for honoring the dead, which involves grave
sweeping.
Nearly 90% participate in the rituals for the dead.
So if we look at belief, the Japanese do not seem religious.
But if we look at practice, we see high levels of involvement.
In addition, when polls are taken asking Japanese people what religion they practice, or what
they're connected with, the number of checked religions is far greater than the total population
of Japan.
This means that most people check more than one religion.
In general, the Japanese tend to practice a particular religion at certain moments in
their lives that the religion is best suited to.
For example, when a baby is born, or a new business is started, a Shinto priest might
be called in to conduct a ritual, but when someone dies, a Buddhist priest who deals
more with issues of impermanence and death will be called upon.
There's a Japanese saying, born Shinto, die Buddhist.
In fact, Christian weddings have also become quite popular in Japan, leading some to expand
the saying to, born Shinto, marry Christian, die Buddhist.
Some call this approach to religion contextualism, and many Chinese and Japanese see religions
as dealing with different spheres of life rather than being at odds with each other.
They're complementary, not conflicting.
It's worth reflecting on why the East Asian approach to religion is so different than
the Western approach.
Here's one perspective.
Affiliation in the monotheistic religions is based largely on belief, and many of the
beliefs are mutually exclusive.
One cannot both be a Christian and a Muslim, because beliefs in these traditions about the
nature of Jesus and the status of the Quran cannot be reconciled.
But if religious affiliation is more about practice and less about belief, then being
affiliated with more than one tradition becomes possible.
This approach to religion is becoming more common in the West, as people are combining
the religions of their birth, like Judaism and Christianity, with Asian traditions, like
Buddhism or Confucianism.
And this is why there are more and more people in the West who think of themselves as Buddhist
Jews, or Zen Christians.
Each brings us to the religious traditions that have shaped the cultures of the West
more than any others.
Until now, we focused on the religious traditions of East and South Asia.
With the next lecture, we begin our study of the three monotheistic religions that all
had their birthplace in Western Asia, or as it's better known, the Middle East, and
went on to become the religious traditions of around half of today's world population,
Judaism, Christianity, and Islam.
