I want to begin our discussion of Judaism with a famous story from the Talmud, a foundational
text of Judaism consisting of the discussions and debates of rabbis on matters ranging from
law and ritual to custom and ethics.
In this story, a group of rabbis is debating about a point of Jewish law.
All the assembled rabbis agree on a particular ruling except for one rabbi, Eliezer, who
dissents.
In order to prove his point, Rabbi Eliezer says, if the law is, as I say it is, let
that tree prove it, upon which a tree moves from its place.
The other rabbis basically say, what does a moving tree prove?
And then Rabbi Eliezer proclaims, if I'm right, let the water prove it, whereupon a
stream changes direction.
And then he says, let the walls prove it, whereupon the walls bend inward.
The other rabbis remain unconvinced.
So finally Rabbi Eliezer says, if the law is, as I say it is, let proof come down from
heaven.
And at that point, a heavenly voice thunders, the law is, according to Rabbi Eliezer, he
is right.
One would imagine that this would settle the issue, but the story goes on.
Rabbi Joshua stands up and quoting the Hebrew Bible, he says, it is not in the heavens.
Which a later rabbi interpreted as meaning that since the Jewish people were given the
Torah on Mount Sinai, they should not look to heavenly voices for guidance, but rather
to themselves with guidance from their scripture.
For as the Torah itself says, decide according to the majority.
So Rabbi Eliezer, despite a moving tree and a heavenly voice, loses the argument.
And the story contains a wonderful ending in which Rabbi Nathan meets the prophet Elijah
and asks him, what was God doing as that event was unfolding?
And Elijah replied, he was laughing and saying, my children have defeated me, my children
have defeated me.
This story contains many themes that we'll explore in our study of Judaism.
First, the close relationship between the people and God.
Judaism is considered to be the oldest surviving monotheistic religion.
The relationship between God and the Jewish people is based on the foundation of the Torah,
the teaching and law that God gave to the Jewish people.
While awe and reverence are clearly dimensions of this relationship, there's also intimacy,
humor and a willingness of the people to struggle with God.
The word Israel itself, a word that can refer to the Jewish people as a community, can mean
those who wrestle with God.
Second, the central role of the rabbis, and in particular their ongoing textual study,
discussion and debate.
There's not an emphasis on blind faith or dogma in Judaism.
There's a continuous engagement with texts, drawing on knowledge, reason and careful argumentation
in the act of interpretation.
Third, the significance of law.
While there are certainly major theological and philosophical debates within Judaism,
there's a strong emphasis on determining the proper way to live in accordance with God's
law and commandments, which is understood as the way to honor the covenant that Jews
have made with God.
Fourth, the importance of narrative and storytelling.
While this story begins with a debate over a matter of law, it is, after all, a story
that comes to us through the rabbinic tradition.
The Jews are, among many things, storytellers, and it's rare to engage in any meaningful
conversation in the Jewish context without someone at some point saying, there's a story
about this.
In fact, this story illustrates another prominent theme in Judaism, the layered nature of stories
and debates, where an initial story, the debate about the point of law, is then amended with
a comment explaining what Rabbi Joshua's statement, it is not in the heavens, means,
which is then amended with yet another quick story about Rabbi Nathan's conversation with
the prophet Elijah.
As we'll see, the Jewish oral law, the Talmud, is structured in this way.
A text from the Torah appears in the center, surrounded by the interpretations and arguments
of rabbis, which are themselves the subjects of comments from other rabbis.
In a sense, the process is never complete, the act of interpreting the words of God and
applying them to our lives is, like Judaism itself, an evolving, ongoing, living process.
In this first lecture on Judaism, we'll look at the nature of Jewish identity, the origins
of the Jewish people, and the importance and characteristics of their sacred texts, the
Hebrew Bible and the Talmud.
In the second lecture, we'll discuss the history of the Jewish people to the present
day and the various forms that Judaism has taken during that time.
And in the final lecture, we'll look at lived Judaism today, with a focus on rituals, holidays,
and the Jewish home.
It's often said that when we use the word Jewish, we can be talking about a religion
and or an ethnicity.
The story of what being a Jew means and who is or is not a Jew is complicated by many
factors.
But what's significant is that the question is focused less on a set of essential beliefs,
as might be the case in some forms of Christianity, and more on what constitutes membership in
a community.
From one angle, a person who's born to Jewish parents is automatically a Jew.
Whether they engage in the practices of the Jewish tradition is an additional question.
So a person who's born to Jewish parents might rarely or never attend synagogue, might know
very little about the Torah or Jewish tradition, and still say, I am Jewish.
For such a person, this is a statement of ethnic identity.
It's recognizing membership in an ancient lineage and in the living community.
People who identify themselves this way are often called secular Jews, and someone can
both strongly identify as Jewish and feel a deep connection with Jewish history and with
other Jews, and yet follow only some or none of the traditional Jewish laws and commandments.
One rabbi said, There are lapsed Jews, but no ex-Jews.
Even if some Jews choose not to practice the religion of Judaism, by birth there are still
members of the Jewish community.
In fact, there are many more secular Jews in Israel than very observant religious Jews.
In addition to the more secular Jews, there are Jews who are committed to living life
in accordance with the commandments and guidance laid out in the Hebrew Bible.
Some of these Jews believe that anyone who is born Jewish has an obligation to live such
a life, although Jews both disagree about whether that is true or even what it means
to live a life in accordance with the Torah.
In addition, there are people who are not born Jewish who make the decision to convert
to Judaism.
So while there is an ethnic component, there is also a universal component.
Anyone can be a Jew.
All of this means that there are many ways to be Jewish, and we will discuss a number
of these in the coming lectures.
Let's take a quick look at demographics.
If we consider as Jewish anyone who identifies as a Jew, whether they are observant or not,
then there are approximately 13.4 million Jews in the world, which is only two-tenths
of a percent of the world population.
Most Jews live either in Israel or the United States, approximately 42 percent in each,
and most of the rest of the Jewish population lives in Europe and Canada, although Jews
can be found throughout the world, from South America to Africa, and throughout their history
they have established communities in some places that might surprise you, such as China
and India.
The community is generally known in two ways, as Jews or as the children or nation of Israel,
whose ancient lineage is referred to as the Israelite people.
In this lecture in the next, the origin of these two terms, Jew and Israel, will be discussed,
which will shed light on the community's history and self-identity.
To understand the words Israel and Jew, we need to talk about both history and Scripture,
and history and text are inextricably intertwined.
Since not enough is known from archaeology or other ancient sources to put together a
reliable historical narrative, the traditional story of the Jewish people comes from the
Hebrew Bible.
So the Hebrew Bible both tells the story of the Jewish people and itself plays a central
role in that history.
So before we do anything else, we should discuss the Hebrew Bible.
I want to begin by reminding you that within the Jewish tradition, the Scripture is not
referred to as Christians refer to it, the Old Testament.
Since Jews do not accept the authority of the New Testament, there is no conception
of an Old Testament.
There is the Bible, which is the Hebrew Bible, so-called because the vast majority of it
is written in Hebrew, along with small amounts of another Semitic language, Aramaic.
The language of Hebrew itself plays an important role in the history of the Jewish people,
and for this reason they are also referred to as the Hebrew people.
Most Jewish children throughout the world who receive a religious education learn at
least some Hebrew, as Hebrew is the language of prayer for all Jews.
Another term for the Hebrew Bible is Tanakh, which is an acronym for the three main parts
of the Jewish Scripture into which its twenty-four books are divided, Torah, meaning teaching
or instruction, Nevi'im, the prophets, and Ketuvim, writings, which include Psalms, Proverbs,
the Book of Job, the Song of Songs, and Ecclesiastes, among others.
Many Orthodox Jews believe that the entire Torah was handed down at one time by God to
Moses on Mount Sinai.
Many contemporary scholars, however, believe that most of the books that were eventually
accepted into the Jewish biblical canon were written between the tenth and second centuries
BCE, with the Torah reaching something like its final form during the period of Ezra the
scribe in the fifth century BCE.
The final phase of the canonization process, during which the Hebrew Bible was accepted
as authoritative, occurred in the first century of the common era.
So we'll begin by looking at the Torah.
The word Torah has a number of meanings, from a narrow to a broader meaning.
The word itself means instruction or teaching, although many people translate it as law.
While the Torah is certainly a source of law for observant Jews, it consists of much more
than laws and rules, so the word law can be a bit misleading.
The Torah consists of many genres, including narratives, genealogies, poetry, and commandments,
and the Torah is understood to contain 613 commandments, or Mitzvot.
Not only is the content of the Torah studied, debated, and considered the authority and
sacred textual center of the Jewish community, but the physical Torah itself is also treated
with great reverence.
When you walk into a synagogue, a Jewish house of prayer, and enter the sanctuary, you'll
see an elevated platform called Abima, from which the Torah is read, and behind this platform
is an elevated cabinet, often beautifully adorned, in which the Torah scroll is kept
behind a curtain or closed doors, and this is known as the Ark, and it evokes the Ark
of the Covenant, carried by the Israelites during their exodus from Egypt, in which the
tablets of the Ten Commandments were stored.
Ideally, the Ark is located on the wall of the synagogue closest to Jerusalem, so that
congregants face Jerusalem while praying.
At one point in the service, the congregation stands while the Torah is removed from the
Ark.
The Torah will be written in the form of a scroll, handwritten with a quill or reed
on parchment by highly skilled scribes.
It will be dressed in a decorative cloth or sash, and often adorned with a crown and
a breastplate.
During some services, the Torah is carried around the synagogue, and some congregants
will touch the scroll with their prayer shawls or prayer books or hands and then kiss whatever
touched the Torah.
The Sabbath service is largely organized around the Torah reading.
Every Sabbath service, a portion of the Torah is read, and throughout the year, Jews go
through the cycle of reading the entire Torah.
They celebrate the completion of the cycle with the holiday of Simcha Torah.
At each service, special prayers are chanted before and after the Torah reading is done,
and members of the congregation can be honored by being called up to the Bima to recite these
prayers.
This is an honor known as analia.
When the rabbi, or canter, or any trained reader, perhaps a boy or girl celebrating a
barbat mitzvah, reads from the Torah, they use a special pointer so that their fingers
do not directly touch the text.
The text is chanted according to special rules of cantalation, known as trope.
In its most specific sense, the word Torah refers to the first five books of the Hebrew
Bible, which are considered the most important parts of the text.
These are Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy.
These are often referred to as the five books of Moses, as tradition states that Moses,
who is himself the central human figure in most of the text, received the Torah from
God on Mount Sinai.
These five books are sometimes called the Pentateuch, which comes from the Greek for
five books.
Torah is also used to refer to the oral Torah that observant Jews believe to have been given
to Moses along with the written Torah, and thereafter passed down in an oral tradition
until being written later.
As we'll see, the oral Torah, contained in written form in the Talmud, contains the
wisdom of the rabbis that is used to interpret and apply the Tanakh.
In its broadest sense, Torah can be used to refer to the entire written and oral Jewish
tradition.
An Orthodox Jew, the most traditionally observant kind of Jew, once told me that the purpose
of his existence was to live the Torah life, a life in accordance with the Word of God.
And by this, he meant the entire Hebrew Bible and the accompanying oral tradition.
The Torah has a narrative arc, often interrupted, that continues to unfold in later books, namely
the books of the former prophets, Joshua through kings.
The narrative begins with the creation of the world and continues through the rise and
fall of the kingdoms of Israel and Judah.
In order to understand Judaism, it is important to spend time with the Hebrew Bible, especially
the Torah.
It is one of the most influential and important books in the world, and knowledge of the Bible
is an important part of religious literacy.
So we'll spend the remainder of this lecture talking about it.
There are a number of important themes woven throughout the Hebrew Bible that shape the
way that Jews think about their history and identity.
One is the theme of God's activity in history.
History and time itself are understood differently in Judaism than they are in most Asian traditions,
such as Hinduism and Buddhism.
As we've seen in those traditions, time is seen as cyclical.
There are many creations and many ends of the universe, and the cycle, which has always
been going, will continue.
And likewise, human life is seen cyclically through the process of rebirth.
In contrast to this, in Judaism, time is seen linearly.
There was a single beginning, and it's moving toward an end time.
The events of history are set against this cosmic backdrop, and God intervenes in pivotal
moments in history.
A central theme in the relationship between God and human beings is that of the covenant,
the agreement between God and people.
In a key point in the Torah, God makes promises to people that are accompanied by demands,
thus creating a binding reciprocal relationship.
Covenants are made with Noah, Abraham, Moses, David, and the people of Israel as a whole.
Another theme is exile and return, with human beings being cast out, out of the garden,
their holy land, their right relationship with God, and their longing to return.
When the Jewish people have suffered exile or oppression, they often understand this
as a sign that they have failed to follow God's commandments, and they believe that
if they return to righteous and holy living, God's promises will be delivered.
Genesis, the first book of the Torah, is concerned primarily with three origins.
The origin of the universe, the origin of humanity, and the origin of the children of Israel,
the descendants of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
After the creation of Adam and Eve, there is the story of their exile from Eden, in
which they are cast out of the garden after being tempted by the serpent and eating the
forbidden fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
Genesis is filled with stories that have been deeply woven into our culture, from
Cain and Abel to Noah and the Flood.
In up to a point, Genesis is concerned with the story of humanity as a whole, but then
it shifts from the story of humanity to a particular focus on the story of one people,
Abraham and his descendants.
And Abraham is considered the great patriarch of all three monotheistic religions, Judaism,
Christianity, and Islam.
They're all three, therefore, called Abrahamic religions.
Abraham is called by God to leave behind everything he knows and travel to the land
of Canaan.
Abraham gives God his obedience, and God gives Abraham a blessing and a promise, particularly
that God will make a great nation of Abraham, give his descendants land, and bless those
who bless him and curse those who curse him.
The sign of the covenant between God and Abraham and his descendants is male circumcision, which
is practiced by all observant Jews, with male infants traditionally being circumcised
on the eighth day after birth.
It's also practiced by most Muslims.
Abraham's 90-year-old wife, Sarah, is understandably skeptical that she'll be blessed with a child,
and so Abraham has a son named Ishmael with Sarah's Egyptian servant, Hagar.
After Abraham and Sarah have a son, Isaac, Sarah demands that Hagar and Ishmael be banished.
Abraham is promised by God that he'll be the father of many nations, including one
through Isaac, whose descendants will become the Israelites, and one through Ishmael, whose
descendants are the Arabs, and who's seen as a central figure in Islam as he's a prophet
and an ancestor of Muhammad.
One of the most powerful stories of Genesis occurs in chapter 22, when God tests Abraham
by demanding that he sacrifice his beloved son, Isaac.
Abraham is willing to obey God's command and is just about to sacrifice Isaac when
an angel of God stops him, satisfying that he's a God-fearing man of true faith, and
has Abraham substitute a ram for Isaac.
This is a story like many in the Bible that has been interpreted many ways and debated
over by rabbis for centuries.
Certainly a story like this demands great struggle on behalf of the reader.
One understanding is that the story demonstrates the unacceptable of human sacrifice and the
requirement that animals be substituted.
Human sacrifice was not unknown among tribes of that period.
The next important figure is the third great patriarch of the Jewish tradition, Jacob,
son of Isaac and Rebecca.
In one story, Jacob wrestles all night with a stranger who turns out to be an angel of
God, perhaps even God himself.
Jacob asks for a blessing whereupon the stranger says,
Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel, for thou hast striven with God and
with men and hast prevailed.
So this is the origin of the name Israel, which can mean to struggle or wrestle with
God.
Jacob has two wives, Leah and Rachel, and twelve sons, who become the ancestors of
the twelve tribes of Israel.
So at this point, we now have encountered the three patriarchs of the Jewish tradition,
and the Jews have traditionally called themselves the people of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.
In many synagogues, the matriarchs of the tradition are also recognized by acknowledging
that the Jews are the people of Sarah, Rebecca, Rachel and Leah.
The next story arc will bring us to the book of Exodus.
Jacob and his wives and children leave the land of Canaan during a famine and go to Egypt.
When Exodus begins, the Pharaoh, believing that the Israelites had become too numerous,
turns them into slaves and ultimately orders all male babies born to Israelite women killed.
One of these babies survives to become one of the greatest figures in the Jewish tradition,
and the one who is the main protagonist for the rest of the Torah, Moses.
The infant Moses is put in a small basket and sent floating down the Nile, where he
is discovered by the Pharaoh's daughter.
Moses is raised by the daughter, but his own mother was employed as his nurse, and thus
Moses grew up with a knowledge of kinship to the Israelite people.
His willingness to fight on behalf of those treated unjustly shows itself when he kills
an Egyptian overseer who is beating an Israelite, which leads Moses to flee, after which he
marries and becomes a shepherd.
It was while tending his flocks that he would have his life-changing encounter with God,
who speaks to Moses from a burning bush and chooses him to be a prophet, and tells him
to liberate the Israelite people from bondage.
During this encounter, Moses asks who was speaking to him.
God responds not with a name in the traditional sense, but rather by saying something like,
I will be who I will be, or I am who I am.
So God is identified with the verb to be.
Throughout the Bible, God is often identified with the Hebrew letters Yud-Heh-Vav-Heh.
And this name can be written out as Yahweh, but traditionally Jews don't ever pronounce
the name of God.
When they come to the word in Scripture, Yud-Heh-Vav-Heh, they substitute the word Adonai, or Lord.
And many Jews just refer to God as Hashem, the name.
So in contrast with Hindus, for whom repeating the names of the gods and visually representing
them is an important form of worship, Jews neither visually represent God nor speak God's
name.
Back to the story.
With his more eloquent brother Aaron as a spokesperson, Moses repeatedly demands of the
Pharaoh that his people be freed, but each time the Pharaoh, after consenting, changes
his mind and refuses.
In order to convince Pharaoh to relent, God sends a series of ten plagues, which include
locusts, flies, and darkness, but none make the Pharaoh change his mind.
The tenth plague visits upon the Egyptians the same horror that Pharaoh had used against
the Israelites, the killing of children, in this case the killing of the firstborn.
The Israelite people mark their doors with lamb's blood so that the angel of death would
pass over their homes, which is the origin of the term Passover, Pesach, and Hebrew.
Finally, the Israelites are freed, but even then the Pharaoh changes his mind and sends
his army after them.
This leads to the dramatic account in which Moses holds out his staff toward the sea,
at which point the waters divide so the Israelites can cross.
Upon the Egyptian army pursues them, Moses again holds up his staff and the waters come
down upon the Egyptian army, drowning them all.
This begins the account of the forty-year wandering of the Israelites in the desert
on their way to the Promised Land, the land of Canaan.
This story is told mostly in the books of Numbers and Deuteronomy, which culminate with
the death of Moses and with the Israelites on the brink of entering the Promised Land.
The story of the liberation of the Israelites from bondage in Egypt is one of the most important
stories in the formation of Jewish identity, and it is retold every year during the Passover
Seder.
It is also a story that has had resonance for other peoples who have been enslaved and
oppressed, such as African Americans.
A central moment in the history of the Jewish people comes when God gives Moses the tablets
with the Ten Commandments on them.
Interestingly, there are slightly divergent lists of the Ten Commandments, and the texts
of Exodus and Deuteronomy that contain the list actually contain about 14 or 15 statements.
A common listing of the ten is often divided into the first four commandments, which concern
the relationship between people and God, and the final six, which concern the relationship
people have with each other.
So the first four are to have no other gods but the God of Israel, an affirmation of Jewish
monotheism, to not make any image of God, to not make false oaths in God's name, or
take God's name in vain, and to keep the Sabbath.
The final six are to honor your father and mother, to not murder, commit adultery, steal,
bear false witness, or covet another's wife, house, or possessions.
God also gave Moses instructions for building a portable tabernacle, which would contain
the Ark of the Covenant, created to house the stone tablets during the Israelites' wandering.
They continued to wander in the wilderness for 40 years, sustained by a food called manna
that would appear on the ground.
The notion of wandering before entering the Promised Land has become an important theme
in the Jewish tradition.
Ultimately, the Israelites did reach and conquer at the land of Canaan, where they established
their kingdom, which we'll discuss in the next lecture.
Although Moses saw the Promised Land from a mountain top, he didn't live to enter it.
Moses' last address to the Israelites is found in the Book of Deuteronomy.
The fact that Moses, the greatest prophet in the Jewish tradition, himself did not enter
the Promised Land, but devoted himself fully to ensuring that his people did, has become
an inspiration to others.
Martin Luther King famously said in his speech the day before his assassination,
"...and I've looked over, and I've seen the Promised Land.
I may not get there with you, but I want you to know tonight that we as a people will get
to the Promised Land."
The Torah ends with the death of Moses, who, along with the patriarch Abraham, can be considered
the greatest figure in the history of the Jewish people.
Rather than any other being, Moses is responsible for the creation of the Jewish people as he
led them to liberation and gave them the Torah, which bound them together into a holy community.
Many Jews call Moses Moshe Rebenu, our rabbi, and father of all the prophets.
One of the final verses in the Torah reads, "...and there hath not arisen a prophet like
unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face."
