We've already seen that Jews are storytellers. During their rituals and holidays, Jews tell
many stories, often using things other than words. Meaning can be communicated through
the arrangement of items on a plate, through the construction of a booth, through the spinning
of a top and the lighting of candles. Some of these involve work, but the heart of the
Jewish religious life is a day in which no work is done. Shabbat or the Sabbath.
The rhythm of the week for observant Jews is woven around Shabbat. The Jewish Sabbath
begins at sundown on Friday night and ends at sundown Saturday night. In fact, all Jewish
holidays and festivals begin at sundown as a Jewish day begins at nightfall. In the creation
story of Genesis, God rests from the work of creation on the seventh day, and the obligation
for the Jewish people to likewise observe the Sabbath is found in the Ten Commandments.
Remember the Sabbath day and keep it holy. In it thou shalt not do any manner of work,
for the Lord rested on the seventh day, blessed the Sabbath day, and hallowed it.
The significance of the Sabbath to the Jewish people is expressed in the saying, More than
the Jews have kept the Sabbath. The Sabbath has kept the Jews. The appropriate greeting
to give someone on the Sabbath is Shabbat Shalom. The Sabbath is celebrated at home with a special
dinner on Friday night. The Sabbath candles are usually lit by the woman of the house
who covers her head and closes her eyes and moves her hands to bring in the Sabbath light
as she recites the prayer. Prayers are recited over the bread and the wine, and a special
meal is eaten, usually featuring bread known as challah.
Sabbath services are held in the synagogue on Friday evening, Saturday morning, and Saturday
afternoon. In Orthodox prayer services, men and women sit in separate sections. In accordance
with Orthodox views on gender relations, it's best to avoid offering your hand to an Orthodox
Jew of the opposite sex.
Jewish Sabbath services generally feature reading and chanting from the Torah and the
prophets. The reading from the prophets is known as the Haftarah, congregational and
private prayer, singing, and a sermon from the rabbi. For their synagogue services, Jews
use a Sidor or prayer book containing the prayers that are used in various services.
Sabbath services are usually led by a rabbi, and many synagogues often feature a canter
or a chasan who sings and chants and leads the congregation in song.
The Sabbath is a day for reading and reflecting on the Torah, praying and spending time with
family and friends, enjoying good food and conversation. It's also the best day for
sexual relations between a husband and wife, as sex is considered a sacred act when done
in accordance with the law.
Ultimately, the Sabbath is a way of stepping outside of the usual concerns of our lives,
slowing down, focusing on what is of true importance, God and the people who give our
lives meaning. In order to do this, the Torah says, we must put all work aside.
The rabbis have spelled out what this means, and there are many categories of forbidden
activities. Jews who observe the Sabbath most strictly not only avoid all work related
to their professions, but also avoid using electricity, and they won't even turn a light
switch on or off, the use of ovens or anything that produces heat, using the telephone, and
traveling by any method other than walking.
As with all Jewish laws, there are exceptions made for emergencies, and exceptions are always
allowed in order to save a human life. The highest value in Judaism is life, which is
why the best way to give a toast at a Jewish meal is to say, Lachayim to life.
Jewish law guides all daily activities, providing boundaries on what's acceptable to eat, wear,
and even say, avoiding gossip, for example.
Throughout the day, one's attention should turn to God, and one should offer prayers
of gratitude for every blessing.
Prayers are set upon waking and going to bed, before eating and drinking.
The blessing over the bread, for example, is, Baruch ata Adonai Elohenu melecha olam
ha-mochi lechem min ha'aretz, which means, Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of
the universe, who brings forth bread from the earth.
There's even a prayer used after going to the bathroom. In part, this prayer goes, Blessed
art thou, our God, ruler of the universe, who has formed human beings in wisdom and created
in them a system of ducts and tubes, who healest all creatures and does wonders.
It's an important reminder of what a remarkable creation the human body is.
In the religion of the ancient Israelites, purity was a central concern, and this continues
among many Jews today, especially Orthodox Jews.
For this reason, among the Orthodox, especially, the mikvah, a ritual bath used for purification,
is of great importance. In fact, in most cases, when someone converts to Judaism, they must
immerse in a mikvah. Following menstruation each month and childbirth, an Orthodox woman
must go to the mikvah prior to resuming sexual relations with her husband. Women also use
the mikvah before their wedding, and many Orthodox men do so as well. While mikvah use is not
required for men, many Orthodox men still use a mikvah on various occasions, including
Yom Kippur, and particularly for Hasidic Jews before the Sabbath.
There are a number of objects that are used as part of the prayer rituals for Jews who
worship according to traditional forms. To begin with, Orthodox, many conservative and
some Reformed Jews keep their heads covered. This is often done with a kippah, a cap, called
a yamaka in Yiddish. Women will sometimes cover with a headscarf, and many Orthodox
women will wear a wig. Even Jews who do not cover their heads normally will put on a kippah
for synagogue services. If you're a non-Jew who attends a synagogue service, it's recommended
that you cover your head out of respect. Extra kippot are usually available at the synagogue.
Observing traditional Jews who pray three times daily wear a talit, a prayer shawl with
fringes at the end. For weekday morning prayers, men, and sometimes women, put on tefillin,
phylacteries, which consist of two small leather boxes containing verses from the Bible, including
the shema. It's the recitation that begins, Here, O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord
is one. One box is tied on the forehead, and the other on the upper left arm close to the
heart. This is in accordance with the commandment regarding the words of the shema to bind them
as a sign on your hand and let them serve as a symbol on your forehead.
Jews are also commanded to inscribe the words of the shema on the doorposts of your house.
For this reason, Jews will attach a mizuzah to the doorframe. A mizuzah is a piece of
parchment on which is written the shema, and it's contained in a decorative case. Some
Jews hang a mizuzah in front of every room of the house except the bathroom, while others
place it only in front of the main entrance.
Since we're talking about Jewish symbols, I'll briefly discuss a symbol that's come
to stand for Judaism for many people, the Star of David. The six-pointed star, composed
of two triangles, is said to represent the tribes of Judah and Benjamin. The symbol probably
came into use as a religious symbol in the 11th century. During the Holocaust, Jews were
forced to wear a yellow star of David to identify themselves, and when the State of
Israel was founded in 1948, a blue star of David on a white background between two blue
stripes became the Israeli flag.
The issue of kosher food will be important if you dine with Jewish friends who keep kosher,
although only around 15 percent of American Jews strictly observe kosher laws. The laws
of kashrut, or kosher laws, are found in the Hebrew Bible and elaborated in the Talmud.
They fall into three general areas.
First, allowable and prohibited foods.
There are a number of animals that observant Jews are forbidden to eat. The Torah defines
certain animals as unclean and thus forbidden. Animals with cloven hoofs who chew their cud
are permissible, such as cows and sheep, but animals outside that group like pigs and
rabbits are not. So Jews avoid all pork products.
Poultry is permitted, and fish with gills and fins are permitted, but not shellfish.
So kosher Jews do not eat shrimp, shellfish, or crab, for instance.
Second category is kosher meat. So if the animal is permitted for food, it still must
be slaughtered in accordance with Biblical law.
Understood to be a relatively humane way of slaughtering animals, kosher slaughter requires
the use of a very sharp knife, wielded by a trained Jewish slaughterer who severs the
carotid artery, jugular vein, and windpipe in a single motion to ensure the rapid loss
of consciousness.
In Jewish tradition, blood has been forbidden to consume from earliest times. People could
eat the flesh of the animal, but its blood, its life, belongs to God. So Jewish kosher
slaughter practices ensure that all blood is separated, and practices such as soaking
and salting the meat are used for this purpose.
The third category involves meat and dairy. The Book of Deuteronomy states, you shall
not boil a kid in its mother's milk.
The rabbis have interpreted this to mean that meat and dairy should not be consumed together.
You can use animals for one thing or the other, but not for both.
So Jews who follow kosher laws do not mix meat and dairy. They have to wait hours after
consuming one to consume the other, so don't offer a cheeseburger to a kosher Jew.
In kosher homes, there's a complete separation of dishes and utensils used for meat and those
used for dairy.
All foods outside the category of meat or dairy, such as fish, fruit, vegetables and
bread, are considered parve or neutral, and these can be eaten with either meat or dairy.
Some Jews are beginning to argue that the best way to honor the intent of kosher laws,
which promote care and compassion for animals, is to eat a vegetarian diet. Vegetarians who
avoid all animal flesh automatically satisfy the kosher rules that we've discussed.
In fact, some rabbis who are advocating this approach point out that in the Garden of Eden,
before the fall, Adam and Eve are permitted only vegetarian food to eat.
Meat eating, with many restrictions, is only permitted after the flood, which many see as
a concession to human weakness.
So while an omnivorous diet is allowed, the argument goes, a vegetarian diet may still
be an ideal.
We'll begin our look at holidays and festivals with the most important period of the Jewish
liturgical year, the High Holy Days.
These begin with the Jewish New Year, Rosh Hashanah, which is celebrated in September
or October in accordance with the Jewish lunar calendar.
During Rosh Hashanah and throughout the period of the High Holy Days that culminates in
Yom Kippur, Jews reflect on their deeds of the previous year, stand before God's judgment,
and commit themselves to righteous living in the coming year.
One of the most distinctive characteristics of the Rosh Hashanah service is the blowing
of the shofar, a ram's horn that produces a piercing, haunting blast featuring both
staccato and legato notes.
When it's blown properly, it's really difficult to get a good sound from a shofar.
The shofar is mentioned in the Bible, and it's said that the Israelites trembled when
the sound of a shofar echoed from the thick clouds on Mount Sinai.
The shofar was blown to usher in holidays, and it's said that the shofar wakes up those
who are sleeping and reminds people that they stand before God.
The foods most commonly associated with Rosh Hashanah are apples and honey, which symbolize
a sweet new year.
The greeting that's given on this day is Lashanah Tovah, wishing others a good year.
Ten days after Rosh Hashanah comes the day of atonement, Yom Kippur, considered the holiest
day of the Jewish year.
The main purpose of this day is to atone for one's transgressions, and Jews are expected
not only to engage in introspection and ask forgiveness from God, but also to ask for
forgiveness from those they may have wronged the previous year.
Yom Kippur is a day of fasting for observant Jews, and unless an exception is granted for
medical reasons, all Jewish adults are required to abstain from food, drink, sexual relations
and wearing perfume or leather shoes during Yom Kippur.
There are many other holidays in the Jewish year, but we'll discuss only the four most
popular and commonly observed holidays here.
Two traditional pilgrimage festivals that have Biblical origins, Passover and Sukkot,
and two popular holidays, Hanukkah and Purim, both of which commemorate triumphant events
in Jewish history.
If you want to give a nice greeting to Jews on these holidays, you can simply wish them
a happy Passover or a happy Hanukkah.
But a good all-purpose greeting for a joyful holiday is Chag Sameach, which basically means
happy holiday.
One of the most widely celebrated holidays, even among largely secular Jews, is Passover
or Pesach.
Like many holidays, it has elements of seasonal celebration and historical commemoration.
Passover begins after the first full moon following the spring equinox, so in March or April.
And it has a number of elements that celebrate the renewal of life and hope.
But the real focus of the holiday is the commemoration, in fact, the retelling of the story of the
liberation of the Israelite slaves from the land of Egypt as found in the book of Exodus.
The holiday is celebrated for seven or eight days with the primary celebratory meals occurring
on the first two nights.
The heart of the Passover celebration is the Seder, a meal at which the Exodus story is
told and sung, and at which symbolic foods are featured and consumed.
Passover Saders are usually times of large family get-togethers, and everyone who sits
around the table gets a Passover Haggadah, which is a text that everyone reads from.
The readings primarily recount the story of God's liberating the Israelite people and
Moses' role in leading the Israelites to freedom.
Those sitting at the table take turns reading passages.
There's a special role for children who read a set of questions about why this night is
different from all other nights.
On the center of the table is a Seder plate that contains a number of symbolic foods.
The most well-known of these is matzah, unleavened bread, more like a cracker, that's eaten
throughout the holiday.
According to tradition, when the Israelites were fleeing the Egyptians, they didn't have
time to let the bread rise, but ate it flat.
And for that reason, throughout Passover, Jews do not eat any bread, cookies, pasta,
or other leavened items.
In the homes of Jews who are strictly observing the law, there is an intensive search-and-destroy
mission to rid the home of any leavened items.
This is normally preceded by major housecleaning activities.
As part of the Passover celebration, a piece of matzah is wrapped and hidden.
This is known as the afi-komen, or dessert.
Children search for this, and the one who finds it, or all children in less competitive
homes, receives money or a small gift.
There are a number of other symbolic items on the Seder plate.
For example, there are bitter herbs called maror that represent the bitterness of the
slaves in Egypt.
There's also harosin, a mixture of nuts and fruit that represents the mortar the slaves
used to build the bricks for the Egyptians.
And there's a shank bone, which represents the sacrificial lamb.
The Seder ritual is a way to transmit the founding narrative of the Jewish people and
bring together members of the community.
The holiday of Sukkot also has a seasonal and historical aspect.
It's a week-long fall harvest festival occurring in late September or October.
Historically Sukkot commemorates the journey of the Israelites in the desert after escaping
from Egypt.
While there are special prayers and services on Sukkot, the most distinctive feature of
the holiday is the Sukkot, or Booth, a structure built outdoors to represent the portable dwellings
of the wandering Israelites during their 40 years in the desert.
Observe and choose build a Sukkot with a roof made of plant material, like branches,
and decorated with agricultural products.
Many Jews eat meals in the Sukkot, and some choose to live in it throughout the week.
Hanukkah, the festival of lights, is one of the most well-known and widely celebrated
holidays for Jews in the West.
Hanukkah is celebrated anywhere from late November to late December.
The holiday celebrates the victory of the Jewish people under the leadership of the Maccabees
over the Hellenistic Syrians who forbade Jewish practices and were trying to force the worship
of Greek gods on the Jews, a story we told in the last lecture.
The main theme of the holiday is the need for Jews to maintain their commitment to their
tradition, even in the midst of powerful outside forces who threaten them, as well as inside
forces that embrace assimilation and abandon Judaism, as some Jews at the time were doing.
A miracle story is associated with the holiday.
After the Jewish victories, the temple had to be rededicated since it had been defiled
by the Syrians.
The rededication process required the menorah in the temple to burn every night, but there
was only enough oil for one night, insufficient to last till a fresh supply of holy oil became
available.
However, the oil burned for eight days, which was enough time to get the new supply.
So Hanukkah is celebrated for eight days, and its main symbol is an eight-branched menorah
or candelabrum, with a ninth-branch usually elevated above the other eight to hold the
helper candle that will light the others.
The menorah in the ancient temple, which held seven flames, has become a symbol for Judaism.
It's on the official emblem of Israel.
The Hanukkah menorah is technically called a Hanukkah, because of its place for eight
candles and the helper candle.
On Hanukkah, a candle is lit for each night of the holiday, so one on the first night,
two on the second, and so on, until the entire Hanukkah burns brightly.
Jewish families place the Hanukkah in a window so that everyone can share in the celebration
of Hanukkah and remember the miracle.
Because of the importance of oil, foods cooked in fried-in oil, such as filled donuts, are
traditionally eaten on Hanukkah.
One popular Hanukkah food is the potato pancake, known as the latke.
And latke making skill is celebrated, especially among Ashkenazi families.
A popular Hanukkah game involves playing with a top, called a dreidel, that has a Hebrew
letter on each side, and each of these letters stands for a Hebrew word that together make
the phrase, neskadol hayasham, a great miracle happened there.
Children enjoy playing the game where chocolate coins are won and lost.
Hanukkah has become the major gift-giving holiday among Jews in America, and in some
families gifts are given on each of the eight nights.
Purim, the festival of lots, comes from the Biblical Book of Esther.
Purim celebrates the deliverance of the Jews from a plot to destroy them.
The story takes place in Persia, where an evil advisor to the king, Haman, plans to
kill all Jews because he is angered by the refusal of Mordecai, a Jew, to bow down to
him.
Mordecai's cousin and adopted daughter, Esther, who is the queen, learns of the plot and pleads
with her husband the king to stop it.
The plot is foiled, and Haman is hung on the gallows that he had prepared for Mordecai.
This is a joyous celebratory holiday with a sense of drama.
The story of Purim is told to children in theatrical readings.
Sometimes children act out the story with costumes and masks, and whenever the name
of the evil advisor is spoken, the children use noisemakers to drown it out.
Other traditions include singing songs, giving to charity, and sending food to family and
friends.
The foods associated with Purim include cookies called hamantaschen, shaped like triangles
and filled with sweet paste.
Along with the rhythms of the week and the year, the Jews follow a sacred timeline for
a human life.
And there are four main events that are marked by rites of passage in the Jewish tradition.
Birth, coming of age, marriage, and death.
The ritual associated with birth is the circumcision of a male baby on the eighth day of its life,
an event called a bris.
In this ritual, a Hebrew name is chosen, and most Jews throughout the world have a Hebrew
name in addition to their given names.
The circumcision, a practice commanded of Abraham and all of his descendants, represents the
covenant between God and the Jewish people.
In many Jewish families, a specialist called a moil is brought in, and the ceremony can
be performed in the synagogue or the home, and some Jews perform the ritual at the hospital.
It's usually followed by a festive meal.
A ceremony called a simchad bat, or a celebration of the daughter in which a baby girl receives
her Hebrew name, is celebrated among some Jewish communities, and it's appropriate
to bring gifts for the baby to these celebrations.
The ceremony in which a Jewish child takes on responsibility for his or her actions, becoming
a son or daughter of the commandments, is the bar or bat mitzvah.
A bar or bat mitzvah usually occurs when the child is 13 years old, but it can occur
anytime after that.
The essence of the ceremony is that the bar or bat mitzvah child leads the service in
the synagogue and chants a Torah and Haftarah portion in Hebrew.
Some also give a sermon, a Dvar Torah.
In many families, this is also the occasion of a party for the new adult, and in America,
this often involves music, dancing, a feast, and gift giving.
The next important life cycle event is marriage.
When a couple plans to marry, they receive a katuba, which is a wedding contract specifying
rights and obligations.
The katuba is often produced in a beautiful artistic style and becomes a ceremonial object
that's displayed in the home.
Family and close friends are invited to serve as witnesses.
The wedding, which often occurs in the synagogue, can include many elements such as prayers,
songs, and a speech by the rabbi to the couple.
And there are a few distinctive elements that you'll see if you attend almost any Jewish
wedding.
The first is that it occurs under a canopy called a chuppah, which symbolizes the new
home being created by the couple.
The bride often walks around the groom seven times when she enters the chuppah.
The second distinctive element is the seven blessings, which are said by the rabbi or
invited guests, and which are accompanied by the drinking of wine by the bride and groom.
These celebrate God's creation of the universe, humanity, the fruit of the vine, and so on.
Some of the prayers focus on God's blessing us with children, and they ask God to grant
perfect joy to these loving companions.
The final blessing says, Lord our God, may there ever be heard voices of joy and gladness,
voices of groom and bride, voices of young people feasting and singing.
At the end of the ceremony, the groom stomps on a glass and breaks it, and the guests
all shout, Mazel Tov, which is good luck.
As I mentioned earlier, some interpret this to mean that even in the midst of joy, Jews
must remember the destruction of the temple.
All happiness is tempered by some sadness.
Other interpretations are based on Kabbalistic mysticism, whereby the glass is seen to represent
the shards of divine light that were scattered in the universe and must be gathered up by
human beings who aspire to repair the world.
Finally, we come to Jewish death rituals.
When one receives the news of the death of a loved one, it is customary in some forms
of Judaism to tear or cut an article of clothing, an example of a tie-breaking ritual that symbolizes
the tear in the fabric of our lives and represents the need to accept the permanent separation.
The body of the deceased is washed and dressed, and there are burial societies that specialize
in the preparation of the corpse.
In the Jewish tradition, the body is to be buried as quickly as possible after death.
Traditional Jews do not practice embalming, and therefore they don't have open caskets
at funerals.
While Judaism traditionally forbids cremation, some reform Jews now practice it.
The funeral service takes place at a funeral home, synagogue, or cemetery, and there's
a procession to the grave for burial.
One of the notable Jewish practices is that mourners come to the graveside to pour shovelfuls
of dirt over the casket.
This practice can be seen as a last act of care, set to provide a sense of closure, which
can help with the mourning process.
Following the death, there's a week-long period of mourning called sitting shiva, the Jewish
word for seven.
Members of the immediate family receive visitors in their home, where friends and members
of the community visit, bring food so that the mourners don't have to cook, and sit
and talk.
Flowers are generally not sent.
Traditionally visitors will not initiate conversation, and they'll wait for the mourners
to talk before talking, so if the mourners want to just remain silent, visitors will
simply sit silently with them.
Mourners especially on the first day of this period traditionally don't shower or bathe,
shave, wear jewelry or leather shoes.
Some mourners sit on low stools or the floor, which symbolizes their emotional state.
This brings us to the end of our discussion of Judaism.
However, the influence of Judaism will be present throughout the next set of lectures,
those on Christianity.
Under the life of one particular Jew, Jesus of Nazareth would change the world.
