Picture the following scene in your mind. Christmas Mass at St. Peter's Basilica in
Rome. Imagine the pageantry in grandeur with bishops and cardinals adorned in their vestments,
a scent of incense wafting through the air, the sound of the organ inquire resonating
throughout the massive church, which is filled with tens of thousands of worshipers. There's
a formal liturgy led by the pope, and the other clergy assembled there are organized
in a strict hierarchy. Now, picture a small unadorned room with a few chairs on which
are seated people dressed in their everyday clothes. The people sit in silence for extended
periods of time, and once in a while someone is moved to speak. There's no leader, no
hierarchy, no liturgy. This is a meeting of the Society of Friends, or Quakers.
Lastly, picture a tent filled with people who are swaying and shouting out in praise
and sometimes falling on the ground, thrashing ecstatically. A man at the front of this Pentecostal
revival meeting speaks with intense passion, his voice rising and falling, filled with
emotion, a Bible gripped in his hand. I could go on asking you to envision an Amish farming
community, activists living and ministering among the poor in Latin America, and worshipers
in a black Baptist church singing out joyfully along with the Gospel Choir.
These are all expressions of Christianity, the largest, most widespread religious tradition
in the world. As we hold these radically divergent images in our minds, it can be hard to see
what they have in common. In some cases, there might be very few beliefs, practices and rituals
that they share. But there's one element that unites every form of the tradition and
that provides the unity to this tremendous variety, the person of Jesus of Nazareth.
Even approximately 2,000 years ago, as Yeshua, a Galilean Jew, how Jesus became Christ the
Lord to over two billion people today, nearly a third of all human beings on earth, is truly
one of the greatest stories ever told. So, our story must begin with the life of Jesus.
Because while Christians have always debated over precisely who he was, what he taught,
why he died, and how they should live in light of these things, Jesus has always been at
the spiritual center of their lives.
Most of what we know about Jesus' life comes from the text that Christians took along with
the Hebrew Bible as their scripture, texts that are known collectively as the New Testament.
It's important to remember that Christianity began as a form of Judaism. And from our discussion
of Judaism, we know that during the period in which Jesus lived, the period of Second
Temple Judaism, there was a theme of messianic hope and expectation in Judaism. And given
the reality of Roman oppression, many Jews of the period looked for the imminent coming
of the Messiah prophesied in the Hebrew Bible. It was into this world that Jesus was born.
And as he taught, preached, and healed, he began to attract followers. Jesus lived his
entire life as a Jew, and all of his earliest followers were Jews. There was no separate
religion of Christianity when Jesus died, and there was no written scripture since as
far as we know, Jesus did not write anything down. Therefore, the scripture of the early
followers of Jesus was the Hebrew Bible, the scripture of the Jewish people. And this
remains a part of scripture for Christians today who call it the Old Testament.
There have been some theologians who've argued that Christians should rely solely on the
New Testament and leave the Old Testament to the Jews. The 1st, 2nd century Bishop Marcian,
for example, argued that the God of the Jewish people, as described in the Hebrew Bible,
and the God of the New Testament are two different beings for which he was excommunicated.
Christian Bibles therefore contain the Hebrew Bible, often additional non-canonical Jewish
texts called the Apocrypha, and the 27 books written by followers of Jesus, the New Testament.
The New Testament consists of four types of books, four Gospels, which contain narratives
of the life of Jesus, a narrative about the lives of the apostles after Jesus' death,
which is called Acts of the Apostles, letters called Epistles, written to various Christian
communities providing teaching and guidance, most of which were attributed to Paul, and
the Book of Revelation, which features symbols, visions, and prophecy to present a picture
of the End Times or the Apocalypse. The New Testament was written in the common Greek
of the post-classical period.
Most of our knowledge about the life and death of Jesus comes from the four Gospels, in particular
what are called the three Synoptic Gospels, since they share so much material about the
story of Jesus, Mark, Matthew, and Luke. The 4th Gospel, John, is quite different in content
and style, more focused on theological reflections and less on narrative than the others.
The Gospels were written between 50 and 110, so none were written down during Jesus' life.
There were other Gospels written during this period, but they didn't achieve canonical
status. After a long period of debate, the New Testament achieved its current form around
the 4th century.
So what exactly is a Gospel? Well, the word means good news, and these texts are not simply
historical narratives. They don't present a comprehensive biography of Jesus. Large
parts of his life, most of his childhood, his teenage years, are missing.
The Gospels are delivering a message about hope and salvation, and they focus on certain
periods and events in the life of Jesus in order to deliver the message most powerfully.
It's a text that's meant not merely to explain or describe, but to inspire, to convince,
and transform, and to share with the world a story that the authors believed was of ultimate
importance. They wanted the world to know about this extraordinary being who had attracted
their intense devotion.
Most Christians believe that their identity as a Christian is bound up with the belief
in Jesus as divine and as a Savior, but Jesus is seen in many other ways as well as a teacher,
healer, prophet, wonder worker, and revolutionary. The events of Jesus' life that are the focus
of the Gospel narratives, and thus are considered the most important for understanding his identity
and mission, are his birth, his baptism, his ministry, what he taught and preached, his
miracles and healing work, and especially the final week of his life, which culminates
in an account of his crucifixion and resurrection. As I tell the story of these central events
in Jesus' life, I'll discuss the ways that Christians commemorate and celebrate these
events in rituals and holidays.
When Mary was engaged to Joseph, she was visited by the angel Gabriel and told that she would
give birth by the power of the Holy Spirit. This is known as the Annunciation of Mary.
Thus Mary is understood to be a virgin when she gives birth to Jesus. In one of the most
well-known parts of the story, when Mary and Joseph arrive in Bethlehem, they're told
that there's no room for them at the inn, and thus Jesus, whose name means God saves,
was born in a stable, which highlights the important theme that the divine can be found
in the most simple and humble of circumstances.
There are two periods of the year that are most sacred to Christians, and these center
on two events in the narrative of Jesus' life, his birth and the events surrounding his death
and resurrection. The first series of celebrations, those surrounding the birth, include Advent,
Christmas, which celebrates the actual birth, and Epiphany, which for many Western Christians
celebrates the visit of the wise men to see the baby Jesus.
Advent refers to the month preceding Christmas, and is a time of building anticipation and
excitement. Many families have an Advent calendar in which each date contains a little niche
behind it, often behind a little flap, in which is placed a candy or gift. And during
this time, churches will often stage plays, usually featuring children in which the birth
of Jesus is re-enacted.
Advent culminates in Christmas itself, celebrated on December 25th. The actual date of Jesus'
birth is unknown, and it's likely that this date, occurring near the winter solstice,
was chosen to fold the pagan solstice ritual into the Christian celebration.
Christmas is a joyful time, where families gather to tell the story of Jesus' birth,
decorate the home in the Christmas tree, and exchange gifts, a tradition that evokes the
bringing of gifts by the wise men to the baby Jesus. Many Christians attend a Christmassy
worship service, and also attend services on Christmas Day.
John the Baptist was a prophet, performing baptisms in the Jordan River to cleanse people
of sin and prepare them for the coming kingdom of God.
When Jesus was around 30, he was baptized by John. John, who had been prophesying that
there would come someone mightier than I, recognized that Jesus was someone very special
and told Jesus, I should be baptized by you.
One of the most important life cycle rituals in Christianity is baptism, the ritual by
which one is brought into relationship with Christ and the Church. The World Council of
Churches explains it this way. By baptism, Christians are immersed in the liberating
death of Christ where their sins are buried, where the power of sin is broken. They are
raised here and now to a new life in the power of the resurrection of Jesus Christ.
A major division within Christianity is whether baptism takes place at birth, which is the
case with Catholics, for example, or whether it is offered only to those old enough to
make a conscious commitment, as in the case with Baptists. In infant baptism, the baby
is sprinkled with holy water, but in adult baptism, within the Baptist Church, adults
are completely immersed in water.
Under his baptism, Jesus undertakes a 40-day fast in the desert, during which he resists
a number of temptations by Satan. He then begins his ministry. Jesus gathers disciples
around him, and he demands of them renunciation of wealth and material goods and even family,
and a devotion to the life of the Spirit rather than worldly things. At times, Jesus spoke
in extended sermons, and at other times he taught in parables that puzzled his disciples.
A characteristic found in much of Jesus' teaching is the radical inversion of traditional values.
In a society that emphasized purity, Jesus touched lepers and associated with outcasts.
In a strongly patriarchal society, Jesus welcomed women into his inner circle as disciples,
including Mary Magdalene, one of Jesus' most important disciples who was present at the
crucifixion and was the first to see Jesus after his resurrection. While she sometimes
understood as a prostitute in the popular imagination, there is no scriptural evidence
for this. Jesus stood with the poor, the weak, and the sick, and he called upon the wealthy
and powerful to repent and reform. Jesus' power was displayed not through traditional
forms of strength. On the contrary, it was shown through selfless service, from the washing
of disciples' feet, and the healing of the sick, to the ultimate sacrifice on the cross.
Jesus taught a radical ethics, one that called upon people to turn away from revenge and
retributive justice to an ethic of love and forgiveness. He challenged his followers to
love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you to suffer a blow rather than
return it. And Jesus' miracles reflected this spirit as well. While some of them were
demonstrations of his power over the natural world, such as turning water into wine or
walking on water, many of his miracles were performed for the sake of helping others,
healing the sick, even raising the dead, casting out demons, and turning a few loaves
of bread and pieces of fish into an abundant meal for multitudes.
Given the concerns that the authorities had about Jesus, it was dangerous for him to go
to Jerusalem. Nevertheless, on Passover, in one of the pilgrimage festivals for Jews,
Jesus rode into Jerusalem on a donkey as a crowd praised and blessed him. Jesus' entry
into Jerusalem marks the beginning of what's known as the passion narrative, an account
of his final days and his death. Jesus seemed to know that his final days lay ahead. In
fact, the plan to betray him had already been set in motion as one of his disciples,
Judas, had sold information that would lead to Jesus' arrest by the Romans.
Jesus has one final meal with his twelve apostles. Apostle refers to those disciples of Jesus
who had spread the gospel. This is known as the Last Supper, which is traditionally understood
to have been a Passover Seder. This meal becomes the origin for one of the most important traditions
in Christianity, the sacrament of Holy Communion, or Eucharist. At the meal, Jesus tells his
companions, This bread is my body, which is given for you. This cup of wine is the new
covenant in my blood. Do this whenever you drink it, in remembrance of me.
At the Last Supper, which has been a popular subject for Christian art for many centuries,
most famously portrayed in Leonardo da Vinci's 1498 painting, Jesus predicts one of his disciples
will betray him. A sacrament that virtually all Christians observe is the Eucharist,
this Holy Communion, which is the ritual meal through which Christians experience communion
with Jesus Christ. Christian Communions feature worshipers eating bread or a wafer and drinking
wine or grape juice. For Catholics, the Eucharist involves a profound mystery in which the bread
actually becomes the body of Christ, and the wine becomes the blood of Christ. This is
not seen simply as a symbolic or commemorative event, as it is in some Protestant churches.
For Catholics, what occurs is known as transubstantiation, where the bread and wine, although remaining
in the form of bread and wine, is in its essence, substance, Christ's body and blood. A priest
has the power to bring about this transformation through his consecration of the bread and
wine. When congregants receive the bread and wine, they are not only experiencing communion
with Christ, they are also remembering the event of the Last Supper, as well as sharing
a sacred meal with their community of fellow worshipers. This ritual is a central feature
of Catholic worship services called masses. Now, if you're a visitor to a church and you
don't want to take communion, you can just stay seated and observe. But if you're not
a member of the denomination and you want to take communion, it's best to ask the minister
or priest in advance whether or not this is acceptable, as churches differ on this matter.
After his betrayal by his disciple Judas, Jesus undergoes trials by both the Jewish
authorities, where he's charged with blasphemy, and then by Pontius Pilate, the Roman governor.
Pilate, in response to the demands of the assembled crowds, has Jesus given over to
Roman soldiers who beat him as they bring him to the hill of Golgotha to be crucified.
The event of Jesus' crucifixion, which is said to have happened on a Friday, in or around
the year 33, is commemorated in the Christian observance of Good or Holy Friday, which
occurs on the Friday before Easter Sunday. During Lent, the period before Easter Sunday,
Christians in some denominations, especially Catholic, stage a passion play, a dramatic
reenactment of the passion of Jesus Christ, the trial, suffering, crucifixion, and death.
Passion here is connected to the root of passive to suffer.
The crucifixion of Jesus is an event central to Christian theology, and it provides the
most powerful and enduring symbol of Christianity, the cross. This would become the symbol that
evokes Jesus' selfless sacrifice, and that reminds Christians that the instrument of
death, in fact, death itself, along with sin, have been conquered through the crucifixion
and resurrection of Jesus. In many forms of Christianity, Christians make the sign of
the cross on their body when they enter a church, or at particular points during prayer,
or during moments of crisis. Clergy will make the sign of the cross when giving blessings
and during certain sacraments. Many Christians wear the cross as a constant reminder, often
on necklaces, and the cross is a central feature in most churches. Another symbol that
portrays the crucifixion more directly is the crucifix, which is a cross with Jesus'
body on it. The crucifix is often featured in Catholic and Orthodox churches, as well
as some Anglican and Lutheran churches, less frequently in other forms of Protestantism.
After Jesus' death, his body was placed in a tomb which was sealed and guarded.
This was the moment when the nascent movement of the followers of Jesus might have ended.
As the person they thought was the Messiah had died and nothing had seemed to have happened.
I mean, some no doubt expected Jesus' death to trigger a major event. Many of the disciples
were grief-stricken, frightened, and disheartened.
Women who had been followers of Jesus, including Mary Magdalene, went to the tomb to get his
body so they could prepare it for the burial rituals. But when the stone that had sealed
it was moved away, the tomb was empty. And they were then visited by angels who told
them that Jesus had risen from the dead. The resurrection of Jesus is commemorated and
celebrated on Easter Sunday, the Sunday following Good Friday.
Now after this, Jesus makes a number of appearances to disciples to remove all doubt. In one of
the most famous episodes, he appears before his disciple, Thomas, who wouldn't believe
in Jesus' actual bodily resurrection until he touched his wounds. That's where we get
the expression, doubting Thomas.
Jesus also eats fish with some disciples. And these kinds of events illustrate the importance
of the resurrection of the body. The fact that Jesus has an actual body that can be
touched, that can eat, that he's not simply an incorporeal apparition.
The doctrine of bodily resurrection will be a central tenet in most forms of Christianity.
Jesus then tells his disciples, all authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me.
Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and
of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all that I have commanded
you.
This begins the mission of the apostles to spread the word of the risen Jesus, a story
that will continue in the book following the four gospels, the Acts of the Apostles. In
his final appearance in the gospels, the risen Jesus ascends to heaven, where he's later
described as being on the right hand of God.
The second major period of observance, the one associated with the end of Jesus' life,
begins with Lent, a period of forty days from Ash Wednesday to Easter, where Christians
repent and renounce, giving up something, often a favorite food, as a form of fasting
to commemorate and share in Christ's sacrifice. The period of forty days evokes the forty
days that Jesus spent fasting in the desert, where he overcame the temptations by Satan.
The period of Lent begins with Ash Wednesday, where many Christians, particularly but not
exclusively Catholics, attend a service in which the priest uses ashes to mark the sign
of the cross on a worshiper's forehead, and often says, Remember, man, thou art dust,
and unto dust thou shalt return.
The last week of Lent, which culminates in Easter Sunday, is called Holy Week. The Thursday
before Easter is known as Mondi Thursday, which is celebrated in memory of Jesus' last
supper. Many churches perform a ritual washing of the feet on this day, as Jesus washed the
feet of his disciples. On the Friday before Easter Sunday, Christians commemorate the
crucifixion of Jesus. This observance is known as Good Friday, or Holy Friday. Catholics
see this as a fast day, with only one full meal and abstention from meat.
By the morning of Easter Sunday, many Christians end the period of anticipation of Lent and
somber reflection of Good Friday with a joyous proclamation, Christ is risen. Easter celebrates
the resurrection of Christ, and is thus the most theologically significant holiday in Christianity.
This is the holiday in which the promise of triumph over death and the attaining of eternal
life through the sacrifice of Christ are celebrated.
The date of Easter varies from March 22 to April 25. It is connected with the vernal equinox.
In many churches, on the Saturday before Easter, is the Easter vigil. It begins in darkness,
to which light is brought by the kindling of a candle. The bringing of light to darkness
represents Christ's resurrection. Passages from the Old and New Testaments are read,
especially those thematically connected to Easter. Then, the churches lit up, bells
are rung, and the service also involves the taking of communion.
Services on Easter Sunday itself are especially joyful, and they might involve elements of
spring, such as Easter lilies. The home celebration focuses on families getting together to celebrate
the holiday with a feast.
And then there's the Easter Bunny, and the coloring of and hunting for eggs, much beloved
by children. Where do these come from?
It's worth noting that the two most celebrated Christian holidays, Christmas and Easter,
are both syncretic, combining pre-Christian pagan elements, trees, mistletoe, bunnies
and eggs, none of which are featured in the Bible. By pagan, I mean here the pre-Christian
European traditions that focus on the celebration of natural cycles and feature festivals on
solstices and equinoxes.
We've already seen the way that many holidays combine seasonal and historical elements,
and this is the case with both Christmas and Easter. Christmas occurs at a time when the
period of darkness is beginning to change into the period of increasing light, which
symbolizes Jesus bringing hope into the world. The Christmas tree, an evergreen that's originally
a pagan nature symbol, can be seen as representing the eternal life promised by Jesus, with the
star on top symbolizing the star that guided the wise men to Bethlehem. Easter, which occurs
in the spring, brings in pagan celebrations of the vernal equinox, which highlights the
return of life after the cold and death of winter, just as Jesus' resurrection makes
possible the overcoming of death.
The symbols of fertility, the rabbit and the eggs, are also connected with the triumph
of life.
The story of Jesus has served as an inspiration and an example to Christians for the last
two thousand years. At the same time, there's a deep mystery in the story, and it raises
a question with which Christians have grappled ever since. Who and what was Jesus?
To most Christians, there are a number of ways to describe Jesus. Jesus is the Savior,
because through his life, death and resurrection, he restores sinful human beings to communion
with God. Jesus' death and resurrection ushered in a new age, a kingdom of God on earth in
which people can participate now. At the same time, many Christians believe, Jesus will
usher in judgment day and the final kingdom of God at his second coming. Jesus is seen
as the one who defeats death itself, for through his sacrifice, those who enter communion with
him can enjoy eternal life.
In addition to being the Messiah, virtually all Christians see Jesus as himself divine.
In the Gospel of John, Jesus is seen as the Logos, the Divine Word, which became flesh
for the sake of redeeming humanity. One of the most well-known passages of the New Testament
is John 316. It's often seen displayed by members of the crowd at sporting events.
The passage is widely known because it contains the theology in a nutshell. For God so loved
the world that he gave his only begotten Son that whoever believes in him shall not perish,
but shall have eternal life.
Jesus' identity is represented in a symbol, one seen on the back of cars driven by Christians
throughout America, the fish, which dates back to first century catacombs where Christians
would draw the fish so that other Christians could identify a gathering place without drawing
suspicion. But why a fish?
One explanation comes from the Greek word for fish, ichthis. This word was seen as an
acrostic for the phrase, Jesus Christos Theos Soter, which means Jesus Christ, Son of God,
Savior.
Jesus' nature is fundamentally paradoxical. He both transcends time and is within history.
He has infinite power, and yet his most enduring act is one of surrender, suffering, and death.
It's worth reflecting on the many ways that Jesus has been portrayed in art. For these
different depictions capture these different aspects of him. He sometimes portrayed as
a powerful king, the Lord who sits at the right hand of God and who will return to judge
all humanity. Other images show Jesus as the suffering servant, bleeding on the cross,
or cradled in the arms of his mother Mary. Jesus is also portrayed as an infant, inviting
Christians to celebrate the miracle of his birth, an event filled with hope for humanity,
and to see the presence of God even in the small and vulnerable.
Finally, Jesus is seen as an example. A human embodiment of divine qualities, virtues we
should all strive to embody, selflessness, forgiveness, compassion, and above all, love.
A love based not on the particular qualities of the object of our love, but an unconditional
boundless love that extends to all beings as creations of God.
Amidst the tremendous diversity of Christianity, all expressions of the religion over the centuries
have had Jesus at the center. For some, this is primarily meant trying to live in accordance
with Jesus' teaching, the message that he conveyed in his ministry. Some call this the
religion of Jesus. For others, this is meant to life grounded in faith in Jesus with the
focus being on the nature of Jesus' sacrifice and the promise of salvation it brings to
all those who have faith in him. Some call this the religion about Jesus.
In other words, some forms of Christianity focus on what Jesus taught during his life.
While others focus on the event of his crucifixion, death, and resurrection, and what these mean
for human beings, most Christians, however, have found profound meaning in both his life
and his death, his teachings and his sacrifice. And the attempt to live a life defined by
both of these has been the guiding ideal for Christians for two millennia.
