During the first century, after Jesus' death, Christianity was a small, persecuted religion.
Today, it is the largest religion in the world.
Even if so many religions come and go, how has Christianity been able to survive, spread,
and ultimately flourish, and might a key role have been played by a dream?
In the next two lectures, we will trace the development of Christianity from the period
immediately following Jesus' death to the wide variety of forms of Christianity that
we have today, from Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Lutheran, Baptist, Quaker, and Mormon.
After Jesus' death, the apostles began to spread the good news about salvation through Christ.
The disciples would be energized by an event called the Pentecost, in which they were visited
by the Holy Spirit, which resulted in the disciples speaking in other tongues.
This is the origin of the practice of speaking in tongues, where certain Christians, often
called Pentecostals, are filled with the Spirit and begin making sounds and utterances that
are unlike any other language.
The word Pentecost means 50th day, and the Pentecost occurs 50 days after Easter.
This event had such an impact on the nearby crowds that 3,000 people were baptized into
the new church.
In fact, some Christians consider this event the moment at which the Christian church was
born.
On more than one occasion, I've heard someone say that Jesus was the founder of Christianity.
But this is a misleading statement.
Jesus lived his entire life as a Jew, and at his death Christianity can be seen as a
particular sect within Judaism.
The man who was most responsible for the understanding of Jesus that would become the foundation
of the most widely accepted forms of Christian theology was Paul, whose letters make up the
next section of the New Testament after the Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles.
The man known today as the Apostle Paul was born Saul of Tarsus, a tent maker and Pharisee
who persecuted Christians.
One day, while he was on his way to Damascus in search of heretics, he had a profound experience
that would change his life.
He saw bright light, he fell to the ground, and he heard a voice saying, Saul, Saul, why
are you persecuting me?
I am Jesus whom you are persecuting.
When he arose, he was blinded and had to be led to Damascus by his companions.
Through this experience, Saul, soon to be called Paul, was made an instrument of Jesus
to carry my name before the Gentiles and kings and children of Israel.
Paul regained his sight and dedicated the rest of his life to spreading the Christian
Gospel.
His story is filled with remarkable hardships as Paul was shipwrecked, put in prison, beaten
and stoned, and, according to tradition, eventually martyred by beheading.
Paul's enduring contribution to Christian theology came through his letters, which were
sent to Christian communities to provide guidance, explain doctrine, and support and encourage
his fellow believers.
Through these letters, Paul formulated a particular understanding of Jesus that explained the significance
of his crucifixion and resurrection.
And for this reason, Paul, even more than Jesus, can be seen as the founder of the Christian
religion.
A prominent view presented by Paul, and developed later by St. Augustine, is a form of atonement
theory, which is based on the concept of sin, a fundamentally important concept in Christian
understandings of humanity.
Human beings are fundamentally sinful, were born in original sin, inheriting our sinful
nature from our fallen ancestors, Adam and Eve.
Because of this, there is nothing we can do to achieve our own salvation.
Since we can't save ourselves, we can only be saved by God's grace through Jesus.
Here's a common theological formulation.
In order to make our salvation possible, Jesus, who was without sin, offered himself
as a substitutionary sacrifice, taking our sins upon himself.
Through baptism and a life of faith, Christians are able to share in Jesus' triumph over
death and achieve salvation.
Paul contributed substantially to the split of Judaism and Christianity, as he told Gentiles,
non-Jews, that they did not have to be Jews in order to be Christian.
Christians didn't have to adhere to Jewish dietary laws, nor did they have to get circumcised.
In the letter to the Galatians, Paul wrote that human beings are not justified by obedience
to the law, but by faith in Jesus Christ.
For the first three centuries after Jesus' death, Christianity spread rapidly, but Christians
faced persecution, imprisonment, torture and death.
How did a small, persecuted minority religion end up becoming the largest religion in the
world?
We've already encountered two of the most important people in the story of Christianity,
Jesus and Paul.
A name that would have to be added to this list is the Roman Emperor Constantine, whose
conversion to Christianity in the early 4th century ultimately led to Christianity becoming
the religion of the empire.
And this all may have occurred because of a vision or dream.
According to tradition, Constantine saw a vision of a cross before an important battle,
and he ordered his troops to add the symbol of the cross to their shields.
After he emerged victorious, Constantine looked favorably on Christianity.
He also saw Christianity as a way to unify a fragmented empire.
And in 313, he announced an edict that Christians would enjoy religious liberty, which freed
Christians from the fear of state persecution throughout the empire.
In 380, Christianity became the official state religion.
Once Christianity gained official acceptance, the next step authorities took was to attempt
to unify it.
Since there was a wide range of perspectives on the nature of Jesus as well as other issues,
Constantine decided to convene a Council of Christian Bishops to achieve consensus on
these issues.
The Council convened in Nicaea in modern-day Turkey in 325.
The issue of the nature of Jesus was a central one, and one of the questions concerned the
meaning of the term Son of God.
One of the bishops, a man named Arius, believed that Jesus as Son was created by God and therefore
inferior to God the Father.
In fact, in the Gospel of John, Jesus says,
If you loved me, you would be glad that I am going to the Father, for the Father is greater
than I.
This view became known as the Arian heresy, and it was defeated at the Council.
Ultimately, what came out of the Council of Nicaea is the statement that would be the
foundation of most Christian theology, the Nicene Creed, which is still recited by many
Christians today.
It begins with an assertion of monotheism.
We believe in one God, the Father Almighty, maker of all things visible and invisible.
Later comes a passage that directly counters the position of Arius, where the Creed states
that Jesus is, very God of very God, begotten, not made, being of one substance with the
Father.
In other words, Jesus was not a separate creation of God, but is divine in the same way God
the Father is divine.
In the next part of the Creed, Christians profess belief in the defining events of Jesus'
life, that Jesus, for our salvation, came down and was incarnate and was made man.
He suffered, and the third day he rose again and ascended into heaven.
From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.
At the end of the Creed, the reciter professes belief in the Holy Spirit or Holy Ghost.
We can see here the beginnings of a concept that, while not explicitly named in the Bible,
would be articulated in later councils and the subject of theological reflection ever
since, the doctrine of the Trinity, one of the central mysteries of Christian faith.
The Nicene Creed proclaims belief in God the Father, Jesus the Son, and the Holy Spirit.
Christians are monotheists who proclaim the oneness of God.
At the same time, they understand God as being three in one.
Ultimately, the doctrine that gained widespread acceptance can be formulated this way.
There is one divine being, one divine substance.
There are three distinct persons, co-equal and co-eternal, all of whom share this one substance.
The term is consubstantial.
Thus, anything that you can say about God the Father, for example, God is omnipresent,
eternal, loving, can also be said of Jesus and the Holy Spirit.
This is illustrated visually by a symbol called the shield of the Trinity, which shows that
the persons are all distinct from each other, but all identical with God.
The Trinity can be one of the most challenging concepts in Christianity, and formal theological
terms such as consubstantial are not accessible to most lay people.
So I find it helpful to reflect in a more informal way on what the Trinity might mean.
For those who believe in God, and if you don't, put yourself in the mind of a believer for
a moment.
Reflect on what the notion of God might mean.
Can you see God as eternal, transcendent, infinite beyond all form?
For many, these are key attributes of God.
Yet at the same time, God could be seen as acting in history, as entering into time.
And thirdly, God can be felt within.
People often speak of feeling the presence of God within themselves, of being moved and
inspired by the Spirit of God.
If these three aspects of God make sense to you, God is transcendent, God is acting within
history, and God is imminent within us, then you can understand why the Trinity has played
such a central role in Christian thought.
A key part of it is the notion of incarnation.
By becoming flesh, God suffers like us, experiences pain and death like us.
And as God becomes human, so do humans have the possibility of being reconciled to God.
It can be hard for human beings to relate to a transcendent, formless God.
For many Christians, it is far easier to relate to Jesus, who is not only fully human,
but chooses to become human in the most humble condition, to lower himself so that even the
lowest among us can feel communion with him and be raised up.
In 330, Constantine had established a new Eastern capital for his empire in the city
of Byzantium, and he called it, no surprise, Constantinople.
After the Sack of Rome in 410, Constantinople became seen as a second Rome, a new center
of the Christian world.
The Eastern and Western parts of the empire would grow further apart over time, with Christian
power in the West increasingly concentrated in the Bishop of Rome, who became known as
the Pope, from the Greek word for father.
From the East, the Patriarch of Constantinople became an important representative of Christianity,
and this division would ultimately yield two forms of Christianity, Roman Catholic and
Eastern Orthodox.
A number of factors contributed to the division.
Some involved the notion of authority.
Christians in the East did not recognize the supreme authority of the Bishop of Rome,
the Pope.
Some issues were doctrinal, such as a division over interpretations of the Trinity, debates
over the nature of original sin, and they were also divided over language, Latin in
the West, Greek in the East, and issues of ritual, such as whether the bread used in
the communion ritual would be leavened, Eastern Orthodox do it that way, or unleavened as
Roman Catholics do.
Other issues dealt with the priesthood, and in particular whether priests must be celibate.
These differences came to a head in 1054, when the authorities from each church excommunicated
each other.
This was the beginning of a schism that divides Eastern Orthodox and Roman Catholic churches
to this day.
While there are many commonalities in belief and practice between the two churches, these
key differences still remain.
So while Roman Catholic priests must be celibate, married men can become priests in the Orthodox
churches.
Although bishops must be celibate, and they are usually drawn from the monastic ranks.
While Roman Catholics accept the supreme authority of the Pope, Eastern Orthodox Christians
do not.
And there is still a division over a range of doctrinal matters.
The Roman Catholic Church has more members than any other church in the world, over 1.1
billion people.
The majority of Catholics live in Europe and the Americas, but the highest areas of growth
have been in Asia and Africa in recent years, while the number of Catholics in Europe has
been declining.
There are over 68 million Roman Catholics in America, which makes it the largest denomination
in the United States.
It is about 24% of the population.
Overall there are about twice as many Protestants as Catholics in America, but there is no single
Protestant denomination that has a larger membership than that of Roman Catholic Americans.
The Catholic Church is a unified hierarchical structure led by the Pope, who is seen as
the successor to the Apostle Saint Peter.
Under the Pope are many bishops who are seen as successors to the original apostles, and
bishops have authority over an area known as a diocese, which is further divided into
parishes.
The individual church communities are under the authority of a priest or deacon.
Some bishops receive the honorary title of cardinal, which means that as a member of
the College of Cardinals, they have the responsibility of electing a new pope when a pope dies.
The Catholic Church, which claims to be the one true universal church, the word Catholic
itself means universal or whole, puts forth a claim of papal infallibility.
This means that when the pope speaks ex-cathedra from his seat of authority on matters of faith
or morals, his position, quote, must be held by the whole church.
This doctrine was formally articulated during the first Vatican Council held in 1870.
While most Roman Catholics accept the pope's authority in matters of faith and theology,
many don't actually follow the Vatican's positions on matters that somewhat consider
the realm of personal morality, such as birth control.
Virtually all Christian churches teach that there are important rituals that serve as
powerful channels for God's grace.
These are known as sacraments.
The Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches observe seven sacraments—Baptism, Confirmation,
Eucharist, Communion, or Lord's Supper, Penance, or Confession, Last Rites, known as Extreme
Unction, Holy Orders, Joining the Priesthood, and Matrimony.
Both Roman Catholicism and Eastern Orthodoxy feature venerated saints, men and women who
are considered holy and pious, whose lives are imbued with the Spirit of Christ, who
exemplify Christian virtues and in whom the power to do wondrous things dwells.
A recent version of the book Lives of the Saints contains depictions of over 2,500 saints.
A person becomes a saint when he or she is canonized by the church, which normally comes
only after a long process in which the person's life is investigated, both to fully understand
their character and also to confirm that at least two miracles can be attributed to
the person.
Many people pray for saints to intercede on their behalf or on behalf of their loved ones.
The body of a saint is considered holy, and their remains and personal belongings are
known as relics.
The holiness possessed by the saint during life can be understood to remain in the relics
after their death.
Devotion to Mary, the mother of Jesus, is also an important feature among many Roman
Catholic and Eastern Orthodox Christians.
There is evidence that as early as 200 years after the death of Jesus, Christians were
already making her the object of devotion, despite the fact that there is only a small
amount of scriptural or historical information about her.
A common practice is praying the rosary, using a chain of beads to count recitations
of prayers, such as Hail Mary.
It seems as if the veneration of Mary has been a bottom-up rather than a top-down phenomenon
in the church.
And Mary has held an important place in the hearts of many Christians for centuries.
Some scholars point out that since Jesus was male, and God the Father is generally conceived
as male, despite the fact that from a theological perspective, God has no gender, then Mary
provides a feminine object of devotion, which is deeply important in many religious traditions.
Catholic, Orthodox, and many Anglican churches celebrate the assumption of Mary, which marks
Mary's bodily ascent into heaven at the end of her life.
The event is commemorated with a major feast day, usually celebrated on August 15th.
As we can see, the spiritual world of Catholics and Orthodox Christians contains a range of
holy beings in the realms between the human and the divine.
In other words, as opposed to Protestant Christianity as we'll see, Roman Catholicism and Eastern
Orthodoxy feature a greater number of intermediaries, such as priests, angels, and saints.
Intermediaries that serve as channels mediate the connection between human beings and God.
Angels are understood as purely spiritual beings who serve as messengers and instruments
of God, and many people believe they have a guardian angel who watches over them.
While a direct relationship with God is an essential part of many Catholic's religious
lives, intermediaries can help bridge the distance between people and a transcendent God.
We now turn to important movements within Catholicism, including monasticism and mysticism.
From the time of the New Testament itself, as seen in Paul's letters, there was a value
put on celibacy, and as early as the fourth century, just as Christianity was moving toward
becoming the religion of the empire, some Christians moved in the opposite direction,
leaving society behind, and living an ascetic life devoted fully to God.
This was the origin of Christian monasticism, and the earliest monks lived in caves in the
Egyptian desert.
Their lives are considered models of Christian virtues, particularly humility, simplicity,
and submission.
At the beginning, many of these monks lived a largely solitary life, but over time, group
monasteries with authority structures and formal monastic discipline developed.
One of the most influential monastic rules was created by Saint Benedict in the 6th century.
The rule discusses how to live a Christian life, focusing on qualities such as poverty,
humility, and obedience, and also how to run a monastery, with sections dedicated to
the responsibilities of an abbot.
The Benedictine order consists of those monasteries and abbies that follow the rule of Saint Benedict.
During the medieval period, new orders and movements arose.
In some cases, the order featured mendicant friars who worked and taught among the people
rather than living a cloistered life.
The Dominicans, an order founded to teach correct doctrines, spread the gospel, and
refute heresies, dates back to the 13th century.
The Dominican order produced many important theologians, the greatest of whom was Thomas
Aquinas.
The life of Saint Francis of Assisi, the 13th century merchant son who, following a spiritual
transformation, lived a life of poverty, begging, preaching, and caring for lepers, served
as the inspiration for the Franciscans.
And Francis is known for expressing a form of spiritual joy that encompass both humans
and animals, and he is often depicted with birds resting on his shoulders.
In the 16th century, Ignatius of Loyola founded the Society of Jesus, or Jesuits, a religious
order requiring vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience.
The Jesuits are dedicated to education, missionary work, and obedience to the Pope.
Their focus on education resulted in the founding of numerous schools, including many highly
regarded colleges and universities.
Throughout the history of Christianity, there have been many people who can be considered
mystics.
Mysticism can be understood as involving a direct experience of God.
Saint Francis' spiritual transformation was ignited by a mystical experience, in which
he saw Jesus in a vision and received instruction from him, and he retained this deep connection
with God throughout his life.
One notable feature of Catholic mysticism is that it sometimes involved women.
While women didn't have access to authority as priests, or for the most part theologians,
they could and did have powerful experiences that they understood to be mystical encounters
with God.
These experiences gave them a kind of spiritual authority, which allowed them at times to
bypass patriarchal structures.
Well-known women mystics include Julian of Norwich in the 14th century, a woman who had
a spiritual illness during which she saw and spoke with Jesus Christ, leading her to write
books about her visions and their meaning.
In fact, she is considered to be the author of the first book written in English by a
woman.
She emphasized God's love and compassion over law and wrath.
And she highlighted the feminine aspects of divinity, sometimes using the phrase, God
our Mother.
The doctrines of Christianity that are generally accepted today have been developed and articulated
by theologians over the centuries.
There are many great Catholic theologians, but two stand out as perhaps the most influential.
The first is Augustine of Hippo, who lived from 354 to 430.
Saint Augustine is perhaps best known for writing what might be the first autobiography
in the West, his confessions, in which he discusses his hedonistic youth, during which
he uttered the famous prayer, give me chastity, but not yet.
And writes about his conversion to Christianity.
Augustine was an influential formulator of the Christian understandings of sin, evil,
and grace.
And he's admired by Catholic, Orthodox, and Protestant churches.
He had a profound influence on Martin Luther and John Calvin.
During the medieval period, particularly the 12th through the 16th centuries, Christian
theology featured an approach known as scholasticism, in which logic and reasoning were used to
harmonize seeming contradictions and analyze important concepts within Christian thought.
The most influential of the scholastics is our second great theologian, Thomas Aquinas,
who lived in the 13th century.
Aquinas wrote on virtually every significant theological issue, from the nature of God,
Jesus, and the Trinity, to the nature of the soul, resurrection, and the afterlife.
One of his most enduring contributions is the Summa Theologica, which contains his five
arguments for the existence of God, as well as his discussion of ethics, in which he synthesizes
Christian conceptions and virtues with the work of Aristotle and the philosophy of the
classical Greeks.
One of the most important modern theological movements is liberation theology, which articulates
Christian faith in terms of a commitment to liberate the poor and oppressed, and join
them in a struggle against systems that perpetuate injustice.
The emphasis here is not on doctrine, but rather on following the example of Christ
inciting with the poor and the marginalized.
One of the most influential works articulating the goals of this movement is Gustavo Gutierrez's
A Theology of Liberation.
The Catholic Church underwent a major transformation with the Second Vatican Council, which took
place from 1962 to 1965.
The purpose of this was to reflect on Catholic thought and practice in light of the developments
of modernity.
A change that resulted from Vatican II that had a great impact on the lives of worshipers
was the revision of the liturgy, both to allow greater participation of laypeople and most
significantly to permit the use of vernacular languages in the celebration of the Mass.
Prior to this, the Mass was conducted solely in Latin.
The Eastern Orthodox Churches together represent the second largest Christian community after
the Roman Catholic Church, with approximately 300 million followers.
A significant majority of the population belongs to an Orthodox Church in countries including
Greece, Russia, Ukraine, Romania, Bulgaria, and Serbia.
There are also significant minorities of Orthodox Christians throughout the Middle East, including
Syria, Lebanon, and Jordan.
Whereas the Roman Catholic Church is one unified hierarchy under the Pope, there are a number
of autonomous patriarchates and self-governing churches in the Eastern Orthodox world.
Bishops have authority over their territory, and they come together in conferences to vote
on issues.
Although no single bishop has supreme authority, they all get a single vote.
It's Jesus who is considered the true head of the Church.
The heads of Orthodox Church communities are called patriarchs, archbishops, or metropolitans.
Fifteen of the autonomous Orthodox Churches are in full communion with each other, meaning
that those who belong to one Church can participate in the rites of any other Church within the
communion.
One major difference from Roman Catholicism is a greater emphasis on mystical practices
by Orthodox Christians.
In Orthodox theology, human beings aim to achieve theosis, which is understood as a
union of the individual with God.
Orthodox Christians draw on understandings like the one articulated by St. Athanasius.
Jesus was made man that we might be made God.
Practices such as meditation cultivate consciousness of God and enable people to become more Christ-like,
which brings a strong emphasis on the contemplative life in Orthodox Christianity.
The ideal is to cultivate states that allow one to experience union with the divine.
One of these practices is unceasing prayer, which aims to inculcate in the believer the
continuous remembrance of Jesus.
The most well-known of these prayers is the Jesus Prayer.
Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, have mercy on me, a sinner, which is said repeatedly.
The Eastern Orthodox Churches are also known for their use of icons in worship.
These icons, which are made according to well-established formulas, do not aim for realism, and it is rare
to have three-dimensional images in Orthodox churches, so no sculptures.
Orthodox theologians believe that before the incarnation it would be blasphemous to attempt
to represent God, which is a view that Jews and Muslims maintain is always true.
However, once God took human form, it became permissible to use images to focus the mind
on Jesus or on saints.
A distinctive feature of Orthodox worship services is their reliance on chanting.
As opposed to Catholic services, which feature spoken prayer, readings, as well as singing
and organ music, Orthodox services are almost exclusively chanted, except for the sermon.
The human voice is the focus of religious musical expression, rather than a humanly
created instrument, like an organ.
While the division between Catholic and Eastern Orthodox marked the first major schism within
Christianity, in the 16th century a new movement would create another major split.
This movement was ignited by a document being nailed to a door.
In the next lecture, we'll look at the Protestant Reformation and the many forms of Christianity
that resulted.
