At various times in history, when there's the right combination of theological, political,
and economic factors, and there emerge remarkable thinkers whose ideas are powerful enough to
shake the foundations of entrenched institutions, religious reform movements erupt.
We saw this occur in the case of Zen Buddhism, for instance.
On 16th century Europe, it happened in Christianity with the Protestant Reformation, a series
of movements that changed the face of Christianity.
Modern movements can arise when devout members of the tradition are inspired to act by what
they perceive as the deviation of the institution from the essential teaching of the founder
and early community.
The Roman Catholic Church was extraordinarily wealthy and powerful.
To raise funds to finance its activities and maintain its influence, it began to use methods
such as selling indulgences, which brought about the alleviation of punishment for sin
for a price.
And this was even extended to souls who were in purgatory, the destination where Catholics
believed souls were purified, purged of sin, before they could enter heaven.
In other words, those with enough money could buy their loved ones out of punishment.
According to one saying, as soon as the coin in the coffer rings, the soul from purgatory
springs.
The church also sold relics and access to the power of relics, which it said provided
relief from punishment.
Martin Luther, a monk and priest, was disturbed not only by these practices, but also by the
theology behind them, that through one's actions one could cleanse oneself of sin or
be cleansed by the church and be justified before God.
As you'll recall from our earlier discussion, Paul and Augustine had both emphasized that
human beings are so stained with sin that only through God's grace offered through the
sacrifice of Jesus Christ and received by faith could they be saved.
Justification for Luther came through faith alone, sola fide, which is itself a gift of
grace from God.
In order to promote debate on these issues, Luther wrote a document containing 95 theses,
and he nailed them to the door of the castle church at Wittenberg in 1517.
Although he didn't intend to split from the church, he was threatened by the pope with
excommunication and was ordered to appear before secular authorities at the Diet of
Worms.
Luther said, I cannot and will not recant anything, since it is neither safe nor right
to go against my conscience.
He sometimes quoted as saying, here I stand, I can do no other.
Having been cut off by the church, Luther turned to German princes for support, and many supported
him, not only for religious reasons, but also for political and economic ones, since
they'd no longer be bound by Rome's authority.
Luther criticized the notion that priests should have spiritual authority over laypeople.
Instead, Luther argued, there should be a priesthood of all believers.
This doesn't mean that there would be no clergy, but rather that clergy should lead
and support the church community without having a higher spiritual status.
Most Protestant clergy, therefore, are referred to as ministers or pastors rather than priests.
Luther believed that people did not need any intermediaries to stand between them and God.
Instead, people should have a direct connection with God, enabled by their reading of Scripture.
Luther wanted people to read the Bible for themselves, and he published his own German
translation of the Bible in 1534.
As long as the Bible had remained in Latin, which most people couldn't read, the Lady
depended on priests to tell them what to believe.
Luther taught reliance on the authority of Scripture alone, and the Protestant movement,
as it became known, became and has remained Bible-centered.
Furthermore, Luther, who had always condemned celibacy based on his reading of Scripture,
married in 1525.
According to some accounts, he smuggled his future wife and other nuns out of a convent
in herring barrels.
This set the precedent of married clergy, which has remained the norm in Protestant
Christianity.
The Lutheran Denomination is the form of Christianity that takes Luther's theology as its foundation.
And like the other Protestant denominations that would develop later, is characterized
by a direct relationship with God, an emphasis on justification by faith alone, a focus on
the Bible as the sole or primary authority, the notion of the priesthood of all believers,
and married clergy.
In most cases, they recognize only two of the seven sacraments seen in Catholicism—Baptism
and Communion.
John Calvin was a French theologian who shared many of Luther's beliefs, such as Salvation
by Faith Alone, the authority of Scripture, and Priesthood of all Believers.
He went to Switzerland, where he brought new forms of worship, theology, and church governance.
Calvin developed the doctrine of original sin, by arguing that, given the extent of
our sinfulness, what Calvin called total depravity, human beings can play no role what
so ever in their own salvation.
He expounded a position of predestination, whereby some people are saved by God's grace,
for reasons known to God alone, while others are predestined for damnation.
If this seems unfair, keep in mind that from a Calvinist perspective, nobody deserves salvation.
The fact that any receive it at all is due solely to God's mercy.
Given this doctrine, one might wonder why people should strive to do good works, since
works have nothing to do with salvation.
However, it is works that reveal whether or not one is among the elect—those chosen
to be saved.
Having faith and living morally are signs that one is the recipient of God's grace.
So those who believe in predestination are motivated to moral action out of fear that
immoral action would lead to the conclusion that one is damned.
Calvinism ultimately achieved the status of state religion in Scotland and has been influential
in other countries as well, such as England and the United States.
Calvinist theology is the foundation of what are known as the Reformed Churches, which
include the Presbyterian Denomination.
The Lutheran and Reformed Churches are representative of what we can unproblematically call Protestantism.
There are other churches that broke with Rome that share certain features with Protestant
Christianity, but differ in significant ways.
One example is the Anglican Church, and its primary American form, the Episcopal Church,
so named because it has bishops.
The Anglican Church formed when King Henry VIII, he of the six wives, wanted to divorce
his first wife Catherine, who could not give him a male heir, and Mary Anne Boleyn.
Henry sought an annulment of his marriage to Catherine, but Catholic authorities refused
to grant it.
So Henry declared royal supremacy over the Pope and the Catholic hierarchy, which constituted
a break with the Catholic Church.
This dispute focused on the King's particular situation, but it was also connected with
larger currents of English nationalism, and at the same time, the theology of the Protestant
Reformation had an impact on the New Church of England, as many influential English people,
including Henry II, Queen Anne Boleyn herself, were supportive of Protestant theology.
Some consider the Anglican Church Protestant, since it shares with Lutheran and Calvinist
churches features such as the commitment to scripture as primary authority, the acceptance
of two sacraments, baptism and communion, and prayer in the vernacular.
Anglicanism developed its Book of Common Prayer early in its history, and it served as a unifying
text.
The Anglican Church also shares many features with the Catholic Church, such as the acceptance
of the Nicene Creed, the apostolic succession of bishops and an emphasis on ritual and imagery.
So the Anglican Church is sort of in between the Protestant and Catholic Churches in certain
ways.
An important contribution that the Church of England made to both Christianity and the
English language is the King James Bible, published in the early 17th century and named
for its sponsor James I.
The translation had a profound effect on the English language, and it's been called the
most celebrated book in the English-speaking world.
Methodism is a revival movement that began within the Anglican Church, but ultimately
broke off.
It began with John Wesley in the 18th century at Oxford University, where groups of students
would meet regularly in an effort to, methodically, hence their name, determine and live out a
holy life.
The emphasis in the Methodist denomination is on a personal relationship with Jesus and
living this out through service to others, particularly those in need, which led Methodists
to build orphanages, soup kitchens and hospitals.
The singing of hymns plays a prominent role in Methodist worship, and John Wesley's brother
Charles composed many of them.
Thus far, we've seen three categories of denominations that split from the Catholic
Church — Lutheran, Calvinist or Reformist, and Anglican.
In addition to these, there are those Christians who form what is often called the radical
Reformation, which can be traced back to 16th century Europe.
The communities that grew out of this movement, the largest of which are the Baptists, of
which there are over 33 million in America, practice adult baptism.
This is done by total immersion whereby the individual is dunked in a river or pool, a
symbol of death to the life of sin and birth into the new life in Christ.
Baptists emphasize soul freedom, where every person is competent to read and interpret
scripture themselves.
They also emphasize the autonomy of the local church, where each community has the authority
to appoint its own pastors and run its own affairs.
Baptists in America are a very diverse group.
They've been divided over many issues throughout their history, including slavery and civil
rights.
The fact that Baptists can be found all across the theological and political spectrum can
be illustrated by this short list of famous Baptist religious and political leaders.
Martin Luther King, Jimmy Carter and Jesse Jackson, as well as Jerry Falwell, Billy Graham
and Pat Robertson.
Other groups that arose from the radical reform movement, such as the Anabaptists, Amish and
Mennonites, aim to follow the teachings of Jesus as closely as possible, and they believe
that Christian faith forbids one to take oaths, hold government office, or commit violence.
They also tend to advocate various degrees of separatism from the world.
The Amish in America, for example, are known for their rejection of many forms of modern
technology, such as automobiles, their adoption of plain dress and appearance, and simple
communal agrarian living.
The largest Amish populations are in Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Indiana.
They desire to maintain a separation from modern society, and that's led many Amish
to end their children's public education at eighth grade, which is a right they fought
for and won in a famous Supreme Court case that we'll discuss in a future lecture.
Another form of Christianity that departed radically from the traditional, institutional
Christianity of Catholics and Protestants alike is the Religious Society of Friends,
or Quakers, which traces its origins back to England in the mid-seventeenth century.
Like the Anabaptists, Quakers refuse to swear oaths or serve in the military and are committed
to pacifism.
One of their most distinctive features is their deep commitment to the notion of the
priesthood of all believers, and the emphasis on the role of the Holy Spirit in the lives
of all human beings.
This means that Quakers believe that God can speak directly to human beings, and they
understand the presence of the divine within as being an inner light, or a quiet voice
that one must be still and attend to in order to hear.
While the Bible is important to Quakers, there is more of a focus on the direct communication
of God through the Spirit to human beings, a form of ongoing revelation.
For this reason, Quaker worship sometimes takes the form of an unprogrammed meeting
in which Quakers sit in silence together with no leader and no structured service.
When someone is moved by the Spirit to speak, they do.
Others sit in silence and listen.
Other Quakers meet for more structured worship, with hymns, a sermon, and Bible readings,
but there is almost always time set aside for silent worship.
Unitarian theology is based on the belief that God is one, a unity, and not a trinity.
Unitarians therefore differ from most other Christian denominations in rejecting the concept
of the trinity.
While they don't believe that Jesus is God, a second person of a trinity, their belief
about who Jesus was differs.
Some believe he was a prophet, great teacher, or moral exemplar, and others believe that
he was a special, more than human creation of God, but not sharing the same substance
with God.
For Unitarians, the only God is the one whom other Christians call God the Father.
Nevertheless, most Unitarians see Jesus as a moral authority, an example to be followed,
and one through whom a worshipper can gain a deep connection with God.
One of the most well-known churches within this movement is the Unitarian Universalist
Church in America.
Churches emphasize the universal, Salvational intention of God, by which all people would
ultimately be saved.
They believe that no religion has a monopoly on truth, which makes Unitarian Universalists
pluralists.
In other words, they see truth in many religious traditions.
Churches often feature rituals and observances for many traditions, from Passover satyrs
and Easter celebrations to Buddhist meditation groups and pagan solstice rituals.
Unitarian Universalist congregations affirm seven principles, which include a commitment
to the inherent worth of every person, justice, equity, and compassion in human relations,
and a free and responsible search for truth and meaning.
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, also known as the LDS or Mormon Church, is
a distinctly American religion that has become a world religion.
While nearly half of the world's 14-plus million Mormons live in America, their missionary
work has given rise to large Mormon populations throughout South America, Asia, and elsewhere.
The Church's origins can be traced back to its founder Joseph Smith, who reported a powerful
encounter with God in the 1830s in New York.
Later, an angel guided him to a hillside under which golden plates were buried.
On these plates was inscribed a book, the Book of Mormon, named for Mormon the prophet
who compiled the text.
Smith translated these plates with the help of a seer stone.
He aimed to create a holy city for his young church, but the Mormons were expelled from
a number of communities.
After Smith was killed by a mob in Illinois in 1844, Brigham Young took over leadership
of the community and led them to Utah territory.
Mormonist followers founded Salt Lake City, which is still the location of the LDS headquarters
today.
Mormons accept the authority of the Bible, the divinity of Jesus Christ, the atonement
theory of Christ's crucifixion and resurrection, and the practices of baptism and communion.
However, they differ from other forms of Christianity in a number of significant ways.
Mormons accept the authority of the Book of Mormon, and they believe that ancient prophets
who lived in America contributed to its writings.
Their belief in the existence of indigenous American communities with origins in the ancient
Near East, and their claim that Jesus appeared in America after his resurrection, beliefs
that give Mormonism its strong American identity, are rejected by other Christians.
In the early history of the church, Mormons were committed to plural marriage, or polygamy,
although the church renounced that practice in 1890.
A number of groups that split from the LDS, such as the Fundamentalist LDS Church, still
practice plural marriage.
Mormons are very family-centered, and they believe that couples and families that are
sealed within the church will be together for eternity.
Ancient Mormons aim to follow the word of wisdom, which prohibits the consumption of
alcoholic beverages, coffee, tea, and tobacco, and strictly forbids any sexual relations
outside of marriage.
Mormons are expected to tithe 10% of their income to the church every year, and all Mormon
men are expected to spend two years as missionaries before marriage.
Some may also do missionary work, but they're not obligated in the same way.
We've now discussed many of the major denominations in Christianity today.
In addition to dividing Christians along denominational lines, there are other ways
to understand the various strands within the Christian tradition.
There are four terms in particular that you're likely to encounter in descriptions of Christianity.
Evangelical, Fundamentalist, Pentecostal, and Liberal.
While any attempt to use a single term to describe a large, diverse group of people
will always end up generalizing and blurring many important distinctions, it's helpful
to look at the basic meaning of each term.
One of the main features of the Evangelical movement is the emphasis on having a personal
relationship with Jesus Christ, and in particular the experience of being born again into this
relationship.
Surveys have shown that Evangelicals make up between 25 and 29% of the American population,
and the movement has shown significant growth in recent decades, unlike the non-Evangelical
mainline denominations which have declined.
Evangelical Christianity is often associated with political conservatism, and it is true
that the majority of self-described Evangelicals consider themselves conservative, with strong
opposition to homosexuality and abortion, and support for school prayer, for example.
However, there are also many Evangelicals who hold what would be considered liberal views.
There's a growing, green Evangelical movement that strongly supports environmental protection,
which they see as a form of creation care, requiring good stewardship of God's creation.
The Evangelical movement cuts across denominational lines, and one can find Christians who define
themselves as Evangelical in many different denominations.
Many Evangelicals today belong to churches that they describe as non-denominational,
meaning that the churches are autonomous and not bound to the institutional or authority
structure of a formal denomination.
Over the last fifty years, a growing number of such churches have attained populations
numbering into thousands.
Many of these are in the United States, although some of the very largest are in South Korea,
the East Asian country with the strongest Christian presence.
The biggest are known as megachurches, sometimes defined as a church with over 2,000 weekly
attendees.
A recent study showed over 1,300 such churches in America, 50 of which have over 10,000 worshipers.
Some Evangelical churches have worship services that feature music performed by rock bands
rather than organs and choirs, giving their services a contemporary feel that appeals
to young people.
Another movement within Christianity is Fundamentalism.
The fundamentalist movement developed in the late 19th and early 20th centuries with a focus
on what they called the Fundamentals.
In 1910, five Fundamentals were affirmed.
1. Biblical Inherency.
This is the belief that the Bible is without error.
2. The Virgin Birth of Jesus.
3. The Atonement Theory of Christ's Death.
4. The Bodily Resurrection of Christ.
And 5. The Historical Objective Reality of Jesus' Miracles.
The first fundamental is a very important characteristic of Fundamentalists.
They tend to hold a position of total inerrancy, whereby the Bible is true in every way, not
just theologically, but also historically and scientifically.
And they also tend to have a literalist approach to interpretation.
Now this combination of inerrancy and literalism is what often puts fundamentalists at odds
with both modern Biblical scholarship and science, particularly in regard to evolution.
Many Evangelicals reject both total inerrancy and literalism, as they may hold that the
Bible is inerrant in spiritual and theological matters, but not in matters of history and
science.
In addition to these first five fundamentals, another element was added, a belief in a particular
view of the end time, in which the saved will be raptured, lifted up to heaven, while those
left behind will face torment and tribulation.
In fact, left behind is the title of a series of novels based on this end time theology.
This period will be followed by Jesus' second coming, which will inaugurate the millennial
reign of Jesus, the one thousand year period of Paradise on Earth, which will be followed
by the final judgment.
This element of fundamentalist belief gives the movement a strong apocalyptic character.
It's important to keep in mind that while most fundamentalists would describe themselves
as Evangelical Christians, many Evangelicals are not fundamentalists.
Another movement that crosses the nominational lines is Pentecostalism.
The word Pentecostal comes from the Pentecost, where the Holy Spirit came upon the early
followers of Jesus, as we discussed in the previous lecture.
This movement emphasizes this experience of the Holy Spirit, and it has a strong focus
on a personal, transformative encounter with God.
This can result in spiritual gifts, including speaking in tongues, healing through prayer
or the laying on of hands, and powerful outpourings of ecstasy and emotion.
In some cases, particularly in African Pentecostalism, exorcism, the casting out of the devil or
evil spirits, is a common practice.
The Pentecostal movement is growing rapidly in Africa and South America, and in some cases
is rivaling Catholicism for membership.
Liberal or progressive Christianity developed out of the rationalism and tolerance of the
Enlightenment, and it's an approach that rejects dogma, biblical inerrancy, and literalism,
and it advocates the use of reason and various methods of biblical criticism to interpret
the Scripture.
Liberal Christians tend to want inclusive congregations, those that are open to Christians
of all races, backgrounds, and sexual orientations.
There is generally an emphasis on Jesus' teachings, such as the Sermon on the Mount,
and the values of love and forgiveness, and less emphasis on miracles and atonement theory.
Those who identify as progressive Christians generally value pluralism, a willingness to
question tradition, and causes such as environmentalism, gender equality, and social justice.
I'll conclude our discussion of Christianity by looking at rituals.
Sunday Christian worship services often feature readings from Scripture, a sermon, and chanting
or singing, sometimes with voices only, sometimes accompanied by an organ, and sometimes with
a contemporary pop or rock band.
What we'll focus on is life cycle rituals.
One of the most important life cycle rituals practiced in almost all forms of Christianity
is baptism, which we've already discussed.
In some Christian traditions, such as Roman Catholic, Lutheran, and Anglican, the next
important ritual is First Communion, where a child, often seven or eight, partakes of
the Eucharist for the first time.
This is generally a time of a large, celebratory family gathering, the wearing of formal clothes,
and the giving of gifts.
In many forms of Christianity, the next life cycle ritual is Confirmation, in which an
adolescent, following a period of religious study, makes a personal commitment to Christianity
and the Church.
In many cases, this ritual marks the formal membership of the person within the Church.
As with the Jewish bar mitzvah, Confirmation is also a time when the child is supposed
to take responsibility for his or her actions.
It's customary to give young people who are being confirmed gifts, and while these can
include gifts connected with Christianity, such as Bibles and crosses, a wide range of
gifts, of course, is welcomed.
Many Christians are married by a priest or minister in their Church, and in some traditions,
such as Roman Catholicism and Eastern Orthodoxy, marriage is considered a sacrament.
But in the Catholic Church, the priest does not administer the sacrament, rather the couple
administers it to each other before God.
Passages of the Bible are read, and a particularly popular reading is from Paul's Letter to
Corinthians, Chapter 13, in which Paul writes the beautiful and well-known reflections on
love.
If I have a faith that can move mountains, but have not love, I am nothing.
Love is patient.
Love is kind.
It does not envy.
It does not boast.
It is not proud.
It always protects, always trusts, always hopes, always perseveres.
While divorce is discouraged in all forms of Christianity, it is permitted in Eastern
Orthodox and Protestant Churches.
It is prohibited by the Roman Catholic Church, but the Church allows annulments of marriages,
which requires a determination that the marriage was invalid.
The final rituals in the cycle of life are those that end the cycle, death rituals.
In the Catholic Church, this begins with the last rites, which involve extreme unction,
a sacrament.
A priest anoints a sick or dying Catholic's forehead with oil while reciting prayers.
After a person's death, Christian churches offer funeral services and burial rituals.
These often involve the reading of Scripture, words of comfort and hope, for through Christ
death is conquered, and often eulogies from friends and loved ones.
Although some Christians today believe in the survival of only the immortal soul after
death, traditional Christian belief and scriptural teaching focuses on bodily resurrection.
Throughout most of history, Christians have chosen burial, which is seen as a more suitable
state for the body to await resurrection than cremation.
However, many Christians today, especially from Protestant churches, now choose cremation.
In these last three lectures, we have encountered the major beliefs, texts and rituals of the
Christian tradition.
The second Abrahamic monotheistic tradition, along with Judaism, that we've studied.
The third and final one, Islam, also had its origins in the desert of the Middle East.
While it accepts the authority of Moses and Jesus as prophets, it features a prophet,
Muhammad, who Muslims believe received a new revelation from God, one that would again
change the world.
It is to Islam that we turn in our next lecture.
