Like all of the major world religions, Islam is tremendously diverse.
One of the biggest mistakes Westerners tend to make when talking about Islam is treating
it as if it were a monolith.
But if we focus on the diversity within Islam, we might begin to think that we cannot talk
about Islam, but only about Islam's.
However, Islam is a tradition characterized by a profound commitment to the notion of unity.
So we must reflect on those elements that are shared by virtually all Muslims worldwide.
Well, I have to modify the phrase shared by virtually all Muslims, to shared by virtually
all observant Muslims.
The reason for this is that there are many people who could be described as secular Muslims.
So the unifying factors for observant Muslims are a set of beliefs and practices that are
obligatory.
The Five Pillars of Islam
The first pillar is a statement bearing witness to the most important beliefs within Islam.
A testimony of faith.
The Shahada.
The Arabic is quite flowing and beautiful.
La ilaha illallah muhammadan rasulallah.
The first part proclaims, there is no God but God.
There's only the one God, that's a statement of tahwid.
The second part states, and Muhammad is the messenger of God.
In addition to being a statement about Muhammad's status, it's also an affirmation of the truth
and authority of the revelation itself, the message that he brought, the Quran.
The Shahada is written on the flag of Saudi Arabia, and this statement, as we'll soon
see, is a central part of the call to prayer.
The words of the Shahada are important in the process of conversion.
Although those who choose to convert to Islam might go through very different steps in accordance
with different cultures and individual choice, there's a common ritual moment at the end
when one becomes a Muslim.
One publicly proclaims the Shahada.
It's a way of committing to these beliefs in the presence of witnesses, and it's often
done at a mosque.
Afterwards, there's a social gathering at which this important event is celebrated.
People also see the Shahada as the ideal last words one should speak in this life.
Prayer, or Salat, is the pillar that is most deeply woven into the daily lives of Muslims,
and the one that most powerfully binds the community together.
The ideal is to pray five times a day, at daybreak, noon, mid-afternoon, sunset, and evening.
The exact times are now available on most mosques' websites, so Muslims can set an alarm
to remind them to pray.
But the tradition, which dates back to the earliest period of Islam, is a call to prayer,
a haunting chant from the minarets of a mosque, calling people out of their daily business
back to a connection with God and with their fellow Muslims.
The call to prayer is so important that a father will whisper it into the ear of a newborn
baby.
These should be the first words a human being hears.
According to tradition, when Muhammad marched into Mecca with his followers and rededicated
the Kaaba to God, the call to prayer was given by a freed African slave, Bilal.
If you travel in a Muslim country, in most areas you'll be able to hear the call to
prayer, often from multiple mosques at once, which can have a mesmerizing effect, especially
with very good muwatsins.
That's the term for those who perform the call.
The pillar of prayer is the way that Muslims follow a sacred rhythm amidst the other rhythms
of their lives.
Multiple times a day, Muslims are pulled out of the rhythm of work into the realm of the
sacred, reminded once again not to forget God and their obligations to God.
Since the call to prayer is heard multiple times a day by Muslims around the world, it's
worth looking more closely at it.
The first words are some of the most frequently heard among Muslims worldwide.
Allah Hu Akbar.
It means God is great, or God is greater, meaning greater than anything that can be
conceived.
It's no surprise that the first word of the call is Allah.
After four repetitions of this, the next part of the call is the expression of the Shahada.
It starts with the words Ashaduan.
Etymologically that's related to Shahada, and it means I bear witness.
So Ashaduan la ilaha ilala.
I bear witness that there's no God but God, and Muhammad is his messenger.
And then there's the literal call, Hayala Salat, that's come to prayer, that's said
twice, followed by Hayala Fala, a reminder of how important prayer is by saying come
to flourishing.
For morning prayers, a phrase is added, it says prayer is better than sleep.
Clearly, the desire to stay in bed and delay getting up is a human universal.
At the end, Allah Hu Akbar is once again proclaimed, followed by the very last statement, which
is the first part of the Shahada, the affirmation of the oneness of God, la ilaha ilala.
People can pray with other Muslims at work, in the neighborhood, in a market, or pray
alone.
In an office, for example, a person can just lay out a prayer rug, turn in the direction
of Mecca, and go through the cycle of prayers.
But on Friday afternoons, all men who are able are expected to gather at the mosque
for what are called Juma prayers, Juma means Friday.
Traditionally, such an obligation would be thought to be too burdensome for women who
have the responsibility for the child in the home.
However, many women have a commitment to attending regular Friday prayers.
I must also point out that although the pillars are considered obligatory, there is almost
always a qualifier that says, for those who are able, and exceptions carved out for various
circumstances.
For example, if a Muslim is involved in a job that will not permit him to leave at that
moment for prayers, say he is performing surgery, then prayers can be made up later.
Likewise, if a person is too ill to come to the mosque, then she can make it up later.
All mosques separate the sexes in some way.
The greatest degree of separation will occur when the men are on the main floor, and women
are in a separate room, either in the back or on another floor.
They'll usually be given a view of the Imam, that's the prayer leader, and there might
be speakers in the room so they can hear the prayers.
In many cases though, women will be in the same room as the men, either behind the men,
or on the other side of the room from the men.
Men and women are kept separated to minimize distractions during prayer and to protect
the women's modesty as everyone goes into full prostrations as part of the prayer.
Many women I've talked with are grateful that they don't have men behind them during
this process.
However, some women I've spoken with are unhappy that they're put in separate rooms.
The issue of male-female separation is something that's being discussed by Muslim feminists.
When entering a mosque, shoes are always taken off before going into the prayer room.
Women will cover their heads, often with a scarf, and men may cover their heads with
a cap or hat.
Before taking part in prayer, Muslims clean themselves ritually through ablutions, and
this puts them in a state of physical and spiritual purity.
There's almost always a source of running water in a mosque, and there's often a separate
area set aside for ritual ablutions.
Muslims will wash hands, mouth and nose, face, arms, head, ears and feet.
Now we can discuss the actual form of prayer.
The prayer room itself has no pews.
Worshipers sit on the floor, although chairs are provided for those who can't do this.
There's usually a beautiful carpet with lines running across it, behind which people sit
and then line up for prayer.
At one mosque in my neighborhood, the lines consist of pillars evoking the five pillars
of Islam.
In most mosques, there are basically two parts to the ritual, a hutbah or sermon from the
Imam and the actual prayer itself.
During the hutbah, people will be sitting on the floor around the prayer room listening,
and it's not unusual for people to filter in throughout the hutbah, it's the prayer
for which attendance is mandatory, although many do their best to get there for the hutbah.
The Imam will usually discuss passages from the Quran and from the Hadith, and will, like
clergy from other traditions, apply these passages to the lives of the congregation
and present day concerns.
There's a great variety of styles, just as with all religions, and I've heard very
theological interesting but somewhat dry hutbahs, and I've also heard riveting and inspiring
hutbahs.
Then comes the moment of prayer itself.
One in the room gathers tightly together, standing in lines, shoulder to shoulder, facing
the mirab, that's a niche in the wall that indicates the direction of prayer toward Mecca.
All Muslims know that when prayers are being said, Muslims all over the world are orienting
themselves toward that same holy place.
The Imam then chants from the Quran.
What he chants might differ from one prayer period to the next, but all of the prayers
will include the first surah, al-Fatiha.
It's the best known of all surahs in the Quran.
As he chants, the worshippers go through cycles of postures that begin with standing, followed
by a bend from the waist, then standing up again, then full prostrations and then kneeling
on the ground, and then the cycle repeats itself.
The Arabic word that we translate as mosque is actually masjid, which means a place of
prostration.
At the end, everyone turns their head to the right and then the left, wishing each other
peace.
Worshipers normally stay around for a while, talking with others after prayers end.
The posture of full prostration is quite humbling.
As worshippers get on their knees and they put their foreheads on the ground, this requires
putting the ego aside and lowering yourself fully.
A posture of complete submission and dependence.
And Imam once said to me that whenever you touch your forehead to the ground, you remind
yourself of your ultimate destination.
The third pillar is zakat, or almsgiving.
Muslims are expected to give a certain percentage of their wealth to support the poor, orphans
and widows, and Islam through donations to the mosque, for example.
The percentage Muslims are expected to pay will differ depending on what's being taxed,
but it's considered to be around two and a half percent.
The idea was to share one's wealth, thereby purifying it.
The meaning of zakat is related to purification, and helping those who are less fortunate.
There is a strong emphasis on social justice in the Quran.
The fourth pillar is the fast, during the month of Ramadan, the ninth month of the Islamic
calendar, during which the first revelation was given to Muhammad.
During Ramadan, Muslims abstain from food, drinking, smoking and sex, from dawn to sunset.
Because Muslims use a lunar calendar for religious purposes, and it's not adjusted to accord
with the solar Gregorian calendar, the time of Ramadan shifts every year.
It's about 11 days earlier per year.
So during the course of a person's life, they'll experience fasting during every season.
It's a great challenge to fast during the daylight hours of summer, as the period is
long and one has to refrain from food and drink despite the heat.
Muslims are usually expected to begin fasting after they go through puberty, but some children
begin with shorter fasts to work up to the full month-long fasting.
As with the other pillars, there are a number of exceptions made.
Women in nursing women, people who are sick or traveling, may eat during Ramadan.
However, in most cases it's expected that they'll make up for the missed fast days later
when they're able, and in some cases people are encouraged to commit to feeding the poor
when they're unable to fast.
Each day, after the sun goes down, the fast is broken with a meal called the iftar meal.
And this often begins with the eating of three dates, which is how Muhammad broke his fast.
Sometimes iftar meals take on a celebratory atmosphere with feasts and a festive spirit
following a quieter, more spiritually focused day of fasting.
During Ramadan, Muslims are committed to undertaking greater acts of piety, such as giving more
to the poor or engaging in regular readings of the Qur'an.
Why do Muslims fast on Ramadan?
The short answer is, it's a religious obligation.
But we can ask, why would God command a month of fasting?
There are many reasons Muslims give when they talk about Ramadan.
When you think about it, we human beings spend a tremendous amount of time focused on the
satisfaction of our desires.
Ramadan is a time to cultivate self-discipline, to refrain from automatically seeking desire
satisfaction so that our attention can be turned elsewhere, to matters of eternal importance
rather than momentary pleasure, to obligation rather than appetite, to God rather than self.
Fasting also reminds us of our frailty and our dependence on God.
In addition to these reasons, there's another very important reason.
Fasting cultivates a connection with those who are hungry and suffering, making the choice
to go hungry cultivates compassion for those who are hungry with no choice, with no fast-breaking
meal at the end of their day.
After the end of the month-long fast of Ramadan comes the biggest holiday of the Islamic year,
A'id al-Fitr, the celebration for breaking the fast.
There's a special prayer done in the morning, this is in addition to the usual five obligatory
prayers, and this can only be done in community.
The holiday period of A'id al-Fitr, from one to three days, is a time when the family
gathers, feasts, and exchanges gifts.
It's common to wear new clothes at this time, it's a joyous time, and in its tone this
time of year resembles the feeling around Christmas, Hanukkah, and New Years among Jews
and Christians in the West.
The common greeting given at this time is A'id Mubarak, or Blessed Eid.
In fact, the U.S. Post Office issued a stamp in celebration of A'id in 2001.
The fifth pillar of Islam is the Hajj, the pilgrimage to Mecca in Saudi Arabia that all
Muslims who are physically and financially able are expected to make at least once during
their lives.
The Hajj takes place from the eighth to the twelfth day of the last month of the Islamic
calendar, which is called the month of the Hajj.
It's the largest annual pilgrimage on earth, with between two and three million people
attending each year.
Only Muslims are allowed into the sacred city of Mecca.
The Hajj connects Muslims in three ways.
It connects them with God, with their history, and with each other.
When on the Hajj, pilgrims wear white ritual clothing.
The men wear two sheets of white cloth.
One draped over the shoulder, and the other tied around the waist.
For many, the clothing they wear on the Hajj is saved and used as a funeral shroud when
they die.
They're not supposed to wear perfume or jewelry, anything that would distinguish them from
others.
The emphasis is on total equality.
On the Hajj, one isn't supposed to know if the person standing next to them is a head
of state or a beggar.
Each is simply a human being standing before God.
One of the most visually spectacular sites in the Islamic world is when thousands upon
thousands of Muslims circumambulate the Kaaba together.
The crowd walks around the Kaaba seven times counterclockwise, the direction symbolizing
in the words of one pilgrim, that this takes place outside of ordinary time.
The Kaaba is the black cube shaped structure in the center of the mosque in Mecca.
The Kaaba was cleansed of all the idols by Muhammad, and now it contains only a sacred
black stone, which was supposedly given to Abraham by the angel Gabriel as a symbol of
the covenant.
Some believe that it fell from the sky.
Pilgrims try to touch or kiss the sacred stone, but given the size of the crowd, many are
able to only gesture toward it.
During the Hajj, Muslims perform many ritual actions that are symbolic of or recreate important
historical events.
For example, they hurry back and forth between the hills of Safa and Marwa, reenacting Haggar's
search for water for her son Ishmael.
She finally found it at the well of Zamzam, and Muslims frequently fill up a container
with water from that well and bring it home.
They also throw stones at a wall to commemorate Abraham driving away Satan, who was trying
to tempt him.
And in one of the most powerful moments on the Hajj, they gather on the plain of Arafat,
where Muhammad gave his final sermon, standing before God in humility and repentance.
Toward the end of the pilgrimage is the second major Islamic holiday, Ayid al-Adha, the Festival
of Sacrifice.
At this festival, Muslims sacrifice an animal, such as a sheep or cow, to commemorate God's
substitution of a ram for sacrifice instead of Abraham's son Ishmael.
Some Muslims also see this as symbolizing the sacrifice of one's ego before God.
Many Muslims on the Hajj don't sacrifice their own animals, but rather pay to have
a butcher sacrifice an animal on their behalf.
However, in many parts of the Muslim world, Muslims do sacrifice their own animal.
Much of the enormous amount of meat that results from this ritual is then given to the poor.
A Muslim who completes the Hajj is given the honorific title Hajj.
Most Muslims who perform the Hajj are deeply affected by it.
In many cases, Muslims get a first-hand experience of the tremendous diversity of Islam, as they
pray alongside Muslims from every part of the world.
To see Arab Muslims next to Chinese Muslims, Pakistanis next to Somalis, Bosnians next
to Americans, give Muslims the sense of the unity and equality of all Muslims.
In fact, studies have found that not only do Muslims feel a greater sense of unity and
connection with other Muslims after the Hajj, but they feel this toward all human beings.
Muslims who have recently been on the Hajj have a stronger commitment to peace and harmony
among people of all religions.
In some discussions of Islam, there is a talk about a sixth pillar, the concept of jihad.
Because this word is thrown around so much in the media today, it's worth discussing.
The actual meaning of jihad is effort or struggle.
It's the effort that's necessary to walk the straight path, to live in accordance with
what God wills.
Now some people equate this term with holy war.
Part of the struggle necessary for Muslims may take the form of a battle against those
who threaten them, as occurred in the early years of the tradition.
However, there are strict rules of engagement that govern this type of jihad, and they're
spelled out in the Quran and the Hadith.
So there's an Islamic just war doctrine, and there are many limitations on how warfare
can be conducted.
Among them, warfare must be defensive, and must not involve targeting civilians, women,
or children.
For example, the Quran states, fight those in the way of God who fight you, but do not
be aggressive.
God does not like aggressors.
If they desist, then cease to be hostile.
Of course, there are numerous examples throughout history of Muslims who've ignored these rules,
but that doesn't mean that their actions are in accordance with the criteria given in the
tradition.
However, the kind of jihad that involves fighting is considered the lesser jihad.
Muhammad explained this to a Muslim soldier returning from the battlefield.
The soldier said, I'm returning from the great jihad against those who attack us.
Muhammad corrected him saying, you are returning from the lesser jihad.
Now you can begin the greater jihad.
The soldier asked, what could be greater than fighting against our enemies?
Muhammad said, fighting against the evil within yourself.
The highest jihad is the inner jihad, the struggle to keep our worst impulses at bay,
so that we can follow the straight path.
Islamic law is often used as a translation for the Arabic word sharia, but that isn't
quite right.
Sharia literally means a road leading to water.
And remembering the importance of life sustaining water in the arid deserts of the Arabian Peninsula,
you get a sense for the true meaning of that word.
It's the way of life that God has given to human beings that will sustain them and enable
them to flourish.
It goes beyond what we might consider narrow legal matters to all aspects of life.
So Muslims who say that they want to live in accordance with sharia often mean that
they want to live in accordance with God's will.
The notion of law in terms of jurisprudence is conveyed by the word fiqh.
There are four commonly accepted sources of sharia, although these are understood and
applied differently by different schools of law within Islam.
The first source is of course the Quran.
And the second source is the sunnah, the way of the Prophet Muhammad which is known through
the hadith.
The thousands of hadith provide a great deal of material on which legal judgments can be
made.
Still, the Quran and the hadith are the products of the 7th century and they cannot directly
address the countless developments that have arisen since then.
What for example is the Islamic position on artificial insemination, cloning, transplants.
Since these are not covered directly in the texts, there are two other sources that are
consulted.
The first is ijma, or consensus of the community.
However, a key question remains, what constitutes the community?
For some interpreters it means the community of Muslims who are qualified to interpret
the Quran and sunnah and apply them to the situation at hand, perhaps scholars or clerics.
To others it means the entire community of Muslims involved in a particular issue.
In other words, concepts like ijma can contribute to a system of Islamic democracy.
The final source is qiyas, or analogical reasoning.
In Islam, not only are the texts and the community given authority, but there is also a place
for individual reasoning.
And the concept of analogical reasoning is as follows.
A particular situation might not be addressed in the Quran, so we look for the closest analog
in the text, perhaps riding horses or camels, and then apply the Quranic example to the
current situation.
So there are four generally accepted sources of Islamic law, Quran, Sunnah, Consensus,
and Reasoning.
As you look around the Islamic world, you can see dramatic differences in how the law develops.
There are vastly different approaches to the status of women, in say Saudi Arabia on the
one hand, and Turkey or Indonesia on the other.
One of the reasons, in addition to the important contributing factors of culture and history,
is that there are different schools of law, by which I mean traditions of legal thinking
and interpretation.
Some, like the Hanafi, are more liberal regarding issues of individual reasoning and the status
of women, and others, like the Hanbali, which is dominant in Saudi Arabia, are far more
restrictive regarding women's rights and the use of individual reason.
The process of striving to interpret and apply the teachings of Islam is called Ishtihad,
which is etymologically related to the term jihad.
It's a kind of intellectual effort.
After the law schools were established, some Muslims believed that the doors of Ishtihad
were closed.
There was no need to engage in independent interpretation of the sources.
One only had to follow the interpretations laid out by the law schools.
However, given the dramatic changes brought about by modernization, many Muslim thinkers
advocate reopening the doors of Ishtihad, taking a new look at the sources with the
eyes of modern individuals.
To conclude, we'll look at how legal opinions are issued.
Qualified Muslim scholars and jurists can issue legal opinions known as fatwas on issues
of interest to Muslims.
So let's say you have a question regarding whether or not a particular practice is in
accord with Islam.
You can ask a scholar who will issue a fatwa giving you the opinion along with his reasoning,
which will almost certainly include passages from the Quran and Hadith, along with other
precedents from Islamic legal rulings and analogical argumentation.
I show my students examples of fatwas on issues ranging from withdrawal of life support
from a dying person to surrogate parenting.
These are fascinating to read.
It's often the case that there will be disagreements among different legal scholars.
There's no centralized authority in Islam.
There's nothing equivalent to a pope.
So many Muslims seek guidance from authorities whom they respect and with whom they have
a relationship.
Sometimes people engage in what's known as fatwa shopping, where they go to different
scholars until they receive the opinion they want.
These days, you can see hundreds of examples of fatwas online and there are websites that
take the form of Ask the Imam, featuring Islamic advice and guidance columns on a wide
range of issues.
Our discussion today is focused on the beliefs and practices that Muslims follow in order
to remain on the straight path.
The way that God has laid out for humanity.
Amidst the tremendous variety in the Islamic world, we see that unity is provided by foundational
sources like the Quran and Hadith and by the Five Pillars.
Despite these shared commitments, there have been divisions within Islam from its earliest
history.
We'll turn to the origins and implications of these divisions in the next lecture.
