Imagine the following situations.
Public high school students in Rhode Island assemble for their commencement ceremony.
At the beginning of the ceremony, a member of the clergy steps up to the podium and offers
a prayer.
Should this be permitted?
Members of the Native American Church gather to participate in a peyote ritual.
Peyote is an illegal drug, and the men are in violation of the law, but the ritual is
a central part of their religion.
Should their practice be permitted?
Or are they obligated to follow the same law as everyone else?
Some of the most important legal cases in U.S. history have centered on issues regarding
religion.
And newspapers in recent years have been filled with controversies that have engaged passions
on all sides, prayer in school, the words under God and the Pledge of Allegiance, evolution
and creationism in the classroom, to mention just a few.
Many Americans have strong opinions about such issues, but only a small percentage knows
exactly what the Constitution and the legal tradition say about religion.
An important part of religious literacy for Americans involves understanding the constitutional
issues surrounding religion, and also knowing the history of religion in America.
The focus is on America here, but these issues also arise in other countries, and I think
America is a thought-provoking case study.
Many Americans believe that the colonists came to America for the purpose of religious
freedom.
Well, there's only a small amount of truth to this claim.
Some colonists came to enjoy religious freedom for themselves, but most didn't come for
the principle of extending religious freedom to all.
What we find when we look at the original 13 colonies is that most of them had established
churches, by which I mean a formal, official relationship between religious and civil authority.
The colonial government would appoint and pay clergy, financially support the church,
enforce church attendance, and so on.
Only members of that church could hold public office.
The Anglican church was established in Virginia, New York, North and South Carolina, Georgia
and Maryland.
The Puritan, Calvinist or Congregationalist church was established in Massachusetts, Connecticut
and New Hampshire.
There were notable exceptions to this tendency toward established churches in the colonies.
One was Rhode Island, founded by Roger Williams, who was picked out of the Massachusetts Bay
colony, and was firmly committed to the separation of church and state and to religious freedom.
This policy drew religious minorities to Rhode Island, such as Mennonites, Quakers, Amish
and Jews.
The other was the province of Pennsylvania, founded by William Penn, a Quaker.
Despite these exceptions and the commitment to religious freedom by some prominent early
Americans, establishment was the norm at the dawn of the 18th century.
But if we look at the text of the Bill of Rights, we find a clear rejection of establishment.
How did this happen?
I will tell this fascinating story here, but first, let's begin with the words of the
Constitution itself.
For the moment, don't think about the Bill of Rights, the first ten amendments that were
ratified in 1791.
Just think about the original text of the Constitution, ratified in 1789.
Here's the question for you.
What does the text of the Constitution say about religion?
Even if virtually every American in the 18th century, at least on record, was affiliated
with a religion, and that the Declaration of Independence contained some theistic language,
we might expect some religious language in the Constitution.
What's remarkable is that there's almost nothing.
The entire Constitution has only one article, Article 6, dealing with religion at all, and
only twenty words of the article relate to religion.
And here they are.
No religious test shall ever be required as a qualification to any office or public trust
under the United States.
That's it.
So the only time religion comes up in the Constitution is to state that it cannot be
considered when determining a person's qualifications for public office.
Clearly, the authors decided to keep matters of religion out of the business of government.
This was made explicit in the First Amendment to the Constitution, where two clauses about
religion were written.
It's these two clauses that have been the basis for American jurisprudence regarding
religion, so we must look closely at them.
Here's the wording.
Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise
thereof.
The first clause, Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion,
is known as the Establishment Clause.
The second, which states that Congress shall make no law prohibiting the free exercise of
religion, is known as the Free Exercise Clause.
We're going to look at each clause separately, and then examine the landmark cases surrounding
them.
Given that established churches were the norm in the colonies, how did the Constitution
end up with a clause that completely kept Congress from doing anything even related
to establishing religion?
There were many factors involved, but we'll focus on two here.
First, while most American colonists were Anglicans or congregationalist Puritans, there
was an increasing religious diversity during the 17th and 18th centuries.
There were growing populations of Catholics, Jews, and a wide range of minority Christian
sects, including Mennonites, Quakers, Universalists, and Baptists.
As the demographics shifted, there was a realization among colonists of the increasing difficulty
of maintaining one established denomination in a colony.
More and more colonists believed that if their group couldn't be guaranteed continued
privileged status and dominance, it'd be best if no group held that position.
Another element that was important in understanding why the founders rejected establishment is
deism.
Deism is a form of religion that had its roots in the Enlightenment, which emphasized the
authority of reason rather than authority of tradition, whether that be religion or monarchy.
Deists believe in God, but their conception of God is the God of nature, a creator and
architect of the cosmos.
In general, they don't believe in a God who intervenes in daily affairs and thus they
reject miracles, or a God with whom people have a personal relationship.
Most deists reject beliefs like the virgin birth, incarnation, trinity, resurrection,
and the atonement theory of Christ's crucifixion.
Most of the most prominent founding fathers could be considered deists, or at least strongly
influenced by deist beliefs.
This is true of our first five presidents, Washington, Adams, Jefferson, Madison, and
Monroe, as well as Benjamin Franklin.
The deist founding fathers were rationalists who believed that God as the supreme architect
had designed and created a cosmos that could be rationally understood, and then with true.
This was the conception of God as the divine watchmaker who designed the system and wound
it up and then left it to operate according to his laws.
In fact, Thomas Jefferson created his own Bible by cutting out the passages that he
rejected, which not only included miracle passages, but also the letters of Paul.
He retained the parables and ethical teachings of Jesus, and he called his work the life
and morals of Jesus.
Given their emphasis on reason and the autonomy of the human individual, the founders were
strongly opposed to coercion in matters of belief and practice, leading them to oppose
the idea of an established church.
This still leaves an important question.
Does the prohibition of establishment mean that there should be a separation of church
and state?
Those who argue against separation point out that the words separation of church and state
never occur in the Constitution.
An argument on this side would be that government can avoid establishing a state religion without
having to keep religion and politics completely separate, meaning that there could be, for
example, prayer in school, vouchers for religious schools, the teaching of creationism in schools,
religious symbols on public land, and so forth.
Advocates of separation point out that while the word separation doesn't occur in the Constitution,
it was the intent of the framers.
The phrase does occur in a letter written by Thomas Jefferson, in which he explains
why he did not support a national day of prayer.
Believing that religion is a matter which lies solely between man and his God, that he
owes a count to none other for his faith and worship, I contemplate with sovereign reverence
that act of the American people which declared that their legislature should make no law
respecting an establishment of religion, thus building a wall of separation between church
and state.
Advocates of separation point out the problems that can arise when the government promotes
religion, and they worry about both government interference in religion and religious interference
in government.
As we've seen, the First Amendment clearly prohibits Congress from making any law establishing
a religion.
But a key question still remains.
What counts as establishment?
Does any kind of government support of religion constitute establishment?
This debate about what the Establishment Clause permits and what it forbids has played out
in the courts for many years.
There are many controversial issues that fall within the province of the Establishment Clause,
including the teaching of creationism in the public school classroom, placing the Ten Commandments
in courtrooms, including the words under God and the Pledge of Allegiance, or having religious
displays on public property.
But I'll focus on one here as an illustration, prayer in school.
In the early 1960s, the State Board of Regents in New York, wanting to provide a moral foundation
for students, and believing that this could be done through prayer, wrote a prayer to
be read by students in public schools.
Now, given the reality of religious diversity in the school system, they tried to make the
prayer as general as possible so as not to offend anyone.
The prayer read, Almighty God, we acknowledge our dependence upon thee, and we beg thy blessings
upon us, our parents, our teachers, and our country.
The Board of Education of New Hyde Park required its students to recite this prayer daily.
Some parents of students in the schools sued in state court, arguing that the prayer violated
the Establishment Clause.
In this case, Angle v. Vital in 1962, the Supreme Court determined that requiring students
to recite a prayer written by the state clearly violated the Establishment Clause, because
the state was showing preference for a particular religious point of view, and requiring participation
in a religious practice.
The Supreme Court was quite clear on their reasoning, quote, we think that the constitutional
prohibition against laws respecting an establishment of religion must at least mean that in this
country it's no part of the business of government to compose official prayers for any group
of the American people to recite as part of a religious program carried on by government.
But the opinion went further and discussed the importance of the Establishment Clause.
They wrote, its first and most immediate purpose rested on the belief that a union of government
and religion tends to destroy government and to degrade religion.
Another purpose of the Establishment Clause rested upon an awareness of the historical
fact that governmentally established religion and religious persecution go hand in hand.
But what if prayer is considered optional instead of required?
Opponents of school prayer argue that students are subjected to social pressure and coercion
when the teacher and the classmates all engage in a prayer, putting pressure on the student
to join in or be seen as an outsider.
Courts have generally found that pressure toward any kind of religious participation,
whether by state requirement or the softer coercion of the teacher's actions and peer
pressure of classmates, is impermissible.
The public school classroom courts have agreed is no place for organized prayer.
None of this means that religion cannot be taught in the public school classroom.
One Supreme Court opinion read,
Nothing we have said here indicates that such study of the Bible or of religion when
presented objectively as part of a secular program of education may not be affected consistently
with the First Amendment.
In addition, students can still pray individually and silently.
Many of us have done this before an exam.
If groups of students want to pray together, they can assemble outside the classroom before
or after school, as is sometimes done around the flagpole at public schools.
These court rulings apply to organized prayer in the classroom.
When the Supreme Court decides cases, they often develop tests to determine the criteria
that should be applied when evaluating the constitutionality of a particular law or practice.
For the establishment clause, the court developed a test that said a law or state action must
meet three criteria.
One, it must have a secular purpose.
Two, it must have a primary effect that neither advances nor hinders religion.
And three, it must avoid excessive entanglement between religious and civil authority.
Now that you know the issues involved and the test that they use, let's see how you'd
rule in the following case with which I began the lecture.
In 1992, at a public school commencement ceremony, the principal invited a rabbi to offer prayers
and gave him guidelines for offering prayers at such events, including the requirement
that they be non-denominational.
Some parents objected and filed suit.
How would you rule in this case?
This is a different situation than the earlier cases.
It's a commencement ceremony, not a classroom.
In this case, Lee vs. Weissman, the court decided that prayer in this case too is unconstitutional.
Even though this wasn't the classroom, commencement is obviously an important moment in the lives
of students and there's strong motivation to attend.
The principal, an employee of the state, in selecting the clergy and providing guidelines
for the prayer is shaping the content of a prayer given before a captive audience at
a public school event.
The court decided that this was a violation of the Establishment Clause.
Now that we've explored cases involving the Establishment Clause, we can look at cases
that fall under the Free Exercise Clause, which states that there should be no law prohibiting
the free exercise of religion.
Clearly, however, there must be limits to this freedom, as there are with all freedoms.
To take an extreme example, if a religious tradition believed in human sacrifice, nobody
would argue that the state should permit this on First Amendment grounds.
Or imagine a police officer pulling over a speeding driver who, when asked, what's
the rush, replies, I belong to the Church of Divine Acceleration and driving at high speeds
is our form of religious worship.
Well, obviously, if any act were permitted as long as it's claimed to be religious in
some ways, there'd be the risk of a breakdown in social order.
So how does the court decide when to protect religious freedom, and when it can be limited?
Let's begin in the 1870s with George Reynolds, a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints, or Mormons, who was convicted of bigamy.
He argued that it was his religious right, in fact an obligation, to marry more than
once.
The court held that the First Amendment protects religious beliefs, so one can believe whatever
one wants, but one could not perform a religious action if that action is harmful to individuals
or society.
In the words of the court, if it's subversive of good order.
And the court held that polygamy was such a practice as it undermined the moral order
of society.
Precedent was set that the government can forbid a religious practice if it has harmful
effects.
As we move to the 1940s, we find a growing presumption in favor of religious freedom,
and a high burden on the government to justify interference.
In 1963, the court developed a test that would be used to determine the criteria under which
the government can prohibit religious action.
This test was called the Sherbert Test, comes from a case called Sherbert vs. Werner, 1963,
and its application is referred to as strict scrutiny.
So here's how it works.
If it's determined that government has placed a burden on religious practice, it must meet
two criteria in order for that limitation to be constitutional.
One, the government must show that it has a compelling interest that justifies burdening
the religious activity.
And two, it must also show it is using the least restrictive means to meet that interest.
What's a compelling interest?
Compelling interest is explained by the court this way.
Only the greatest abuses, endangering paramount interests, give occasion for permissible limitation.
In other words, the bar for government encroachment on religious freedom was set very high.
A case that illustrates the extent to which protections for religious freedom were granted
is Wisconsin vs. Yoder in 1972.
In this case, Amish parents wanted the right to refuse compulsory education for their children
beyond the 8th grade.
The Amish, whose origins are found in the 16th century Anabaptist movement, believed
in maintaining a distance from worldly lifestyles and technology in order to maintain a pure
Christian life and avoid corruption.
They want their children to be educated at home after the 8th grade so that they can
focus on skills related to the home and farm and receive a proper religious education without
being contaminated by worldly teachings.
Wisconsin's law mandated education beyond the 8th grade.
So what do you think the court decided?
The court ruled for the Amish, concluding that the religious freedom of the Amish would
be unduly burdened by requiring high school attendance, given the inevitable exposure
to worldly values their children would face.
Furthermore, the Amish community provided an alternative form of education, and their
children wouldn't be a burden on society.
We can see that in this period, the burden was placed on the government to justify curtailing
religious freedom, and it would take an exceedingly powerful interest in order to do so.
Everything changed with the landmark ruling, Employment Division of Oregon versus Smith
in 1990.
This is the Native American peyote case I alluded to at the beginning of the lecture.
Let's review what's at issue here.
We all know that the government cannot pass a law that discriminates against a particular
religious tradition.
For example, there couldn't be a law that said, no Jews can wear yarmulkes in the school,
or no Sikhs can wear turbans.
However, what if there's what's called a generally applicable law, a law that applies
to everyone equally like, no one can wear a hat or other head covering in school?
Now, this kind of law wouldn't single out a particular religion, but enforcing the law
would certainly burden the religious practice of observant Jews and Sikhs.
While the law's intent may not be to burden religious freedom, perhaps it's part of a
school uniform policy that aims to promote community and maintain equality.
The result of the law's enforcement does, in fact, burden certain religions.
This brings us to the key question, is the government obliged to allow exceptions to
generally applicable laws for religious purposes?
During prohibition in the United States, there was an exception made for sacramental wine,
for example, should an exception be made for peyote in the Smith case?
In this case, Al Smith, a member of the Klamath tribe and the Native American church, attended
rituals in which peyote was consumed.
For this, he was fired from his job and denied unemployment compensation.
The case made it up to the Supreme Court, where the court dealt with the question of
whether or not the Free Exercise Clause protected the use of peyote despite the generally applicable
law of prohibition against it.
Peyote, which comes from a cactus harvested in special rituals, is an important sacrament
to many Native American tribes.
Ruben Snake, a member of the Ho-Chung tribe and the Native American church, writes,
We try to have compassion for our fellow men, for that's what our Creator tells us to do.
This attitude comes to us through a sacred herb, one that is sacred because it is, in
fact, divine.
We call it peyote, but more often because of what it does for us, we call it our medicine.
It is the most powerful of all plants because God endowed it with his love and compassion.
Native Americans argued that peyote use in religious rituals should be protected by the
First Amendment, while the state argued that they had an overriding interest in enforcing
drug laws.
How would you rule on this one?
The court majority, in an opinion written by Justice Antonin Scalia, ruled against the
Native Americans.
And in the opinion of many legal scholars, changed the nature of free exercise jurisprudence
by stating that the Sherbur test does not apply in the case of generally applicable laws.
Now, here's the majority's reasoning.
The Establishment Clause does not relieve an individual of the obligation to comply
with a law that incidentally forbids the performance of an act that his religious belief requires
if the law is not specifically directed to religious practice.
So in other words, as long as the law is generally applicable and doesn't target a particular
religion, the government doesn't have to prove any compelling interest if the act happens
to burden someone's religious freedom.
The majority argued that ruling in favor of Smith would produce, quote, a private right
to ignore generally applicable laws, unquote.
In a religiously diverse country such as this one, Justice Scalia wrote, allowing religious
exceptions for people would be a luxury that we cannot afford.
Justice Harry Blackman wrote a powerful dissent to the majority opinion.
Having the point that allowing religious exceptions to generally applicable laws is
a luxury that a well-ordered society cannot afford, and that the repression of minority
religions is an unavoidable consequence of democratic government, Blackman argued, quote,
I do not believe the founders thought they're dearly bought freedom from religious persecution
a luxury, but an essential element of liberty.
And they could not have thought religious intolerance unavoidable, for they drafted
the religion clauses precisely in order to avoid that intolerance.
Finally, Blackman looked at the actual issue of Native American peyote use itself, asking
the question, does government really have a compelling interest to ban this religious
practice?
He concluded that no harms from peyote use have been shown, arguing that the state offers
no evidence that the religious use of peyote has ever harmed anyone.
After the court's ruling, there was a major outcry of concern from a wide range of religious
groups.
Not only Native Americans, but members of other traditions who believed that all religious
people were at risk of losing their First Amendment protection in light of the Smith
ruling.
So in response, Congress passed the Religious Freedom Restoration Act in 1993, which said
that government made burden a person's exercise of religion only if it demonstrates that
the burden is in furtherance of a compelling governmental interest, and is the least restrictive
means of furthering that interest.
As you can see, the act aimed to pass into law the Sherbert test.
This attempt to revive the Sherbert test ran into trouble, as the Supreme Court said,
You can't pass a law that tells us how to interpret the Free Exercise Clause, or any
clause.
Interpreting the Constitution is our job, not yours.
Because of this, the Religious Freedom Restoration Act is no longer applicable in many cases.
There's one more part of the story of the Smith case.
In order to specifically protect Native American religious freedom, Congress passed amendments
to the American Indian Religious Freedom Act in 1994 that permitted Native Americans to
use peyote in religious rituals.
So the specific problem of peyote use has been handled through legislation.
But the reverberations of the ruling in the Smith case continue to be felt.
Because if the members of a religious tradition need an exception to a generally applicable
law for their rituals or practices, they can no longer rely on the compelling interest
test to protect them.
The burden is no longer on the government, but on the religious practitioners.
Let's conclude with a final test case for you.
The Church of Lakumi Babalu I versus the City of Hialeah in 1993.
In this case, after a Santaria church made up primarily of Cuban immigrants announced
plans to open a house of worship, the City of Hialeah, Florida passed a law making it
illegal for animals to be slaughtered if not for the primary reason of food consumption.
Now, in the rituals, the sacrificed animals often consumed afterward, but this is not
the primary reason for the slaughter.
The law stated that slaughter for purposes of sacrifice and ritual would not be permitted.
Santaria is a syncretic religion originating in the Yeruba religion of West Africa and
brought to the Caribbean with slaves.
It involves priests and priestesses who interact with arishas or spirits, and it features animal
sacrifice to the spirits as an important part of some rituals.
So how would you rule in this case?
You might be surprised to find out that the court ruled for the church.
The primary reason is that the city's law was not a generally applicable law.
The law didn't say that no animals could be slaughtered in the city, rather it specifically
targeted the practice of slaughtering animals for the purpose of religious sacrifice.
In the majority opinion, Justice Kennedy wrote,
The ordinance's texts and operation demonstrate that they are not neutral, but have as their
object the suppression of Santaria's central element animal sacrifice.
And for this reason, the court ruled the ordinance's unconstitutional.
This brings us to the end of our discussion of religion and law in United States history.
You're now familiar with the religion clauses of the First Amendment and how cases involving
establishment and free exercise have been decided.
This knowledge will continue to serve you as new cases arise all the time.
In fact, as I was preparing this lecture, a new case was just decided about whether
or not a county board of commissioners meeting in North Carolina could open and close with
a prayer.
This case is Joiner v. Forsythe County, and I encourage you to look up the background
of the case and the court opinion.
But before you see how the court decided, think about the case in light of what you've
learned today.
How would you rule?
