Hi, I want to talk about Aristotle on substance. Aristotle's categories give us ten modes
of being, the most fundamental, the primary one, of which is substance. Everything else
is really a quality of a substance, a quantity of a substance, a relation between substances
and so on. So substance is fundamental. But what is substance? We've talked some about
criteria for identifying substances. Substances can admit contrary qualities. They don't
themselves have contraries. A substance is this such. It's this particular example of
a certain more general kind. And there are a variety of others. But what does that really
mean for what substance is and what kinds of things are substances? You might think,
look, I know already everything I need to know about this. Substances are in the primary
sense particular things. And then in the secondary sense kinds of things. End of story.
Well, not quite. And Aristotle goes into, in great detail in one of the books of the
metaphysics known as metaphysics zeta, about what it really means for something to be a
substance and what substance really is. It turns out the picture is complicated. My only
incomplete that I received during my graduate education was in a course on Aristotle. I
took on the problem of explaining Aristotle's analysis of substance in metaphysics zeta
as the topic for my term paper. I couldn't finish it within the semester. And I figured,
well, I'll write it over the summer. Over the summer I studied the question. I read more
and more about it. Finally, I became convinced I couldn't solve the problem. And so quickly
shifted my topic to Aristotle on infinity and wrote a paper about that, which was not
exactly my greatest work. But that problem about substance, I in the end considered insoluble.
And as you'll see today, I have more ideas about it. But actually, I think still Aristotle's
point in a way is nothing really fulfills all of the considerations, all of the criteria
intuitively that we have for being a substance. Why is it complicated? Well, let's start
our discussion by reminding ourselves about the role that substance plays in the categories.
Substances that are in no way composite signify substance, quantity, quality, relation, place,
time, position, state, action, or affection. Those are the basic categories. Substance,
in the truest and primary and most definite sense of the word, is that which is neither
predictable of a subject nor present in a subject. And so all of those other things are predicated
of substance. He refers to these, in fact, as figures of predication. And so we talk
about quantities of substance or qualities of substance, relations between substances.
Substances being in a certain position or in a certain state as doing things, having
things done to them. In short, we predicate other things of substances. But substances
are the things that aren't predictable of something else. They aren't present in something
else. They are the ultimate subjects of predication. So Aristotle says everything except primary
substances is either predicated of primary substances or is present in them. And if these
didn't exist, it'd be possible for anything else to exist. If there were no substances,
there would be no quantities or qualities or relations or places or times or anything
else as well. So they are most properly called substances because they underlie everything
else. As the name suggests, they stand, stand, under, sub, everything else. They are the
basic foundation, the basic things the universe consists of. So he says the science of substance,
understanding substance, must be of the nature of wisdom. If you really want to understand
the world at the deepest level, you've got to understand substance. That turns out, however,
to be rather difficult. The overall question here is the deepest question, I think, of
metaphysics, which is the question of ontology. And Willard Van Orman Quine, a 20th century
philosopher, has put this question beautifully at the beginning of one of his papers called
On What There Is. A curious thing about the ontological problem is its simplicity. It
can be put in three Anglo-Saxon monosyllables. What is there? It can be answered moreover
in a word, everything. And everyone will accept this answer is true. However, this is merely
to say there is what there is. There remains room for disagreement over cases. And so the
issue is stayed alive down through the centuries. Well, that's precisely right. What is there?
Everything. Well, Aristotle's a little more specific than that. What is there? Substance.
But what's substance? Well, substance is that which is primarily, not in any qualified sense,
but without qualification. It's what exists. That is substance. But we need criteria for
figuring out what substance is and for identifying then the particular things that we take to
be the fundamental constituents of the world. Well, all substance, he says, appears to signify
that which is individual. It is this as well as such. It's an individual thing as well
as a thing of a certain kind. Another mark of substance is that it has no contrary. There's
no opposite in the way that hot is the opposite of cold or right is the opposite of left or
being on top of something is the opposite of being under something or there isn't anything
like that with substance. Substance doesn't admit a varying degrees. We don't have something
that is more a cat than other things. If you're either a cat or you're not a cat, one cat
can't be more cat than another cat. The most distinctive mark of substance, he says, is
that it admits contrary qualities. The cat can be awake or asleep. It can be running
or it can be staying still. It can be meowing or it can be silent. So here are some criteria.
Putting these down on a list of substance isn't predictable of or present in anything else.
It underlies everything else. It's individual. It's of this. It has no contrary. There are
no degrees of it and it admits contrary qualities. It can be changed and undergo a change of
quality while remaining the same. Now, what do we mean when we say substance is primary?
That's not that easy a question to answer. Aristotle says there are actually several
senses in which a thing may be said to be primary or first. Substance, however, is first
in every sense. It's first in definition. It's first in order of knowledge and it's
first in time. So let's think first about time. Other categories can't exist independently,
only substance. You can't just have the color red floating around independently. It's
got to be a red something. You can't just have an action of throwing, for example, without
anyone doing the throwing or anything being thrown. And so substance has to be there in
order for anything else to exist. If there were no substance, nothing could be thrown,
nothing could throw. Nothing could be red or could be tall or could be lying over on
its side and so on. And what about first in definition? Well, everything else is a quality
of a substance, a relation among substances, a quantity of a substance, an action or a state
or affection of a substance. So in short, all of those have substance in their very definitions.
And what about in the order of knowledge? We know substances most fully and most particularly.
It says, here's the way to do it. Think about knowing something. Before you really can know
anything else about it, the most important thing to know is what is it? What kind of
thing is it? Is it a man? Is it fire? Is it a horse? Is it an action? You need to know
what kind of thing it is. You need to know what a thing is before you can even start
describing it. Surely first in the order of knowledge is knowing that it's a person or
knowing that it's a book, knowing that it's a table, knowing that it's a vegetable and
so forth. Now, Aristotle says the question raised of old and raised now and always, what
is substance? Well, he gives us four candidates. And this is interesting because you might
have thought, well, wait, we've known this already, right? We mean particular things
like this book and then the general kind book or this particular human being and then the
general kind humanity or human being. But not so fast. In metaphysics Zeta he says there
are actually four candidates. Well, four and question mark, there's really an obvious
fifth which he somehow seems to neglect in the discussion. The word substance is applied,
if not in more senses, still at least to four main objects, for both the essence and the
universal and the genus are thought to be the substance of each thing and fourthly the
substratum. Now, this is quite startling when you see it. Wait a minute. I thought we had
particular things and then kinds of thing. That's it. But now we're talking, well, I
mean, what happened to the things? What happened to the kinds? We've got, well, we've got genus
as a kind type term. Those are the secondary substances of the categories. But we've got
essences and universals and the substratum. What's going on here? Well, I thought we were
talking about primary substances, individual things, things like this book or this human
being. Ah, well, let's go through our criteria. Not predictable of or present to anything else.
True. I am not predictable of anything else. Neither is that book. Underlying everything
else. Yes, individual things seem to underlie everything else. If there were no individual
things there would be nothing at all. So nothing would have any qualities or relations
and so on. Individual. Yes, it's this book, this human being. And so individuality. Check.
No contrary. Right. There's no contrary. Nothing that's the opposite of being Dan Bonnevac.
No degrees can't be more Dan Bonnevac than somebody else. So either you are or you aren't.
And the same thing with just being human. You either are or you aren't. Admitting contrary
qualities. Yes, I can speak. I can be silent. So I can exhibit contrary qualities. The book
might be closed. The book might be open. Contrary qualities. But ah, primary. Here Aristotle
says, wait a minute, wait a minute. I'm looking for the ultimate constituents of the world.
The things that are primary in the sense that they are the most basic things. And actually
this book or this human being, they seem composite. There is both the this and the such aspect.
They seem to have matter and form. I am this person in this body, in this flesh and blood.
I have a certain form. I have an essence. And we'll talk more about what essences are.
But certain things are accidental to me. They can change and I remain the same. Other things
might be essential to me in that if they change, I am no longer who I am. And so we can talk
about my essence, my form, my matter. Ooh, I seem to be composite. But Aristotle says,
I'm not talking about composite things now. I want to know what the ultimate constituents
of the world are. And these particular things that I took to be primary substances in the
categories, they look composite. What are they made up of? What are their ultimate constituents?
Hmm, maybe they're physical parts. Maybe they're form. Maybe something else. Now we have to
investigate. Well, one possibility is the substratum. Okay, so Aristotle says the substratum
is that of which everything else is predicated, while it is itself not predicated of anything
else. So I think about myself as a human being. And I think, okay, good, humanity is being
predicated of me. Human being, that's something like a species. So that's a more general kind
of thing. It's a secondary substance, but it's found here in me a primary substance. But admittedly,
I'm not predicated of anything else. I satisfy that criterion. But am I basic? I do seem to have
matter, this flesh and blood. And then I have a form in this general shape of a body. But also,
we can talk about my form in a sort of mental state, talk about my personality or my consciousness
or something of that sort. And then I have an essence, things that could not change while I
remain the same person. And then you could say, well, let me ask a different question. What or
who is it that is Dan Bonobak? After all, we've said, aha, humanity, that gets attributed to Dan
Bonobak. Dan Bonobak, well, something here is being Dan Bonobak. What is that thing? Suppose I
say, well, it's that flesh and blood. You could say, well, what is it that is that flesh and blood?
I don't know what to say about this. And we're going to see this in a number of different
philosophers throughout the term. But you might think, okay, look, maybe I mean, whatever that
ultimate thing is, that is Dan Bonobak. So I look at the book and I say, yeah, I'm not talking about
the book as the fundamental thing. After all, books are obviously not basic constituents of the
universe. They're made up of pages and those pages contain words. And, and so it looks as if this
book is something that I can't identify as a basic constituent of the universe. There is something
that is this book. Let's say it's these pages. Well, there's something that constitutes these pages.
What's that? And I can keep pushing down. And so Aristotle thinks maybe there is a substratum here,
maybe here in the end, it's the paper, let's say, or in my case, maybe it really just is the flesh
and blood, or it is the ultimate constituents of my biochemistry, whatever we end up saying about
that. We end up with a substratum that isn't predictable of or present in anything else that
does seem to underlie everything else. But is it individual? Hmm, it's primary in a way, but the
individuality seems disturbing. Let's think about a statute. It's a little easier than thinking
about a human being or a book. In one sense, matter is said to be the nature of the nature of a
substratum in another shape and in a third the compound of these. By the matter, I mean, for
instance, the bronze. By the shape, the pattern of its form, in this case, the cap. And by the
compound of these, the statute, the concrete hole. So if I'm looking for ultimate constituents of the
universe, well, primary substance in the terms of the book, the categories, is that sculpture. But
now I say, well, that sculpture doesn't really seem primary. So what is it that is that sculpture?
It's a certain shape, but what is in that shape? Well, the bronze. Now, later philosophers will
say, so what is that bronze? And push it even further. But Aristotle is willing to stop with the
bronze or the paper or the flesh and blood, etc. In any case, we've got to consider those
possibilities. Maybe the ultimate constituent is simply the statue, the hole, the matter and form
together, that individual object. That's what he assumes throughout the book, the categories. But
it could also be just the matter, just the bronze, it could be just the form, just the shape. So,
let's take those in turn. The compound, could it be the compound of matter and form? That is to
say, that matter in that particular shape, that bronze shaped that way. Well, Aristotle says,
look, we can easily dismiss that. It's obviously posterior. It's nature is obvious. It is not
the basic thing. It's not like you say, what's the basic constituent? Oh, it's this bronze statue
of a cat. No, right? Surely that is a compound of the bronze put in that shape. So it's not primary,
it's not going to count. What about the matter, the bronze, there in the shape of the cat, here in
the shape of the man? Well, is it the bronze that is primary? Aristotle is tempted to go in that
direction, but then he says, well, that statement is obscure. On this view, matter becomes substance.
If this isn't substance, it battles us to say what else he is. When all else is stripped off,
evidently nothing but matter remains. So I look at the sculpture and I say, take away the shape,
abstract away from the shape, take away that olive branch behind his ear, take away the nose,
take away all of that. What's left? Well, just the bronze. But really, in the end, it's just well,
stuff like bronze. I mean, it might be, right? If we're thinking in terms of chemistry, we might
say the ultimate elements, the iron. Actually, bronze is something of a compound, there are a
mixture. So really, it should be things like, okay, oxygen, carbon, hydrogen, etc. The basic
chemical elements, maybe that is what counts as the ultimate constituents of the universe. Or
maybe it's the atoms of those or the micro particles making up those atoms. But in any case,
well, nothing but matter is really going to remain. So what's wrong with that? Well, Aristotle says,
look, take away length and breadth and depth. There's nothing left unless there's something
bounded by these. So if you consider the matter this way, matter alone must seem to be substance.
Well, that would be neither a particular thing nor a certain quantity nor assigned to any of the
other categories by which it's determined. All those determinations are gone. We can no longer
say, oh, it's a statue or it's a man or it's a book or it's anything of any particular kind. It's
just the matter in the end. So he says, look, we lose something really important. Maybe we gain
some degree of primacy, but we lose other things we cared about. The ultimate substratum would
itself be neither a particular thing or a particular quantity or otherwise positively
characterized. Nor would it be the negations of these. They would belong to it only by accident.
So it would turn out that matter is substance, but hold on a second. We said that being of this
such was crucial to substance. Being separable, having its own independent individual existence,
being of this, those are among our criteria too and matter surely fails that. So that won't work.
Matter can't be right. Well, the substratum then satisfies us with respect to being not
present in anything else, not being predictable of something else, underlying everything else,
good, but individual. No, it's not individual. It fails that test.
What about essence? I do have an essence as a human being. Well, how about that? Is that
something that can count? He groups those together under shape, form, the universal.
The question of essence is complicated. We'll talk about that separately. But for now, let's
just go with this idea that by essence, I mean something like the shape or the form or the
universal I exemplify. I mean something like being a human being in my case, or being a book,
or maybe being a statue of a cat in that particular shape, or of a Greek goddess,
or of an Olympic winner, etc. Shape, you might think, is a universal. So those are coins,
all of which are bronze coins, but all of which are in basically the same shape, the same form.
Well, can we count the universal or the shape or the form as itself substance?
Plato, Aristotle thinks, wants to do that. But he says, no, that can't be right. It seems impossible
that any universal term should be the name of a substance. Why? Well, the substance of a thing
is what is peculiar to it that doesn't belong to anything else. But the universal is common.
Universal is, by definition, something that is multiply instantiated. So look, it, by its very
nature, belongs to more than one thing. There can be more than one human being, more than one triangle,
more than one statue, more than one cat. So where's the individuality? It looks like universal can't
be it. And it can't be shape or form or anything like that. We can have lots and lots of different
statues produced in a factory with exactly the same shape, multiply instantiable,
so we don't get what's unique. So Aristotle says, well, look, no universal attribute can be a
substance. And not only for that reason, because also it is predictable of things. I can say that
has the shape of a cat. And that's something that I can predicate of that statue. So it's
predictable of other things. It is something that can be in something else. It's multiply
instantiable. It flunks a bunch of different tests of substance. It fails our test of not
being predictable, but it fails others as well. And so we want to say, look, everything that's common
indicates not of this, but a such. But a substance is of this. We agreed that substance was of this
such, particular of a certain kind. And a universal isn't like that. It is purely the universal part.
Maybe it's an answer to the such part. It is not an answer to this part. So it fails individuality.
Well, what about a kind? We've talked about that as a secondary substance in the categories. And so
we might look at it and say, well, maybe Aristotle's changed his mind by the time he gets to metaphysics.
Maybe he's decided the secondary is really primary. And we should be talking about kinds,
about general sorts or types of things. But look, that doesn't work either. It's
predictable of something else. I am a human being, for example. That animal is a cat. That is a book.
It also fails individuality. Because after all, it's of this such, this human being.
The kind is giving you the such, not this. So we summarize and we say, well, we've looked at now
five possibilities. Is it an individual thing? It looks like that's compound. It's not primary.
Matter? It's not individual. What about shape or form or universal? It's predictable and it's not
individual. What about a kind? It's predictable. It's not individual. What about the combination
of matter and form? Well, now we're back to the individual thing. It's compound is not primary.
So in the end, I think Aristotle thinks nothing on that list really satisfies everything we wanted
about the nature of substance. We went thinking, look, I've got a very intuitive idea. What is the
basic structure of the world? Let's look at the structure of language and the structure of thought.
Everything is really about in the end. Well, in language, nouns. It's about persons,
places, things. It's about individual objects, individual people, individual things. But then
we look and we say, wait a minute. I wanted it to be, yes, individual, but also primary and not
compound. Something that underlies everything else I wanted it to be having. The ability to
admit contrary qualities, but to have no contrary itself and so on and so forth. I didn't want it
to become positive. I wanted it to be simple and basic. And it turns out I can't have it all.
I can either go with the compound, but hey, in other respects, satisfying things, that is to say,
the matter plus form, the individual thing, or I can go with some element like the essence or the
shape, form, universal, matter, kind. And then I'm going to have to give up the idea that this is not
practicable. I'll have to give up the idea of individuality. I will have to surrender my
conception that substance is not this such. I have a big price to pay no matter what. So in short,
the moral seems to be this. Nothing satisfies all the criteria for being a substance. Well,
that's disappointing. And so Aristotle in a kind of summary says, well, look, what are we really
in the undo then? If we can't have everything, what do we settle for? Here's what we settle for.
We call substance, first of all, the simple bodies, like the elements, in other words, earth, air,
fire, water, everything of that sort. But also the individual things composed of them, bodies, books,
human beings, and so forth. All those are called substance because they're not predicated of a
subject. Everything else is predicated to them. So in short, we refer to both the basic elements
and then the things made up out of those elements, the compounds, the individual objects,
the individual people, those are substances. They satisfy at least some of the criteria
for being a substance. We sometimes refer to substances as a principle or even a cause and
pursue it from that starting point, he says. So sometimes we focus on the cause. And here we're
looking towards something like an essence, like the soul of an animal or a human being.
And we think about a person's mind, let's say, and we think of that as something like a substance.
It's not a material substance, but nevertheless, it's something like the cause of the motion
of the material substance. And so sometimes we extend it in that direction too. Then we talk
about the parts of things. Okay, so there's me, this human being, but then there's also this hand,
and that hand, and this hair, and those eyes, and so forth, the various parts of me. And then
ultimately, of course, the individual atoms, the individual microparticles that make me up.
So those are in a different sense, substance. And then finally, he says, the essence.
Who am I really? You might think, what is my essence? What is really the essence of being Dan
Bonobak? Or, you know, what is this? It's a book. Well, what is it to be a book? I'm looking for the
essence of books. So maybe the best answer to what it is, is ultimately an explanation of the essence
of the thing. We call that substance too. So in short, we have a variety of criteria. Does
anything meet all those criteria? No. But we settle. And we settle in various ways. Sometimes we refer
to substances as the individual things. Sometimes to the elements out of which they're composed.
Sometimes to the parts out of which they're composed. Sometimes to something like the cause,
the mind, the soul. Sometimes we actually refer to, well, gosh, the kind. After all,
there are secondary substances. We refer to a bunch of different things. So in the end, he says,
and you might think here, he's going to say, so substance has four senses or something.
He gives us two, really. Because of those criteria, he tells us, look, we either choose
the substratum, the thing that is basic, but forces us to lose the individuality part.
So we think about the basic elements, for example, or the bronze. We think about that type of thing
where we basically preserve the underlying everything else, but we lose the individuality
part. Or we think about the individual things, that this is, whether it's the whole thing or
the parts of the thing, this part, this hand, that hand, and so on. Those things we can also take.
But then we lose some sense of primacy because they're compounds. So we can't have it all.
We settle. We either say, well, this satisfies most of the criteria. I have to give up the
individuality part. Or we say, well, it satisfies most of the criteria, but I have to give up
the primacy part. In the end, we settle because we can't have everything. So we look at the sculpture,
and sometimes we say, what is that? It's bronze. Sometimes what is that? A child reading a book.
Sometimes we say, what is that? Well, it consists of several parts. There is the child,
there is the base of it, there is the book, and the individual things that are marked so
they look like pages. In short, we do lots of different things to answer questions like,
what is that? Because, well, there is no one simple way to understand what substance really is.
