Hi, I'm going to talk to you today about Hume's method.
Hume is an empiricist par excellence.
Locke, you might say, is one of those philosophers who has an idea, in theory of knowledge, empiricism,
but he's trying to combine that with all sorts of other insights, and so he, for example,
tries to prove the existence of God.
He talks unapologetically about powers, about capacities, about causation.
He does a variety of other things that later empiricists have thought are dubious things
to do.
He develops an extensive political philosophy and other works where he talks about obligations
and rights, and a variety of other things that it's rather hard to reconcile with his
empiricist foundations.
Hume is not like that.
If Locke is somebody who is combining a bunch of different insights about a bunch of different
areas and trying to make them fit together in a complex philosophical framework, Hume
is somebody who has one idea.
He takes over that idea from Locke of empiricism, and he says, I'm going to pursue that to
a bitter end, and that's what he does.
So he finds out that all sorts of things have to be rethought.
He doesn't take anything like our common sense conception of causation or obligation
or rights or anything else, really, and say, somehow we have to build that into the empiricist
framework.
Locke's mission.
Hume instead develops a method and says it either fits or it doesn't, and if it doesn't
fit, out with it.
So Hume is going to interpret empiricism rather differently, even though you might say, look,
his method is basically just Locke's, yes, but used in a rather different way.
So his classic work is a treatise of human nature, and there is my well-loved copy of
it.
Hume wrote that when he was only 23 years old.
That's a remarkable masterpiece for someone who was so young.
Later he wrote a small book, The Inquiry, which was meant to summarize and publicize
this.
He wrote it with great expectations of having produced a great philosophical work, but then,
as he put it later, it fell stillborn from the press.
It didn't attract much attention.
Nobody paid any real attention to it at all, even to refute it, and it took a long time
for Hume to be recognized as a great philosopher.
Even throughout the 19th century, he would have been viewed as somebody notable, but
not one of the true philosophical greats.
Whereas on the contemporary scene in England and the United States, Australia, New Zealand,
in short, in the English-speaking world, he's viewed as one of the most important philosophers
in history, and a treatise of human nature is now viewed as one of the greatest philosophical
classics.
With Hume outlines his method there, and we've talked about some of the basic elements, so
I'm going to review them here just to remind you, because they're crucial to understanding
where that method is coming from and how it's being used.
They're simple and complex ideas.
The complex ideas are built out of the simple ideas, and they come from simple impressions.
Moreover, they represent them exactly.
We build more complex ideas, often we stray very far from experience, and maybe from any
content at all, but at the level of the simple ideas, we've got a direct and exact match
to simple impressions.
So Hume says all our simple ideas in their first appearance have derived from simple
impressions, which are corresponded to them and which they exactly represent.
Those simple impressions are things that Locke would have referred to as sensations, or reflections,
that is to say, awarenesses of our own mental states.
This method, as we've seen, is to take things we think we know, but might just turn out
to be faith, or opinion, or even superstition, and try to figure out whether those beliefs
count as knowledge by tracing them back to their origins.
We trace the ideas that are part of that knowledge, or belief, and go back to where
we got those ideas.
We trace them to the origins and experience to find out whether this really counts as
knowledge, whether we have good evidence for our beliefs, whether any of those would
count as certain, and so on.
We want to understand which ones are really just opinion and which ones are knowledge.
Well, the empiricist method in general is inspired by that.
We take complex ideas, we examine the simple ideas they're made of, we find the origins
of those simple ideas and the simple impressions and experience that they come from, and here's
the idea, the content of the idea lies in those simple impressions from which it comes.
So we trace things back to what it, well, what gave rise to it, what it popped out of
in experience.
But there is a complication, even at that basic level.
It's partly because we abstract, combine, negate, disjoin, and do all sorts of other
things with our ideas that we can diverge far from reality.
But it's not only that.
There are other problems as well, because our ideas are weak in comparison with impressions.
Even the simple ideas are weak in comparison with the impression itself, even though there's
the same content.
The content matches exactly, but the force and the vacity, as Hume puts it, are very
different.
He says all ideas, especially abstract ones, are naturally faint and obscure.
The mind has but a slender hold of them.
There have to be confounded with other resembling ideas.
And when we have often employed any term, though without a distinct meaning, we're
up to imagine it has a determinate idea next to it.
So ideas are relatively faint, obscure, or weak.
And that's true even at the relatively simple level.
If we think about ideas of colors, those ideas are fairly weak.
If I show you the impressions, it's easy to tell them apart.
I might show you two different shades of paint I'm considering.
And when I hold the paint patches up, you can very clearly discern the difference between
them.
And the impression, the sensation is very strong, it's very vivid.
You see that they're different.
But now, you forget their names, you go back to the paint store and you say, well, I know
I like that one better than the other.
But which one was it?
And you go and you look at the chart now and you say, maybe you have luckily the same thought,
but maybe there's no chart.
Maybe the guy at the paint store says, well, I'm sorry, we're all out of charts, but what
was the name of the paint?
And you suddenly go, I don't remember.
And you try to call it up your mind.
He says, well, was it this one?
I don't know.
I have the idea of that color.
Maybe I can do remember the name or something like it, but the problem is I can't now distinguish
it.
If somebody says, yeah, all these things got mixed up and they're all mislabeled.
So is it this or is it that?
You may not know.
And maybe you've seen it, but maybe you no longer remember it.
The idea is weak in comparison with the impression.
The content's the same, but it lacks the same force.
It lacks the same velocity.
Well, impressions in contrast are strong.
When you're right there looking at the chip of paint, it's very prominent to you, right?
It's very strong.
It hits you hard as a word mentally, whereas the idea, the memory of it and so on, that's
much weaker.
So Hume says all impressions, all sensations, either outward or inward are strong and vivid.
The limits between there are more exactly determined.
Or is it easy to fall into any error or mistake in regard to them?
I can tell the difference between the paint chips when I'm looking at them directly, but
trying to remember them later or just saying, okay, I remember one was called Belgian chocolate
and the other was called German chocolate and which was which and which one did I like
better and what exactly did that German chocolate thing look like?
I may not be able to remember that.
Well Hume's method then is to say, if I want to understand the content of my ideas, I have
to go back to the impressions.
I have to go back to what they come from in experience.
Now in the case of a paint color, all right, that's not too hard.
I know what impression that came from.
And so I can go back to that.
I know the idea was a content and not where, yeah, you're just making up that German chocolate
thing.
No, no, no, I saw the chip.
I know, I saw it.
I may not remember now exactly what it looks like, but I know I saw it.
But a lot of more abstract ideas are not like that.
A few years ago, somebody came and gave a talk in the English department.
And the main concept of their talk was the concept of hegemony.
There was an older professor in the audience who heard the talk and stood up at the end
to ask a question and said, I have a very simple basic question.
What is hegemony?
And the speaker didn't know how to answer that, didn't know how to give a definition.
And that's one of those things where you might say, well, okay, a lot of academic discourse
is like that.
A lot of things that go on in the university involve terms that are very abstract, very
far removed from experience.
It's not at all like, oh, that German chocolate color I saw at the Sherwin-Williams store.
No, it's like something else.
It is much more abstract.
And you might think, wait, what is the content?
I don't know.
Here's somebody who had written a doctoral dissertation on it and couldn't give a definition.
And so you might think, well, wait a minute.
I mean, if that person doesn't know what the content is, how am I supposed to know what
the content is?
Now, that's not to say that particular concept or any other particular concept is meaningless
or contradictory or absurd or anything.
But humans say, look, it's super easy in that kind of abstract discourse to start talking
about things without really having a clear idea of what you're talking about, to use
terms without any ideas that are so vague, we have no idea what their content is.
So to understand this kind of thing, we have to trace it back.
Now, a lot of early analytic philosophers inspired by Hume thought that philosophers
of their era, and often they were idealists, personalists, for example, around the turn
of the century.
Or people like Heidegger, they attacked us using all sorts of meaningless concepts.
And indeed, a lot of those philosophers say things that are rather bizarre, absolute idealists
around the turn of the century were fond of talking about a world's soul, a soul of
a person that's already hard enough, but a soul of the world?
What does that mean?
What content could that possibly have?
Or Heidegger talks about nothingness, the nothing, as if that's an object.
I mean, what do you mean the nothing?
That's very strange.
Heidegger talks about the horizon.
Well, I think that actually does have a precise meaning, but it's not obvious what it is.
And so the analytic philosophers, look, I have a shirt.
I might have a personality, but do I have a horizon?
I don't know.
And he didn't mean, by the way, the physical horizon of where the earth meets the sky.
He meant something much more abstract.
So in short, you might say, I don't know what content these things have.
If they do have a content, I want to trace that back to experience.
So Hume often entertains a suspicion that people don't know what they're talking about.
And he says, when that happens, when we entertain any suspicion that a philosophical term is
employed without any meaning or idea, as is but too frequent, we need but inquire from
what impression is that supposed idea derived?
And if it be impossible to assign any, this will serve to confirm our suspicion.
By bringing ideas into so clear a light, we may reasonably hope to remove all dispute,
which may arise concerning their nature and reality.
So if somebody starts talking about some abstract idea, whether it's the nothing or
the horizon or hegemony or the world soul, Hume says, all right, look, from what impression
is this derived?
Okay, tell me what an experience generates this.
You've got an idea of a world soul?
Well, what do you mean?
Where'd you get that idea?
So maybe, well, I studied Neoplatonism, well, where'd the Neoplatonists get that idea?
Come on, I mean, what do you mean?
It's hard enough to figure out what a soul of a human being would be.
I don't know what this even means.
So where's the impression?
What are you talking about in the end?
And later, pragmatists will adapt this to their own purposes, as we'll see, and start
talking about the cash value of an idea.
What difference does it make to practice?
Say there is a world soul, or say there isn't, who cares?
What difference does it make?
And you might say something similar here, but Hume means something more specific, not
just what difference does it make in practical terms.
He means trace it back.
Where inexperience did this come from?
And if you just made it up out of thin air without an experience to back it up to give
it content, I'm going to say it has no content.
Maybe of course it will turn out it has a content that's very different from what you
think it is.
You've lost the thread.
And so, yeah, it did mean something, but you know what?
That makes everything you're saying absurd, if that's the meaning of it.
So we've got to watch out for both things.
Maybe it doesn't mean anything.
Maybe it means something really different, and you're misusing it.
Well Hume's method then is this.
We take our ideas and we're trying to figure out which ones are adequate, which ones actually
match experience.
So we trace them back to their simple impressions from which they're derived.
That's their real content.
Sometimes it will turn out we can't do it.
There is no real impression underlying this.
And so we end up saying this is just, you know, and maybe with world soul that's what's
going on.
There just is no content to that.
There is no impression underlying it.
We said, meaningless.
It doesn't mean anything at all.
Sometimes maybe it's contradictory.
We take apart the idea and we find out in the end it's not that it doesn't have any
corresponding impression.
It's that it has corresponding impressions that clash.
So in the end it looks like, gosh, it has a content.
But the content is sort of like round square.
It's something that is itself contradictory.
It makes no sense.
Sometimes it will turn out it does have a content, but it's not what we thought.
And so much of what we're saying about it turns out to be false.
So Hume will say, look at things like this, especially when you start entertaining this
suspicion that people don't know what they're talking about.
Say, look, what are you talking about?
Sometimes it's going to turn out to be nothing.
Sometimes it will be, well, something, but completely incoherent and contradictory.
Sometimes it just will be something surprising that isn't what they seem to be talking about
at all.
I want to go back to remind us quickly of what an empiricist thinks, because it brings out
another aspect of the method.
The question between judgment empiricists and judgment rationalists is the question of synthetic
a priori judgment.
Those other three categories everybody agrees about.
There are things that are analytic and a priori, synthetic and a posteriori.
Nobody thinks there's anything that's analytic and a posteriori.
The question is whether there can be anything that is synthetic a priori.
Something that's synthetic truly about the world and not just about language, but on
the other hand a priori, knowable independently of experience of the world.
The empiricist says, well, obviously not.
How could you know what the world without having experience of the world?
But the rationalist says, you can.
You can through reason alone, through reflection, through thought experiments, through things
like that.
The judgment empiricist says, yeah, I'm not going to believe that I can get anywhere purely
by examining my own mind purely through this idea of thought experiments and so on.
All that does is tell me about the relations of ideas inside my mind.
It doesn't take me outside my mind to the world.
That implies that from an empiricist point of view, there are only two kinds of knowledge.
All knowledge, assuming that there is any content at all to what somebody claims to know, it's
got to go back to one of those two categories.
It's got to be either analytic and a priori or synthetic and a posteriori.
Either it's an empirical truth about the world as natural sciences, that's the synthetic
a posteriori part, or it's analytic a priori in the sense that it is purely verbal, purely
a matter of logic, but in that way doesn't tell us anything directly about the world,
but still it's something knowable independently of experience.
Lots of things are like that from an empiricist point of view, at least from the point of
view of Hume and many other empiricists, logic is like that, knowledge on the basis of definitions
is like that, mathematics is like that.
So I can know that a bachelor is a bachelor, or that a bachelor is unmarried, or that one
plus one is two, purely on the basis of definitions.
I don't need experience of the world because they're not really about the world.
But anything that really is about the world, like there are more than a dozen chairs in
this room, that requires experience.
I can't know that just by reflecting on chairs and rooms, I have to actually have experience
of the room.
And that means that's synthetic and a posteriori.
I need experience to gain that knowledge of the world.
So there are two kinds of knowledge.
Basically there's a kind of knowledge you find in logic, in definitions, in mathematics,
in dictionaries, there's the kind of knowledge you find in natural science, history and other
things that are really describing the world on the basis of experience.
That's it, there's nothing else.
So what does that exclude?
Well we might take a look at various things that rationalists have called synthetic a priori
truths.
We've looked at this list before, so I'll just remind you a little bit of the kind
of thing here.
Avicenna talks about the whole being greater than the parts, or things equal to the same
thing being equal to each other.
For Descartes, I think, I am.
Nothing's made from nothing.
What's been done can't be undone.
Nothing could be and not be at the same time.
Could exist and not exist at the same time, but also, for example, could not be red and
green all over at the same time.
Leibniz, no fact without a sufficient reason why it should be so and not otherwise.
Kant, every event has a cause.
Seven plus five is twelve and every other mathematical truth, including the truths of
geometry, like between any two points lies one and only one line.
All of those are examples of synthetic a priori truths, and of course philosophers have
had their candidates, too.
Things like God exists, the soul is immortal, the world consists of substances and attributes,
the will is free, every substance has an essence, you ought to seek the good, happiness is intrinsically
good, courage is a virtue, and so on.
Well, if we take a look at all of these, you've says, and examine them and try to understand
where they're coming from and whether they're legitimate, we only have a few choices.
So he gives us a test for nonsense.
Hume says, when we run over libraries persuaded of these principles, what havoc must we make?
If we take in our hand any volume of divinity or school metaphysics, for instance, let us
ask, does it contain any abstract reasoning concerning quantity or number?
No.
Does it contain any experimental reasoning concerning matter of fact and existence?
No.
Commit it then to the flames, for it can contain nothing but sophistry and illusion.
So Hume is saying something rather remarkable here.
Commit it to the flames.
Either it's got abstract reasoning concerning quantity or number, in other words, it's got
logic and mathematics in it, in which case it's knowledge, it's analytic, it's not really
knowledge of the world, but it may be highly useful anyway, or what about experimental reasoning
concerning matter of fact and existence?
That's highly useful.
That's what natural science is in a different way.
It's what history is, political sciences, economics is, and so on.
All of those are really expressing truths about the world.
Don't think of experimental here as just within a laboratory.
Really it's a question of matters of fact about the world.
That's fine too.
But there are all sorts of other things that aren't like that.
So let's run down that list and find out what we do with them.
Nothing has to be classified as either analytic or synthetic, or as utterly meaningless.
So we look through.
As empiricists, the whole is greater than its parts, almost certainly Hume would say,
that's analytic.
It's just a question of the meaning of whole in part.
Things equal to the same thing or equal to each other.
He said that's part of the meaning of equality, analytic.
Nothing's made from nothing.
Now that seems to be a claim about the world.
Nothing just pops into existence.
Nothing is made out of nothing.
Things have to be made out of other things.
If I'm going to have a factory that is going to produce some object, I've got to have inputs
to my factory.
I can't just say, Alakazam, and poof, it goes out of nothing.
But that seems like a claim about the world.
There's no conceptual absurdity about a magician or a wizard suddenly creating something out
of thin air.
Could happen.
It's not incoherent in the sense of being logically contradictory.
So it's not an analytic truth that nothing is made from nothing.
It's a claim about the world.
So humans say, well, but look, it's pretty darn well established, right?
It's on the basis of experience.
We say that things don't just pop out of thin air.
Things are made out of other things.
It's impossible for anything to be and not be at the same time.
Well, be and not be, it's part of the meaning of negation, that that's true, he would say.
What's been done can't be undone.
That seems to be a claim about the world.
After all, I can erase what I've written on a page.
Here we mean really go back into the past.
It's something like saying time travel is impossible.
Well, that's a claim about the world.
That's not just an analytic truth, and it can't be anything else.
It's a factual claim about the world.
Might turn out to be true.
Might turn out to be false.
Kurt Girdle showed that there are actually circular time loops that are consistent with
the axioms of general relativity.
So who knows?
Every event has a cause.
Similarly, that's a claim about the world.
Might turn out to be true.
Might turn out to be false if there are truly random events in quantum mechanics, for example.
But then we turn to the philosophical ones, and now Hume says, look, a lot of these might
turn out to be meaningless.
God exists.
That's surely not analytic.
It's a claim about the world.
Might be true or false about the world.
And does it even have a meaning?
We have to inquire into the content of the concept God, and trace that back to its origin
and experience.
Maybe we can do that.
Maybe we can't.
And so some empiricists have said we can, some others have said we can't, controversial.
So it might be a synthetic claim.
It might, on the other hand, be meaningless if you think that your concept of God is one
that can't be tied back to any kind of impression.
What about the soul is immortal?
Well, depends on this question of the soul, right?
I mean, mortal, that we can find the origins for an experience.
People experience death.
They see things die.
So that's not a problem.
We can negate the concept of being mortal and get immortal.
But what about soul?
Here we have to say, well, I don't know.
So that's why that was also controversial.
Maybe it's a factual claim about the world that there are such things as souls in the
world and that those things can survive death.
But on the other hand, maybe it's really meaningless if it turns out that we can't make any sense
of the idea of soul.
So once again, there's a place where we may or may not be able to use the empiricist method
to trace back the content of our concept of a soul.
What about the freedom of the will?
Well, it's the same thing in a way.
It's similarly controversial.
What do we mean by the will?
What do we mean by freedom?
Maybe we can make good sense of that, but if we can, that seems to be a claim about the
world and about this thing called the will.
But maybe we can't, in which case that's really a meaningless claim.
Maybe substance has an essence.
Again, this idea of a substance, well, Locke thinks we can trace that back to experience.
Hume and Barclay think we can't.
What about an essence?
Actually all of these empiricists after Locke tend to be suspicious of that notion.
Locke thinks we can make good sense of the concept of an essence.
Barclay and Hume deny it.
So we're going to see a sharp divide among empiricists on that one.
You ought to seek the good.
Well, we might worry that obligation or the good actually turns out to be meaningless
and we can't trace it back to experience in the right way.
So maybe that turns out to be meaningless, or maybe it's simply analytic.
That's how the good is defined, that which is worth seeking.
And then finally courage is a virtue.
Maybe that's just part of the definition of courage, but maybe it's a synthetic claim
about the world that in general it's a good thing to be courageous, or maybe we end up
saying courage or more likely virtue.
We don't know how to make sense of that in purely experiential terms.
So with all of these we apply Hume's method.
And sometimes we say, that's not synthetic a priori.
That's not a real truth about the world that we can only discover through reason alone,
but that, well I shouldn't say only discover, that we can discover through reason only without
experience of the world.
Instead we have to say either it's analytic, like holes are greater than their parts, or
it's a synthetic claim about the world, like you can't go back and change the past, or
it's something that's utterly meaningless.
So what if it's utterly meaningless?
Well Hume says quite figuratively, I hope, commit it to the flames.
Or more rationally you might say, don't pay any attention to it.
You can gain nothing from it.
It's meaningless.
It has no content.
So you will learn nothing from it.
You can gain no knowledge from it.
And lots of people talk nonsense.
You would say, look, this isn't a problem if people didn't talk nonsense all the time,
but they do.
And so hang around the university for a while, you'll find all sorts of people talking nonsense.
And it's not just in universities, tune into the media.
A lot of people are talking nonsense.
It happens all around you.
And it happens day to day.
It happens in almost every setting.
You encounter people, they start talking about things.
Sometimes those things are really things about the world.
You understand their content.
Maybe they're true.
Maybe they're false.
But sometimes they don't mean anything at all.
So Hume says, be on your guard.
And even though I am not going to tell you, commit anything to the flames, I think it's
a really bad idea, I will tell you there are things that you really should ignore.
And you should simply say, yeah, I'm going to learn nothing out of this.
Nothing good can come from this.
Thank you.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
