Hi, I want to talk to you today about Immanuel Kant's Copernican Revolution in philosophy.
Kant sees himself as doing for philosophy, just what Copernicus did to astronomy and
to our general perspective on the universe.
Kant thinks he's switching our perspective on the entire philosophical universe.
And in some sense, he did.
Richard Rorty has said that Kant is the person who turned philosophy into a profession,
basically because his thinking was so difficult that you had to be a professional to understand
it.
And Kant is difficult.
Nevertheless, he transformed the philosophical world in a fundamental way, everyone writing
after Kant, whether they approve of his revolution or not.
Nevertheless, he is in some sense responding to Kant and seeing things in the light of
what Kant argued and what Kant accomplished.
What did Kant accomplish?
I think there's a sense in which he was right that he did fundamentally transform the way
we think about certain philosophical problems.
But there's another sense in which he was doing the reverse of what he claimed.
He really wasn't like Copernicus, as I'll argue.
He is somebody who was like the inverse of Copernicus, somebody who switched our perspective
but away from something like Copernicus's perspective toward something much more ancient.
At any event, let's take a look at the view that Kant describes as transcendental idealism.
It is, from one point of view, a kind of idealism.
Nevertheless, it's not exactly a traditional kind of idealism, and in fact, in his greatest
work, The Critique of Pure Reason, Kant argues against idealism.
He has a section entitled The Refutation of Idealism.
So if transcendental idealism is an idealism at all, it's a very odd kind of idealism,
as we'll see.
That phrase, Critique of Pure Reason, should be understood as ambiguous.
In part, he is critiquing pure reason and pointing out that it has severe limits.
On the other hand, it is also a critique conducted by pure reason.
It is pure reason's critique.
And so in that way, it is really something like pure reason critiquing itself.
Well, what did Copernicus do?
Copernicus transformed our understanding of the universe and transformed the science
of astronomy by reversing our perspective on our position in the universe.
He did it by saying, look, according to an older conception, we are at the center of
the universe.
The Earth is at the center.
Everything revolves around us.
However, he said that's not right.
Instead something else is at the center, at least, of the solar system.
We revolve around it.
So here is an earlier Ptolemaic conception of the universe.
There in the center is the Earth.
The Sun revolves around the Earth.
And then other things revolve around the Earth as well, including the outer spheres containing
the stars.
Copernicus, on the other hand, said, no, no, it's not like that at all.
In fact, the Sun is at the center of the solar system.
The Earth and the other planets revolve around it.
Well, Kant sees himself as doing something like that.
Now exactly why?
Why does he think he's transforming our perspective in this?
Well, he sees himself as responding to the contrast between rationalism and empiricism,
a contrast that dominated early modern philosophy.
Kant himself was brought up in the rationalist tradition.
He was a student of Christian Wolf, who was a student of Leibniz.
And so he thought of things very much as Leibniz had.
He sees himself as part of that rationalist tradition.
However, he says that then he read David Hume, and Hume awoke him from his dogmatic slumber.
At that point, he changed his perspective and realized that he had to do something to
try to combine the insights of both the empiricist and the rationalist tradition.
How did he do it?
Well, the rationalists, people like Galvesena, Descartes, and Leibniz, had held that universality
and necessity, the kind you find in scientific laws, for example, but also in mathematics,
required synthetic a priori knowledge, knowledge of the world that was independent of experience.
We weren't gaining a knowledge of universality from our particular experiences.
We weren't gaining knowledge of necessity from our contingent experiences.
Instead, they were being supplied from some other source, something that was not from
experience at all, not a posteriori, so it had to be a priori.
But it was really telling us something about the world, not just about language or concepts,
and so it had to be synthetic as well.
Well, Hume said, I think you've got the problem right, but the solution wrong.
You're right that universality and necessity, causation, and a variety of other things aren't
coming from your contingent and particular experiences of the world.
However, they aren't coming from reason at all.
There is no synthetic a priori savior waiting in the background to say, I have the cause
and the concepts you need, I have the principles you need, I'm going to allow you to get to
those conclusions.
Instead, Hume says, look, here's what's going on.
You see something happen a bunch of times, you get a feeling of expectation that it will
happen again.
It's that feeling, it's that sentiment inside you.
It's not something rational.
There is no bit of knowledge underlying it.
Instead, it is simply a passion.
It is custom or habit, but here, not a kind of cultural custom, instead a custom or habit
of the mind.
The mind does this, but why does it do it?
Because it has this feeling inside.
So it's all based on something internal, these internal impressions to use his language.
Kant says, I think Hume is right that the source is in us.
But he's wrong to say it's something outside of reason.
It's just a feeling, it's just sentiment.
Kant says instead, no, it is something inside us.
In that respect, he's right.
But it's really part of reason itself.
So in that sense, he remains in the rationalist tradition.
He says Descartes, Leibniz, other rationalists basically had it right, in that there are
synthetic a priori bits of knowledge that supply the gaps here that take us from contingent
particular experience to universal and necessary conclusions.
But it's not as if they are things that are sort of automatic.
And once we realize their character, we realize they're very limited in what they can do
for us, they can apply to the appearances, the things we actually perceive in experience,
but they have no further application.
Well, how does he get there?
Here's the question Kant asks, and it's a disturbing but very fundamental question.
Do our concepts revolve around objects, as realists, for example, think, or do the objects
revolve around our concepts?
We've talked about the possible gap between mind and world.
And now we can say, well, you might think the problem is that the world is what it is,
and mind has the job of conforming itself to the world.
Kant says, what if it's the reverse?
What if the mind is what it is, and the world has to conform to it?
That's his revolution.
There isn't that serious a gap between mind and world, not because mind is adapted to
understanding the world, but because the world is adapted to being understood by mind.
Here's how he puts it.
It is hitherto been assumed that our knowledge must conform to the objects, but all attempts
to ascertain anything about these objects a priori by means of concepts, and thus to
extend the range of our knowledge, have been rendered abortive by this assumption.
Let us then make the experiment whether we may not be more successful in metaphysics
if we assume that the objects must conform to our knowledge.
Well, that is his remarkable revolution.
He says, the problem isn't getting our ideas to conform to the objects in the world.
Instead, it's the objects problem to conform to our mind.
Now, that's a bit surprising, right?
I mean, you might think, look, it's my job to investigate, to find out about the world.
Kant says, relax.
It's the world's job to conform itself to you.
Now, at first glance, that seems bizarre.
You might say, no, I don't think it's really like that.
It's a little harder than that, right?
Why would I have to go to school if it's the world's job to conform itself to my mind?
It looks like I don't have to learn anything.
I don't have to exert any effort.
It's the world's job to match me.
But of course, that's not quite what he means.
What he means is that our minds are constituted in such a way that they can only process the
information that our bodies and our minds are receiving from the world in certain ways.
And they form out of that information they're receiving, a conception of objects.
Those objects, as we understand them, are constructed by the mind.
He was right about that.
Objects are being constructed by us.
But he's saying to that extent, the objects have to conform to the mind because the mind
is building them.
But the world is giving us this information.
It's not as if that's a bizarre idea.
No, the world is somehow transmitting information to us.
But then we are processing that information.
And what we do with it forces it to conform to the structures of our mind.
So the objects, as we understand them, are part of the output of that process.
So of course, they conform to the mind.
It's not the mind's job to conform to those objects.
Those objects are constructed in such a way that they do conform to the basic structures
of my mind.
That's how it's possible for me to know something a priori about them.
Let's take a look at how Caught compares himself to Copernicus.
He says, we may make the same experiment with regard to the intuition of objects.
If the intuition, and here he means intuition in the sense in which Avicenna used the term,
it's something like sensation or perception, not just sort of what we mean by intuition
where I can't really explain it but I have this feeling.
It's not feeling.
It's really a matter of sensation or sensibility.
Anyway, if the intuition must conform to the nature of the objects, I don't see how we
could know anything of them a priori.
If on the other hand, the object conforms to the nature of our faculty of intuition,
that is to say our faculties of sensation and of understanding, I can then easily conceive
the possibility of such an a priori knowledge.
So if it's my job to match the world, I have no reason to think that my mind is built in
such a way that I could have a priori knowledge of the way that world is.
That world is independent of my mind.
It's far into my mind.
I have no reason to believe that my mind matches it and certainly no guarantee that it will.
So it looks as if I can't know anything about an a priori independently of experience of
it, but if the world is something that has to conform to me, or let's be more precise
really, if the objects have to conform themselves to me because I'm the one constructing out
of all this information I encounter, then I can know something about them a priori.
So Kant says, we here propose to do just what Copernicus did in attempting to explain the
celestial movements.
When he found that he could make no progress by assuming that all the heavenly bodies revolved
around the spectator, he reversed the process and tried the experiment of assuming that
the spectator revolved while the stars remained at rest.
So earlier people thought the heavenly bodies are revolving around us, but instead Copernicus
said, what if we're revolving around this particular heavenly body, the sun?
That changes the perspective.
We're revolving it's stationary.
It's not the case that we're stationary and everything's revolving around us.
Now I mentioned that I think Kant is in a sense doing the reverse.
Why?
Because realism would say our concepts have to revolve around an external world, a world
that is external, a world of objects that are independent of our minds.
But Kant says, no, no, no, the world of objects revolves around us.
The world of objects has to revolve around our concepts.
Our concepts aren't revolving around those objects.
So I think there's a sense in which this is really a Ptolemaic revolution.
That is really taking us back to a picture where we're at the center of the world.
We're at the center in the sense that our minds are constructing the objects in the
world.
And so the structure of the world is the result of the structure of my mind.
Think of it this way.
Earlier philosophers thought of, let's say, a window on the world, or a mirror.
In fact, a common image was the mind is the mirror of the world.
And so the mirror might get cloudy, it might get dusty, it might get broken.
But the understanding was, look, it's essentially a mirror of the world, at least when it's
working well.
That's the ideal.
Kant's saying, what if it's more like a projector?
The world is something like what's displayed on a screen.
And the world is the projector, projecting it onto that screen.
Now, of course, there's some input into the projector.
I mean, it's receiving some information from something.
It has a film strip or a digital file.
It's doing something that it's processing and producing that projection.
Nevertheless, you might say, if I know something about that projector, then I can know something
before I even see the images projected about what they're going to be like.
I might know, OK, the projector is like this.
Suppose I know, for example, it just produces black and white images.
Then I'll know that what I'm about to see is in black and white.
It's not going to be in color.
And I can know that before I even see what's on the screen, because I understand the structure
of the projector.
Now, if this is something like a mirror, you might say, look, I don't know what's going
to be on the mirror.
I have to know what it's reflecting.
That's the more traditional perspective.
But if the mind is like a projector, then if I understand the nature of the projector,
I'll understand something about the nature of what's going to be projected before I
even have any experience of what is actually projected.
In just the same sense, if the mind is like a projector, if it's the mind that is giving
structure to the objects of the world, then it is possible for me to know something about
those objects a priori, independently of experience of them, because I can understand something
of the nature of the projector.
So there is a sense in which Kant is really saying, look, the mind doesn't have to revolve
around the world.
The world revolves around the mind.
And by putting ourselves at the center, that's the sense in which I think he's really doing
something like the reverse of the Copernican Revolution.
So here is how he describes it.
And you'll see here how he gets to rationalist conclusions.
He says, before objects are given to me, that is, a priori, I must presuppose in myself
laws of the understanding, which are expressed in concepts a priori.
To these concepts, then, all the objects of experience must necessarily conform.
So in order for me to be able to understand anything about objects, a priori, independently
of experience, there must be certain laws of the understanding.
In other words, before I know anything independently of experience about what's going to be projected
on that screen, I have to know something of the laws by which that projector operates.
And there better be concepts I have a priori, concepts, ways, in other words, I have of
understanding things that are independent of what I'm getting off the images on the screen.
So I have to have some innate ideas, I have to have some synthetic a priori knowledge,
these laws of the understanding.
So Kant does turn out to be a rationalist in something like the traditional sense.
There are innate ideas, these pure concepts of the understanding, something that he calls
the categories, and we'll talk about those separately.
There also have to be synthetic a priori truths, which he calls the laws of the understanding.
If there are these categories built into the mind, these a priori concepts or innate ideas,
and there are also synthetic a priori truths or laws of the understanding, understanding
those is going to enable me to understand the nature of this projector.
And that will enable me to understand something universal and necessary about what is about
to be projected in experience, even independently of and prior to experience.
However, something important is, you might say, a byproduct of this way of understanding
things.
These things apply only within the realm of experience.
I can say something universal and necessary about what's going to appear on that screen.
I can say, okay, it's going to be black and white, and it's going to be of a certain
kind of resolution, because I know something about the nature of the projector.
But now if you say, okay, fine, tell me something about the input that projector is receiving.
I have to say, I don't really know.
Or maybe I do.
Maybe I know enough about the projector to say a little bit about it, to say, well, it
only understands digital files.
Or it's an old-fashioned one.
It only takes a film strip.
You can't take a flash drive and do anything, and it won't play a DVD and so forth.
So I might know something very general about the input, but I'm not going to know much
about it.
If you want to say, yeah, I want to know what's in these digital files.
For example, if that's the input, I can tell you, here's what it's capable of doing with
them, and so I can tell you it's going to be of this resolution, and it's all going to
be in black and white, and it's going to be a projection on this screen of that size.
But that's all I can say.
I can't tell you anything about what is actually going to be in the input.
And so I can only say something about things as I'm going to experience them.
I can tell you something about what will be on the screen.
I can't tell you anything about the world beyond what's on the screen.
So I can't tell you anything about the inputs.
And just so, Cart will say, I can come up with universal and necessary knowledge, independently
of experience now, and that's a beautiful thing.
But it applies only to the realm of experience.
If you then say, well, I'm interested in things going beyond experience, like I'm interested
in the nature of God.
I'm interested in the nature of the will and whether the will is free.
I want to know whether we have a soul and whether that soul is mortal or immoral, if
it exists.
Kant says, I can't tell you any of that, okay?
That's not something that's covered here.
I can't say a word about any of that.
I can tell you something about what kinds of experiences you're capable of having.
But that's all.
I can't tell you about anything.
And in fact, it will turn out I actually can't tell you anything about things as they are
in themselves.
I can tell you something about the appearances, something about the way they're going to look
to us and experience.
I can't tell you what they really are independently of that experience.
Kant gives us a kind of transcendental argument.
We've seen this in Descartes, but Kant is the one who makes this form of argument really
famous.
Here's the general structure of it.
Q is a necessary condition for the possibility of P. In other words, P would not even be possible
if it weren't the case that Q.
But P is the case.
P is not only possible, it really is actual.
Therefore, Q.
Well, in the form Kant uses it, it takes on this structure.
Descartes had talked about clear and distinct ideas using this form of argument.
Kant says this, a priori concepts and laws of the understanding are necessary conditions
for the possibility of experience.
Experience would not even be possible unless we had some of these a priori concepts and
laws of the understanding.
To put it in terms of my metaphor, it's as if he's saying, look, nothing would be on
that screen if we didn't have a projector.
And that seems possible.
It's like, look, in order for anything to appear on the screen of experience, something
has to be projecting it if we don't have a projector.
And if it doesn't work, if it doesn't have any structure and it won't do anything, nothing
will appear on the screen.
Experience wouldn't even be possible.
But experience is possible.
We're having an experience right now.
So he says there have to be a priori concepts, there have to be laws of the understanding.
But what results is, well, we only know in things a priori what we ourselves place in
them.
We know nothing about what they are in themselves.
We only know what we put into them.
So the laws that govern the realm of experience are in us.
Those are those laws of the understanding.
But that does mean that we can know things only as they're experienced by us, not as
they are in themselves.
So I mentioned at the outset that Kant does end up being a rationalist, but an odd kind
of rationalist.
He ends up being, well, kind of an idealist, but an odd kind of idealist.
Something of a realist, you could argue, but an odd kind of realist.
Here are the questions on which he agrees with either Descartes or Hume.
Descartes here being the paradigm of a rationalist of the early modern period, and Hume being
the paradigm of an empiricist of the early modern period.
Is there synthetic a priori knowledge?
Descartes, the rationalist, says yes.
Hume, the empiricist, says no.
Kant says yes.
It's based on those laws of the understanding.
It applies only within the realm of experience, but we do have synthetic a priori knowledge.
So there he's agreeing with Descartes and Leibniz and the other rationalists.
Does that knowledge extend beyond experience?
Descartes says yes.
I can prove the existence of God, for example.
I can talk about primary qualities, matching our ideas, that is to say, of primary qualities,
matching the qualities that are really in the thing.
Hume says no.
We don't have any knowledge beyond experience.
All of our knowledge that is not purely verbal is merely a posteriori.
Kant says no.
He agrees with Hume about that.
We can have synthetic a priori knowledge, but it does not extend beyond the realm of experience.
Can we know the world as it is?
Not just as it appears to us, but as it really is, independently of us.
Descartes, Leibniz and the other rationalists say yes.
Hume says no.
In fact, I'm not even sure what you mean, Hume would say, about this world as it is beyond
the realm of experience.
What's that?
You're talking about substances?
You're talking about actual, ah, none of that makes any sense.
Kant agrees with Hume here.
He says no.
You can't have any knowledge of the world as it is.
And so we can't know anything beyond experience.
We can't know the world as it is.
We can only know something about it as it appears on the screen of experience.
But of the things that we ordinarily think of as objects, that he calls objects of experience
or appearances, well, we can know lots of things about those.
Let me show you what Kant is really doing.
Kant is transforming our way of understanding how the mind relates to objects.
So let's start with Plato in the little picture we've drawn.
Here is a mind and a thought of an object.
Let's say a triangle since I've been talking about those all semester.
What's going on there according to Plato?
Well in part it's that triangle affecting the mind, causally in some way through perception.
We recognize that thing as a triangle, so I'm able to think of this thing as a triangle
only by virtue of having access somehow to a form, an abstract universal triangularity.
And so the mind is also turned toward that form of triangularity.
That's the form.
And the object participates in the form.
So I'm actually capable of knowing that's a triangle because my mind manages to relate
itself to the form that actually is in the object.
So this constitutes not only thinking that this object is a triangle, but also if it
really is a triangle then getting it right and having knowledge that it's a triangle.
The first thing that Kant does is to say, hmm, these forms and these innate ideas really
along the way.
I have something like an idea of triangularity that relates to that form.
This particular thought that that thing is a triangle is mobilizing that general concept
or idea and according to Plato then that would be an idea of triangularity, would relate
to this directly.
But Kant says, really, I don't think there's anything out here.
I'm talking about pure concepts of the understanding.
So actually, let's think of the mind as extending to include that form.
That is to say, the forms could really be understood as identified with the concepts
now.
I don't even have to draw that distinction.
I can just say, this is now a pure concept, one of these a priori concepts.
And then I can say, aha, what's going on here?
The object participates in that?
Actually the object is formed by my conceptual activity.
So this arrow goes in one direction.
This is something like a relationship, not just a participation, but a projection.
So the mind is projecting this object of experience.
Well, wait, that object of experience was causing me to have this thought.
That's a triangle, right?
Kant says, well, not exactly, not exactly.
This is really a creature of the mind.
Now something is, my mind is presumably getting some kind of input here through perception.
So I've got a faculty of sensibility here.
I'll say, this is like my eye.
And something is giving me this.
This is the thing in itself, the thing as it is independently of my mind.
But this thing, the thing that is being projected by my mind, that's an object of experience
or an appearance.
So he does talk about these in several different ways, an object of experience, which is the
same thing in his language as an appearance.
And he then introduces a technical term for that, drawing from ancient Greek sources and
says, objects like this are phenomena, phenomenon for one of them.
But I'll make them all plural here, since I made that one plural.
The phenomena are the appearances, they're the objects of experience.
And now we can say, oh, wait, I see what's going on here.
Something, it's something like, look, the projector is getting some kind of information,
right?
It's some kind of input.
It's projecting this stuff on the screen.
So this is something like the image on the screen being projected by the projector.
This is whatever the projector is using to generate what it's doing and doing the projection.
Well, what is that exactly?
I don't have direct experience of that.
Or at least let's put it this way.
It does seem like I do in the sense that it's, I guess, having some effect on me.
In the first edition of the Critique of Pure Reason, he's happy to say, yes, I'm gathering
information and this thing in itself is in some way causing my mind to start this process,
causing me to have this perception and so on.
But as we'll see later, cause turns out to be one of these categories that applies only
within the realm of experience.
And by the realm of experience, he means the kinds of things that are projected on that
screen.
So these aren't projected.
So well, or in a certain sense they are, but they don't appear there as anything like
this form.
So in the end, he says, I can't actually officially save it.
This is causal.
So really, I'm going to take this arrow and kind of make it dotted to indicate there's
something happening here, right?
Something is going into the projector, I guess, if I can even say going in, but what
the relationship is between my mind sensibility and the thing in itself I can't really quite
say.
Now, once we've got something like this picture, and by the way, this is something that is
already in a sense in Barkley, even in a sense in Descartes and Locke, because now the question
is, this thing is what we've referred to as the cause.
Here I'm going to put cause in scare quotes.
We can't officially say that in constant.
Not really a cause.
It's not clear what it is.
Over here, we've got something like what actually appears.
And now the question is, what's the relationship between these two?
What's the relationship between that triangle as it appears in experience and the thing
in itself, whatever is affecting the mind ultimately to lead it to experience that triangle
as we experience it?
There are different approaches we might take.
So for example, Aristotle would say, well, I'll tell you what this relationship is,
it's identity.
The cause of perception is represented in the perception and is represented in the way
that these objects of experience are.
So actually the object of experience, the appearance, that is just the thing in itself.
That is the cause of perception.
Well, that's one answer.
Descartes and Locke say, well, that's a little too simple.
Because after all, it's really the atoms.
It is something described by physics that is having an effect on our bodies and that
our minds project something, but it includes primary qualities as well as secondary qualities.
And the primary qualities are really in the thing itself, but the secondary qualities
aren't.
So the shape, the motion, yeah, that's in the thing itself.
However, the color, the texture, the taste, the smell, that's something being supplied
by the mind.
That's only part of the phenomenon.
So if you're Descartes or Locke, you're going to say this isn't exactly identity, but there
is a relation of similarity between them.
They're going to share primary qualities, but they won't share secondary qualities.
In fact, the secondary qualities won't be down here at all.
What else could we say?
Well, Barclay looks at this picture and says, I don't like this at all, because once we
get rid of the identity, now the skeptic can come in and say, aha, there's this unbridgeable
gulf between the objects of experience and the things themselves.
How can we ever know anything about the world we can't?
And so, indeed, this is the point of the argument from comparison in Philo and in Sextus.
We can never get across that gap.
We have no idea whether our objects, as constructed, whether the appearances match anything in
reality.
And so we'd end up in skepticism.
Barclay says, well, it'd be great if we could identify these.
As Aristotle does, it would be great if we could say the primary qualities at least match
as Descartes and Locke do, but he says, since I can't experience these, I got no way to
do that.
So what does Barclay do?
He says, get rid of those, OK?
Get rid of the things in themselves.
Then no problem.
You're an idealist.
And so idealism is usually construed, does exactly that.
Get rid of the thing in itself.
And we're going to look at the philosophy of Hegel.
That is one of the main criticisms that Hegel makes of Kant.
He says, you don't need the thing in itself.
Get rid of it.
And then we've got idealism in its traditional form.
Well, what is Kant doing?
He doesn't identify them.
He doesn't say they're similar, and I'll tell you in what respects they're similar,
as Descartes and Locke do.
He doesn't get rid of the thing in itself entirely, as Barclay and Hegel do.
So what does he do?
He leaves it a question.
Now, when it first comes out, well, that's just great, Kant.
But I think that is precisely the way it gets left.
In the end, he says, there are the objects of experience, the appearances, the phenomena.
We can know about those.
We can know things about them in a synthetic, a priori fashion.
I can really know about the world, not just verbal truths about these, not just logic,
not just math even.
But I can know all sorts of things about these because I can know something about what's
going to be projected on the screen by understanding the projector.
So I can know something about these in a synthetic, a priori fashion.
I can't know anything about these.
I can't know anything about them synthetic, a priori, but actually, he's going to say,
I can't know anything about this relation.
Now he will argue, in that section I referred to, the refutation of idealism.
They have to be here.
Don't get rid of them.
They're doing something.
But I can't tell you what they're doing.
And in principle, I can't tell you what they're doing.
They lie beyond the realm of experience.
They're not on the screen.
And I can only base my knowledge on what's in my mind and what's on that screen.
So I can't know what the relationship is.
In fact, I can't officially even say they exist because existence is something I use
for the things that are on the screen.
But look, I can't get rid of them.
If you say, but they don't exist, no, it won't work if we do that.
And so we'll see why later.
But that, as I see it, is where it leaves us.
We're in a picture where something like the forms, these abstract universals,
they're in the head as these a priori concepts of the understanding.
We project the objects of experience.
So we can know something about the objects of experience before we even
encounter the inexperience.
We can know this a priori because we can understand the nature of this projection.
But can we know anything about the inputs to the process and
how they relate to what appears on the screen of experience?
No, in the end, we can't know anything about that at all.
