Hi. I want to talk to you today about Plato's metaphysics. Plato is perhaps the greatest
metaphysician of the Western tradition. Alfred North Whitehead once said that all Western
philosophy is really a series of footnotes to Plato. And it's this part of his doctrine
that he really had primarily in mind. Plato gives us a distinctive view, so distinctive
that actually this general kind of view, even today, tends to be known as Platonism. It's
often also called realism, but realism can mean different things. It's a specific kind
of realism. But Platonism is still recognized as one of the most common, one of the most
powerful, and even today, one of the most popular approaches to philosophy. So what
is Platonism, and how do we understand it? I have a separate video in which I talk about
the distinction between universals and particulars. But it's crucial to getting us going, so
I want to remind you of the general shape of that distinction. A universal is something
that can have multiple instances, but a particular cannot. So particulars are things that there's
only one of. You can't have multiple instances of them. I'm a good example. Dan Bonobat,
or any other person for that matter, is a particular. I'm a particular person. As you
could probably tell from this slide, I was talking in another course when I first made
it up about the beginnings of the First World War. So the other person I had in mind was
Gavrilo Principi, the guy who started the war by assassinating the Archduke. The Empire
State Building, or the Pericostinata Library, a particular beach ball, a particular watch,
this grain of sand, a particular city like Austin, or the state of Texas, or Sarajevo,
a particular date or time, an event like the assassination of the Archduke. All of those
are examples of particulars. You can't have a bunch of them. Even if you somehow cloned
me and produced a bunch of people who looked like me, they would all be copies of Dan Bonobat.
And you might joke and say, oh, now there are many Dan Bonobats. But actually, that would
turn that term into a kind term. There would still be just one of me. There would then
be a bunch of copies of me. So particulars, there's only one of them. They can't have
multiple instances. But a universal has multiple instances. You can find it all over the place.
So here are some examples. There are properties like red, or triangular, or large. Relations
like being between, being on something, or loving someone, being friends with someone.
Relations like tiger, or building, pencil, shortstop. Some of these are natural kinds,
like tiger. You find them there in nature. Others are human artifacts, or socially defined,
like pencil or shortstop. There can be books, books like the Bible, or the novel, Edwin
Mulhouse. They're musical works, Lucanbach, Texas, or Box, Takata, and Fugue, and D Minor.
You can find many copies of those musical works. You might find sheet music. You might
find them in a sort of digital form. They might be on a record album. They might be
on a CD. I might start humming the tune. And I could sit down at the piano, maybe, and
start playing the Takata, and Fugue, and D Minor. Actually, it's an organ piece. I would
get into trouble because I wouldn't have pedals. But in any case, those are things that there
can be many, many different instances of. Well, there's nobody much doubts that particulars
are real. You and I exist in the world, if anything does. But are universals real? Well,
there are different attitudes about that. The realist says yes. Not only do they exist,
but they're mind independent. They're really, in some sense, out there. They're not just
concepts. The conceptualist says, I agree with you, they really exist. But I think they are
just concepts. I think they are really, in the end, dependent on the mind. The nominalist
says, I don't think they exist at all. There are no such things. Everything that exists
is a particular object. There is no such thing as humanity. There are simply particular people.
There's no such thing as the color red. They're just a bunch of red things. And so, the realist,
and as we'll see, Plato is the paradigmatic realist, says yes, they really are constituents
of the world. And they're really out there. They're not in here. They are real mind independent
constituents of the world.
Well, as I've said, he is the paradigmatic realist. He is the first one who says yes,
universals are crucial to understanding anything. And he calls them forms. These forms are these
mind independent universals. So, in the Republic, but also in a variety of other works, he lays
out what is known as Plato's theory of forms, trying to explain what they're like, what
access we have to them, how they make possible all sorts of things about our relationship
to the world.
Now why on earth would you think these forms exist? What's the point of them? Well, here
is his idea. And it's, at first glance, an odd idea. He says, look, there is a sense
in which the mind is turned in two different directions whenever I have a thought. I see
something that is a triangle, like that object that I've depicted here on the slide, and
I think this is a triangle. So take that little stop sign looking thing as a mind and that
little squiggle as a thought within that mind. The content is there in the little bubble.
This is a triangle. When I do that, I am recognizing that object I am perceiving as a triangle.
And so I am partly directed toward that object and perceiving it, but partly I am directed
toward triangularity. I'm recognizing it as an instance of triangularity as a triangle.
Well that means whenever I have a thought like that about an object, about a particular,
yes, my mind is directed toward the particular, but it's also directed toward that universal.
I am directed both toward that particular triangle and also I'm thinking about triangularity.
In fact, I am able to recognize that object, that particular, as a triangle because my
mind has some contact with or awareness of triangularity, the form. So abstractions like
the forms, universals, make it possible for me to have thoughts about particular objects.
I couldn't do it. I couldn't think about that as a triangle unless I already had some
awareness of triangularity. That is one crucial reason we think the forms exist.
Why, however, more broadly should we think they exist? In addition to my ability to recognize
things as triangles, as red, as human beings, and so on. There are different explanations he gives,
and I think they fall broadly speaking under five categories.
The forms enable me to think general thoughts. They enable me to recognize regularities about
the world, to recognize and characterize universal and necessary laws that govern the world.
They allow me to explain how it's possible for human beings to communicate and how it's possible
for them to mean anything at all with their thoughts and with their words. And finally,
it explains, well, what philosophers like to call veridicality, something like accuracy,
a question of our thoughts or our statements matching the world. So it's a question of truth,
of objectivity, of accuracy, of faithful representation of the world. The forms he thinks
explain all of that. And if we don't have the forms, then he says we're not going to be able to
think general thoughts. We won't be able to recognize laws or regularities. We won't be
able to communicate, and we'll have no basis for thinking there's such a thing as truth.
We'll have to become skeptics, or even worse than that, we'll simply have to say,
there's no such thing as truth. There's no such thing as communication. Really, in the end,
everybody has their own ideas. We're all confined in our own little worlds, incapable of interacting
meaningfully with anyone else. Let's turn to that first point. The forms make it possible for us
to think general thoughts. Here we can say the general thought, the general principle behind
this general thought argument is this. There must be something all Fs have in common by virtue of
which they are Fs, whatever F happens to be. So I see a herd of horses. Well, there's something
that those animals have in common. What is it? There must be something they have in common.
I call them all horses. What enables me to do that? Now, the nominalist is going to say,
I don't need any universals around. I can just look at those particular objects. And I see
they're similar. And so, hey, I introduce a term for them, horse. I use it for things that are
similar to things like that. But Plato says, wait a minute. Why are they similar? You're recognizing
they have something in common, right? But take that seriously. They have something in common
by virtue of which they are similar. Here's what they have in common. They're horses.
They exemplify the general kind, horse. And so what you're doing in recognizing that they're
similar and that you can apply the same term to them is that you're recognizing the universal that
is present in all those particular animals. So that's an example of that universal and
a contact with the universal making us making it possible for us to think that general thought.
The same would be true of cats. I see a variety of cats and I think, hey, they have something
in common. They're similar. I'll call them cats. What are they similar in what respect?
They're all cats. They have something in common. This is explicit even in the early dialogues.
In the Lockhees, which we talked about separately, for example, about courage,
Socrates says to Lockhees, I was asking about courage and cowardice in general.
I'll begin with courage and once more ask, what is that common quality,
which is the same in all these cases and which is called courage? Notice he's saying,
I'm looking for the thing they have in common. They're courageous people. They're courageous
actions. What do they have in common? There must be some common quality, some form of courage that
is present in all these courageous people in all these courageous actions. They are considered
similar and we call them all courageous for a reason. It's because they exemplify courage.
Okay, there is some quality they all have in common. So even in the early dialogue, Socrates
is already saying there has to be a universal present here. Tell me about that universal.
Don't tell me about particular cases or instances of courage, like standing and fighting and not
running away. Tell me about the universal. Tell me about that common quality. Universals,
we can find in all sorts of different places and sometimes they are abstract things like
triangularity or redness or kindness or courage. Other times they may be tied in some way to a
particular and that's quite possible. Let's return to the theme of thinking general thoughts.
I see a variety of trees, for example, and I think they are similar in some way. They have
something in common. Now it is not trivial what they have in common by any means. It's a hard
biological question what they have in common and there may be vague boundaries. I may say,
well, is this a bush or a tree? I don't know. In fact, things have started growing in my backyard
and I think I don't know what this is. Is this a weed? Is this a bush? Is this a tree? I let it go
and in several cases it's now a 40 or 50 foot tall tree. It wasn't really planned. It was just
this thing that started growing and well, let's see what it is. But in any case, that's something
that is a hard question, what exactly the nature of this thing is, but to notice they have something
in common is in a way to say, yeah, what is that thing? It is being a tree. It is something like
the universal of being a tree. And we can apply the same principle to other cases. So I see a
bunch of triangles. I think, huh, look at all those. Gee, they seem to have something in common.
And then I think, yes, there is something they have in common. They're all triangles. I recognize
triangularity there and that is what enables me to think of them as triangles.
Here is how Plato puts it. Don't you know that though they make use, they hear people doing
mathematics and specifically geometry, they make use of the visible forms and reason about them.
But they're thinking not of these, instead of the ideals they resemble, not of the figures they draw,
but of the absolute square and absolute diameter and so on. The forms they draw or make and which
have shadows and reflections and water of their own are converted by them into images. But they're
really seeking to behold the things themselves, which can only be seen with the eye of the mind.
Perhaps you've taken a geometry course and you've done things like this.
Somebody has written something on the blackboard. Let's say they've said, consider this triangle
and they've given you some information about it.
And then they say, prove that the triangle ABC, let's say, is a right triangle. In other words,
that this is a right angle. Well, here's one way you might think of it doing it. In fact,
my daughter at one point, when she was first learning geometry, was I showed that this is a
right triangle. She took out a protractor and said, see, it's a right triangle, 90 degrees.
Well, that's not what geometry is about. It's not a question of this particular drawing I just made.
In fact, this is just a representation or an image of what we're really talking about,
a triangle with certain characteristics. And if I look at it carefully, I realize it's actually
a pretty sloppily drawn. For example, these two lines don't even meet. And this one sort of curves
there near the end and here they kind of crisscross. So you might say, well, actually, that's not even
a triangle. It's kind of close to being a triangle. But that shouldn't worry us, right? If the geometry
teacher writes this down and you say, I'm sorry, those two lines don't exactly meet. So it's not
a triangle. That's not an answer. We're not talking about this particular drawing. We're talking about
the abstract form. And so Plato says, if you doubt any of the rest of it, think about what
people are doing in mathematics in geometry, in other areas where they're talking about numbers,
let's say, or sets or functions or any kind of mathematical object. They are talking about
things that are abstract. They're not talking about something that is particular. You know,
if I'm talking about the number two, and I hold up my fingers like this, I'm not talking about
these two fingers in particular. I'm talking about the number two. And the same thing with this
triangle. I'm talking about something abstract, something that isn't just written down, but
instead is that form that can only be seen with the eye of the mind. Now, I think that's
an intriguing phrase, the eye of the mind. We're not talking here about what we see,
the individual people, or trees, or diagrams. We're talking about what we can only see with
the eye of the mind, the general kind, or the general property of being a tree, or being red,
or being a triangle of a certain kind. That's what's really at issue. We're thinking about
universals, in other words, not just particular drawings, or particular plants, or particular
colors, or instances of colored objects, or other things like that. We're not discussing
particulars. We're talking about something that lies behind them. His second argument is based
on regularities. We notice all sorts of regularities in the world, and we do it on the basis of
particulars, but we then abstract from those particulars to universals. It might be that the
world just looks like one thing after another to us, and it's all a jumbled mess, but eventually
we start making sense of it. Maybe we're children who are experiencing a severe thunderstorm for
the first time, lots of lightning, lots of thunder, and to us it's just chaos, lightning,
thunder going on, and it's just scary. But eventually we start noticing a pattern,
and we start thinking, wait, I think I can predict the next bout of thunder. I watch for the
lightning, and so I start realizing, wait, those flashes, that's lightning, those booms, that's
thunder, and hey, the thunder tends to follow the lightning, and so I recognize a regularity
that the lightning tends to produce the thunder, and so suddenly the storm starts having a pattern,
and recognizing that pattern, recognizing those regularities is possible because I can categorize
those flashes as a kind, as being reflections of a certain more universal type of thing,
lightning, and those booms as thunder, and then seeing a general connection between those universals.
So any regularity, any pattern is made possible by those abstract forms, those universals.
The same thing is true of laws. When I formulate a scientific law of any kind, I'm not talking
about this particular electrical circuit, for example, I'm talking about any circuit of that
kind. I'm talking about the universal pattern. If I'm thinking about Newton's laws and focusing on
F equals ma, for example, or looking at a mathematical law like the quadratic formula,
or thinking about something involving the reflection of light, or any other scientific law,
I'm thinking about the general universals here. I'm thinking about the relation between mass and
acceleration and force, for example, and it's not a question of that particular force and that
particular mass. It's not a question of, ah, yes, this chalk and the force I apply to it,
and it's rolling and accelerating away. No, I'm talking about the general kinds here.
I'm talking about something universal, and that's what gives it its universality and necessity.
If it weren't for that, it would just be life being one thing after another,
and the scientists would just say, yeah, a lot of stuff happens, I don't know.
We wouldn't be able to formulate regularities or laws. Communication is the same way.
What makes it possible for me to mean anything with my words, for my thoughts to have meaning,
for me to be able to communicate them to anyone else? Well, at first glance, this is hard, right?
I have some idea, and I'm trying to communicate it to you, but why should I think that's even
possible? Why should I think the words I'm using mean anything at all and will mean anything like
the same thing to you? Well, Plato says, look, without anything universal, I have no reason
to expect that. There are just particular thoughts in my head, particular sounds I make,
particular thoughts then in your head. Who knows? They don't really have anything in common,
so there's no way to talk about communication or meaning or that kind of transfer of knowledge
or information being possible. However, it is possible for two people to mean the same thing,
to think the same thought. Here's a silly example. He said it, meet us here at recess at the monkey
bar. Yeah, well, anyway, it is possible for people to misunderstand. We don't want to rule that out.
Sometimes we latch on to the wrong universal and grasp the wrong meaning, and it can happen even
with me myself. Me, earlier in the day, me later in the day, I might think, oh, I had a thought
about that this morning. What was it? And I might have trouble remembering or maybe I misremember.
So those problems of meaning and communication can happen within me at different times or in
different situations, maybe in one situation. I say something. Does it mean the same thing?
And do I remember it? Does it have the same significance? Can I communicate when I'm in a
different situation? Well, intuitively, we want to say, yeah, there can be problems here, but
overall, yes, I can mean the same thing that I meant this morning. I can remember and think
the same thought I thought this morning. I would think the same thought and give you the same
lecture on Play-Doh, even if it were a different day of the week. And so I might say, look, it
should be independent of all that, or at least it's possible for it to be independent of all that.
But if so, then meaning isn't tied to particular objects. Neither is the possibility of communication.
They depend on something universal. How does that go? Well, I must latch on to universal. If I say
this is a triangle, then what I'm doing is linking not just to this particular diagram I've drawn,
for example, but to triangularity itself. When you understand what I mean and say, oh, yes,
that is a triangle, you are recognizing this as a triangle because you have grasp of the same
universal triangularity. And so if you want to think of it this way, here you are thinking about this.
Here I am. We've got two different thoughts going on here. And both of us are thinking, hey, triangle.
But what enables our thoughts to have that significance? And how do we know that we're
thinking anything in common? Answer is, our thoughts must be connected to something like
this universal of triangularity that ties into the contents of our thought. And without that,
he says, look, just something happens in my mind. Something happens in your mind. We have no reason
to expect them to have anything in common or to tie to anything about this particular diagram.
But if there is a universal, then it's possible for it to not only be present in this individual
diagram, but it's possible for our thoughts to latch onto it. So if it's possible for us to mean
anything at all, to communicate even with ourselves at a different time or a different situation,
not to mention other people, it must be the case that we can latch onto these universals to
something outside my mind or your mind that enables us to think the same thought, to communicate
the same thing, to mean the same thing by our words. If that's not possible, it looks like
meaning and communication aren't possible either. Finally, this explains how we can have
accurate thoughts, how things we say can be true, how they can be objective truths about the world.
It really relates to the diagram that I was just drawing. The triangularity is not only
something that is in some sense present in my thoughts and in your thoughts when we communicate
about it, and both think of this as a triangle. It's there in the diagram itself. That diagram,
as Plato puts it, participates in triangularity. So when I say something true, I'm saying something
that links to a universal that really is there in the world. That particular really is exemplifying
that universal. The diagram here is a diagram of a triangle, and you and I recognize it as a triangle,
and in getting that right, in having veridical thoughts, that is to say, and in having true
statements, this is a triangle, then what's going on here is, well, we are tied into the very form
that is in some sense present in that drawing. This is the relationship sometimes described as
participation or exemplification. That diagram is a triangle. It exhibits triangularity. It
participates in triangularity, and it's that participation, that link between the particular
and the universal that makes it possible for me to have knowledge, makes it possible for you and I
to think the same thought, makes it possible for us to get things right about the world.
Otherwise, I have no reason to think my thoughts have anything to do with the world,
and that anything like accuracy, truth, objectivity are possible. But if those same universals
can be present in my thoughts and in a different sense in the world, then I can explain this.
So Plato's philosophy of mind gives us this picture of the mind as directed in two ways,
toward the object, in particular, through perception, for example, and also toward the form.
The content of my thought is linked to the form, my perception, and that representation in my mind
is linked to the form, but the object is linked to it too. And when they link to the same form,
that's when I've got accuracy. That's when I say something true, it's when my thoughts
are veridical or correct representations of the world. But of course, there is a problem here.
We don't perceive the forms. We don't directly see triangularity, for example,
or humanity. We see particular people in particular triangles. If that's true,
how do we know anything about them? Aristotle's answer is we abstract the universals and our
knowledge of universals from the particulars. But Plato says that won't do at all. I recognize that
as a triangle because I already understand triangularity. I can't in some way see a bunch
of triangles and then abstract the idea of triangularity. I've got to first recognize
they have something in common, namely being triangles. So he gives us two answers in different
dialogues. One answer is I recall it. And he tells us a sort of beautiful mythical story
about the soul being in contact with the realm of forms before we were even born.
We forget about that at birth, but we can be reminded by contact with particulars.
The other story is about the form of the good. He ends up saying that I am impelled toward the good
by, well, what exactly? I'm not sure, but in some way the form of the good
illumines the entire realm of forms for me. And so once that happens, the good somehow shines a
light on my mind and makes it possible for me to recognize these forms through recollection,
or in some other way with what he calls the eye of the mind.
Now, is that a plausible account? Well, maybe. There is a problem here. We seem to be limited
in our causal contact to the realm of the senses. So how is it possible for us to have
knowledge of something that lies beyond the senses of this realm of universals of forms
that are not directly present to the senses? It looks as if I can't make sense of the world
and my own thinking about the world and my own communicating about it, unless I assume there are
such universals. But how do I know anything about them? How does that solve the problem exactly?
Surely then I must have some special faculty of knowledge. So it looks as if Plato has to
postulate some special faculty of knowledge, saying I really do have not only my physical eyes
that can perceive things through the senses, I have something like an eye of the mind
that can think about triangularity or humanity or being a tree or something else that is strictly
universal and not directly tied to particular objects. In fact, I can then make up new universals
that I've never seen exemplified in a particular once I've mastered a certain number of these
universals. But how is that possible? That becomes a difficult philosophical question
and occupies plateness for centuries to come.
