Today we return to the wonderful desert landscape of Kwa. And we're gonna be
talking about an issue that is, well, in a way dominates the next several decades
in philosophy. Now at first glance you might think it's a very surprising thing.
What is this issue? It's often referred to as the problem of
quantifying it and dealing with the issues that arise from a quantified
load a lot from combining ideas about possibility and necessity or for that
matter various attitudes on belief and knowledge with quantifiable apparatus
that allows you to use terms like some and all. Now at first glance you might
think why is this significant? Why does this pose serious philosophical problems?
The answer is roughly this. There is a traditional way of looking at
metaphysics where you think about objects. As in Aristotle, for example,
there are substances, they have properties, they stand in relation, and some of the
properties of these substances are essential to them. They couldn't lose
them without altering what they are. Okay? Other properties are accidental. They
can change without affecting the identity of the object at all. So for example, what
are some accidental properties of me? They could change, I would still be me. Yeah.
Where you're standing? Where I'm standing, exactly. I'm standing here right now, but I
can move around, I'm still me. Okay? If I do this, you can't suddenly say, well, we
just keep getting a new professor in this class. Right? I'm still me. Other properties
that are accidental. What are you wearing? What I'm wearing, exactly. I could wear
different things, I'm still me. That I'm wearing this kind of sort of cream colored
shirt. That is an accidental property of mine. What are some other accidental
properties of mine? The color of your hair. Color of my hair? Yeah. I guess I could
do something about that. It used to be different, but I was the same person. In
fact, somebody recently saw me. I guess they hadn't seen me in a while. They said,
when did your hair turn like this? I don't know. Actually, I sort of do know. It all
happened rather suddenly. But anyway, that's something that is an accidental
property of mine. What about essential properties? These are properties that are
necessary to a thing. And in fact, Aristotle gives us three ways of thinking
about these properties that are necessary to a thing. One is just that. The
thing cannot lose them without stopping to be what it is. A second is that they
are the things by virtue of which the thing is what it is. We might say that
they are the nature of the thing. That's the way he sometimes refers to it. And
Aquinas later calls it the nature of the thing. It's what makes it what it is. And
then finally, we could think of it as something like the definition of the
thing or what corresponds in the thing to what would be a definition of it. Now,
could there be a definition of me? Aristotle talks about the question of
whether there could be a definition of Socrates, for example. But there could
certainly be a definition of a general kind. So we might think we could have a
definition of bachelor or a definition of human being even. And that these things
would express what is necessary to being a bachelor or a human being, what makes
somebody a bachelor or a human being, what would correspond in the thing, the
properties in the thing that would match the definition of those terms
bachelor and human being. So are there such essential properties? Well, from one
point of view, yes, in the Aristotelian tradition, in fact, not only are there
such properties, but they're crucial to understanding the nature of the world.
After all, the accidental properties aren't really very important in detailing
what a thing is, but the essential properties are. And so Aristotelian
essentialism is this doctrine that some of the properties of a thing are really
substantively identical to it, right? Not identical to it, essential to it. And
constitutive of its identity in some way. Now, there has been throughout the history
of philosophy some resistance to this idea. And so there are people, I think
John Walk would be a good example, at least in, well, in a certain respect, in
another respect, not at all. Maybe Hume is a good example of someone who is
doubtful about this idea of essentialism. Why do I say, well, Locke distinguishes
the real from the nominal essence of the thing. He does think things have a real
essence connected to the real internal constitution of the thing. But most of
the essences he thinks that are talked about in the Aristotelian tradition are
actually just nominal essences. They do correspond to something like the
definition. But the definition, you might say, is something that depends on our
categories, our way of understanding the thing. So understand me as a human
being and certain things will look essential to me. But we could also ask,
well, am I essentially a human being? Maybe, maybe not. And if I'm not
essentially a human being, then those properties that are essential to me
qua human being might not be essential to me, qua soul, let's say, or qua
something else. And so it depends how a thing is described, what is essential to
me. From this perspective, you might say, essence depends on the description of
the thing. It's something that we use to understand the thing, but it's not in
the thing itself. And so one way of framing this issue is, if we grant that
some properties have this status of being essential, either to a thing or to a
kind of thing, then is that something that really is about that object? Is it
really about that kind? Or is it something that we are supplying as part of our
conceptual framework for understanding that thing, that kind? It's really a
question of realism versus a kind of anti-realism about those essences. So
almost nobody is going to say, oh, just nothing's essential to anything, in the
sense that we never can talk about something being necessarily this or
that, or we can't really talk about definitions. It's a question of whether
that distinction is something that we find in the world among the properties of
the thing or the kind, or whether it's something that really is just our
creation. Now suppose you're a logical empiricist and you think, well, first of
all, you're going to be uncomfortable with this talk of necessity in the first
place, right? And we'll get some more of that in a moment. But whether or not
you're willing to talk about necessity at all, you're going to think, well, what
is necessity from a logical empiricist point of view? It's basically analytic
truth. It is coming from our verbal conventions. And so you're going to
think that, of course, to the extent that we can talk about essences at all,
they're things that are coming from our conceptual capacities. They're coming
from our linguistic framework. And so sure, we can have definitions of
terms, but that's not expressing some fundamental distinction between
properties in the thing. It's simply a function of the definitions of the
terms we're using. So it's all coming from us. From a more traditional
perspective, though, you might think, no, there really are things that are
essential to me and I couldn't lose without ceasing to be me. There are other
things that may be, well, certainly I can lose and still be me, like the color
of my hair or the color of my shirt or where I'm standing. Now, if we start
asking, well, what are the kinds of things that are essential to me? It's
much harder, right? Easy to list accidental properties. But if I say
suddenly, well, one is essential to me, then that's a really hard question to
answer. Yeah.
Do these essential properties actually need to you?
Well, not all of them certainly, right? There could be some things that are
essential to me. For example, you might say, I've got an idea. Self-identity is
essential. You are necessarily you. Okay? So Dan Bonovac is necessarily Dan
Bonovac. Now, that seems pretty safe. And also a good example of something that
seems analytic, right? It's not something that really expresses something you might
think about the nature of me, but about the way we use identity. And certainly,
it's not unique. Every object would have that property and have that property
essentially. So not all of these are going to really be unique to me. On the
other hand, you might have the idea that what makes me differ from anyone else is
that if you take the collection of these essential properties, there's something
that's unique to me about that collection. So individually, they might not be
unique, but that combination might be. On the other hand, maybe not. So have you
ever seen a movie multiplicity? The guy gets cloned and then the clones start
cloning themselves and it all gets sort of outrageously outhand. But anyway,
suppose we did have a cloning mechanism so that there were just a bunch of
duplicates of me. Would those be me? Would we not say, oh, Dan Bonovac used to be a
particular, but now he's a general kind and there are a bunch of them. He's
multiply instantiated. Or would there be something that distinguishes me from them?
Something about my origin, maybe, the way in which I came to be. They came to be
in a very different way by means of the cloning machine. Or maybe it's a
transporter malfunction in Star Trek. You know, you get in the transporter and
actually we don't send your particles down. We just rebuild you on the other
side and kill you here. It's a really disturbing view of the transporter system,
but suppose you have that view. And then suppose it malfunctions so that we don't
kill you here. So you're still on the ship. But also now there's a clone of you
running around on the planet. And then the clone comes back and what that means is
now there's a second one of you on the ship and that guy's still stuck down
there and they all claim to be you. Well, I don't know what to say about such cases.
So it's not clear to me now whether we have three of you or whether, no, you're
still you. There's something essential to you about the way in which you were
created. These are copies of you, but they're not you. Just as if you produce a
copy of a file on a computer. You've got a copy of the file. You don't have that
same file. In any event, however that may be, does this whole idea of an essence of
the thing make any sense? Well, I've already mentioned one reason why is a
logical empiricist. You might think it doesn't. But there are other reasons you
might think it doesn't. And they are more general. After all, Klein is not a logical
empiricist. He's attacked the analytic synthetic distinction. He's attacked the
identity of truth by convention. So you might think he's the kind of guy that's
actually going to be very friendly toward this idea of essential problems,
really beating the world. But not true. And why not? Well, really, let's go back and
think about the essential major of empiricism. What is an empiricist? An
empiricist thinks that, oh, knowledge comes from what? Well, well, analytic
and synthetic truth, but fundamentally experience, right? And then, yeah, there
are these things that are really, well, knowledge of a sort, but really, in the
end, knowledge of linguistic conventions or something like that, you might
think. But all of our knowledge of the world comes from experience. Now, if
you're quite, you're not actually going to single out some of these analytic
judgments or conventional judgments or something like that as an exception. In
the end, it's all really about the world. And so it's all coming from
experience. It's all judged by the tribunal of experience. So in the end, it
all comes down to experience. But now, there are going to be things that are
hard to explain in connection with experience. So think about the kinds of
things that you as trouble accounting for, for example. Okay, we can talk about
the color of my shirt. But now, there are going to be other properties of me,
dispositional properties of me that you might think are not so evident. What do
we say about dispositional properties? What are some examples of dispositional
properties? You can't directly observe them. They have to do with the way I
would behave in certain circumstances. But those circumstances might actually
never come about. Like the match, let's say. We say it's not soluble, even though
it's never placed in water. It's a we never really have the experience of
finding out. Similarly, the salt in my salt shake. I say it is soluble, but
actually, it might never encounter water. And so we might never find out.
Look at your temper. Sorry. Would your temper be one?
Okay, good. My temper. Am I somebody who is a rassable, easy to anger? Or am I
somebody who's gentle, mellow, difficult to anger? Well, I think I don't know. Not
much happens in the average analytic tradition course to really upset me. And
so you might think this is like the match that's never been placed in water,
right? I mean, nothing's ever happened in your in your experience to really test
whether I'm easy to anger or not. And the same thing is true with respect to you
given my experience, right? Are you easy to anger or not? I don't have any
experience that's relevant to that. I mean, you might be the sort of person who
flies off the handle. What, analytic judgments? No. And you know, analytic
philosophy does that to some people. There's the famous story about
Wittgenstein threatening copper with the poker. But wordarily, you might think,
yeah, it doesn't really come up in the context of this sort of course. So we
don't find out. And maybe I never find out that about them. Yeah.
We're saying that these dispositional probabilities are like essential things.
Oh, no, no, no. I'm not saying anything about them being essential. I'm just
thinking, yeah, well, I should make it clear what I'm saying here. What are
potential trouble for an empiricist? Things where we say, gosh, what
experience could that be based on? Right? Now, maybe I do have experience.
There might be some people who see you get angry and they have a sense you're
either easy to anger or hard to anger. But maybe we never encounter that,
right? You just go through life and it's all pretty good. Go through life. It's
like, you know, all right, there's this story about a kid who, you know, never
spoke. Parents took him to all sorts of specialists, had him examined. He seemed
normal in all other ways, but just never said a word. Well, finally they gave up,
right? They take him to this specialist, that specialist, do all sorts of brain
scans and so on. He seems absolutely normal, seems to be intelligent. Nobody
can figure out why this child does not speak. So eventually they just kind of
give up. And then one morning, the kid's sitting down before going to school for
breakfast. Mom gives him this piece of toast. Kid suddenly looks at it and says,
this toast is burnt. Well, suddenly she and her husband, they're all like, you
spoke, you spoke, they're so happy, right? And the kid said, well, of course I
can speak. Why haven't you said anything up to now? It's been 12 years. Kid said,
well, it's all been okay up to now. Okay, so it might be that the kid goes through
life the whole way, right? I mean, we never find out whether this person is
easy to anger because just nothing ever happens to upset them. Yeah, why would
that really be a problem? Because we don't have the knowledge then. So, I mean, you
don't have to justify it with empiricism if you don't know it. Okay, good. You might just say,
well, then we don't know, right? Whether this person is erasable or gentle or what
have you. And so that's fine. It's fine to have things we do not know. But now you
might think, well, here's the problem. Remember, we were talking about this in
Karnap, where Karnap was trying to define terms like soluble in terms that were
strictly observational. And he probably couldn't do it with a regular conditional.
He needed something like a counterfactual conditional. So it had to be something like
if blah, blah, blah were to happen, right? Then blah, blah, blah would happen.
And now the problem is that were to and that would. It seems to refer to things that
actually, well, aren't part of this world. The way philosophers now, following Leibniz,
said to think about this, it's talking about other possible worlds. If you were to be placed
in this kind of situation, right, but maybe you never are, then this would happen. And so it's
not just that we don't happen to know. It feels like the kind of thing that actually
it would be hard to explain our possession of such a property. What could it even mean
to attribute such a property on empiricist grounds? Because you might think, gosh, it's not
just that to notice I'd have to somehow have contact with these other possible worlds. The
very definition of what it is that such a property seems to refer to these other worlds.
And so there's something strange about that. Yeah. I mean, you could just arrive at that knowledge
inductively and say salt dissolves when placed in water, right? I don't really, I remember
talking about this before, but not that we'll be visiting it like this. I don't really see why
you need counterfactuals. Good, good. Well, you might think, look, I don't really need
any mysterious knowledge here. Here's how I do it. I have inductive evidence about this rule,
right? And on the basis of that inductive evidence, I conclude certain generalizations.
And some of those I actually consider laws. Now, some of these generalizations I consider
accidental. It just so happens that this takes place. I can't infer it to have any really
lawline character. It's just been a matter of chance that it's worked out that way. However,
some of these other things might seem to me to reflect some deeper pattern.
And so I think that's a law. Now, what's involved in my going from the generalization
that G puts salt in water and it dissolves to the law, put it in water, it must dissolve?
Where does the must come from? Where does the necessity come from? And you might say,
look, it's just if we have enough inductive evidence, right? We do this in the United States.
We do it in Europe. We do it in Africa. We do it in India. We do it in China. We do it in Russia.
And gee, no matter where we go, no matter when it is, it seems to all be the same.
And we start thinking, this isn't just an accident. This is really lawlike.
And so one way of looking at this is to say, we start attributing something like necessity,
like the must, like calling that a law, when the inductive evidence is just very broad,
very powerful, seems very, what, have a huge scope in space and time and so on.
Which is, by the way, why it would be so hard to come up with equivalent laws in the social sciences,
because you might think it's very hard to have that kind of fraud, inductive evidence.
Maybe in psychology, you can do it because you can observe lots of people in lots of cultures
and so forth. But if you're thinking about political science, you might think, gosh,
where's the science? Because here we call that a department of government, right?
We don't claim it to be a science. But you might think, the problem is really,
we can't get enough inductive evidence. I mean, how many countries are there in the world now?
That's quite few, but not in comparison to grains of salt, for example. And what kinds of experience
have we had, let's say, with revolutions? Well, some, but not equivalent to putting salt in water
and finding out what happens. And so, you might think there, the inductive evidence is just
sparse enough, very hard to make that move. Anyway, I don't have any real objection to that.
In fact, I think that's the way Locke thinks all of this goes. It's Hume, who after all says,
wait a minute, look at what's happening in these cases. We observe this happening,
we observe that happening, we never see the causal connection. We never actually observe the link.
Yeah. I don't really see how this inductive evidence would work. Like, if someone were to
tell me that salt doesn't dissolve in oil, I wouldn't necessarily have to do the experiment over and
over again to understand that for certain, but I could still believe it conceptually. So, I feel
like inductive evidence isn't necessarily the only way to get some kind of dispositional property or
something. Right. Well, here's the problem. Sometimes you're right. We do take one counter
instances enough to establish either a connection or the lack of a connection. But I'm thinking of
cases like the cold fusion experiments. People claim to have discovered cold fusion. And then,
for at least a decade, there was a huge attempt to try to replicate those experiments to figure
out whether there really was a principle underlying this and there was really a technology that would
enable cold fusion or whether this was due to some, the results they got were due to some kind of weird
phenomenon in their lab. And for a long time, it was unsettled what it was. I think now most
people dismiss the possibility, though I think there are still some authors who think that
there may still be something there that one could do. But many of them, from one experiment,
people thought, oh, that's intriguing. It made them want to do more experiments. But people
didn't immediately say, we've got the technology in the future. Let's start building cold fusion,
power plants, and so forth. They felt the need to do more experimentation. So, I think in some
contexts, especially when something refutes along, then it's very powerful. We say, wait a minute,
this is going to happen. We put the salt in the oil and then what happens when we put the salt in
the oil? We've never done it before. We're doing it for the first time. And we might say, aha,
this is what happened. It did dissolve, so salt does dissolve oil or it didn't dissolve. But
the evidence for that is rather thin until we repeat it. And if it's the kind of thing that we
can't repeat, then it's hard to know what to do, which is, again, part of the reason why it's a
political science. It would be so difficult to come up with something law-like. You can't start
saying, whoa, what if that would happen again? Let's hold the last presidential race over again
and see if Trump still wins under these conditions or something. Yeah, can't do that.
And so, in short, it's the kind of thing that, well, yeah, it's going to depend a lot on how
this fits in with the rest of our knowledge. And so, quiet at least will say, yeah, you're right,
this is how it goes. But a lot of that is driven by where this is in the web, how close we are to
experience, how much other theoretical support there is and so forth. Anyway, we're getting sort
of off track because I don't want to spend a huge amount of time thinking about how we can
account for dispositional properties, except to say that there's a sense in which essential
properties raise the same kinds of questions. I was hoping here to be referring to something we all
agree about, but oh well. Anyway, essential properties are kind of the same. Why? Because we
think, well, yeah, I'm saying here, gosh, if the object were right to lack the property,
it wouldn't be what it is. And that's similarly modal, right? It's similarly talking about what
would be the case. And maybe I never, in fact, lack the property. And so, you know, for example,
would I still be me if I were bald? Well, let's suppose I just never go bald. And then you might
say, well, gosh, we never find out. Now, in fact, we think, oh, come on, it's still me himself
to be bald. And so, we think we know something about that. And yet, it looks like, in a sense,
what we're knowing here goes similarly beyond experience directly. So, if you're in the school
of lock as an empiricist, you're going to say, well, we reach inductive conclusions about this,
just as we do about these scientific laws, just as we do dispositional properties. If you're more
humian, you're going to see a deeper problem here. And think that the very idea takes you
beyond the bounds of experience in a way that makes you uncomfortable. So, why did I stand on that?
I don't know. It was really just to make the point that there is kind of this distinction
between the lockians and the humians here, and that there's a sort of parallel problem here.
So, just as Karnab worried a lot about this, and a lot of people start writing about
counterfactual conditionals, and how to understand them, and what the nature of laws is, and so
forth. So, similarly, we have an analogous problem with essential properties. Now, we can characterize
certain contexts in language and in thought as referentially transparent, and others as
referentially opaque. And that's an important distinction for Karnab. So, here's the general
idea. We've got this notion of identity. Okay? And there, or just expressed by is in English.
And ordinarily, it allows us to substitute. So, typically, we can substitute identicals
for identities. So, here's an example. Two plus two is four. Four plus four is eight.
Well, I should be able to substitute two plus two for four in that equation to get two plus two
plus two plus two is eight. And that, that seems right, right? That works out just fine.
And so ordinarily, this is a legitimate rule. Leibniz's law in general says that things are
identical. If they have exactly the same properties, and if they have exactly the same properties,
you should be able to substitute one for the other. And typically, we can do that. If Dan
Bonobak is talking, and Dan Bonobak is the professor, then the professor is talking, etc.
But now, there are some contexts where that prevails. So, we'll say that a context is transparent.
If that works, that is to say, if substituting identicals for identicals always preserves
truth value. So, it turns true sentences into true sentences, and false sentences and false
sentences. And opaque, if it sometimes fails, which means it doesn't always preserve truth value.
So, Quine is worried about these opaque contexts, where we've got some situations where substitution
doesn't always work. Here's one of his examples. Basically, well, yeah, we can say things that
involve quotation, either directly or indirectly. So, yeah, here's one of these examples. Cicero,
a name, right, contains six letters. This fall, by the way, there's going to be a
course on Cicero and Catullus in the classics. So, you should all take it. It would help with your new lab.
Yeah, well, I'm very fond of both of them. So, now, Cicero, what is his actual name?
Well, it's Marcus Tullius Cicero. And so, he's sometimes called Tully as a nickname. So, Cicero
is Tully. But then we might think, ah, so we can substitute. Tully contains six letters.
Well, that obviously fails, right? We don't preserve truth by that kind of substitution. We
can substitute in direct notation. And that's sort of a surprise, really, because after all,
this is about the name, Cicero, and not about the person. And so, the identity of the person here
doesn't mean that the names are going to share the properties. So, it's easy to explain why that fails.
Now, this can also be indirect. So, for example, he gives us this case. Georgione is called Barbarelli.
Sorry, Georgione is Barbarelli. Georgione Barbarelli was the first of the great painters of the
Italian Renaissance. And in particular, he's thought to have painted a painting called The Three
Philosophers, which is perhaps why Klein knows about it. Sort of a mysterious character. He died
when he was around 30 of the play, and only painted a few paintings. So, little is known about him.
But anyway, here's a quite example. Georgione was so-called because of his size. Big guy.
Okay? Barbarelli was so-called because of his size. Well, that's not right.
Okay? So, so-called here is something that sort of sneaks in a reference to the name. And so,
it's kind of an indirect, well, not literally, an indirect quotation. But nevertheless,
it's something like a quotation context. It sneaks it in. So, there are those kinds of cases.
But there are much more interesting kinds of cases. So, in particular, necessity
is one of these. One way of thinking about an essential property is that it's necessary to the
thing, or to the kind of thing. But now we can think, well, wait a minute, necessity is weird
because it's opaque in this way. So, here's an example that might show that.
The number of planets
is 9.
Necessarily,
9 is greater than 7. Therefore, necessarily, the number of planets
is greater than 7. Now, does that work?
No. What's gone wrong?
There's no necessity that there'd be more than 7 planets.
Exactly. There's no necessity that there'd be more than 7 planets.
I think there could have been 6 planets. I mean, a little while ago,
they demoted Pluto for being a planet. Now, again, they promoted Pluto back up again.
So, there are 9 planets again. Yay! Go ahead, because it makes it easier to teach quine here.
But, actually, somebody said, well, wait a minute, I'm not sure. The Earth is a planet.
And you might think, oh, wait, we're going to change the definition of planets. So,
even the Earth isn't a planet. Maybe it will turn out that only, I don't know,
would satisfy their new definition of planets. Those people got their way.
But there might be way fewer than 7 planets by that criterion. In any case, you might think,
yeah, look, it's highly contingent whether or not there are more than 7 planets. That's not a
necessary truth. But this surely is a necessary truth. 9 is greater than 7. That seems necessary.
Something that follows from the laws of arithmetic. And the number of planets is 9.
So, why can't we do this substitution? Well, here's what quine ends up concluding.
Is this property, so you can frame it this way, is the property of being
necessarily greater than 7? Well, maybe I don't want to. We could just say, is that true?
Let's say, is the property of being greater than 7 necessary to 9, the object 9?
Now, one way of looking at it, if you're a realist, you think you can answer the question. If you're
a realist, the amount is essences, right? Because then you think, yes, the essence is in the object.
And so, what is the realist going to say about this question?
Is the property of being greater than 7 necessary to 9?
Yeah, sure it is. Because 9 is necessarily greater than 7. You couldn't make it less than 7,
for example, or equal to 7 without changing what 9 is. But suppose we're one of these anti-realists.
Then how are you going to answer that question?
It depends how you designate it, right? If you call it, if you're thinking of 9 as 9,
then yes, it's necessarily greater than 7. It has that property unnecessarily.
But suppose you're thinking of it as the number of planets, then it doesn't.
9 quad, 9, you might think, necessarily has that property. But the number of planets,
9 quad, the number of planets does not. And so, it sort of depends on how it's described.
And that's in the end client's position. It depends how it's described. So we can talk
about things having essences, but only as, when described as such and such. 9 described as that
number. We're already sort of describing it in terms of its position in the number sequence.
And so, yes, it's necessarily greater than 7, but 9 described as the number of planets. No,
that's not necessarily greater than 7. 9, just without any description, he says,
I don't think I could make any sense of the idea. Yeah.
Well, why is 9 described as the number of planets not necessarily greater than 7?
Because there could have been fewer than 7 planets.
But there aren't.
There aren't. Yeah, there aren't.
That's why I'm confused. Like, there could have been, but if there would have been,
then it just wouldn't have been 9 in the first place. It would be different. So it wouldn't
necessarily, you know.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Okay, good. You might think the number of planets, wait a minute,
I'm not sure what to do with that when I start thinking about other possible circumstances.
After all, you say that could have been fewer than 9 planets. Well, we're now talking about some
other possible world, right? And so, what about one of these worlds where there are now fewer
than, here's the sun, and here's Mercury, let's say, and here's Venus, and the big bang worked
out a little differently in this world. So all the other planets flew off in this space,
and there are only those two remaining. Okay. So in this world, there are two planets.
Now, what does the number of planets refer to in that world?
Two. Okay. One wavelength. Yeah, look, the number of planets here is just two.
But then it looks like the number of planets is 9 in this world, 2 in that world, so it's not
necessarily greater than 7. On the other hand, you might think, wait a minute, no, when I said the
number of planets is 9, I mean the number of planets in this world. And so I don't mean the
number of planets, let's call the actual world here w, in this world, w prime, let's say, then
really I have to distinguish the number of planets in w prime from the number of planets
in w. And the number of planets in w is still 9, right? Because it is what it is. It doesn't
matter what world you're viewing it from, in that world, in our world, the number of planets is
9. And so you might think, wait a minute, when I say the number of planets, do I mean that to
vary with world? So, ooh, now the number of planets is this. Or do I mean the number of
planets there actually are? And that actually would be something that ties this to this world.
The actual number of planets? That sort of means that's not going to vary from world to world.
But if I don't sort of pin it down with actually, then it looks like it could vary.
On the other hand, people don't ordinarily go around, unless they're teaching seminars on
motor logic, they don't go around using the term actually much in that way. And so often,
if we just say the number of planets, the number of students in the class, etc., etc., we mean the
actual number. We're not talking about something that might vary. You know, I say the number of
students in the class is, what is it in this class? Like 25. And somebody says, well, what if a
bunch of people dropped? Well, yeah, then the number of planets would change. The number of
students that are in the class then would be different. On the other hand, the number of
students who were in the class now would remain the same. And so you might think that actually
there's a sort of hidden ambiguity here, which I think is part of this. You might think, look,
it depends on how it's described. And here's an additional way in which it depends.
Do I mean the number of planets that happen to be in a given world? Or do I mean the number
of planets that actually are in this world? And those would be, as it were, two different
descriptions. And that too would affect what we end up saying about this question.
Okay, well, that's one sort of problem. It's connected to a problem about quantification.
Because now if I say, so there is something
that is necessarily
greater than seven. How do I evaluate that?
Now, Quine doesn't have any problem with necessity applied to a sentence.
He doesn't have any problem with necessity on the outside of this, you might say. It's a necessary
truth that blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. He worries about the necessity being inside.
Okay, there is something that is necessarily greater than seven, that has been greater than seven
as an essential property of it. And why does he worry about that? Because this something
isn't described as being of any particular kind. And if it really does depend on how it's described,
then it doesn't make any sense to talk about whether the object itself is necessarily greater
than seven or not. What makes sense is to say the number of planets is not necessarily greater
than seven, but nine is necessarily greater than seven. And yet we're talking about the same object,
so it depends on the description. And so he's worried that things like this don't fully make sense.
Now, the same sort of thing can happen with respect to attitudes. And that's what the paper
quantifiers in propositional attitudes is about. This begins, by the way, with one of my favorite
passages of analytic philosophy. The incorrectness of rendering Tessius is hunting unicorns. In the
fashion that there is an X, such that X is a unicorn and Tessius is hunting X, is conveniently
attested by the non-existence of unicorns. But it's not due simply to that zoological Kunah.
It would be equally incorrect to render Ernest's hunting lions as there is an X such that X is
a lion. And Ernest is hunting X, where Ernest is a sportsman in Africa. The force of one is
rather that there is some individual lion or several, which Ernest is hunting, stray circus
property, for example. The contrast recurs in I want a sloop. The version, there is an X such
that X is a sloop, and I want X. It's suitable insofar only as there may be said to be a certain
sloop that I want. If what I seek is mere relief from slooplessness, then do guess the wrong idea.
Okay, now this is something that actually linguists have worried a lot about. What do you do about
cases like hunting a unicorn or hunting a lion or wanting a sloop and so forth?
And then he kind of leaves that problem behind, but it's an interesting problem.
Anyway, that's one difficulty where we want to say, wait, hunting, actually, yeah, I should
sort of put in here. We've got this additional thing now of attitudes. Hunting is something
that does involve some kind of attitude. Hunting, searching for wanting.
But there are others. So here is a wonderful story. Consider the difference between there is an X
such that Ralph believes that X is a spy and Ralph believes that there is an X such that X is a spy.
They're two very different states, right? They may be ambiguously phrased as Ralph believes that
someone's a spy, but they may be unambiguously phrased respectively as there's someone who Ralph
believes to be a spy, and Ralph believes there are spies. The difference is vast. If Ralph is like
most of us, aid is true, that is to say, he does believe there are spies, but there's no particular
person of whom he believes that that person is a spy. Well, here is the marvelous story.
There's a certain man in a brown hat whom Ralph has glimpsed several times under questionable
circumstances on which we need not enter here. Suffice it to say that Ralph suspects he's a spy.
Also, there's a gray-haired man vaguely known as Ralph as rather a pillar of the community whom
Ralph is not aware of having seen except once at the beach. Now, Ralph does not know it, but the
men are one and the same. Can we say of this man, Bernard J. Orcutt, to give him a name,
that Ralph believes him to be a spy? If so, we find ourselves accepting a conjunction of this type.
W sincerely denies blah-blah-blah and yet believes that blah-blah-blah. With one and the same sentence
in both of these planks, for Ralph is ready enough to say in all sincerity Bernard J. Orcutt
is no spy. He's that upstanding member of the community, right? If on the other hand, with a
view to disallowing these situations, we say Ralph believes the man in the brown hat is a spy,
Ralph doesn't believe the man seen at the beach is a spy. But wait a minute, the man in the brown
hat is the man at the beach. Now, what do we say about Ralph's beliefs? So here the problem is,
well, in general about belief, but also specifically about this. Does Ralph have a belief for Ralph
Bernard J? Well, here's Ralph. He believes the man in the brown hat is a spy, but Ralph doesn't believe
that the man at the beach is a spy. In fact, he would outright deny it, but those two are identical,
right? They're both Bernard J. Orcutt. So does Ralph believe that Orcutt is a spy or not?
Well, under one description, the man in the brown hat, yes. Under the other description,
the man at the beach, no. And so it's very tempting here to say that actually belief
is not something you have about an object, it's something you have about an object under a certain
description.
