Last time we were talking about Klein's attack on analyticity and I want to
return to that there's one last argument we have to consider before we move on
to the second dogma of empiricism. However before even doing that I think I
should say a little bit about what motivates Klein's attack. Why does he
care about this anyway? We began last time by thinking about empiricism and
thinking it was pretty important to be empiricist to screen off a certain set
of sentences as things that were well verbally true that didn't concern
experience. Otherwise you have to fake the claim that our knowledge even that
one plus one is two or that every duck is a duck and so on is actually something
we have to learn from experience. However the reason goes deeper than that
in a sense why someone would care. After all Kant is the one who actually
framed the analytic synthetic distinction in the form we have it today
more or less. You introduce those terms and why did he do it? Not because he was
an empiricist but because he was able to identify a mission for philosophy.
Philosophy was the thing that would discover the grounds and the extent of
synthetic apriori truth. So from that point of view, Kant has a way of
distinguishing philosophy from empirical science from other sorts of things.
Philosophy is the thing that uncovers the synthetic apriori truths. Hume and other
empiricists have tended to find a role for philosophy in doing an analysis of
concepts and so I'm covering certain analytic truths especially those that
aren't just lookable up in the dictionary but ones that are more
theoretical, ones that are more illuminating, one that explicated
concept as opposed to just giving you a definition of courage as being courageous.
I can only imagine what Socrates would have said. He said, what is courage? It's
being courageous. It's like, yeah, that's not going to satisfy him, right? He wants
something more and so there's a task there too. When Quine is challenging this
distinction then what is he doing? He's challenging the claim that philosophy
actually has any distinctive task of its own and so in the end Quine's
motivation for challenging the analytic synthetic distinction is not to attack
empiricism, it's to defend naturalism. The idea that there is no way to
distinguish philosophy or some other discipline from natural science. In a
sense, it all becomes one big project of understanding the world and any
distinction we draw between philosophical analysis and actual
investigation of the world between an attempt to discover the transcendental
grounds of synthetic apriori truths or any other type of thing as opposed to
disciplines of psychology or physics or anything like that. All of that is bound
to fail, he thinks. In the end, it's all the same thing. Philosophy is just part
of natural science. Or to put it another way, you might say all branches of
knowledge are really just part of the same thing. Our distinction between
philosophy and anything else is really arbitrary. In the end, it doesn't
reflect a deep difference of discipline, it's just a matter of levels of
generality. And so what he's going to do by the end of this essay is draw us a
picture that's like this. He says in the end, think of our beliefs not as resting
on some foundation of observation and analytic truth, but instead as being
something like a spider web connected to experience at the ends, but then
containing lots of things in between. So here I will draw a spider web. That might
be a crappy spider. But this is something he ends up calling the web of
belief. And the point, in a sense, of the attack on analyticity is to say, look,
it's all in there together. Yes, some things are closer to experience and
some aren't. So some look kind of empirical. Some are very far here in the
center and might look either analytic or very abstractly theoretical. But all of
that is just a matter of degree. In the end, there's nothing that is sort of
directly tied to experience in the way that an observation sentence is supposed
to be a logical empiricism. There's nothing that is sort of off limits to
revision as part of natural science as an analytic truth might be. So it's all
sort of hanging in there together. What's physics and what's math? In the end,
they're going to be sort of mixed together and we draw certain pragmatic
distinctions between them. But there's no really principal distinction to be
drawn between. So that's what this attack on analyticity is really about. Now,
we identified a couple of attacks before. So let's return to this question of
analyticity. And remember, we had thought of a variety of ways of thinking about it.
One was based on meanings and synonymy. But Kauai doesn't like thinking of
meanings as entities, number one. And secondly, we could say, well, okay, a
bachelor is an unmarried man. That's an analytic truth if it's only a bachelor
and an unmarried man are synonymous. But how do we tell whether it's those
things are synonymous? In the end, well, that's just a question of whether that
sentence is an analytic truth. So synonomy and analyticity can be defined in terms
of each other, but neither really helps. It's as if we just have two synonymous
sentences. Or it's like pig and swine. Or brave and courageous. If I say, what is it
to be courageous? To be brave, you might think that doesn't help me a lot. What is
it to be brave? To be courageous. And so in the end, that doesn't help. If we think
about definability, we've got all sorts of definitions. But the ones that are
interesting from our point of view, and aren't just stipulations, all involve
some prior sense of synonymy. We write in the dictionary that this is the
definition of that term because we're trying to capture something about usage
and something about identity of meaning or synonymy. So we just get thrown back
into the same problem. And then we talk about interchangeability and end up
finding that problematic and basically saying, look, in the end, that doesn't
seem either necessary or submission for understanding analyticity. Well, the last
thing he considers before moving on to the second topic is a different approach
to this. And it's an approach based on the idea of a sematical rule. So this is
what Karnat does. He gives us a language and he characterizes the language in
terms of its syntax. So he defines a vocabulary in that set of grammatical
rules. And then he said, here are the semantic rules for actually interpreting
my language. Okay. What is an analytic statement? It's something that is true on
the basis of the sematical rules. So it's something you can derive from the
sematical rules alone. So we've got a syntax that gives us a vocabulary and a
grammar that defines the well-formed expressions of our language. And then we've
got sematical rules. The semantics tells us how to interpret those expressions. And
it generally does that in a compositional way. We start out with the simple parts
and tells us how to interpret the simple parts and then how to combine those into
more complex parts. And so we've got a way of interpreting the well-formed
expressions. And in particular, that semantics consists of rules, rules for
the basic expressions and then the ways of combining them. And those rules are
going to imply certain things. And indeed, what Karnat lays out here is what
linguists do all the time. If you look up an average paper in linguistics and
philosophy, you will find a sort of toy language frequently with a simple
vocabulary, a simple set of grammatical rules, and then some sematical rules that
tell you how to interpret all of that. And so something is analytic, if it just
follows from the sematical rules. So I can show you a little example of that if
you're interested. Yeah, okay. This is something from a paper by Bar-Wise and
Harry in 1981. It's a very simple thing. Suppose we have a sentence like this.
John sees Mary run. How would we interpret that sentence? Well, they say the
basic idea here, you've got something strange going on in these
sentences. Look at Mary run. That's called a naked infinitive. That is to say an
infinitive, but without the two. And so it could be like an ordinary infinitive.
It would be something like John once Mary to run. This, however, leaves out the two.
And so there's something a little bit surprising about that. These constructions
are a little unusual. What do they mean? Well, the idea in Bar-Wise and Harry is
that this is really a situation. It's a scene. So John is seeing a scene here. And
so let's call that scene S. We want to say there is such a scene that John sees,
basically. So the truth conditions will be something like this. There is an S such
that, well, what? John sees S and now S supports the truth of Mary runs. So one way
to put that is like this. Where that thing just means, well, that's from a set of
situations now in which Mary runs. So in other words, John sees some situation in
which Mary runs. And that would be, well, actually this is a simplified version of
a semantic rule for that kind of construction involving these oddball
infinitives. So what does it mean to see Mary run, let's say, or to see, let's say,
Fred trip and fall? It's going to mean something like that. John would see a
scene and that scene would support the truth of, in that case, Fred trips and
falls. And then we could actually see that there are some things that follow
from that. For example, when would a situation support Fred tripping and
falling? When it supports Fred tripping and also his falling, right? And so we'd
be able to say, ah, John sees Fred trip and fall. So John sees Fred fall. That
should be a legitimate inference. And that's something that would follow from
the semantical rules. Well, all right, but that's just a simple example of the
kind of things that people do in semantics. And indeed, there are things
that count as semantical rules. Ones that you're much more likely to have seen
are ones in basic logic. So for example, we could say, what is the meaning of
something like A and B? Well, think of that as something like the set of
possible worlds supporting the truth of A and B. And what would that be? Well, it
would be the set of possible worlds in which A is true, intersected with the
set of possible worlds in which B is true. And so that would be another form
that a semantical rule could take. Some of you are nodding appreciatively,
others are hating my guts right now. Yes. This makes sense, but can you relate a
little bit to the analyticity? Oh, yeah. Okay, good. So, right, here's a
semantical rule, let's say in our plotter. And now I say, aha. Okay, here's an
analytic set instead. If Fred tripped and fell, Fred fell. Now, actually, I'd have
to tell you about if then in order to really make this work. This is going to
follow from this together with something about if then. But that's going to end up
analytic because after all, Fred tripped and fell, that means our situation is one
in which, well, this happened. But what is that? It's the intersection of those two
things. That means this happened there and this happened. So, it's going to follow
that Fred tripped and fell, Fred fell. And that would be that analytic because
it's derivable from our semantical rules just using logic. Well, what's wrong with
that? Why can't we do this and have a good account of analyticity? Gwein does
think Carnap's come closer than anyone else to capturing what analyticity really
is. And so, suppose we try this strategy and say that's what an analytic statement
is. It's something that follows from our semantical rules. After all, what Gwein
is worried about are the things, not really so much the logical things,
strictly speaking, as the other things. So, presumably we're going to have not only
these kind, well, yeah, let's not get ahead of ourselves. But we're going to have
to have semantical rules of a variety of kinds, right, to get something like
Bachelors of Unmarried Men. Now, why does he object to this strategy?
Why isn't that perfectly good? Imagine somebody studying linguistics now who
says, what do you mean? I'm taking semantics. We write down semantical rules
all the time. And we think things follow from those and are true just by virtue
of meanings. And that means we think they're analytic. And so, gosh, linguists use
this sort of thing all the time. That's wrong.
Well, problem A, which isn't actually stressed by Klein, if you think about all
Bachelors of Unmarried, what kind of semantical rule is going to give you that?
That depends on the lexical meanings of terms like Bachelor, right? And so,
we're actually going to have to have that as part of the semantical rules here,
lexicon. So, one objection that he doesn't really stress, but he could, is to say,
wait a minute, a lot of this is going to require a lexicon that's going to
actually specify meanings. But now we're back into the same problem of definition.
Now we're going to have some dictionary that's basically going to give us a
bunch of definitions. But why don't we give us those definitions? Because it's
trying to match identities of meaning already. And as we've seen, metros gets
tied up with analyticity. So, we're back to the same problem we had before.
Yeah.
So, just to confirm, vocabulary is different to lexicon. And vocabulary is just a list of words
and lexicon times the meanings of the words.
Yeah, exactly. So, here we might have, you know, in the syntax we have a vocabulary
and that might include Bachelor. So, that'll just tell us sentences involving
Bachelor in the noun position are well-formed. But then here, it'll be
something like, ah, Bachelor, you know, noun unmarried man. So, we're going to, in
a sense, be back to the same problem we had. But that's not actually his main
objection. The main objection is this. What's a semantical rule? Why don't we just
start writing down every true sentence and calling this semantical rule? Okay. So,
gosh, John C. is very wrong. We have this account. Why don't we just keep going?
After all, here we've got something that goes beyond the bounds of ordinary
logic we were talking about basically seeing with respect to this kind of
construction. What about running? Should we have a logic of runs and start
writing down semantical rules for this? We actually had a PhD in philosophy a
number of years ago. Actually, we've had several who have gotten jobs at a
software company here in Austin. And their job is to sort of write down
axioms in a database that will allow it to interpret things it reads, things
that people say, and so forth. It's this huge database, actually, that's sort of
an encyclopedia of all sorts of things. And at one point I asked this guy, so
what are you working on? Because you have a little business card and it said
ontological engineer. I thought, all right, that's sort of awesome. What is an
ontological engineer? And he said, well, you know, it's basically we try to
systematize everything that's in your head and put it into a computer so the
artificial intelligence system can actually converse with you as if it were
human. And I said, okay, well, like for example, what are you working on right
now? He said, right now I'm working on the ontology of beds. I said, wait, beds?
Yeah, beds. Okay, well, what do you mean? There are beds, right? I thought that was
the ontology of beds. He said, no, no, no, you know, for example, Joe walks into a room
and sees a bed. Now, what do you have to know about that bed to figure out what
might happen next or to understand the subsequent discourse? Well, there's a head
of a bed and a foot of a bed. There's usually space under a bed. You can either
sit or lie down on top of the bed. Beds have flat surfaces. And then, you know,
they often have headboards and things like this. They often have pillows. They have
blankets. Now, it was important to know this because suppose the story goes, you
know, John got to his hotel. He walked into the room. He saw the bed. He put his,
um, yeah. What could we have happened? Okay, he sat down on the foot.
He said, what, whose foot? Right? His own foot? Did he sit on his own foot? No,
the foot of the bed, you have to understand. Was there somebody else in the room?
Stacked down on the foot? No. And so, in short, you have to sort of have the computer already
have a huge amount of world knowledge that we have already. But now, here's the significance
of this. How do we decide what of the entry, entries into that huge database
counts as a semantic rule about beds and what is just a fact about beds? How do we divide the
semantics from the world knowledge? Beds are, I mean, suppose I ask you, what is the definition of a bed?
It's sort of hard to say, right? A surface to sleep on.
A surface to sleep on. Yeah, but now, what about, how is that different from a cot or a house? Or,
yeah, a couch, people can sleep on a couch. Gosh, I've slept on floors. Actually, it's really good
for my back to sleep on. Right, a sort of back. Could you possibly describe it as a complex
comprising of symbols like the mattress in that comprise it for the function? Oh, you could start
saying, all right, yeah, I mean, a bed consists of a mattress. Evidently, Austin is big into beds,
by the way. I mean, everywhere I go, there are these mattress firm stores. That, and very close to
where I live there too, right across the street from each other. It's like, what? How many mattresses
does Austin need? But anyway, yeah, okay, you could define it in terms of its parts. You could say,
no, it's just its function, something to sleep on. You could start describing it in terms of its
typical shape, maybe. You could, anyway, all the point is, I don't know how to give you a definition
and how to separate the definition of bed from all these other things that are true of beds.
And bed isn't pretty unusual here. We would do the same thing if we talked about chairs or tables or
all sorts of things, actually, that we began to think about that are in common usage. There are
all these things that we commonly assume about them, and which of those are actually part of the
meaning, which are just commonly known facts, if you would want to put it in a database so that
it can help the computer understand the story, for example. Gosh, I don't know. And in effect,
Quine's saying it's an arbitrary choice. Some of those things, we designate as semantical rules.
Some we treat as world knowledge. But what really ultimately is the difference between
things that are true by virtue of meaning and things that are just commonly known?
He thinks it's impossible to tell. In the end, in word and object, in some later words, he does
define a notion of stimulus analyticity. But that's just something someone will immediately
accept to if they know the language. And he says, yes, that will include things like bachelors
are unmarried, but it will also include things like there are dogs. So it's not going to give you
actually a very good approximation to what philosophers have wanted by this notion of
analyticity. And so the basic objection to this is something like our objection to certain kinds
of definitions, that in the end, it feels arbitrary or circular. Either we do have some sense of what
really meaning is, but then we're back into the problem of meaning and sonotomy and all of that.
Or we're just arbitrarily designating some of these as part of the definition of say,
bed, as opposed to a commonly known fact about bed. But there's really no way to draw that
distinction that is not ultimately arbitrary. Yeah. What is where the line falls between
synthetic analytic statements actually tell us about the world? Why is it so important for
ontology? Oh, right. Why is it important? Well, one reason is that if we have a distinction between
the analytic and the synthetic, we can say there are certain disciplines that fall on one side
and certain disciplines that fall on the other. So for example, if we're logists, for example,
at Fraga and Russell, and we say mathematics ultimately reduces to logic, we can put logic
and math on this side, we can put semantics on this side. And then over here we get physics and
psychology and biology and other natural sciences and so forth. And then the question is, what do
we do with philosophy? Well, we could, if we have this sharp distinction, think, oh, you know,
philosophy is a form of analysis. In fact, why is analytic philosophy called analytic philosophy?
Because it arises in the context of a sort of empiricism that says we can draw that distinction.
And over here, we can put philosophy because philosophy really consists in analysis. It's a
matter of analyzing concepts, serving as something like the logic of science, understanding what we
mean when we debate about whether people have free will. In short, the kind of thing that Air does
in language truth and logic. Or we could be like Kant and say, no, no, no, philosophy concerns itself
with the synthetic. But it's not just one more science, alongside physics and biology and chemistry
and psychology and so on. No, instead, philosophy appears over here. But what is it doing that's
distinctive? Well, it's really engaged in this transcendental enterprise. And that transcendental
enterprise is actually capable of giving us synthetic a priori truths. So on both sides,
you end up saying there's something a priori about philosophy, something that philosophy is doing just
through reflection that isn't dependent on experience. But what kind of truth is it giving you?
Well, maybe it's this. And so here we get human air and Russell
and Karnapp. Or it's doing this kind of thing. And if we're over here, maybe we have Kant or
Heidegger, it's involved in this sort of transcendental enterprise. Actually,
I think it's not just these guys, but many rationalists would put it over here too.
So maybe Descartes, Leibniz, I think Plato. And so in a certain sense, part of the reason
client cares is that he sees philosophy's self concept is often tied up with this distinction,
the vital terms of it. And if that distinction goes away, not only then is there no really
principle distinction on this sort of discipline and that sort of discipline,
but also then this way of understanding philosophy goes away. So what is philosophy now?
That's why he says there's a shift toward pragmatism, this result. Because in the end,
there's no way to really distinguish in principle what is philosophical. And I think that's what
client thinks. What's the difference between philosophy and physics or philosophy and psychology
or philosophy and linguistics? It's more or less that just philosophy is somewhat more general.
But whenever physicists start reflecting generally on the nature of reality or the nature of physical
law, whenever a psychologist says, so what does this really tell us about the mind,
they're really engaging in philosophical reflection. And it's really just kind of degrees
of generality. So the difference between philosophy and everything else is just a matter of degree.
More or less philosophers are just constantly involved in these reflective, extremely abstract,
rather vague enterprises. And as soon as you get more specific about it, you turn to a scientist.
So why did he say that he preferred logical, positive, positivism over pragmatism in the
office if this is? That's a great question. So if that's really the story in the end,
why isn't Quine, somebody who really doesn't engage so much with Russell and Carnap and so on,
but is writing about Dewey and James and Perse and so on, why doesn't he see himself clearly in
that pragmatic tradition? I think that is a really good question. You might think in the end,
he forced to choose, he ups with these guys, right? So what's going on there? I think partly
it's that he looks at this older pragmatist tradition, and he thinks it's just not precise
enough to actually give you any real information. So there's a way of being, of denying this distinction
being a pragmatist, that in a sense he thinks is going in the right direction, but he doesn't really
have much sympathy with that way of doing philosophy. And he sees it in people like Perse, James and Dewey,
where it's sort of suggestive, but on the other hand, not worked out. There are places in Quine,
especially in his 1969 book, Ontological Relativity and Other Essays, where he talks directly about
Dewey, and he says, I'm trying to give you a theory of language that's very similar to Dewey's
in a certain way. Dewey was hostile to this sort of picture of language where, I think in a language
is a name of something, it's a sort of museum metaphor. We take a term and we go off looking
in the museum for the thing that we can attach that label to. And he says, yeah, that's not the
right way to see language, so Dewey was right about that. But then he sort of forgets about Dewey,
and why? I think because in the end he thinks, Dewey gives you a good sort of picture of the way
things go, but gives you no real argument in favor of that. And in fact, the picture is so
that there's not that much to be learned from it. So in the end, I think he thinks
analytic philosophy does a better job, and logical empiricism even does a better job,
because at least it formulates precise questions and allows you to frame precise arguments.
He thinks in the end, some of its presuppositions are wrong. And those are things the pragmatists
are right about, but the pragmatists also are not in a position to do anything very interesting
with that. It's sort of like, let's say a great philosopher with brilliant ideas brings up a child
to have that perspective on the world, but not to actually have any of the arguments
be able to formulate anything precisely. And so this little kid kind of has, let's say,
the right philosophical ideas, but can't defend them, can't articulate them very clearly.
Quite almost sees the pragmatists as being like that child. And so I think in the end,
that's why, here at least is a method that he thinks is a useful method, whereas he doesn't
think the pragmatists historically had a very useful method, even though their views were in
the end closer to the truth. Yeah. I don't understand why the John Seesmerian
rule that you introduced, why would he say that that's arbitrary?
All right, good question. It's not just a rule of like seeing. You could substitute
other than like, John, here is Mary saying or whatever. Oh, right, exactly. It's a more general
rule than that. Yes, that's right. And in fact, in practice, linguists do this kind of thing all
the time. And if you said, well, gosh, is it part of personal medical rules that people see with
their eyes? The linguists would typically say, no, that's not really part of my theory. Why not?
Well, gosh, why not exactly? I think the linguists would typically say, because that doesn't really
fit into this compositional structure, that's not something that has to be built into the theory
of meaning. That's just an additional fact about seeing. And there is a kind of rough and ready
intuition that supports that thought, I think. So one of the things that lurks underneath this
and forms the foundation of a number of people like Rice and Strauss are not projecting to what
Kwan does, is the thought that, look, actually, in practice, linguists don't have any proof
figuring out what they should write down as a semantical rule and what they would actually
account as a bit of world knowledge about things. There's huge agreement in the linguistic community
about that. And the same thing is true about logic. We don't have any problem writing down things
about and or even about knows that and things like that. And so why, if nobody seems that confused
about this, we should re-attack the distinction. There must be something that we're all responding
to here. Now, in the end, is the analysis is going to be, well, we're responding to distance from
the edge of experience or something like that. And so the analytic truths are going to be the ones
here that are pretty far from empirical dependency. And so they're going to be
way in the center of the level of belief. But in the end, it's a matter of degree.
And this is why there will be vague cases in the boundaries and blah, blah, blah.
I think to get a better answer than that, though, what we really need to do is think,
what exactly is coin objecting to? Is he saying there's no way to draw the distinction? Because
you might think, what we're doing to give you a semantic theory is drawing the distinction.
So what do you mean we can't do it? That's like saying we can't do semantics,
but people do semantics all the time. So we've got to distinguish, I think, several questions.
One is, what coin is really done? And let me see where I can put this. Let me get rid of this.
What coin is really done, in a sense, is say, analytic is part of a set of concepts, meaning
synonymy. Definition. Substitution. Substitutability. Substitution. And semantic rule.
Oh, I could put a certain kind of necessity in here, too. And he's in the end saying,
we've got this whole set of concepts, and we can characterize them in terms of one another.
And we do, to a surprising degree, agree about how to use these things. But here's the thing.
He thinks they're all, in a sense, ill-founded. He wants to find some way of making sense of them.
From outside that circle. Now, one response is to say, why? The circle is fine as it is.
If I say I define courage in terms of bravery and bravery in terms of courage, that's not very
illuminating. But you might still say, but I'm right, right? And it would be very strange to say,
so there's no such thing as courage as a result of that. So what is he really concerned about?
To some extent, I think this is developing within the context of logical empiricism.
And he's thinking, okay, what is logical empiricism all about in the end? Observation,
right? Bringing things back to observation. And so he's thinking, I don't know how to give
an observational account of any of these. How do I explain, in terms of observation,
what any single one of those is? You might think, oh, I observed definitions in the dictionary.
Yeah, but they're putting them in the dictionary because of some identity of meaning,
Zanari, let's say. But how do I characterize that in terms of observation? The closest I could come,
maybe, is the terms are used in exactly the same way. And so something like a criterion of
substitutability. But we saw that doesn't really work either. That's neither necessary nor sufficient.
And so in short, he ends up saying, this whole structure is something that we would really like
to find the foundation with respect to observation, with respect to usage, with respect to behavior,
something we can actually pin down from the perspective of a logical empiricism. And it's
all sort of floating up there, and it's something we can't find any observational content to.
So one way of looking at it is to say, within the project of logical empiricism,
he can't find any way of making sense of what it is. Now, if you frame it that way,
you've got a reason why this is an objection to people like A.R. and Russell and Karnan.
You don't have much of a reason why anyone on the other side should care about this,
because you can have cards or Heidegger or Descartes or whatever saying. But I don't start
with those purposes. I don't care about resting this on observation. Why should I care? So that's
best an answer that will explain why these people are going to be in trouble here,
because on their own likes, they can't really assign any of this any meaning. Yeah.
Sorry. It's been a long week. And so this was just to explain the
why semantic rules are put into the creature?
Well, no. Really, now I'm trying to respond to the question of what's going to be your picture
here? What's the real objection come to? And I think it comes down to the fact that these
concepts can all be defined in terms of one another, but there's no way to define any of them
in terms that are outside of that. And in particular, that would rest on something like
observation or behavior or usage or something we could tie these down to in ways that don't already
involve something that's in that circle. Yeah. On the analytic synthetic kind of
way of looking at things, where would art be? Where would art be? Well, art isn't really giving us
truths, you might think. And so it doesn't really have propositional content that would allow us
to classify them one way or another. For example, suppose I say, ah, you want to work at artwork,
I will now give you an artwork. This is Bonnevac's logical empiricism defined.
Okay. So we've constructed a lot of symbols. Oh, I should put a lamp this morning.
There. Now, there's no propositional content to that, right? I haven't said anything. I haven't
asserted anything. So if you say, is that analytic or synthetic? It's kind of like, yeah,
there's nothing there to be analytic or synthetic. Now, as soon as I say things about it on the other
hand, so art criticism or that sort of thing will have to find a place somewhere. If I say,
ah, that's a terrible work of art, right? Where do I put aesthetic judgments like that?
Presumably it's not through my definition that it's a bad work of art. That's something that would
require some content. So presumably something like that would be synthetic. Now, in so far as
it's a value in it, it raises special philosophical questions because what about all value judgments
like that's a bad work of art or that was a bad action or something. Presumably those are typically
going to be synthetic claims, though they might have a special status and make us worry about
things. But most normative claims are going to end up being over here on the synthetic side.
Things like murder is wrong or that's a bad work of art. Now that I look at it.
My drawing teacher would be very happy because it was very fast. Oh yes, the faster you draw it,
the more you get the essence of the object. You can actually see some of the face in the middle
of a little bit. Oh, you sort of can. Yeah, there's a little bit like Wittgenstein.
And it's on a blackboard like that famous portrait of Wittgenstein in front of the
blind board. So see, it not only is a nice work of art in there, it contains allusions of other
works of art. See, you just see more and more levels as you come. This is the kind of thing that
got me an A in art. See what's going on. Oh, that's a great idea. Okay, well, never mind that.
Yeah, oh yes, we've got five minutes left and we haven't even moved on to the second dog.
So by the after spring break, we'll forget what the second dog even is. So let's talk about the
second dog. It's one about reduction. And it turns out to be, well, we can take it as really
reduction in something like the sense that Frege and Russell were concerned with, the
reducibility of mathematics for logic. But in a certain sense, I think we can characterize
what Klein's doing here much more simply without going into the details of that.
So suppose we just thought of it this way. For any sentence,
S, let's say,
there are sets of observations
that would confirm
or disconfirm
S. And let's call these, oh, I don't know, like O plus and O minus.
Okay. O plus here would be the set of observations that would tend to confirm
sentence S and O minus the set of observations that would tend to disconfirm S.
So now, if we actually could do that, if we could associate with any sentence,
whether we call that its meaning or not, presumably people like A are saying that is the
meaning of S. But whether or not we say that, we could say, all right, if we can characterize
sentences in terms of pairs of sets of observations that would confirm them or
disconfirm them, then we could say, aha, then we can define analyticity. S is analytic
if and only if every observation
is in that O plus or S. Yes, we should make that specific to that sentence.
Okay. So everything confirms it, then we make it an analytic truth. Yeah.
Oh, well, I've been thinking, and this has popped up before in class,
where like this sentence is false, like as, how do we apply that?
Good point. What will happen if we have a paradoxical sentence?
This sentence is false. What confirms that? Oh, you might think nothing confirms that, right?
Suppose there were an observation that confirmed it. Well, then it would imply that it was false,
but that would disconfirm it. And so, what if something disconfirmed it? Well,
it says it's false, so that would actually confirm it. And so, you could be thinking, oh,
gosh, I get every observation both confirms and disconfirms it, or maybe you could think,
actually, nothing ends up really confirming it or disconfirming it.
I haven't said anything about what the relationship between these would be, but if we say,
assume these are disjoint sets and nothing both confirms and disconfirms the sentence,
then we would end up saying, gosh, yeah, maybe a paradoxical sentence is one,
which is going to look actually very much like a meaningless sentence.
The way the logical empiricists understand it, no observation would confirm or disconfirmed.
So, you might say, if S has no empirical content,
if and only if O plus S and O minus S are just the empty set, nothing confirms it,
nothing disconfirms it. And paradoxical sentences would probably end up being in that sort of
thing. So, it would end up saying, yeah, this sentence is false, that has no empirical content.
But admittedly, that's a trickier problem and it might give us headaches for other reasons as
soon as we think about what truth means more broadly. But anyway, this at least has some hope.
So, suppose we were able to do this, what's quite a subjection to that? This is actually,
in a sense, what Carnap is trying to do, ultimately, at a certain stage of his thought.
What? What? What's wrong with that?
Ground time! But I'm not going to say the answer comes next time, because actually,
next time we won't have class and your offer spring break and no one will remember the question.
So, what we're going to do is just make, look, it's one answer, do head, okay? These things
don't face the tribunal of experience one-on-one. We have to do our examination of what confirms
or disconfirms in the context of about a broader theory. And so, in the end, he says it's really
all of science together that confronts the tribunal of experience, not each sentence together.
So, in short, he says there's really no way to define O plus and O minus here,
because we only know what confirms or disconfirms something in the context of a background theory.
