Well, how was your spring break?
Too short.
Too short? Yeah, I know, I sympathize with that.
It's especially cool to come in here and find Spanish written up there.
It says, how long was your vacation? Did you have a good time? I was like, eh, too short.
But now, the reason I raised the question is not just to be friendly,
but also to make the point that there are a number of ways in which you might answer.
So, yeah, did you have a good spring break?
I said, yeah, you know.
Or you could say, no, bad things happened, right?
Went to Port Aransas, got hopelessly drunk up by mosquitoes and what do they call those things?
Portuguese men of war.
So, anyway, whatever.
The point is, could you ever say, oh, yes and no?
Alright, yeah, you could, right?
Aren't there times where you could answer a question?
Somebody raises a question like, how was your spring break?
And your answer is something like, well, yeah, yes and no.
Now, what are some examples of that?
Other than, how was your spring break?
Did you sleep well last night?
Good, did you sleep well last night?
Yeah, yes and no.
Now, what would that mean if you said yes and no?
Yeah, yes in one way, no in another way.
Ah, yes in one way and no in another way.
So, that's one way we can interpret this.
Yes in one way, right?
No in another way.
So, with the sleeping business, for example, what would it mean to say, yeah, did you sleep well last night?
Yes and no, yes in one way.
What's that way?
Suppose I follow up and I say, well, in what way did you sleep well?
Didn't wake up all night.
Didn't wake up, okay.
But is that in what way?
Not.
Bad dreams.
Bad dreams, okay, good.
So, there would say, well, you're not denying the law of non-contradiction, right?
There is a logical truth.
In fact, in some ways you might say it seems like the most basic logical truth, non-contradiction.
And so, we could formalize that as, you know, not, both P and not P.
And at first glance, answering a question with yes and no sounds like a violation of non-contradiction.
It sounds as if you're saying, oh, you know, the proposition I slept well last night is both true and false.
And yet you might say, no, that's not really what you're saying.
You're saying in one way it's true and in another way it's false.
So, I slept well in the sense that I didn't wake up.
I slept poorly in the sense that I had a lot of bad dreams.
Are there other sentences you might respond to with a yes and no part answer?
Are you married?
Are you married?
Ooh, yes and no.
Now, that sounds like a logical contradiction.
So, what might you mean if you say yes and no to, are you married?
If you're a sailor and you're married to the sea.
Okay, if you're a sailor and married to the sea, maybe if you're a nun and married to God,
where there's some special sense in which you're married but not the most obvious sense,
why don't you think of some other way in which somebody might respond that way?
An open marriage.
Oh, maybe an open marriage.
So, are you married?
Well, yes and no.
Yeah, that could be the sleazy yes or no.
Oh, I suppose somebody who's separated might respond that way to say, you know,
where it really means yes technically but not for very much longer.
Could there be another kind of response or another way in which you'd respond that way
and that means something?
Let's see.
I can hear a terrible spouse that cheats a lot.
Oh, yeah, are you married?
Yes and no.
Well, yes, but I act as a woman.
Yeah, actually yesterday, the revised common lectionary reading was this passage from the New Testament
in which Jesus talks to a woman at the well and shake this well.
And he says, well, go get your husband.
And she says, I have no husband.
And he says, oh, you speak truly when you say you have no husband.
You've had five husbands and a current guy is not your husband.
And so you could imagine him asking this question, so he married.
And the answer is sort of, well, yes and no, kind of common law marriage but non-physically married, that type of thing.
So anyway, part of the reason I mentioned these is some of these fit in one way in another way category, right?
But others refer to maybe different senses of the question.
Are you married, let's say, is the question.
And it seems like there, it's like, ah, married, what do you mean married?
Are you including things as broad as being married to the sea or being married to God?
Are you including common law marriage or just official marriage?
Are you referring to somebody who actually accepts the normal behavioral norms of marriage or not?
And so on and so forth.
So there might be all sorts of ambiguities around the word.
And so in that case, you'd say, well, it's not so much that proposition being true in one way and false in another way.
It might be just their different propositions being expressed there and you're sort of noting the ambiguity.
And the yes and no is to say, well, you know, if you mean this by your words, then the answer is yes.
If you mean that, it's no.
So we've now seen two ways.
There can be this sort of variance in ways or respects or something like that.
And then there can be this question of an ambiguity where we end up saying, well, really there are different senses, maybe, of the terms being used.
Different senses of what you've asked or of a proposition.
Are there any other occasions where we might be tempted to say that the law of non-contradiction fails?
That is to say, somebody seems to assert both P and not P.
Yeah, like time.
Like if we go back to the question, did you sleep well last night?
You could say, yeah, up till 2 a.m. and then no afterwards.
So you can say yes or no.
Oh, very good.
So it could be yes and no.
Yes, for a while, but then I woke up really early.
And so there could be a variation, not only in these ways, but in time.
So was it warm winter?
Well, yes, for much of the time, but not so much in the third week of March.
Friends in New England and Canada who have been sending me these photographs of three-foot snowdrifts
have been complaining about waking up at minus 29 degrees Fahrenheit.
Meanwhile, here it's 80 degrees and I send them pictures of a sunny field.
This is for the time of Texas.
But in any case, yeah, it could be differences in time.
Right?
Are there other sorts of ways in which you might be willing to say P and not P?
Well, let's frame it slightly different.
Because the law of non-contradiction says, well, this is a logical truth.
It is not the case that P and not P for any P, really.
So, you know, it's just not the case that it's both raining and not raining.
Incidentally, that might be a good example.
Could you ever answer, is it raining outside with yes and no?
Or a similar case.
Are these walls green?
Right?
So, that identifies another of these.
There are cases of just rains where we end up saying, look, when would I say yes and no to?
Is it raining?
And I don't mean time differences or I'm not claiming that this question about rain is ambiguous.
I'm not saying, well, one way it's raining and another respect it's not raining.
I really mean it's sort of rain.
Right?
Yes and no.
It's kind of raining.
It's like misting something like that where, yeah, drive around and your windshield will
get wet, but you don't really have the sense that it's raining and that kind of thing.
So, they're going to be faintness.
We're like, are these walls gray?
Are these walls green?
You might say, oh, yes and no.
Where you really need to sort of kind of, kind of on the borderline of that.
So, all of those are ways of saying something that looks like this but isn't really denying
a truth of logic, right?
Isn't really, because we'd right away say, well, what I mean to say is it's sort of raining
or here, yeah, I slept well in one way but not in another way or here, well, married
in the technical legal sense, no, but common law married, yes, or here, you know, slept
well up to 2 a.m. and then after that, not.
And so, there's no real contradiction being asserted.
Yeah.
What about in a question like, is light continuous?
Oh, is light continuous?
Good.
So, that seems to actually be yes and no.
Yeah, right.
Say a little more about that.
Can we assimilate it to one of these cases or is that a separate case?
It's, I'm not an expert in thinking, but from what I know, it seems to be a separate
case that light is both a particle in a way, so continuous and not continuous.
Oh, okay, good.
This is a case where you look at some things that are characteristics of this one class
and it has those characteristics.
You look at this, the characteristics of this other contrary class or you would have felt
contrary class and it has those characteristics too and you end up saying, wait a minute,
there's something very weird going on there.
So, there's one case and I'll just sort of refer to it as the case of quantum mechanics
because it's hard to characterize exactly what's happening with light or with various
other kinds of phenomena that occur in quantum mechanics, but those are cases where you might
say, actually, I don't know how to describe this, right?
I don't know if this violates the laws of logic or not.
Some people would propose a separate quantum logic that handles these kinds of cases.
And so, one thing we should note in thinking about what Kwan is arguing with Karnab about
really is to think about some of these alternative logics and think, where do people actually
disagree about the logic?
You might think that all these kinds of things aren't really reflecting logical differences.
Maybe this one does because if you think, wait, light is continuous and it's not continuous,
that seems to be a real direct denial of this in the sense that all these aren't.
Or at least it has that appearance of first glance and then you really have to get into the details
of the theory to understand what's being claimed and whether it's a real violation.
Well, there might be others.
What about paradoxical sentences like this sentence is false?
You might think, well, suppose it's true.
It says it's false, so it's false.
Suppose it's false.
It says it's false, so it's true.
So it's both true and false.
But if it's both true and false, it says it's false.
That's true.
But that's okay.
As I said, it was both true and false.
So maybe paradoxes are a case where you've got a real instance.
Now, most people have said, no, wait a minute.
A paradoxical sentence like this sentence is false.
There's something deviant about it.
There's something wrong with it.
I want to exclude it from consideration.
But notice we can't really say, well, what I meant to say was false yesterday, but it's true today.
Or what I really mean is, well, it's false, where that has several different senses.
Or it's true in one way and false in another.
I mean, it doesn't fit any of those cases, right?
So that too might be something that is a deeper challenge to this.
All right.
Well, quite in this paper.
And by the way, it's a difficult paper.
I had forgotten how difficult it was until I started reading it.
So I don't know if you actually made your way through it or if you did how much you were able to follow.
And it's no, don't feel bad if you either didn't read it at all or didn't get very far.
Or went through it and didn't feel like you understood much because he's assuming a lot of background in this paper.
But let's start with what Carnap is actually claiming that Quine is objected to.
I want to have this in the background because I wanted us to think about what a logical disagreement would actually be
and how we might begin to think about.
So I wanted some cases on that tape.
Well, let's think about Carnap's basic scheme.
He develops this initially in the logical structure of the world, then in the logical syntax of language,
then in a series of papers and books in the 40s.
And by the time Carnap is right, sorry, by the time Quine is criticized,
Carnap has a view that is still a version, although it's not exactly the same as the early version, of logical empiricism.
So what does that really mean?
It means there is a sharp distinction between the analytic and the syntax.
And we might phrase the question that he's dealing with you as,
what is the ground?
What is the source?
What is the nature of truth?
Where does truth come from?
What makes sentences true?
Now, depending on which of those you focus on, you're going to be led to maybe a different kind of theory.
But for the moment, let's don't worry about that.
What makes things true?
The answer is roughly, well, there's this distinction between the analytic and the synthetic.
And the analytic includes both logic and then truths by definition.
And what makes them true?
Well, the idea is, in the end, the synthetic truths, they're made true by the word.
And in particular, we come to know them by our experience of the world.
So here we can say, look, the ultimate ground of this is the world.
And moreover, we know it by virtue of our experience of the world.
So there's both the metaphysical question of what makes it so,
and then the epistemological question of how we know that.
But what about these cases?
What makes a truth of logic true?
What makes it true that it's never the case that both be anonymous?
Well, here's Karnab's answer.
It's, in the end, convention.
It's linguistic convention.
So what makes it true here is really language, in the sense that all bachelors are bachelors.
It's just true by virtue of the meanings of the term all and are.
We don't even need the meaning of bachelors there.
And we come to know that by knowing how to use our language.
But what's the ultimate source, you might say, of those linguistic truths?
Well, we operate with a certain set of conventions.
And so we've got a set of conventions about how we're going to use certain terms.
And the same is really true of definition.
It's a question of language.
And that's a matter of adapting to certain linguistic conventions.
So, Karnab's idea is some truths are made true of the world.
And we find out about them through experience.
Others are made true by our own linguistic conventions.
And we find out about them by learning our language.
Okay, that's all.
So something like this.
Well, we don't actually have to know what p is here.
All we have to know is the meaning of not and the meaning of a hand.
And we're good, okay?
That would require some empirical experience in a way.
Ah, here's the objection.
That would require some empirical experience.
Now, what kind of empirical experience?
Karnab's response is, well, yes, in the sense that you have to learn the language.
You have to learn what linguistic conventions we adopt.
And that is a matter of experience.
We have to learn languages somehow.
We're not just born learning and knowing these languages.
And we have to learn all sorts of conventions about the use of language.
So some of them are things that might be involved in the meaning of logical terms like not and and.
Others might be involved in learning the meanings of terms like bachelor.
Some are matters of linguistic convention or social convention that go beyond this.
Like, I don't know, bumping into someone and saying, oh, excuse me, or I'm sorry.
And that type of thing.
And indeed, that's the kind of thing that can vary a lot culturally, right?
I mean, you meet somebody for the first time, what do you do?
Like, oh, you know, we're just meeting, so what do I say?
Hello, or how do you do?
Or, you know, nice to meet you or something like that, right?
It would be weird if somebody said something else, right?
You know, have you read Karnab?
Now, it could be that that works, right?
A bunch of philosophers are standing around a meeting in the American Philosophical Association,
and they're all talking about Karnab, and then some new person comes over and say, hey, have you read Karnab?
And so, you know, it's not necessarily weird, though.
It requires a special social setting.
If somebody just shows up at a party and is introducing their spouse and just says, you know, you say, oh, have you read Karnab?
That would be a reason out of the blue.
Anyway, we learn these kinds of conventions through experience,
but Karnab's idea is that once we've learned those, once we've learned to speak the language and learned those linguistic conventions,
then we know that a bunch of things are true or false.
So, all I need is to have learned these conventions, the conventions governing God,
and then I can say, okay, good.
Now I know that if somebody says P and not P, or answers a question with yes and no, I have to reinterpret, okay,
because it sounds like they're denying truths of logic.
And indeed, this goes along with his question about the issue anthropologically of whether there could be pre-logical people.
Levy Brewell and some others have claimed that certain tribes are pre-logical.
They go and translate the language and they're constantly saying things like yes and no, or like P and not P.
And so Levy Brewell said yes, logic is a sort of cultural achievement and there are pre-logical peoples.
And Kwan is making fun of the idea, saying, in the end that doesn't.
Well, actually, I shouldn't say that.
Really, Karnab, in a sense, makes fun of that idea because he says, well, they're there to translate the native speech
and they're going around saying P, I think in his example, it's P, Ka, Bu, P, and you translate that as and not.
If they go around saying that, how could you possibly be translating that as and not?
It's bad translation, okay, because it's great evidence that this word doesn't mean not or doesn't mean and if people go around saying P and not P.
Now, that said, the idea here, the background plot is where does truth come from and where does our knowledge of the truth come from?
Entirely from the world and from our experience of the world or from our linguistic conventions.
So all truth is either empirical truth about the world or it's merely verbal truth.
It's something that we, as a word, make up.
So, you could think, the realist says, you know, the world is independent of our thoughts.
The anti-realist says, no, it's not.
And Karnab's saying, well, this part really sort of is, but this part is not.
This part is something that is really governed by our own convention, our own ways of conceptualizing.
How much of language would Karnab say you have to learn empirically?
Because it seems like if you've learned A language, you could learn another language without any empirical basis purely from the first language, like translation.
Alright, that's a great question.
How much of a language do you actually have to have learned in order for this sort of thing to kick in?
We're going to see later some people who think that in order to really understand a concept, you have to understand all concepts.
And that implies you don't know the language until you know it completely.
But that seems absurd.
Like, nobody knows English completely.
There are 500,000 words of English.
Nobody knows all of them.
You might think, I'll read the Oxford English Dictionary in all, you know, in volumes and I'll know them all.
Well, no, you won't remember that many.
Your vocabulary can't possibly be that big.
And so you might think, well, look, if the answer is we have to learn the entire language, that seems unreasonable, how much do we have to learn?
And in particular, how much would we have to learn to actually understand the truth, like the law of non-construction?
Here is part of the challenge that Kwan has raised.
He's saying, well, look, in order to make sense of this notion, we have to be able to distinguish these truths.
And two dogmas is a paper about how it's impossible to draw that distinction.
But suppose we neglect that and just focus on the logical part.
The idea is supposed to be that we can draw this distinction and that the definitional truths ultimately reduce to these logical truths once we replace definitions with the terms being defined.
And so in the end, it comes back to this.
But really, now, what part of the language would we have to understand from that?
Well, I suppose I say it's not true that it's both raining and not raining.
I don't really have to know what it means to say it is raining.
I have to understand and not.
So the thought is there's a certain logical vocabulary.
And all that I really need for logical truth is that logical vocabulary.
Now then, later, to learn that bachelors are unmarried, for example, I actually have to learn the term bachelor.
But for the logical part, all I would really have to master is this logical vocabulary.
Now, in a sense, quite and quite I have to agree about what that is.
Well, more or less anyway.
You know, it's things like not and or if, what else?
Some, all, is.
But now we can ask what distinguishes those things?
What makes those different from terms like bachelors or light or married or raining or sleep, et cetera, et cetera?
We think we have lots, right?
Or we teach a theory of these words.
You might think, well, I want to take a class in the logic of sleep.
I want to know the logic of sleeping.
We don't do that, right?
We don't think of that as part of logic.
But how do we distinguish the logical vocabulary from the last one?
Well, there's going to be affirmations.
Some of them seem to be affirmations of what is denoted or what is stated.
For example, it's really, it seems to be more like declarations or, I don't know, it's like linking various singles together
or confirming it and declaring it or disaffirming it.
Ah, okay, yes.
Affirming or disaffirming, denying something?
Yeah, maybe it's not too far from what you're saying to think.
These are structural.
They're laying out a certain form if you think about the form of a statement.
So one way of thinking about this is, aha, these are formal in the sense they have to do with form.
They have to do with the form of what you're saying as opposed to the content.
So if you say all bachelors are bachelors, you have to know bachelor in order to understand the real content of that.
But the form is revealed just by the R, right?
Bachelors are bachelors.
You know the form is just A's or A's.
And that's something that you might think relates to form.
And what you mean by that could be spelled out in all sorts of ways.
But the thought is it has something to do with the structure of thought as opposed to its content.
So that might be one way of thinking about this.
As you put it, linking various things with content together,
it's the sort of links among content terms that are really revealed by the logical vocabulary.
Can you think of any other ways of trying to characterize what's different about those words?
And what makes us do logic of war for some in a way that we don't do logic of rain or sleep?
Yeah, seems harder to reduce those.
Like, I know there's a logic where you do it all with like two connectives,
but at a certain point it gets harder to reduce them as opposed to married.
You can kind of spell out what that means with other words.
Ah, well, okay, yes.
You might think that, look, in the end definitions, things like married, bachelor, rain, etc.
All of that you could ultimately explain.
But finally, you've got to get back to starting points, right?
And you might think that logic represents the ultimate starting points in some sense.
That everything else comes down to love.
They're not empirical claims of the world.
Like, life consists of particles that preserve the claim of the world.
But you might think that in the end, take out the world, knowledge, take out all this many definitions as you can.
You get led back to certain axioms.
And so that would be another way of thinking about this.
The question of sort of the ultimate axioms, the ultimate starting points.
Once we've abstracted away from world knowledge, once we've abstracted away from the meanings of specific terms that we can define,
we ultimately get back to these basics we just can't define.
And maybe you think logic is that theory of those basics, indivisible things.
So it might be a question of ultimate axioms, or it might be a question of ultimate indivisibles, something like that.
And when you see Bertrand Russell getting so excited with Scheffer's discovery that NAND, or NOR,
are themselves connectives that would allow you to define all the other sentential connectives,
you could think, yeah, why would this be exciting?
From this point of view, not really about exciting at all, but from this point of view, very exciting.
That you think, ah, got an ultimate symbol now.
Are there other ways of thinking about this book?
Oh, yeah, I'm getting to the bottom of the board, so some of you can't see it.
I've only been teaching for 37 years to realize nobody can see anything below about here on the blackboard.
Which is especially strange, because as a student, I always sat in the back.
I was just the kind of person who always gravitated to the far corner of the room.
I don't know why.
See, in this class, there's no point to me, because there's like no reason.
Well, here's the way some people have tried to do it.
They've said logic is topic neutral.
So let's say, I ask you, is it raining, and you say yes and no.
What are we talking about?
The weather. This isn't supposed to be our question.
Hard question.
Suppose I ask, so did you sleep well last night?
We're asking about your sleeping, right?
And so on and so forth.
The walls, green, we're asking about the color of the walls.
However, and indeed, green, gray, married, unmarried, raining, sleep,
all of those things have to do with certain topics.
But if I say, ah, I couldn't catch much of their conversation, they were too far away,
but I heard and used the term, and, what were they talking about?
Right? I can't say.
I can use these things all over the place.
They are topic neutral.
They're sort of universal things.
Think about playing cards that you might have, and, you know, in some sort of role-playing game,
this card is only useful in this very rare situation.
Hey, this one's useful all the time.
Okay?
Money is sort of like this.
The economy, money's useful all the time.
So it's topic neutral, you might say.
And a lot of people have tried to define the logical vocabulary that way.
Now, here is why Quine thinks all of this becomes really critical,
and why it's important to distinguish logic from other things,
partly to just make sense of this claim that logic is true by convention,
but partly also, well, to distinguish logic from mathematics.
What's the difference between logic and math?
In the end, Quine says, it's one thing.
It's the vocabulary of membership.
That's all you have to add to logic to get set theory.
Okay?
Or to get the vocabulary of set theory, I should say.
So, in a sense, he's concerned with this distinction between logic and set theory,
which introduces that, and set theory gives you the entire rest of mathematics.
He thinks that's what Russell and Whitehead and Fraga show.
And so, in the end, it's really just logic plus this that gives you math,
but logic seems to be what you get if you don't have the membership relation.
But now, how can we say that?
Because, after all, isn't this topic neutral?
Doesn't it reflect some sort of ultimate axiom?
In a way, that's what you do when you axiomize all of math in terms of set theory.
And then he takes card after we've shown in the logical structure of the world
that actually, with logic and set theory, I can now reproduce all of our language about the world,
not in the sense of getting the troops out, but being able to say what we want to say.
So, in the end, why do we say set theory, or why does Quine say set theory is not logic?
What's the difference between logic and set theory?
Well, this is a place where I think this paper gets hard to understand.
So, let's take a look at how he actually tries to structure this argument,
because the way the paper proceeds is sometimes confusing.
He grants, for example, that sheer verbal usage is, in general, a major determinant of truth.
And so, for example, Brutus killed Caesar.
Well, the Ides of March have just passed.
Too bad I am.
Too bad we were up for spring break and couldn't do this on the 15th.
But you might say, look, yeah, you have to know what Brutus and Caesar refer to,
and you have to know what killed means in order to assess the truth of that.
But you also have to know something about the world.
So, it's not as if here it's just the world, just experience.
It's really all of that, plus the conventions.
You need to know the conventions to know what's even being asserted before you can claim to know anything.
And the truth of a proposition like Brutus killed Caesar depends on the linguistic conventions
about meaning and reference, as well as on the truth of the world.
So, that's an important point.
But now, when we get to the key bit of the argument, we could say, well, yeah,
I thought it would be easy to appeal to my underlinings to make the structure of the argument clear.
Now that I look at them, it seems more difficult.
But, okay, here's one way we might try to characterize the distinction.
Every truth of elementary logic is obvious, or can be made so by some series of individually obvious steps.
Set theory in its present state anyway as other theories.
So, here we can say, yeah, in the end this gives amounts to a series of obvious steps.
Here, not so, okay?
Not obvious, not reducible to obvious steps.
Now, why does he say this, by the way?
What in set theory is not obvious?
Actually, who studied set theory here?
Some of you.
There are several things that are bothering you, I think.
Frege's way of approaching all of this.
In a certain sense, tried to reduce everything to the obvious axiom of abstraction, comprehension,
that just said, look, give me a predicate, and I can create the set of things that that predicate is true of.
Okay?
And then you get things like, is not an element of itself.
It all blows up in Russell's paradox.
So, you can't do the simple thing.
At that point, people attempt various non-simple things in set theory.
And we've talked a little bit about the most common way of doing this.
You end up with a bunch of different axioms.
One of which actually is an axiom of extensionality that says two sets are identical if and only if they have the same members.
Is that obvious?
Well, in a certain sense, you could say that does seem characteristic of a convention about what we mean by set.
That's what makes a set different from a property.
Two properties can be different, even though they apply to exactly the same things,
by creature with a heart and creature with a kidney.
But two sets are identical if and only if they have the same members.
So that, when you might argue, is a question of convention.
It seems obvious once you understand what we mean by set.
But now, what about, well, I've used this example before, the axiom of infinity.
There is an infinite set.
That doesn't seem obvious.
Hey, there is this infinite object.
There is this infinite set.
Why?
That doesn't seem obvious in the way that other things in logic seem obvious.
Or what about this one?
A restricted axiom of comprehension that says, essentially, well given a predicate and a previously existing set,
that I can talk about all the members of that previously existing set that satisfy the predicate.
So I'm always doing that sort of defining of the set within a background set.
You might think that's even more obvious than the original axiom of abstraction since it follows from it.
But actually, it feels like that's weird, right?
All of a sudden, it's now complicated.
And you might think, wait, why that?
But it's worse.
I now have to have axioms that say there are such things as pair sets.
So given an x and a y, I can form the set that contains just x and y.
And I have to have a power set axiom that says I can take the set of all subsets, begin the set.
And why do I have to do that?
Because those are things that aren't contained within some previously existing set.
So all of those have to be introduced as separate axioms.
Are they obvious?
And then eventually, people introduce an axiom of foundations that says, essentially, that there are no infinite descending epsilon chains.
That if I have a set, I can ultimately trace it back to atoms.
It's never like, oh, well, the set contains the subset, which contains the subset, which contains the subset, and so on, now, infinitely.
That is also going to imply that I don't have any loops.
So it's never the case that A belongs to B and B belongs to A.
That doesn't seem obvious, right?
And so a lot of these things end up seeming not obvious at all.
Now, for those of you who have no idea what I'm talking about,
I hope I've said at least enough obscure stuff to convince you that these things aren't obvious.
For those of you who know enough set theory, you can sort of say, OK, yeah, it does feel like there's a difference among the axioms of set theory.
Some feel pretty obvious, and some don't feel very obvious.
Some, I would have thought were obvious until you told me that, I mean, great danger of running into paradoxes, and now I'm afraid of everything.
So in short, there's that kind of difference between logic and set theory.
Is there any other kind of difference?
Well, here is a key part to Klein's argument.
He says, let's consider a logical truth, like everything is self-identical.
Everything is what it is, and not another thing, as Richard Butler once said.
We can say that it depends on the truth, fourth truth, on traits of a language,
specifically on the identity statement, is, and not on traits of its subject matter.
But we can also say alternatively that it depends on an obvious trait, namely self-identity in its subject matter, namely everything.
The tendency of our present reflections is there is no difference.
In the end, he says there is no difference between the two pseudo-nauthorians of saying these things are truths about the world
and the claim that these are truths by linguistic convention.
So in a certain sense, he's willing to say, look, there is a distinction here, but it's not the right distinction.
It's not the distinction between things that are true by convention and things that are true in some other way.
And if we get the line between that and that physics, that too is not a line.
We can distinguish it in the same sort of way.
Now, why not?
Well, here's part of the reasoning.
We want to say in the end, look, it's us that are responsible for these truths.
They come from our linguistic conventions.
These things, it's a question of the world.
But Kauai says, now, wait a minute.
Take a look at this.
Is it really just a question of the meanings of not an ant?
Or is it a matter that the world doesn't contain contradictions?
Similarly, with the law of self-identity.
Let's take that as an example, a second example of a logical law.
Self-identity.
So basically, for all x, x equals x.
Is that something that is giving us a truth about the world?
Or is that something that's just true by virtue of the meaning of identity?
He says, I don't know how to tell the difference between those two claims.
There's no real difference.
How would you decide?
Here is some of Kauai's underlying logical empiricism coming out.
He's rejecting a huge amount of a logical empiricist tradition.
But in this respect, he's still in the spirit of it.
He's still saying, what's the difference between the doctrine
that these things are true by virtue of the way the world is
and the view that they're true by virtue of the meanings of the terms?
Is there any way we can tell which of those it is?
Define a world.
My world.
Well, good.
If I include my linguistic conventions in the world,
then it looks as if, that's a really good point, right?
Linguists, amazingly enough, think that they're empirical scientists, right?
Because they're looking at the world, namely the linguistic conventions.
And that's part of the world.
And it would be very strange to say to the linguist,
oh, everything you're doing is a priori.
Although, actually, it often has that favor.
I mean, increasingly linguists do actually study corpus' bodies of text.
But for many, many years, linguists didn't do that.
They just sat around and thought about what was grammatical and what followed from London.
Empirical research consisted of Nick Asher running down the hallway in Wagner Hall,
saying, Daniel, what do you think of this argument?
I said, oh, it sounds good to me.
That was empirical research.
Now, people really do more of an empirical investigation of the way people use language.
But still, you might say, in the end, what's true or false in linguistics is a matter of convention.
So anyway, it's a good question.
What do we mean by the world and how do we distinguish the conventions from it?
The picture in Cardab is, aha, there's me, really, but all of us together.
We have these conventions we agree upon about the meanings of terms.
That sets a certain framework.
And then we go investigate the world, and we find out certain things,
and we find out what's true and false in this language we've created
beyond the merely logical truths that were sort of established by the framework itself.
So one way of thinking about the distinction in Cardab is that there are certain things.
And this will help lead us into next time.
We're establishing a certain framework for understanding the world.
It is, in part, a linguistic framework.
We can think of it more broadly as a conceptual framework.
We're crafting this framework to understand the world.
And part of it is a matter of sort of defining the framework, understanding what this framework is,
and then investigating the world using the framework.
Quine is basically saying, look, that's the wrong picture.
We come up with a framework as we investigate the world.
It's not as if we agree upon a language or agree upon this logical structure or these meanings,
and then we go find out what's true in the world.
It's rather that we're crafting our language, changing our language, expanding our concepts,
redefining our logic, maybe coming up with new things in mathematics and so forth,
all in an attempt to understand the world broadly speaking, including our linguistic behavior.
And as we do that, we come up with certain things.
We adapt by adding certain claims.
But now, if you say, well, wait a minute, what are the basic things?
What are the ultimate axioms or indefinables?
He'll say, well, it's a good question, and you can identify axioms in geometry and other views.
But it's sort of arbitrary.
It's not like there are certain things that are just intrinsically axioms.
You can axiomatize things in all sorts of ways.
Formal structure, how do I decide what's the form and what's the content?
It's an old distinction going back at least to Aristotle.
But I think quiet is challenging in a way, and saying, look, in the end, what I say has a certain content.
What is its form as opposed to the content?
It's a theoretical question, and I can get far in logic or in mathematics by thinking about form in this way.
But in doing that, I'm giving you a theory about my linguistic behavior.
And it's not separate from my theories about the world.
The same thing is true if I think about topic neutrality.
In talking about the world, I'm going to use certain terms much more often than other terms.
And so it is going to include things like not and or if some all is.
Well, what are some other really common things that would come up in language?
Let's say we're doing a word count frequency on a big database.
Okay, good. There are going to be lots of things that are really common.
What else?
And indeed, those do feel logical, right?
Hence the theory of indefinite descriptions.
Ah, good.
That's going to be really common.
We have is.
Another variance of the verb to be will be there.
But what are some other really common words?
You can often tell in a language because they're really short words.
But.
Oh, possessive. Yeah, possessive like so and so's, right?
The apostrophe s, let's say, or but or on.
What are some others?
Does, does, doesn't.
Does. Oh, yeah, does.
Right, right.
No.
No. Good.
Now, notice some of those feel logical, like no, but, ah, da,
but others too on other simple prepositions.
We don't have a logical on, right?
We don't have a logical to at least the way we ordinarily think of it.
And yet I can use those prepositions in a way that seems pretty topic neutral.
I can say, oh, he was talking about, about would be another good book, right?
We were talking about this or that was about this or, you know, this,
the book was on the table.
The top was on quantum mechanics, et cetera, et cetera.
So a lot of these feel pretty topic neutral too.
So in short, Quine is saying, actually, when we think about this framework,
it's not going to be that obvious how we distinguish logic.
Now, it's not as if we can't.
He, he's not somebody who says, so there's no such thing as logic or something like that.
But in a sense, it's part of our overall theory of the world to do that.
One way of looking at it is we draw these distinctions between analytic and synthetic,
between logic and definition, between all of that, and then things that require
experience of the world, between logic and mathematics.
But the ways in which we do it are driven by our overall theories.
It's not as if things come up philosophically pre-divided,
and then we fill in these categories in the way Carnot thinks.
It's rather we draw these distinctions as part of our overall theory of the world.
So at least the way I like to read Quine here isn't saying there's no difference
between logic and set theory.
He thinks there are differences.
No differences between those in physics.
There are.
It's just that all of that is defined within a certain theory.
It's not something that comes to us in advance of theory.
Well, next time we'll look at Carnot in empiricism, semantics, and ontology.
We'll take a look at some further details of Quine's arguments
as we look at Carnot's way of thinking about this and responding.
