Well, now let's start talking about Klein and his analysis of ontology.
Klein's way of thinking about Oziloffical Matters has been hugely significant.
The thing starts, you might say, his project starts in the 1930s.
He goes to Vienna, he's working with Karnapp, takes a position at Harvard and stays at Harvard
his entire career, ends up shaping the Harvard Department in crucial ways and turning it
into one of the, well, for the entire time he was there, really, one of the top two or three
departments of philosophy in the United States.
Klein's influence was felt partly through the power of his work.
He's a great writer and so has a lot of influence, partly because it is important
philosophically, partly because the stylistic excellence of this makes him fun to read.
And it's not often you encounter philosophy that's fun to read.
So I think a lot of people read Klein when they might have been tempted not to read a similar set of ideas
from another writer just because he's such a great writer.
But also because Klein's students end up having a huge amount of power in the profession and well-deserved power.
He has many of the greatest philosophers of the next generation studying with him.
And so there are lots of people whose views he shapes.
Saul Kripke, David Lewis, a variety of other people are Klein students and end up shaping the world of philosophy in the realm.
So Klein's influence is both direct and indirect.
Now last time we were examining Klein on autology and we saw there was something key that he develops.
It becomes known as Klein's criteria of logical commitment.
There are different ways of putting this, but the most famous formulation, as we saw, was just this.
To be is to be a value of a variable.
And last time we talked about what that meant.
The idea was really that we have some statement like this.
And what does that say? There is an x such that a holds true of x.
Or in other words in English that says there are a's.
Now understood in terms of its meaning, what this really means is that there is some domain of objects.
And then we identify some of those as a's.
So there are some objects x in here such that a is true of x.
And we might think, okay, so one way of looking at this is that there is some non-empty subset of that domain consisting of a's.
And so you might think, yeah, that's the a's in our domain.
And that's what this means.
So we could even think about the English but what, when we con Knight ourselves ontologically to something when they say there are such things.
To ontologically commit yourself to people is to say there are people, to ontologically commit yourself to red things is to say there are red things.
Does ontologically commit yourself to numbers is to say there are numbers, to ontologically commit yourself to attributes is to say there are attributes.
And all of those could be put in logical terms
in this sort of way.
They could be put in English terms
by just saying there are these things.
We can think of it in terms of model theory, which
is what this way of interpreting the logic comes to.
These things are understood as models.
There's a domain of objects and then properties and relations
that can be defined on that set of objects.
And to say there are attributes is just
to say some of the things in our domain are attributes.
To say there are red things, some of the things
that are domain are red.
There are people, some of the things in the domain are people.
So we can think of this in sort of syntactic terms,
either formally or informally.
We can think of it in semantic terms,
as saying there are certain kinds of things in our domain.
And ultimately, the domain is the domain of all things.
That's right.
Well, yes.
This can be understood as the domain of just everything,
all things.
On the other hand, in a lot of contexts,
we don't have in mind everything.
So for example, suppose I am thinking
about the various people in this class
and how you're doing on your papers,
then actually the domain that's relevant to that
are the people in the class and the papers.
And I'm not worried about the rest of the word.
If somebody says, but what about Vladimir Putin?
I don't think.
Oh, yeah, Vladimir Putin's an art domain.
I better think about him, too.
No.
I'm just going to say, yeah, the domain of objects
that's relevant to this particular context
is one involving students and papers.
And that's it.
So frequently in language, what happens
is we don't focus on this entire domain of everything.
If I say, everyone's here.
I don't mean everyone in the universe here.
I mean, everyone in the class, for example, is here.
So often in language, we really are talking about a much
more restricted domain.
But yes, in the abstract, we could
be talking about everything.
And indeed, when we're thinking about ontology
in the broadest sense, that's what we want to do.
Think about the way Klein opens his famous essay
on what there is.
A curious thing about the ontological problem
is its simplicity.
It can be put in three Anglo-Saxon monosyllables.
What is there?
It can be answered, moreover, in a word, everything.
And everyone will accept this answer is true.
So in a sense, if we're asking that basic ontological
question, what is there, then the answer is everything.
And so we do want this domain to include everything
for those purposes.
However, this is merely a saying that there is what there is.
There remains room for disagreement over cases.
And so the issue is stabilized after centuries.
And so that tells us when we're doing metaphysics,
we typically have in mind a domain that just consists
of everything.
Well, OK, so this looks like a very simple picture.
But it's actually not quite so simple.
Because even in his essay from 1939,
a logistical approach to the ontological problem,
after saying that to be is to be a value of a variable,
he says, well, of course, sometimes we
speak as if certain sync-categorical expressions
were names of entities.
We talked last time about the roundness of pebbles,
or the roundness of the clock.
And you might think, actually, roundness
is something I don't want to recognize.
Admittedly, it looks like I'm quantifying over that.
If I say pebbles have roundness, so pebbles have something.
But I might want to think, no, that's
an avoidable way of speaking.
And there might be other things that it
looks like I'm committed to by my use of a noun
that I want to retreat and say there's no such thing.
Actually, one of Quine's favorite examples
is to say for the sake of something.
I did it for her sake.
Does that mean there is an x such that I did it for her x?
No, I mean, sakes aren't things, right?
That's something we'd want to paraphrase in some other way.
If I did that for my wife's sake,
then I want to be ontologically committed to my wife.
But I don't want to be ontologically committed
to her sake.
I don't know what that would even be, right?
So sometimes he says, we speak as if these things are actually
names of entities, but we hold that these are merely
manners of speaking, that the expressions are not actually
names, that the alleged entities are convenient fictions.
This notion of fiction can be given a clear meaning
from the point of view of the present developments
to speak as if certain expressions were names
is to allow those expressions to replace and be replaced
by variables according to the laws of quantification.
But if this is to be merely a convenient and theoretically
avoidable manner of speaking, we must
be able to translate such usage into another idiom, which
does not require the expressions in question
to replace and be replaced by variables.
So there is another possibility that emerges here.
This is, you might say, the basic way to be committed.
But now we can also say sometimes these things
are avoidable.
So we can say, here's a criterion
of being committed to something.
To be is to be a value of a variable.
It's for us to include it in the domain.
But then we can say, well, all right,
there's another way of looking at this.
Sometimes we do that, and yet we think, nevertheless,
the term is really synchro-grammatic.
We're not really committed, OK?
And so when we really have commitment,
when we can't avoid this.
So sometimes, Quine just puts it this way.
But sometimes he puts it in a different way.
And we'll see an exact formulation
of that in his essay on what there is.
It's really, to be is to be something
that has to be in the domain for what
we're saying to be true.
And it might be that it has to be in the domain directly
because we're saying there are a's and there are a's in the domain.
But sometimes it's the case in this very indirect fashion.
We say there are a's, but really that's
an avoidable way of speaking.
And in the end, what we are quantifying over in our final
domain is just the things we have to recognize,
some things we translate.
So in short, there's this possibility
of, well, reduction of translation,
of eliminating certain ways of speaking.
And before we formulate that in official terms,
I want to give us some examples and see
how he thinks about this.
So let's turn back to on what there is.
Because here he formulates a nice puzzle right at the outset.
Suppose there are two philosophers,
MacEx and I, differing over ontology.
Suppose MacEx maintains there is something which I maintain.
There is not.
MacEx can, quite consistently with his own point of view,
describe our difference of opinion
by saying I refuse to recognize certain entities.
I should protest, of course, that he's
wrong in his formulation of our disagreement,
for I maintain there are no entities in the kind which he
alleges for me to recognize.
But my finding him wrong in this formulation of our disagreement
is unimportant, for I'm committed to considering him wrong
in his ontology anyway.
When I try to formulate our difference of opinion,
on the other hand, I seem to be in a predicament.
I can't admit that there are some things which MacEx
countensess and I do not, for admitting that there are such
things I should be contradicting my own rejection of them.
Now notice what he can't say.
Yeah, there's some things that MacEx countensess that I don't.
Because if I am saying that, look what I'm saying.
There are things that he recognizes that I don't.
And it sounds like I'm saying there are things
that I don't believe in.
But wait a minute.
If I confess that there are things that I think there aren't,
it sounds like I'm contradicting myself, right?
Or at least I'm saying that my own beliefs are false.
I'm saying, yeah, you know, there are these things
that I don't think there are.
And so it looks like I'm in trouble.
Now, he says, it looks like this reason
can sound that anybody in the logical dispute who's
denying the existence of anything is a severe disadvantage.
Because the moment you try to say, yeah, there
are these things that I don't accept,
it looks like you're actually committing yourself
to the things and undermining your own position.
Well, this, he says, is the old platonic riddle of non-being.
Non-being must, in some sense, be.
Otherwise, what is it that there is not?
This tangled doctrine might be nicknamed Plato's beard.
Historically, it's proved tough, frequently dulling
the edge of Occam's reason.
That's some of that great writing that I was mentioning.
So he says, consider Pegasus.
We want to say something like this.
Does Pegasus exist?
No.
No, right?
Pegasus is supposedly a winged horse.
But there are no winged horses, so we might say yes.
Pegasus does not exist.
But now you might think, well, this is a problem.
What does our logic do with constants, with names?
Well, they have to stand for things in the domain.
So you might think, ah, OK, so I see what's happening here.
This is like saying, gosh, my shirt is not blue.
And what's going on there?
Well, I'm referring to the shirt.
And then I'm saying something about it, right?
That it is not blue.
So I may think, OK, so similarly here,
I'm saying something about Pegasus.
This winged horse.
Yeah, horses have manes, they have eyes.
So there we go.
Pegasus, OK?
And I'm saying it doesn't exist.
Like saying, my shirt is not blue, there's Pegasus.
And Pegasus doesn't exist.
But now, that's weird, right?
For one thing to say it doesn't exist,
that's a bad thing to predicate an object.
But secondly, it looks like I have to have an object.
So my domain has Pegasus in it.
And then I'm saying, but Pegasus doesn't exist.
And so I'm in trouble.
Now, gosh, what do I do about it?
It's a problem with all of these names
that don't denote anything.
How should I, in general, deal with those things?
It becomes a problem in logic.
And so there are various ways of dealing with it.
Quiet outlines one in this essay.
There's an entire branch of logic called free logic
that tries to accept that there are terms like Pegasus that
don't denote anything and to allow them in the logic.
But then what you do, you can't allow yourself
to go from Pegasus doesn't exist to, OK,
there are things that don't exist.
And in fact, that's a good test case.
Suppose I say, there are things that don't exist.
Does that make sense?
Or is that somehow self-contradictory?
Self-contradictory.
OK, Klein wants you to think, yes, that's self-contradictory.
There are things that don't exist.
What do you mean?
You're saying there are things that there aren't?
That's absurd, OK?
And so he's trying to get that intuition going.
Now, there were other philosophers
who think it makes perfectly good sense.
Terence Parsons writes a book on non-existent objects, in fact.
And one of the things he says right at the start
is there are some things that don't exist, like Pegasus.
For example, and he thinks that's just fine,
and we can say that without any problem.
In fact, it's great.
His dedication is to my parents, without whom I might have
been one, and mine is to love it.
So anyway, that's something that you could say is up for dispute,
whether you can say intelligently there
are things that don't exist.
But many of it, let's get back to Pegasus.
Pegasus doesn't exist.
We don't want that model of what's going on here.
But what can we do?
Well, our philosopher, Meg X, is thinking about this.
And says, well, actually, I don't want to say
there are rain horses, right?
In fact, it looks like I've got a problem.
Because if I've now got Pegasus in my domain,
and I've got this, like Pegasus is a horse.
That seems true.
Pegasus is white.
Pegasus is winged.
Now I've got white winged horses in my domain.
And so we can actually get Pegasus out there to say,
look, some horses have wings.
And it will turn out to be true, right?
But I don't want to say that's true.
And it doesn't help to say, of course, some horses have wings.
Pegasus, for example, you still want to say,
no, Pegasus isn't real.
And so what can you do?
Well, one way to do it is to try to turn Pegasus
into something else.
So Meg X here, for example, says, ah, yeah, of course,
I don't want to say there's an actual horse that is white,
it has wings, and is written by Valerafon, and so on,
as in medical stories.
No, instead, I'm saying there is something
like the idea of Pegasus, the idea, the concept of Pegasus.
So maybe this exists in the realm of ideas, or concepts,
or something like that.
And indeed, we can say, yeah, a fellow doesn't really exist,
but a fellow exists in the realm of characters,
for Shakespeare.
And so we could have realms of ideas, of concepts,
of characters, of fictions, and so forth,
where we want to say the object exists,
but in that special world.
So maybe this is ideas, maybe this is a realm of fictions,
maybe it's a realm of characters,
or of mythological creatures, whatever
we want to say about this, we find some way of putting it
in a place where it doesn't do any harm,
and where we don't have to admit that it's a real horse.
Well, Klein doesn't like that option of saying,
it's just an idea.
And so when I say Pegasus doesn't exist,
I'm referring to an idea, or a fiction, or a character,
or a mythological creature, and saying that it doesn't exist.
Now, why doesn't he like that option?
What's wrong with that?
Does he talk about meaning and beings?
Is that where he goes with this?
Well, eventually, yes.
But the outset, there's something wrong with just the idea part.
Think about something that does exist.
Are you going to, is that a claim about an idea too?
Suppose I say that Harvey Friedman exists.
There really is a person named Harvey Friedman.
He's giving a talk at four o'clock today.
And so there really is that guy.
And now, if I say Harvey Friedman exists,
am I saying that, oh, am I talking about the idea
of Harvey Friedman, or a mythological creature
of Harvey Friedman, or a character, or a fiction?
No, right?
I'm actually talking about this person, this mathematician.
And it looks as if, in that case, you say, well, gee,
it's very clear, right?
I've got this here I am, let's say, and here's my mind.
And I've got this idea of Harvey Friedman.
But then here's Harvey Friedman.
Wow, that's a great picture of him.
He wears glasses.
That's ridiculous.
But anyway, I'm not tempted to confuse Harvey Friedman
with my idea of Harvey Friedman.
My idea of Harvey Friedman is mental,
but Harvey Friedman isn't mental.
He's an actual guy.
He's an actual mathematician.
And so you might say, look, I'm in no danger with that.
His example in the essay is the Parthenon.
I'm not going to confuse the Parthenon, which
is on the Acropolis, from my idea of the Parthenon,
which is in my head.
And so it's very clear there when
I'm talking about the Parthenon or Harvey Friedman,
and when I'm talking about my idea of the Parthenon
or my idea of Harvey Friedman.
Yet, if I look at Pegasus, well, now,
it looks like I'm getting confused.
Pegasus doesn't exist.
I'm talking about the horse, right?
It's saying it doesn't exist, but I'm talking about my idea.
Yeah?
How does this relate to idealism?
Is this kind of what gave rise to the idea
of everything not just in your head?
Because this seems to presuppose some sort of realism,
right?
That there is a Harvey Friedman in the real world,
and not just in the mind.
Well, Coyne is thinking of realistic terms.
He's framing this in realistic terms.
MacEx historically probably stands for MacTigert,
who is an idealist.
And so one way to interpret what's going on in this essay
is that it is an attack on idealism.
On the other hand, I'm not sure that's
the best way to look at it.
Because everything, and in fact, I
think it's part of the reason that Coyne refers
to fictional philosophers here, rather than actually engaging
specific people.
It's because even the idealist is
going to have to draw a distinction between the things that
are mind dependent in this way and the things that
are mind dependent in that way, right?
So the Parthenon will be mind dependent if I'm
an idealist, holding that everything is mind dependent.
But I can also then refer to my idea of the Parthenon.
I'm not identifying them as an idealist.
Moreover, I still want to draw the distinction between Pegasus
and the Parthenon.
The Parthenon really exists.
And Pegasus doesn't.
They both are, in a sense, mental projections or constructions
from an idealist's point of view.
But they have a really different character.
You can actually go to see the Parthenon.
But you can't go see Pegasus.
And so there's something fundamental.
You can go hear Harvey Friedman talk.
But if I say Santa Claus is going to be on campus
on December 25th, you can't wait around and go here
and talk by Santa Claus.
So something different is going on, even
from an idealist's point of view.
Idealists would distinguish between their idea of the Parthenon
and the actual Parthenon.
Sure, I think they have to.
Now, there's going to be an intimate relationship
between them.
What is that going to look like?
Suppose we took the following idea.
We thought, and Russell thinks this at a certain stage,
so does John Stuart Mill.
They are in this stage of their thinking phenomenalist.
And so they're, in a sense, saying,
what we call a physical object is really
just a collection of actual and possible sensations.
Now, since sensations are mental,
this is a way of being an idealist.
And if you take that view, then what's
the difference between Pegasus, for example,
and the Parthenon?
Well, in both cases, you're identifying the object
with these actual and possible sensations of them.
But now, yeah, so what does existence
come to for an idealist?
How do we distinguish that actual and possible,
I should say, the collection of actual and possible sensations
of a real thing as opposed to a collection
of actual and possible sensations of a fictional?
Presumably all of those are possible, right, but not actual.
These are, well, there are some actual ones,
but possible ones.
On the other hand, they're real things that nobody's seen.
And so I don't want to just say, oh,
it's the difference between actuality and possibility,
because there might be something we've had no actual sensations
of that we hope to gain sensations of.
So how could we do it before I do this?
Yeah, some of you are.
So there's one, I mean, it's a problem
that any idealist needs to face.
And interestingly enough, if you think about classic ideals,
what would Barclay say about this, for example?
What would Kant say about this?
My answer is, I have no idea, because they don't address
this question at all.
What's Kant's account of fictional entities, or Barclay's
account, this is not a problem they ever talk about.
And so in a certain sense, you could say, gosh,
have idealists recognize that they actually
have a task to perform here?
But let's help them out.
What could you say?
Collective belief.
Collective belief, well, how would that help?
I don't know, if multiple, well, I
guess if you have some kind of threshold problem,
people believe in something, and then that threshold
is fulfilled, and you can turn that
into an actual thing that exists.
Oh, well, I should say, OK, look, here's the difference.
Not many people believe in Pegasus.
Lots of people believe in the Parthenon.
That's what it comes down to.
But gosh, that means if a religious revival sweeps through
and everybody starts believing in God, God exists now, right?
Or if people give up on religion, then God no longer exists.
But that seems silly, right?
Whether there's a God or not doesn't
depend on how many people believe it.
So that's one thing that's problematic.
Secondly, it looks like it's going
to wreak havoc with science, because suppose scientists
become convinced that there is such a thing as flogistan,
for example.
And then our physical theory changes.
Well, now, what do we say?
Oh, yeah, there used to be this stuff called flogistan.
And when you burn something, it was an escape of flogistan.
But now, and it had negative weight and stuff,
which is why it went up to the air and so on.
But then it stopped existing.
And all of a sudden, things started oxidizing.
Gosh, before oxidation wasn't a thing.
No, it's a thing.
Flogistan used to be a thing.
Found it all over the medieval world.
But then around 1750, flogistan just went out of existence.
And that seems ridiculous, right?
That's not right.
So it isn't entirely easy to figure out what to say.
We might say, look, it's a question of systematic,
predictable collections of actual and possible sensations.
So then if I go and visit the Parthenon,
I'm there on the Acropolis.
I'm looking at it.
I close my eyes, open them again.
It's still there.
I walk around to this side.
It's still there.
Whereas Pegasus, that's not necessarily the case.
Suppose I'm imagining Pegasus, and then
I stop imagining Pegasus.
Do I suddenly then start imagining Pegasus again?
No, right?
It's not nearly so systematic.
So you might say there's a kind of patterning
to actual and possible sensations of the Parthenon,
but there isn't the case of Pegasus.
Yeah.
Why can't the idealist just say that the Parthenon is an idea
in the mind, and Pegasus is an idea of an idea?
Parthenon is an idea, and Pegasus is an idea of an idea.
And that's basically what Pegasus is.
Well, but then how do we explain that Pegasus
is a horse seems true?
We'll just say, no, Pegasus is an idea of a horse.
I say, no, no, no, no, no.
Polarifon wrote Pegasus.
No, you're saying the idea of Polarifon
wrote the idea of Polarifon, Pegasus.
So anyway, yeah, of all horses.
Yeah, I don't know.
I mean, there's an appealing thought there
that it feels like there's some sort of difference in level.
And yet, as soon as you start trying to think about how then we'd talk about these things,
it's going to get really weird fast.
So that's how to say we can't deal with that weirdness, maybe we can, and find a translation
pattern that makes it make sense.
But it's at least going to be an obstacle to that approach.
Yeah?
Yeah.
I mean, it seems like, I don't know if this is even helpful at all, but when I'm talking
about my idea of Parthenon and my idea of Pegasus, they can interact very easily in
my ideas.
I can talk about Pegasus landing on the Parthenon, and that's not problematic that they go together
very well.
So that you have ideas that could be fictional of real things, just like you have ideas of
fictional things.
Well, okay, good, good.
Yes, this turns out to be a mess because of exactly what you're pointing out.
There are all sorts of mixtures of real things and fictional things, right?
Often stories that are fictional stories include some real things.
But maybe not.
Maybe in a science fiction universe, you're dealing with something where everything is
really strictly imaginary, but often fiction isn't like that.
It's based on something real.
So Sherlock Holmes lives in London.
London is a real place.
It's not just fiction.
But Sherlock Holmes is fictional, and so you've got this mixture of the fictional and the
non-fictional.
Similarly, you might have Pegasus landing on the Parthenon.
Well, Pegasus in the story is a mythological creature, but on the other hand, the Parthenon
is not mythological, and we mix them together in certain ways.
And so if we've suddenly got some big difference in level, that's like, well, an idea landed
on this, right?
And that's going to be bizarre.
How can an idea land on a building?
So there's something very strange about those mixtures, and that's going to make it super
hard to really sustain the difference in levels throughout.
We want fictional things and non-fictional things to interact, at least in the fictions.
So, oh gosh, maybe a case that's extreme in this instance is a historical novel.
When I was a kid, I used to love these books called You Were There.
You Were There at the Battle of Hastings.
You Were There at the Battle of Guadalcanal or something, and it's written as if you're
actually there.
It's like, wow.
In fact, if I were really there at the Battle of Guadalcanal or something, that'd be terrifying.
But all of a sudden it's like, yes, you're nine years old and you were really there
watching all the battle take place, and they were very effective fictions written for elementary
school kids, putting you there in that situation.
But of course, now what's going on is partly actual events from the battle.
But it's partly, you know, you're not really there, and there are other characters you
meet who are fictional characters, but inserted into this real historical situation.
And so in historical novels, this sort of thing is going on all the time.
If all of that's true, you might think, well, yes, we're going to have trouble actually
referring to Pegasus in a way that separates these levels and keeps that distinction of
levels going throughout.
Intuitively speaking, there's something that feels right about it.
We think, but wait, Pegasus is something like a character, is a fiction, is a mythological
preacher.
And yet to say, well, that just makes Pegasus mental in a certain way, that other things
are not.
Looks like it's going to be puzzled, not only from an idealist point of view, but from
anybody's point of view.
So what if we took another strategy?
He says, ah, yes, now we have another philosopher, why?
Who says, here's the way to think about this.
And by the way, it's not just sort of a hypothetical approach.
This is something taken by many people in free logic.
This was the approach taken by Leblanc and Thomas in 1968, and it has a lot of intuitive
appeal.
The idea is really that we should think about a domain of possible objects.
And then some of those are the actual objects.
So if I say that Harvey Friedman exists, or the Parthenon exists, I'm putting Harvey
Friedman or the Parthenon in the realm of actual objects.
But Pegasus, if I say Pegasus doesn't exist, what I mean is Pegasus is out here in the
realm of merely possible objects.
So here's Harvey Friedman, here's the Parthenon, they're inside there.
But now Pegasus or Sherlock Holmes, they are out here in the realm of merely possible objects.
And then I can say exists.
I understand what that means.
It just refers to that subset of things.
Okay, so just as we said here, ah, these are the things that are a's at some subset of
our domain.
The things that exist are some subset of the domain of possible objects.
Now, actually, there is something intuitively plausible about that.
Why does Quine object to that?
The bald man in the doorway.
Okay, good.
There are really two arguments he gives.
And one of them is precisely that one, the bald man in the doorway.
The other one is concerning the round square cupola of Berkeley College, okay?
So the first difficulty is now contradictory descriptions.
The round square cupola.
And then the second one is this thing about identity conditions.
It becomes one of Quine's main themes, no entity without identity.
For me to say there are such things as a's, for example, I not only have to postulate
their existence, I have to give you some identity criteria.
At least if a is a count now, there's a distinction between count nouns and mass nouns.
Things like water, gold.
And to say there is water, that would be just as the treat this as a master.
How do you deal, how do you understand those as complicated, but a count noun like there
is a person, there is a piece of chalk, there is a flying horse, etc., those things seem
to require not only do we say these things exist, but to give us some idea of what makes
for there being one or two or three of these.
We seem to need criteria of identification and individuation.
How do I tell one piece of chalk from another?
How do I re-identify something as the same piece of chalk?
Well those questions of identity are crucial for actually talking about objects of a certain
kind and we need that, he says, for these.
So let's take the first argument, contradictory descriptions.
What do we do with the round square cupola?
Do we put it in the realm of possible objects?
That's going to trouble, right?
Because then we're saying it's possible that there's something that's both round and square.
Could anything be both round and square?
No.
So the difficulty here is that it looks like that's impossible.
But now I could either take the description or I could give it a name.
I could say, ah, yes, Franklin, that beautiful round square cupola on Berkeley College.
And now you might say, wait a minute, Franklin is now denoting an impossible object.
So I seem to have a choice.
I can either say something that is false, right, that something could be both round
and square, and I'm going to get contradictions out of that, or I say, well actually I need
a broader realm now out here of impossible objects.
And quite doesn't really go into that in detail, but now I'm going to have a realm of things
that are both round and square.
I'm going to have a realm of things that have both two and three parts.
I'm going to have a realm of things that are both white and black and red all over.
And so I'm going to have all sorts of trouble if I introduce those, you might think.
At least you might think.
By the way, Klein does not actually deduce a contradiction from this, right?
He says all sorts of embarrassing questions could be raised about those.
He doesn't actually go through and raise those questions and attack this.
However, he catches Wyman saying, actually I think something like this is meaningless,
and that's very strange to say as Wyman points out.
Something that is white and red and black all over is different from something that's
both round and square, right?
We cannot understand the meaning of both.
In fact, it's by virtue of understanding the meaning that we realize there could be no
such thing.
That won't fly at all.
So it looks like this is problematic.
What about the identity conditions?
This is perhaps the most famous passage in the essay.
Can I just ask you some questions here?
So when he's saying that, no, that's not meaningless because it has meaning, does that go back
to sort of what Karnat was doing is like the logical optimists are saying all these
things have no meaning because they can't be very...
Okay, yes.
We are here floating around with that same question of significance.
What has meaning?
What doesn't have meaning?
Can we draw a distinction?
And there are going to be several things that are difficult about this one.
One that he points out is a purely logical problem.
Church's theorem implies that in the Rommel first horiologic, validity is undecidable.
There is no decision procedure for validity.
That means there is no decision procedure for contradictoryness.
So if whether something is possible, consistent or contradictory, is at issue, that's an undecidable
question.
But it's weird to think that it's undecidable whether something has meaning or not.
We'd like to have not only some criterion, but some way of deciding in principle in a
finite time whether this is meaningful or not.
And so he wants to say, look, if it turns out that contradictions are meaningless, you're
already basically saying the distinction between the meaningful and the meaningless is undecidable.
And that's a creepy thing to say.
So there's that problem.
But in addition to that, you might think there is a difficulty about, well, you might...
Let's relate to Hepple's criteria.
Remember he said there's a criterion of adequacy.
And one of the things that was a corollary from that is that A should be meaningful
if and only if not A is meaningful.
If I understand a sentence, putting in a not should preserve meaning, or taking a not away
should preserve meaning.
But what happens here is basically something that is a contradiction.
The negation of that will be a logical truth.
If I've got something that comes down to P and not P, but then I negate that, I've got
a logical truth.
And so if it turns out that contradictions are meaningless, it's also got to turn out,
if Hepple's right, that logical truths are meaningless.
And so actually we won't just say the round square, oh, meaningless, we're going to have
to say the claim that nothing could be both rounded square is meaningless.
And some philosophers are willing to do that.
Wittgenstein in the Tractatus actually thinks about x equals x.
Actually, is it in the, I'm sorry, I've forgotten now whether it's in the Tractatus
or the Investigations.
But Wittgenstein at some point thinks about x equals x.
And he says that has no use.
It has no function.
So actually the claim that x is equal to x is meaningless.
And that's a very strange thing to say.
But you can see maybe why somebody would be led to think it.
Because A should be meaningful if not only if not A is meaningful.
So to say x equals x is meaningful is basically to say that x is not equal to x is
meaningful, which it is, it is meaningful.
But anyway, it's going to turn out not only contradictions have to be meaningless
on this criterion, so would logical truths.
And that's a hard thing, I think, to swallow.
But now let's get back to the identity conditions argument.
Wyman's overpopulated universe is in many ways unlovely.
It offends the aesthetic sense of us who have a taste for desert landscapes.
But this is not the worst of it.
Wyman's slum of possibles is a greedy crowd for disorderly elements.
Take, for instance, the possible fat man in that doorway.
And again, the possible bald man in that doorway.
Are they the same possible man or two possible men?
How do we decide?
How many possible men are in that doorway?
Are there more possible thin ones than fat ones?
How many of them are alike?
Or would there be a like, make them one?
Are no two possible things alike?
Is this the same as saying it's impossible for two things to be alike?
Or finally, is the concept of identity simply inapplicable
to unactualized possibles?
But what sense can be found with hugging of entities
which cannot meaningfully be said to be identical with themselves
and distinct from one another?
These elements are well-nigh and original.
By fregian therapy of individual concepts,
some members might be made of rehabilitation.
But I feel we'd do better simply to clear Wyman's slum
and be done with it.
Now, is there an argument there?
And if so, what kind of argument is it?
Well, let's look at the doorway.
Is there a possible fat man in that doorway?
Yes.
OK, if we're going with this way of thinking about things, sure.
Sure, right?
All that is to say, there could be a fat man in that doorway.
Now, presumably, it couldn't be too fat or you couldn't get into the doorway.
But nevertheless, sure, there could be a fat man in that doorway.
Could there be a bald man in that doorway?
Sure.
So there's a possible bald man in it.
Are they the same?
Well, good.
Yeah, there are some possible men in that doorway
that are both bald and fat.
There's some that are bald and not fat, right?
How many of them are there?
What should Wyman say?
Well, I think Wyman would say there was infinite, right?
Infinitely many, yeah.
There are infinitely many, right?
Infinitely many possible bald men in the doorway.
Infinitely many possible fat men in the doorway.
Infinitely many that are both bald and fat.
And so on.
OK, so I think Wyman would actually
be able to answer my questions.
Now, how many of them are alike?
Oh, could there be two, qualitatively, indiscernible fat bald
possible men in the doorway?
Sure, right?
They could be identical twins.
Sure, they could be alike.
Is this or no two possible things alike?
Well, sure, some of them are alike, right?
And in fact, I could say, yeah, there
could be a fat man in the doorway who goes away
and then reappears, same possible fat man appearing.
And so it doesn't seem as if these questions are really
unanswerable if we go seriously about this and say,
yeah, look, I'm talking about this domain to say
there is a possible object here is to just say
there could be an object such that blah, blah, blah.
And I can say there could be the same object in that doorway,
et cetera.
So all of that can go out here would seem.
And sure, I don't myself find this a very powerful argument.
It seems to me easy for somebody who has Wyman's view
to respond to these arguments.
Now, the first one is more serious,
because what do I do about things
like the round square cupola?
And if I'm doing it with respect to that, whatever I do,
why don't I do the same thing with Pegasus and the detective
in such and such a story and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
So I think this is in a way a more serious problem
just because of a viable way of solving it.
Why can't I use it across the board?
But this one seems to me a bit fishy.
Anyway, whatever you think about that,
Klein doesn't like this approach either.
He wants to clear the slum and be done with it.
So what does he do?
How can we solve the problem?
Russell.
Russell, exactly.
We rustled it.
I've spoken disparagingly of Plato's beard
and hinted that it's tangled.
I've dwells at length on the inconveniences
of putting up with it.
It's time to think about taking steps.
And so the answer is Russell.
Now, how does Russell help us here?
Well, we can think about Pegasus not existing
and say, let's think about this in a slightly different way.
Let's think about what we would do
with something like the present king of France's ball.
We don't say, aha, so there is a present king of France.
But of course, he's just mythological, he's fictional.
He's just an idea or he's a merely possible object.
Instead, what Russell taught us
is that we don't have to do any of that.
We don't commit ourselves to a present king of France.
We just say that saying there is one and only one king
of France and that person is bald.
But there isn't one and only one king of France, so false.
And we're never committed there
to there being a present king of France.
So do the same thing with Pegasus.
Now, we have to turn the name into some kind of description.
And so we do have Pegasus as a name.
Well, directly speaking, Russell's theory of descriptions
doesn't apply to it.
But even Russell thought proper names of this kind
should be translated really into descriptions.
And so it could be like the winged horse
written by Bolairefond.
It could be just the thing that Pegasizes.
And so Quine says, you could just turn this into a verb.
And so it could be the Pegasizer.
But you can also just say the thing called Pegasus, which
might seem a little bit less peculiar than the Pegasizer.
In any case, what do we do if we do it that way?
Then Pegasus doesn't exist to become something like this.
There is, well, actually, yeah, Pegasus.
Let's start with Pegasus as a horse.
There is one and only one Pegasizer,
or a thing called Pegasus, and it's a horse.
Now, is that true or false?
False.
It's false, right?
There is no such thing as Pegasus.
There's nothing Pegasizes in the actual universe.
And so we end up saying that's false.
So the strategy was that Pegasus is, of course, false.
What about Pegasus doesn't exist?
What's going to happen there?
It looks like we have to say there is one and only one Pegasizer,
and it doesn't exist.
But that sounds self-contradictory.
That sounds like we're saying there's one and only one thing,
and there is no such thing.
And so it looks like that's not just false, but logically false.
So this becomes logically false.
So, actually, if we just try this strategy of Rossellian descriptions
and apply it literally to this, we get trouble,
because it looks like actually now,
Mik-X can say hi-hi, don't you?
It turns out this is actually contradictory.
And so we're in trouble.
Now, what can we do?
Well, remember Rossell had this distinction
between primary and secondary occurrences.
So we can say, ah, wait a minute.
This is the same thing as with the present king of France.
That's not the way to do it.
The way to do it is to say this.
Not that there is one and only one thing and it doesn't exist,
but to say it's not the case that there is one and only one Pegasizer
and it exists.
And then that's true.
It's not the case that there is one and only one Pegasizer.
And now it exists part is actually irrelevant.
And so now we get something that's true and that occurs.
But notice what this means.
It means that actually something like Pegasus doesn't exist
is ambiguous between a statement that's contradictory
and a statement that is true.
Now, why doesn't exactly bring that up?
Partly because he doesn't like this as a predicate.
He doesn't really want to think that it should be understood that way.
But now the same thing is going to arise with attributes.
We'll have to postpone until next time our talk of roundness
and other sorts of attributes like redness.
But what happens when we apply this strategy to it?
Well, Friday we'll figure out how that all goes.
