Welcome to the Making Sense podcast. This is Sam Harris. Just a note to say that if
you're hearing this, you are not currently on our subscriber feed and will only be hearing
the first part of this conversation. In order to access full episodes of the Making Sense
podcast, you'll need to subscribe at SamHarris.org. There you'll find our private RSS feed to
add to your favorite podcatcher, along with other subscriber-only content. We don't run
ads on the podcast, and therefore it's made possible entirely through the support of our
subscribers. So if you enjoy what we're doing here, please consider becoming one.
Okay, jumping right into it today. Today I'm speaking with Eric Schmidt. Eric is a technologist,
entrepreneur, and philanthropist. He joined Google in 2001 and served as its CEO and chairman from
2001 to 2011, and as executive chairman and technical advisor thereafter. In 2017, he co-founded
Schmidt Futures, a philanthropic initiative that bets early on exceptional people who are helping
to make the world better. He is the host of Reimagine with Eric Schmidt, his own podcast,
and most recently, he's the co-author of a new book, The Age of AI and Our Human Future.
And that is the topic of today's conversation. We cover how AI is affecting the foundations of
our knowledge and how it raises questions of existential risk. So we talk about the good and
the bad of AI, both narrow AI and ultimately, AGI, Artificial General Intelligence.
We discuss breakthroughs in pharmaceuticals and other good things, but we also talk about
cyber war and autonomous weapons and how our thinking about containing the risk here
by analogy to the proliferation of nuclear weapons probably needs to be revised.
Anyway, an important conversation, which I hope you find useful.
And I bring you Eric Schmidt.
I am here with Eric Schmidt. Eric, thanks for joining me.
Glad to be with you.
I think we have a hard hour here, so amazingly, that's a short podcast for me,
so there's going to be a spirit of urgency hanging over the place, and we will be
efficient in covering the fascinating book that you have written with Henry Kissinger and Daniel
Huttenlocher. That's right. And Dr. Kissinger, of course, is the former Secretary of State,
and Dan Huttenlocher is now the Dean of Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science
at the Schwartzman Center at MIT. He's a proper computer scientist.
Yeah, and that book is The Age of AI and Our Human Future, where you cover,
most of what I have said about AI thus far and every case where I have worried about
our possible AI future has been focused on the topic of AGI, Artificial General Intelligence,
which you discuss briefly in the book, but it's not your main focus. So I thought maybe we could
save that for the end, because I would love to get your take on AGI, but there are far more near
term concerns here and considerations that we could cover, and you are quite well placed
to cover them, because if I'm not mistaken, you ran Google for what was it, 10 years?
That's correct. What was your background before that? How did you come to be the CEO of Google?
Well, I'm a computer scientist. I have a PhD in the area, and I worked for 45 years in tech,
in one way or the other, a whole bunch of companies. Larry and Sergey brought me in
as the early CEO of the company, and we built it together. After a decade, I became chairman, Larry
became CEO, and then he replaced himself with Sundar, who's now doing a phenomenal job at Google.
So I'd say collectively, this group of which I'm a member built one of the great companies,
and I'm really proud of that. Yeah, and obviously, Google is quite involved in developing AI. I just
saw just the other day that there's a new, I think it's a 540 billion parameter language model
that is beating the average human at something like 150 cognitive tests now, and it seems like
the light is at the end of the tunnel there. I mean, it's just going to be a larger model
that's going to beat every human at those same tasks. But before we get into some of the details
here, I just wanted to organize our general approach to this. There are three questions that
Kant asked, and his critique of pure reason, I think it was, which seem unusually relevant
to the development of AI. The first is, what can we know? The second is, what should we do?
And the third is, what is it reasonable to hope for? And I think those are really do capture
almost every aspect of concern here, because as you point out in the book, AI really promises to,
and it has already begun to shift the foundations of human knowledge. So the question of what we
can know and how we can know it is enormously salient now, and maybe we can talk about some
of those examples. But obviously, this question of what should we do and what can we reasonably
hope for captures the risks we're running in developing these systems. And we're running
these risks well short of producing anything like artificial general intelligence. And it's
interesting that we're on a path now where we're really not free to decline to produce this technology.
I mean, to my eye, there's really no break to pull. I mean, we're in a kind of AI arms race now.
And the question is how to put that race for more intelligence on a footing that is not running
cataclysmic risk for us. So before we jump into the details, I guess I'd like to get
your general thoughts on how you view the stakes here and where you view the field to be at the
moment. Well, of course, we wrote the book, Age of AI, precisely to help answer the questions
you're describing, which are perfectly cast. And what's happened in the book, which is written
roughly a year ago and then published, we described a number of examples to illustrate the point. One
is the development of new moves in the game of Go, which is 2,500 years, which were discovered by
computer, which humans had never discovered. It's hard to imagine that humans wouldn't have
discovered these strategies, but they didn't. And that calls the question of are there
things which AI can learn that humans cannot master? That's a question. The second example that we use
is the development of a new drug called Hallison, which is a broad spectrum antibiotic, which could
not be done by humans, but a set of neuroscientists, biologists, and computer scientists put together
a set of programs that ultimately searched through 100 million different compounds
and came up with candidates that were then subsequently tested, advancing drugs at an
enormous rate. That's another category of success in AI. And then the third is what you've already
mentioned, which is large language models. And we profile in the book, GPT-3, which is the
predecessor of the one you described. And it's eerie. On the back cover of our book, we say,
to the GPT-3 computer, are you capable of human reasoning? And it answers, oh, I am not.
You may wonder why I give you that answer. And the answer is that you are a human reasoning
machine, whereas I am a language model that's not been taught how to do that. Now, is that
awareness or is that clever mimicry? We don't know. But each of these three examples show the
potential to answer consquestions. What can we know? What will happen? What can we do about it?
Since then, this past few weeks, we've seen the announcement that you mentioned of this
enormous large language model, which can beat humans on many things. And we've also seen something
called DAAL-E, which is a text to art program. You describe roughly what you want, and it can
generate art for you. Now, these are the beginnings of the impact of artificial intelligence on us
as humans. So Dr. Kissinger, Dan, and myself, when we looked at those, we thought, what happens to
society when you have these kinds of intelligence? Now, they're not human intelligence. They're
different kinds of intelligence in everyday life. And we talk about all the positives of which
they're incredible positives, better materials, better drugs, more efficient systems, better
understanding, better monitoring of the earth, additional solutions for climate change. There's
a long, long list, which I can go through. Very, very exciting. And indeed, in my personal
philanthropy, we are working really hard to fund AI-enabled science discoveries. We recently announced
a grant, a structure with a guy named James Manika, who's a friend of mine, to $125 million
to actually go and fund research on the really hard problems in AI, the ones that you're mentioning
and others, and also the economic impacts and so forth. Because I think people don't really know.
The real question is, what happens when these systems become more commonplace?
Dr. Kissinger says, if you look at history, when a system that is not understandable
is imposed on people, they do one of two things. They either invent it as a religion,
or they fight it with guns. So my concern, and I'll say it very directly, is we're playing with
the information space of humans. We're experimenting at scale without a set of principles
as to what we want to do. Do we care more about freedom? Do we care more about efficiency? Do we
care more about education and so forth? And Dr. Kissinger would say, the problem is that these
decisions are being made by technical people who are ignorant of the philosophical questions that
you so ably asked. And I agree with him, speaking as an example of that. So we recommend, and indeed
I'm trying to now fund, that people begin in a multidisciplinary way to discuss the implications
of this. What happens to national security? What happens to military intelligence? What happens to
social media? What happens to your children when your child's best friend is a computer?
And for the audience who might be still thinking about the killer robot, we're not building killer
robots, and I hope we never do. This is really about information systems that are human-like,
that are learning, they're dynamic, and they're emergent, and they're imprecise,
being used and imposed on humans around the world. That process is unstoppable. It's simply too many
people working on it, too many ways in which people are going to manipulate it, including
for hostile reasons, too many businesses being built, and too much success for some of the early
work. Yeah, I guess if I can just emphasize that point, the unstoppable is pretty interesting,
because it's just anchored to this basic fact that intelligence is, almost by definition,
the most valuable thing on earth. And if we can get more of it, we're going to. And we clearly can,
and all of these narrow intelligences we've built thus far, all that are effective, that come to
market that we pour resources into, are superhuman more or less right out of the gate. It's not a
question of human level intelligence, it's a bit of a mirage, because the moment we get something
that's general, it's going to be superhuman. And so we can leave the generality aside. All of these
piecemeal intelligences are superhuman. And the example you give of the new antibiotic,
Hallison, it's fascinating because it's not just a matter of doing human work faster. If I understand
what happened in that case, this is an AI detecting patterns and relationships in molecules already
known to be safe and efficacious as antibiotics, and detecting new properties that human beings
very likely would never have conceived of and may in fact be opaque to the people who built the AI
and may remain opaque. I mean, one of the issues you just raised is the issue of transparency.
Many of these systems are built in such a way as to be black boxes. And we don't know how the AI is
doing what it's doing in any specific way. It's just training against data and against its own
performance so as to produce a better and better result, which qualifies as intelligent and even
superhumanly so. And yet it may remain a black box. Maybe we can just close the loop on that
specific problem here. Are you concerned that transparency is a necessity when decision making
is important? I mean, just imagine the case where we have something like an AI oracle
that we are convinced makes better decisions than any person or even any group of people,
but we don't actually know the details of how it's making those decisions.
I mean, you can just multiply examples as you like, but just questions of who should get out
of prison, the likelihood of recidivism in the case of any person or who's likely to be more
violent at the level of conviction. What should the prison sentence be? It's very easy to see that
if we're shunting that to a black box, people are going to get fairly alarmed that in any
differences in outcome that are not transparent. Perhaps you have other examples of concern,
but do you think transparency is something that... I mean, one question is technically feasible to
render black boxes transparent when it matters, and two, is transparency as important as we
intuitively may think it is? Well, I wonder how important transparency is for the simple fact
that we have teenagers among our midst and the teenagers cannot explain themselves at all,
and yet we tolerate their behavior with some restrictions because they're not full adults.
So, but we wouldn't let a teenager fly an airplane or operate on a patient. So, I think a pretty simple
model is that at the moment, these systems cannot explain how they became to their decision. There
are many people working on the explainability problem. Until then, I think it's going to be really
important that these systems not be used in what I'm going to call life safety situations, and this
creates all sorts of problems. For example, in automated war, automated conflict, cyber war,
those sorts of things where the speed of decision making is faster than what humans can,
what happens if it makes a mistake? And so, again, we're at the beginning of this process,
and most people, including myself, believe that the explainability problem and the bias problems
will get resolved because there's just too much money, too many people working on it.
Maybe at some cost, but we'll get there. That's historically how these things work. You start
off with stuff that works well enough, but it shows a hint of the future, and then it gets
industrialized. I'm actually much more focused on what's it like to be human when you have these
specialized systems floating around. My favorite example here is Facebook, where they change their
feed to amp it using AI, and the AI that they built was around engagement, and we know from a
great deal of social science that outrage creates more engagement, and so therefore,
there's more outrage on your feed. Now, that was a clearly deliberate decision on part of Facebook,
presumably thought it was a good product idea, but it also maximized their revenue.
That's a pretty big social experiment, given the number of users that they have,
which is not done with an understanding, in my view, of the impact of political polarization.
Now, you sit there and you go, okay, well, he doesn't work at Facebook, he doesn't really
understand, but many, many people have commented on this problem. This is an image of what happens
in a world where all of the information around you can be boosted or manipulated by AI to sell
to you, to anchor you, to change your opinion, and so forth. We're going to face some interesting
questions in the information space that television and movies and things you see online, and so forth.
Do there need to be restrictions on how AI uses the information it has about you
to pitch to you, to market to you, to entertain you? These are questions we don't have answers,
but it makes perfect sense that in the industrialization of these tools, the tools that I'm describing,
which were invented in places like Google and Facebook, will become available to everyone
and every government. Another example is a simple one, which is the kid is a two-year-old
and gets a toy, and the toy gets upgraded every year and the kid gets smarter, the toy is now,
the kid is now 12, and there's 10 years from now, there's a great toy, and this toy is smart enough
in non-human terms to be able to watch television and decide if the kid likes the show. The toy
is watching the television and the kid, the toy says to the kid, I don't like this show,
knowing that the kid's not going to like it, and the kid goes, I agree with you. Now, is that okay?
Probably. Well, what happens if that same system that's also learning learns something
that's not true, and it goes, you know, kid, I have a secret, and the kid goes, tell me, tell me,
and the secret is something which is prejudicial or false or bad or something like that.
We don't know how to describe, especially for young people, the impact of these systems on their
cognitive development. Now, we have a long history in America of having school boards and textbooks
which are approved at the state level. Are the states going to monitor this? And you sit there
and you say, well, no parent would allow that, but let's say that the normal behavior of this toy
is smart enough, understands the kid well enough to know the kid's not good at multiplication.
So the kid's bored, and the toy says, I think we should play a game. The kid goes great. And,
of course, it's a game which strengthens his or her multiplication capability. So on the one hand,
you want these systems to make people smarter, make them develop, make them more serious adults,
make the adults more productive. Another example would be my physics friends. They just want a
system to read all the physics books every night and make suggestions to them. Well, the physicists
are adults who can deal with this. But what about kids? So you're going to end up in a situation,
at least with kids and with elderly who are isolated, where these tools are going to have
an out of proportion impact on society as they perceive it. We've never run that experiment,
dynamic, emergent, and not precise. I'm not worried about airplanes being flown by AI because
they're not going to be reliable enough to do it for a while. Now, we should also say for the
listeners here that we're talking about a term which is generally known as narrow AI.
It's very specific, and we're using specific examples, drug discovery, education,
entertainment. But the eventual state of AI is called general intelligence, where you get
human kind of reasoning. In the book, what we describe that as the point where the computer
can set its own objective. And today, the good news is, the computer can't choose its objective.
At some point, that will not be true. Yeah. Yeah. Well, hopefully we'll get to AGI
at the end of this hour. But I think we should talk about the good and the bad in that order.
And maybe just spend a few minutes on the good because the good is all too obvious. Again,
and intelligence is the most valuable thing on earth. It's the thing that gives us every other
thing we want. And it's the thing that safeguards everything we have. And if there are problems,
we can't solve, well, then we can't solve them. But if there are problems that can be solved,
the way we will solve them is through greater uses of our intelligence. And if, you know,
insofar as we can leverage artificial intelligence to solve those problems, we will do that more
or less regardless of the attendant risks. And that's the problem because the attendant risks are
increasingly obvious and it seems not at all trivial. And what we've already proven, we're
capable of implementing massive technological change without really thinking about the consequences
at all. You cite the massive psychological experiment we've performed on all of humanity
with no one really consenting that is social media. And it's, you know, the effects are
ambiguous at best. I mean, there's some obviously bad effects. And it's not even
straightforward to say that democracy or even civilization can survive contact with social
media. I mean, that remains to be seen given how divisive some of its effects are. I consider
social media to be far less alarming than the prospect of having an ongoing nuclear doctrine
anchored to a proliferating regime of cyber espionage, cyber terrorism, cyber war,
all of which will be improved massively by layering AI onto all of that. So
before we jump into the bad, which is, you know, really capturing my attention,
is there anything specifically you want to say about the good here? I mean, if this goes well,
what are you hoping for? What are you expecting?
Well, there are so many positive examples that we honestly just don't have time to make a list.
We give you a few. In physics and math, the physicists and mathematicians have worked out
the formulas for how the world works, at least at the scientific level. But many of their calculations
are not computable by modern computers. They're just too complicated. An example is how do clouds
actually work is a function of something called the Navier-Stokes equations, which for a normal
sized cloud would take 100 million years for a computer to figure out. But using an AI system,
and there's a group at Caltech doing this, they can come up with a simulation of the things that
they care about. In other words, the AI provides enough accuracy in order to solve the more general
climate modeling problem. If you look at quantum chemistry, which is sort of how does, how do chemical
bonds work together? Not computable by modern methods. However, AI can provide enough of a
simulation that we can figure out how these molecules bind, which is the Hallisyn example.
In drug discovery, we know enough about biology that we can basically predict that if you do
these compounds with, you know, this antibody, we can make it stronger, we can make it weaker,
and so forth, in the computer, and then you go reproduce it in the lab. There's example after
example, where AI is being used from existing data to simulate a non-computable function in science.
And you say, what's he talking about? I'm talking about the fact that the scientists have been stuck
for decades because they know what they want to do, but they couldn't get through this barrier.
That unleashes new materials, new drugs, new forms of steel, new forms of concrete, and so forth and
so on. It also helps us with climate change, for example, because climate change is really about
energy and CO2 emission and so forth. These new surfaces, discoveries, and so forth will make a
material difference. And I'm talking about really significant numbers. So that's an example. Another
example is what's happening with these large language models that you mentioned earlier,
that people are figuring out a way to put a conversational system in front of it so that
you can talk to it. And the conversational system has enough state that it can remember what it's
talking about. It's not like a question-answer-question-answer, and it doesn't remember. It actually
remembers the context of, oh, we're talking about the Oscars, and we're talking about what happened
at the Oscars, and what do I think? And then it sort of goes and it gives you a thoughtful answer
as to what happened and what is possible. In my case, I was playing with one of them
a few months ago, and this one, I asked the question, what is the device that's in 2001
a space odyssey that I'm using today? There's something from 1969 that I'm using today that was
foreshadowed in the movie, and it comes right back and says the iPad. Now, that's a question
that Google won't answer if you ask it the way I did. So I believe that the biggest positive impact
will be that you'll have a system that you can verbally or by writing ask it questions,
and it will make you incredibly smarter. It'll give you the nuance and the understanding in the
context, and you can ask it another question, and you can refine your question. Now, if you think
about it in the work you do, or that I do, or that a scientist does, or a politician, or an artist,
this is enormously transformative. So example after example, these systems are going to build
scientific breakthroughs, scalable breakthroughs. Another example was that a group at DeepMind
figured out the folding structure of proteins, and proteins are the way in which biology works,
and the way they fold determines their effectiveness, what they actually do.
And it was thought to be not really computable, and using these techniques in a very complicated way
with a whole bunch of protein scientists, they managed to do it, and their result was replicated
in a different mechanism with different AI from something called the Baker Lab in University of
Washington. The two together have given us a map of how proteins work, which in my view is worthy
of a Nobel Prize. That's how big a discovery that is. All of a sudden, we are unlocking the way
biology works, and it affects us directly. But those are some positive examples. I think the
negative examples... Well, let's wait because I'm chock full of negative examples. But I'm interested
in how even the positive can disclose a surprisingly negative possibility, or at least it becomes
negative if we haven't planned for it ethically, politically, economically. So you imagine this
success, you imagine that more and more... So what you've just pictured was a future of machine and
human cooperation and facilitation, where people just get smarter by being able to have access
to these tools, or they get effectively smarter. But you can imagine just in the limit, more and
more getting seated to AI, because AI is just better at doing these things. It's better at
proving theorems. It's better at designing software. It's better. It's better. It's better. And
all of a sudden, the need for human developers at all, or human mathematicians at all, or you
just make the list as long as you want, it seems like some of the highest status jobs cognitively
might be among the first to fall, which is to say, I certainly expect at this point
to have an AI radiologist, certainly, before I have an AI plumber. And there's a lot more
above and beyond the radiology side of that comparison that I think is going to fall before
the basic manual tasks fall to robots. And this is a picture of real success, right? Because
in the end, all we're going to care about is performance. We're not going to care about
keeping a monkey in the loop just for reasons of sentimentality. If you're telling me that my car
can drive a thousand times better than I can, which is to say that it's going to reduce my risk of
getting in a fatal accident, you know, killing myself or killing someone else
by a factor of a thousand, if I just flip on autopilot, well, then not only am I going to flip
it on, I'm going to consider anyone who declines to do that to be negligent to the point of
criminality. And that's never going to change. Everything is going to be in the position
of a current chess master who knows that the best player on earth is never going to be a person
ever again, right? Because of alpha zero. So I disagree a little bit, and I'll tell you why.
I think you're correct in about 30 years, but I don't think that argument is true in the short term.
Yeah, no, I was not just to be clear. I'm not suggesting any time frame there. I'm just saying
ultimately, if we continue to make progress, something like this seems bound to happen.
Yes, but what I want to say is, I defy you to argue with me that making people smarter
is a bad thing. Okay, right. So let's start with the premise of the human assistant that is the
thing that you're using will make humans smarter. It'll make it deeper, better analysis, better
choices. But at least the current technology cannot replace the essentially the free will of
humans. They sort of wake up in the morning, you have a new idea, you decide something, you say,
that's a bad idea, so forth and so on. We don't know how to do that yet. And I have some speculation
on how that will happen. But in the next decade, we're going to not be solving that problem,
we'll be solving a different problem, which is how do we get the existing people doing existing
jobs to do them more efficiently that is smarter, better, faster? When we looked at the funding
for this AI program that I've since announced, the funding 125 million, a fair chunk of it is
going to really hard computer science problems. Some of them include, we don't really understand
how to explain what they're doing. As I mentioned, they're also brittle. When they fail, they can
fail catastrophically, like why did it fail? And no one can explain. They're hardening,
there are resistance to attack problems, there are a number of problems of this kind.
These are hard computer science problems, which I think we will get through.
They use a lot of power, the algorithms are expensive, that sort of thing. But we have also
focusing around the impact on jobs and employment and economics. We're also focusing on national
security. And we're focusing on the question that you're asking, which is, what's our identity?
What does it mean to be human? Before general intelligence comes, we have to deal with the
fact that these systems are not capable of choosing their own outcome, but they can be
applied to you as a citizen by somebody else against your own satisfaction. So the negatives
before AGI are all of the form, misinformation, misleading information, creating dangerous
tools, and for example, dangerous viruses. For the same reason that we built a fantastic new
antibiotic drug, it looks like you could also imagine a similar evil team producing an incredible
number of bad viruses, things that would hurt people. And you could imagine in that scenario,
they might be clever enough to be able to hurt a particular race or a particular sex or something
like that, which would be totally evil and obviously a very bad thing. We don't have a way
of discussing that today. So when I look at the positives and negatives right now, I think the
positives, as with many technologies, really overwhelm the negatives, but the negatives need
to be looked at. And we need to have the conversation right now about, let's use social media, which
is an easy whipping boy here. I would like, so I'm clear what my political position is,
I'm a very strong proponent of freedom of speech for humans. I am not in favor of freedom of speech
for computers, robots, bots, so forth and so on. I want an option with social media, which says,
I only want to see things that a human has actually communicated from themselves. I want to know that
it wasn't snuck in by some Russian agent. I want proof of providence. And I want to know that it's
a human. And if it's a real human who's, in fact, an idiot or crazy or whatever, I want to be able
to hear their voice and I want to be able to decide I don't agree with it. What's happening instead
is these systems are being boosted. They're being pitched. They're being sold by AI. And I think
that's got to be limited in some way. I'm in favor of free speech, but I don't want only some people
to have microphones. And if you talk to politicians and you look at the political structure in the
country, this isn't of completely unintended effect of getting everyone wired. Now, is it a human?
Or is it a computer? Is it a Russian? A Russian Compromat Plan? Or is it an American? Those things
need to get resolved. You cannot run a democracy without some level of trust.
Yeah. Well, let's take that piece here and obviously it extends beyond the problem of AI's
involvement in it. But the misinformation problem is enormous. What are your thoughts about it?
Because I'm just imagining we've been spared thus far the worst possible case of this, which is
just imagine under conditions of where we had something like perfect deep fakes,
that were truly difficult to tell apart from real video, what would the controversy around
the 2020 election have looked like? Or the war in Ukraine and our dealings with Putin at this
moment? Just imagine a perfect deep fake of Putin declaring a nuclear first strike on the U.S.
or whatever. Just imagine essentially a writer's room from hell where you have smart creative
people spending their waking hours figuring out how to produce media that is shattering to every
open society and conducive to provoking international conflict. That is clearly coming in some form.
I guess my first question is, are you hopeful that the moment that arrives, we will have the same
level of technology that can spot deep fakes? Or is there going to be a lag there of
months, years that are going to be difficult to navigate?
We don't know. There are people working really hard on generating deep fakes and there are people
working really hard on detecting deep fakes. And one of the general problems with misinformation
is we don't have enough training data. The term here is in order to get an AI system to
know something. You have to give it enough examples of good, bad, good, bad. And eventually you
can say, oh, here's something new and I know if it's good or bad. And one of the core problems
in misinformation is we don't have enough agreement on what is misinformation or what have you.
The thought experiment I would offer is President Putin in Russia has already shut down the internet
and free speech and controls the media and so forth. So let's imagine that he was furthering
it. If you'd like to continue listening to this conversation, you'll need to subscribe
at SamHarris.org. Once you do, you'll get access to all full-length episodes of the Making Sense
podcast, along with other subscriber-only content, including bonus episodes and AMAs
and the conversations I've been having on the Waking Up app. The Making Sense podcast is ad-free
and relies entirely on listener support. And you can subscribe now at SamHarris.org.
