Let's talk about the pornography thing.
Right.
Well, that was...
How did that go when you discussed it with Father Dave?
Well, you'll have to ask the people there.
I mean, I can only judge it from my perspective.
I thought it went terrific.
When I saw that clip of you in Exodus, I got the sense that you were a bit sidelined.
Or totally.
And if somebody who has a talk show, I wish that I could go back and rephrase things or
add some new ones to...
Well, that's correct.
That is exactly how I wrote a letter.
I hope you saw it.
It was the last thing I imagined being asked at an Exodus course with Jordan Peterson
and a bunch of scholars whom I adored, by the way.
Nevertheless, I should have...
I wish I had phrased it better.
It is what it is, and I phrased it better tonight without being untrue to myself.
And what I did not see, a big part of the problem, should I review this for your watchers,
listeners?
Review?
Review what happened so that they'll understand what we're talking about.
So I...
The Daily Wire asked me to join Jordan Peterson, or Jordan Peterson asked me to Jordan...
Or both of them asked, because he's doing the book of...
Did the book of Exodus?
They were, I believe, 16 sessions of 90 minutes each.
That's a lot, a lot of time, with no commercials.
How many days did you film this in?
Oh, eight days.
Eight days.
Yes, eight days each time in Miami.
And it was wonderful.
I loved it.
So what arose at one time, and I've even forgotten about this, it was five minutes out of...
Let's see, what is 16 times an hour and a half, 24 hours.
So it's five minutes out of 24 hours.
What happened was, I don't even remember how the issue arose, but I mentioned that there
is a Jewish-Christian difference with regard to Jesus' statement that a man who lost after
another woman has committed adultery with his heart.
That A, that phrase does not appear, obviously, in the Hebrew Bible, but B, that the general
Jewish view, and I say general because I can't speak for all Jews, even though I try to be
normative, is that you can only commit adultery with, and I said this in the video, and I
purposely said, I'm not trying at all to be cute in any way.
You can only commit adultery with one organ and it is not the heart.
Judaism is very behavior-based.
Christianity is more...
It's not that it's not behavior-based, but it is equally, if not more, thought, inner-self,
heart-based.
So for example, there's a phrase in Hebrew that I learned very early in my Yeshiva education.
I'll say it in Hebrew so that people will know I didn't make it up.
Oh, ha'mah shavah, yikar el ha'mah, say it is not the thought that counts, that, no, not
that counts, that is the essence, but the deed.
Judaism is very behavior-ist, and I am very behavior-ist.
So for example, and I mention this at Franciscan, I've said on the radio very often, I don't
care if you like Jews, I don't care if you dislike Jews, I prefer you like Jews, but
there are a lot of Jews I don't like, I mean it's just a little silly to say I like a whole
group, there's no whole group I like, there's no whole group I dislike, but in any event,
I don't care if you dislike Jews, I care how you treat Jews.
And that is, it goes to the essence of what my belief is, I want to know how you act.
The left does this all the time, oh, you treat gays beautifully, like in my case, my wife
and I are godparents to a gay couple's children, but the fact that I'm against a same-sex marriage,
that makes me a hater.
So how I treat gays is irrelevant, it's what I think.
This bothers me that your thoughts can be regarded as a demerit.
But see, your thoughts wouldn't be uncharitable towards people with same-sex attraction, you
would just think that the behavior is presumably sinful.
So they would be wrong in their thinking of you as a homophobe.
Bothers me the most is that we redefine marriage.
My Leviticus commentary comes out, that'll be the fifth of my five-volume commentary
on the Torah, I have already written 22,000 words on one verse, which of course I've never
done for any other verse about a man shall not lie with a man as with a woman.
And so without even getting into that, the point I wanted to make was, for the left,
what I think renders me awful, not what I do.
So my treatment of gays is excellent, but the fact that I don't think marriage should
be redefined is enough to make me a hater, bigot, homophobe, and all the other terms
that they use.
Anyway, back to us.
Let me interject here.
So Aristotle in the Nicomachean Ethics has these four levels of the vicious to the virtuous
man.
The vicious man is the one who wants to do evil and does it, and he has the incontinent
man, the continent man, but he says the virtuous man is the one who wants to do the good and
does it.
And so to me, I have children, if one of them held anti-Semitic views but treated you kindly,
I would say, well, that's better than holding anti-Semitic views and being bad toward you,
but I wouldn't.
I would think that's not where I would settle.
I would want him to...
That's fine.
That's fine.
I respect that.
And I also want to say that I think I agree with you that obviously adultery and lust
are different things.
If they weren't different things, we wouldn't have two separate words for them.
Right?
Yeah.
Which comes somewhat of a revelation to my Christian friends is there is no sin of the...
There are 613 laws in the Torah, none of them say do not lust.
You can't covet.
Covet is a very different concept than lust.
Covet means you want to take what belongs to another, and it is a very simple proof
that it doesn't mean lust.
Covet, you don't lust after a house or a donkey, one presumes, and yet you're not allowed
to covet those either.
So do you make a distinction between sexual desire and lust?
Do you see a distinction?
No, I don't.
Okay.
So therefore, if you don't see a distinction between those two things, I can see why you
would think it insane to tell somebody they shouldn't lust.
I don't know how you sexually desire your wife and have no lust for her.
Oh, I do.
Okay.
So I would think that...
That's interesting.
I would think that lust...
So you think so lust...
Okay.
Yeah, you're right.
This is interesting.
I've never confronted it quite this way.
So lust is...
Lust reduces the subject to an object.
It subordinates the dignity of the person to the good of a selfish pleasure.
It's also a distorted sexual act.
So it's an act which is contrary to human nature or to the end of the sexual act.
So if sexual desire and lust are different, can you sexually desire a woman you're not
married to and not lust for her?
Yes.
Oh.
I would think so.
Okay.
I haven't heard that from a Christian before.
Three stages, if I would think of it.
If I board an airplane and I sit next to a beautiful woman and I'm attracted to her
sexually, how could I not be?
Okay.
That's beyond my control.
Now, the next step could be, now what do I do with that?
Do I sit here and fantasize about what I could do with her sexually?
At that point, the will is engaged and that is something within my control.
So I think it is important to make that distinction and I think that might be part of what drives
some Christians neurotic if they think, well, sexual desire is a sin, can't sexually desire
anybody who isn't my wife.
Not only Christians, but I think in some cases with Jews too, that it does drive people
to be neurotic.
It's like if I said you don't think of a pink elephant.
Well, better.
You're in a restaurant, don't think of food because that's a real life.
Very bad.
Stop it.
Yeah.
You'd go crazy.
The more you don't think about it, the more you think about it.
So there's that element too.
Agreed.
So I differ with you and I did with the father and by the way, I mentioned this is very important
to note.
What a credit it is to Franciscan University A having me, A as a religious Jew obviously
doesn't believe in Christ, not a Christian, and B that they discuss openly with me at
the university what they heard me say on Daily Wire.
But he did raise this issue about sexual objectification and that reduces the human
being as one created God's image, et cetera, just what you said now.
And I have a different view of that.
Sure.
I think this, I suspect you may have not heard this before in one of your podcasts.
Here we go.
Here's one of your guests.
I think that in the bedroom, if a loving husband who is a loving husband and I have
a word to say about what a loving husband is, a loving husband who sees his wife in
the bedroom as a sexual object, I will be totally open with you.
I have said on the radio, if after X number of years married, your husband still sees
you as a sex object, you are both very lucky.
I would say it depends what you mean by sex object.
If what you mean is your husband continues to find you sexually desirable, I would agree
with you.
If what you mean is the man essentially treats his wife as a warm body to masturbate in, not
taking into account her feelings, her desires.
Oh, of course.
But that's not objectification as a dirty meme.
He said, the father said, one shouldn't even objectivize baseball players.
And it was an excellent analogy.
I had thought of that myself.
But I do objectivize the baseball player.
I'm not sure if I agree with him.
But it doesn't mean that you would automatically mistreat the baseball player.
That's right.
But I'm in a different relationship with the baseball player than I am with the one I
married to.
Correct.
But there is a place in the totality of a relationship.
So here is my motto because I talk about men and women every week for an hour on my radio
show and I have for about 20 years.
And that is you make love outside the bedroom and you have sex inside the bedroom.
I think it's a romanticization of the sex act to say that it's always making love.
It's OK to make lust.
It's OK to have some objectification.
That doesn't mean you're mistreating her.
Yeah, I think I'd want to know what you mean by objectification.
Because I had the sense that you're using language to convey something that I might agree with.
Yes, you might.
You really might.
I agree with you.
It certainly doesn't mean mistreat.
It's not even implied.
But any more than with the baseball player.
And you'll say, well, I have a different relationship with the baseball player, but you're right.
Sex is its own world.
I don't like to romanticize sex.
Sex is many, many things.
Sometimes it's love.
Sometimes it's just pure sex.
When it's pure sex and not just love, there is an element of objectification.
I'm crazy about her legs.
Is that a statement of love?
What do you mean?
You don't love legs.
What do you mean by love?
Right.
So I would say Aristotle and Aquinas would say that to love is to will the good of the other for their sake.
So I don't will my wife's good for my sake.
It's not like I say, honey, I really need you to go to CrossFit so I can lust after you.
Well, what?
But if I want her to get healthy for her sake, then this is love.
But if she says to you, honey, there's a certain thing that you could do for me sexually
that will really turn me on.
And it may not really turn you on.
Are you being objectivized or are you doing it because you love her and because she wants it?
Well, first of all, she's asked a question in which I presumably am free to decline as she.
Oh, if she's not free to decline, that's coercion.
And there's no room for that.
Right. So there is an objectification of coercion or not the same thing.
Which I'm free to decline.
Right. So, honey, would you put on this sexy outfit for me?
Are you OK with that?
Me? Yeah.
Buddy, hell, that's a question I didn't expect you to ask me.
Well, you opened it up.
I would not be OK with that.
That's interesting. I don't think.
Even in the bedroom.
It's not that I'd be morally opposed to it.
It's just that I'd feel uncomfortable with it.
Well, my view is that the more comfort the couple has, the better the relationship.
I think that's right.
So long as comfort doesn't lead to what I would consider to be sexually perverse acts.
Well, why is it sexually perverse to wear a sexy outfit?
It's not. And that's why I said I'm not morally opposed to it.
But if you're saying that the discomfort is personal, that's fair.
I that's not an area I need to get into.
One thing I would love you to get into, because you did say this in the email,
is you think that the widespread proliferation of property is destroying teenagers.
Help help help help people hear this side of what I given.
I gave an example tonight.
So I'm very friendly with a young woman.
She's 23, very, very close to her.
People could guess who it is, because I do a podcast with her.
So she is so open.
God bless her.
I don't think she would object to my to my telling this story.
In fact, maybe it was even discussed on one of our podcasts.
We're very, very open.
So she was on a date and they were both a track.
It was not the first date and they kissed.
It's all they did. They kissed.
And in the midst of the kiss, he he grabbed her neck.
Oh, like this.
And even me, Mr.
Open was taken aback.
And and so was she to her credit.
She when she took his hand away, she said either then or later
that evening or later another time.
Why did you do that?
And he to his credit was open enough to say, I thought you would like it.
That's what I see on the Internet.
That's a bad thing that that's that's
the number of young men who learn about women through porn
and not real life is a very scary thing that has developed.
So I am I am as worried as you are
about the pornification of society.
When I answered the question that Jordan Peterson asked,
which came out of nowhere, I'm not blaming him in the least.
It was a perfectly legit question, but it came out of nowhere.
I was thinking still in the way I have always defined it as Playboy magazine.
That to me, that was porn.
The stuff that is out there now is not what I think of when I'm asked the question.
And and so I did say this to the father tonight,
and I'm sure it shocked everybody there.
Did you ask it? No, keep going.
Make a bad you'll get it.
You'll get a charge out of this intellectually.
It'll blow your mind, I think.
So my dad was an Orthodox Jew, a modern Orthodox, admittedly,
but Orthodox did never drove on the Sabbath, never ate a non kosher food.
Wariamolka and the house sent the kids to Yeshiva.
I mean, he was the real deal.
He was the president of the Kingsway Jewish Center.
Still exists an Orthodox synagogue in Brooklyn, New York.
And he subscribed to Playboy, which shocks Jews as well as non-Jews, to be honest.
Good. OK. Yeah.
Glad that it does. Yes. OK.
However, so I I I was raised in a very sexually open home
that was also deeply religious, and I never found them conflicting
as he didn't.
And so he was an outlier.
I acknowledge and I am an outlier.
I acknowledge.
However, I want people to understand my parents were together 72 years
and they loved each other crazy when she died at eighty nine.
He died at ninety six.
He basically his life ended.
His screensaver was I love you, Hindi.
That was his nickname for her.
Her name was Hilda, and she knew he got Playboy.
This did not did not trouble my mother.
Oh, that's Mac. OK.
I'm married to a live wire who was faithful and who loved me.
And she was crazy about him.
And that and that and that was it.
What would be better for your father
to love your mother and get Playboy or for your father to say,
even though I'm tempted to look at pornography,
my wife's body is enough for me and I'm not going to look at that,
even though I'm tempted to. That's a very fair question.
I don't have an answer, which will I should give you the answer you want.
I think you should, too. Yes, that's a good point.
You do. I don't know what that means enough.
As I said, which bothers is funny.
There were two groups that it bothers.
The very religious and the radical feminist.
When I say that men are variety built in,
God made male sexual nature as variety oriented as one.
I don't know who put it this way, but one would put it.
A woman loves a man and men love women.
Now, I don't want men to go around loving women.
I'm totally opposed to that.
I am I am and insist on my being.
It's not it's not even debatable that I am faithful to my wife.
It's a given.
My wife knows that other women are a turn on.
She knows it. It does not bother her.
She she is she to my luck.
I am married to a woman who does not find male sexual nature frightening.
Most women do. And by the way, I understand that.
But again, I think we have to make the distinction
between sexual arousal and sitting and fantasizing or watching.
Actually, they looked at it together.
And if you. Well, that's sad, too, I think.
I don't. Why is it said?
Because I think pornography is a version of the sexual act.
Yeah. Well, OK, which is holy.
What if they looked OK?
Let me finish, which is God's first commandment to humanity.
Be fruitful and multiply.
It is the most intimate thing two human beings can do together.
Not watch the office.
No, not go for a walk on the beach.
It's the fundamental act that brings about the family,
which brings about society.
I'm of the opinion that if you pervert that fundamental I don't know why.
It's why. Why is it perverted?
Why is it because it usurps the natural end of sexual intercourse?
If I eat food and then force myself to throw up, I'm usurping.
OK, but I don't think that that it's a fair analogy.
Let's say they look very fair.
Let's say they looked at at bathing suit ads, not at Playboy.
Just they looked at that other beautiful women together that that.
And it was OK with my mother.
Obviously, the assumption is it was OK with my mother.
If it wasn't, then it's not a good thing. Clearly.
I am more worried about men having to hide their nature.
See, when you say God has built into their nature,
a desire for variety, it sounds like you're saying that therefore
it would be unnatural to not look at pornography.
Well, forget the word pornography because it's so loaded.
I'm anti pornography.
But if pornography means anything that is arousing,
then it could be a bra ad. Right.
Well, I think I could define pornography like this.
I could say material which depicts a rotec behavior.
That's not behavior.
There's no behavior in Playboy. OK.
Well, it's not behavior.
I think that's an important distinction.
I think what when you say behavior, I think you're meaning video or.
No, I didn't. That's why that's why I read.
Then no, I don't I'm I am not
advocate of watching sexual behavior, but I want to know what you mean
by the word behavior, because if I'm going to say it's sexual,
sexual activity between two people.
OK, so even a photograph in Playboy of two people engaging in it.
But there weren't such when I.
That's when you were opposed to that,
but you're OK with a man looking at one naked woman, let's say.
Yes, or they weren't even naked then.
They were covered in their privates.
Right. But but you're opposed to them
looking at anything that might be arousing.
You're what if a woman is wearing a regular
what if a man is turned on, which every man is,
by an attractive woman in a nice dress?
That's a turn on. So no, no, no, please answer.
So is that bad?
I'm going to add his wife.
I'm going to answer, but let me unfold this a little bit.
I think pornography can sometimes be a difficult thing to define.
I would say, and let me see if I can redefine it for you,
material that depicts
something that's intended to sexually arouse or replace replace a prostitute.
I mean, the word pornography comes from two Greek words,
porne graph pain, which means the writing or the drawing of the prostitutes.
It's meant to serve an erotic function.
And so what if the but what if the eroticism is then is then.
So I'm OK with the wife.
I'm OK looking at breasts and I'm OK looking at bums.
And I if you go to the Sistine Chapel,
you'll see that Catholics are perfectly comfortable with nudity.
But I think that nudity can be presented in a way
that upholds and expresses the dignity of the person.
So I could say, OK, I could look at that and marvel at God's creation
and the beauty of woman and the beauty of man.
But I think I could also look at a lingerie catalog
and in my mind treat this person as a mere object.
So I would say
that in one aspect I'm OK looking at breasts, let's say, Sistine Chapel.
But in another sense, if I'm looking at a lingerie catalog
with the intention of lusting it, that wouldn't be OK.
What if I'm looking at the lingerie catalog
with the intention of getting my wife lingerie?
I think the intention does matter. Yeah.
OK. All right.
Yeah. We're not that far.
I'm not advocating this.
I know you're not.
And I really want that to get.
Yeah, yes, it's very important.
But I I'm so worried.
Remember, I come from the woman calling my show.
I saw I saw pictures on my husband's computer.
I'm devastated.
So what am I supposed to say?
You know what?
You're right to be devastated.
Your husband is a real sinner.
He treats you as an object.
What would you like me to say to her?
Here's what I'd like you to say.
I think you could.
I don't think you have to say.
I think I would I think I would begin by validating her pain.
I wouldn't dismiss it by.
And I'm not saying you did this
because I haven't heard this sort of phone call.
But I wouldn't dismiss it by saying
you're wrong to be hurt.
I would say there are many things out there
that your husband, I'm sure, loves you very much.
Well, that's my first question to her.
And you're right.
This is does he love you and is he loving
and do you have a good love life?
And I yeah.
And this is what I'll be if the answers are all.
Yes, go on.
So if the answers are all, yes, I would say, well,
since he loves you and since this bothers you,
there are some excellent resources
that I'd love to tell you about
that could help him be free of pornography.
Because surely you would say if a man is looking at pornography
and his wife's heartbroken, you're not saying, well,
she's wrong to be and he doesn't need to change.
If she's heartbroken, wouldn't you want to say to the man,
here are some ways that you could quit?
Yes, I would want to say to both of them.
I understand why your heartbroken
because you think that he loves her more than you
or as much as you.
And I want you to know that's not the case at all.
I don't know if that's the only reason she'd be heartbroken.
I don't think it's that she loves.
I think that pornography trains us in selfishness.
Yes, so.
It also legitimizes.
So a lot of he says to her, well, look,
you saw lingerie ads and I'm dying to buy you
some really cute lingerie.
Would you be okay with that?
I would say that we're verging on what's sometimes called
the fallacy of the beard.
You ever heard of this?
Just because you don't know when something begins,
it doesn't mean you can't say what a thing is.
This isn't a beard.
But in the three months, if I didn't shave,
it would be and just because you don't know
when it started doesn't mean you can't say what a beard is.
And I would say that there are blurry lines.
I would agree with you.
Like a Victoria's Secret fashion show.
Is that pornography?
I'd say probably, what about,
but is it less bad than other forms of pornography?
Yes.
Not all pornography is equal.
Some pornography can be far more ratchet than others.
We're really not that far apart.
I, my biggest, one of my biggest teachings
is that there are levels of sin
and there are levels of good.
And that we should not listen.
I don't think this is not a Catholic thing,
but many Protestants who listen to my show
take issue with me when I say
that God does not regard stealing a stapler from the office
as he does child molestation.
And they call me up and say, Dennis, love you,
but I gotta tell you, a sin is a sin.
Yeah, no, we would part ways with our...
I know you would.
Yes, I know.
I said Catholics and Jews believe in gradations of sin.
Correct, okay.
So there are gradations in that arena as well.
Yes, but I would say that just because something is less bad
than something else, it doesn't make it good.
So if you're saying to the...
Okay, I'm not arguing it's good.
So if you say to the...
I'm arguing it's not as bad
as people often make it out to be.
I am not arguing that it's good.
In an ideal marriage with my father,
not have subscribed to Playboy,
I'll be prepared to say yes, however.
Look at you, good job.
Yes, yeah, but it doesn't gain you as much as you think
because I saw their relationship for seven,
I didn't see it for 72 years, obviously,
but I saw it for the bulk of their life.
And the respect with which he treated her.
I'm sure he did.
I'm not making the claim that you have
pure pristine holy marriage and haven of filth.
I'm not saying that those are only two options.
Right, okay, so fine, so there are degrees.
But if you're saying to the woman,
better for him to look at porn than to commit adultery,
then what I would say there is,
it might be less bad, all things being equal,
but less bad doesn't make it good.
And if adultery can be analogized
to shooting your marriage in the head,
I would say pornography is the slow poisoning of it
and that there's a great deal of research
to be able to back that up.
Yes, well.
In fact, Dennis, I'm gonna get your book on Exodus.
I promise to look at it.
This is my book on pornography.
It's a non-religious response to pro-porn arguments.
Oh yeah, I'll be very happy to read it.
And I'll sign it so it'll be worth more
in the garage sale one day.
But there's no talk of sin, there's no scripture verses.
It's all based on the 40 plus years of science
that's coming out of academia from neuroscience.
So here's the question.
Okay, so you see, the reason I actually
never talk about pornography.
He asked me, you were asked me.
This is your news.
I never do, I certainly don't advocate it.
I don't even discuss it, let alone advocate it.
But it was asked, and I sort of took a vow many years ago,
I won't avoid questions.
I wish I had known in advance it would be discussed.
I would have said how much I'm horrified
by the pornification of society, et cetera.
But we, I want to, we're on so many different,
related but different tracks.
And it's a very important subject.
Oh yes, I was influenced by my parents' marriage.
We're all influenced by our parents' marriage.
If you see your father beat your mother,
you think that's normal and you end up beating your wife.
Of course, my father, I mean,
the thought that he would ever lift it,
he wouldn't, it's so inconceivable to me.
All he did was tell his sons
how much he loved their mother.
I mean, constantly.
So what I saw was a man got Playboy
and loved his wife for 72 years.
She knew he got Playboy and loved her husband
and knew he loved her for 72 years.
So that's what I saw.
And I'm not going to sit here as their child
and say, this was really awful.
When I can't say it because I would be lying.
But if you ask me, is there an ideal?
I will argue, okay, there is an ideal.
But the human condition is messy.
So back to our earlier question,
where we differ on can a loving husband
in the bedroom ever see his wife as a sex object?
And I said, that's good.
See, that's there.
Finally, we have a real difference.
I actually think that is a positive.
I don't know if we do have a disagreement.
If by sex object, you mean
you find your wife sexually desirable.
I don't know what the difference is.
What's the difference?
I think this is what I would say, right?
As subject, like man is made
and man makes his own ends, right?
Slavery is wrong because we take a man
who makes his own ends and would like to fulfill them.
When I talk about objectification,
I guess I'm talking about a sort of evacuation
of the subject of the person.
I'm not concerned about her.
I'm not concerned about her.
You draw an inference that I'm not implying.
And that's why I say I don't know if we're disagreeing.
We may not.
That would be great to resolve it.
I'm totally happy with that if that happens.
How you treat her is not that you will treat her badly.
The moment women don't say I'm crazy
about my husband's legs, okay?
But a man may not say it.
Well, that's true.
Fair enough.
Okay, I'll ask your wife, okay.
But every man thinks that way
if there's a part of her body
that is particularly a turn on to use the term do him.
That is objectification.
Women don't do that.
Women don't, very, I mean, young women do.
Oh, he's got a great butt.
By objectification, do you mean I find a part
of my wife's body that I find attractive sexually?
Yeah.
Yeah, all right.
I suppose that for me, objectification means
sort of subordinating the good of my wife
to a selfish pleasure.
You have drawn a behavioral inference from a thought
and I don't.
Yeah.
But see, I still am not convinced
that this sharp distinction or the distinction,
because I've heard Ben Shapiro say something similar.
And so I don't know if this is,
as you say, more of a behaviorist, kind of Jewish idea,
because I think he said something like,
I don't really care if you have racist thoughts.
I care about how you act.
That's right.
I said that to the group tonight.
I don't care if people dislike Jews.
I care how they treat us.
But if my son or daughter.
I know you're right.
I would tell the same to my child.
If my child said, I don't like this group.
But I think this is what our Lord Jesus Christ is doing,
in which he's saying your righteousness
has to pass out of the Pharisees.
It's not enough that you don't murder.
You should not want to.
It's not enough that you don't commit adultery.
You should not say fuel the flame
that could lead to that.
I happen to think it's a good thing
not to want to murder.
I subscribe to that.
But there's a very interesting Hebrew phrase
translating from the Hebrew.
So it'll be a bit awkward.
In the place that a penitent stands,
the most righteous person doesn't stand.
And I extrapolate from that,
that if you have bad thoughts and don't act on them,
you're on a higher moral plane
than the guy who never has a bad thought.
I don't get any credit for not molesting children.
I'm as interested in children sexually
as I am in bananas or peach trees.
So I get no credit for not molesting a child.
But the sick dude who does want to and doesn't,
he gets a lot of credit.
So speaking of pedophilia,
suppose a man says, I view animated child porn.
So there's no real victim in that sense of child pornography,
which we both agree is horrendous.
And by viewing animated child porn,
it prevents me from acting out sexually on a child.
Now, I deny that.
I think that pornography inflames us
to then want to act those fantasies out.
And I think there's good studies that back that up.
But surely you wouldn't say to the man
who views animated child pornography,
that's not bad so long as you don't act it out.
Wouldn't you want to help this poor sick dude?
Yes, I would.
But I am thrilled that he's not acting it out.
I mean, of course.
Well, that's big.
We're both thrilled that he might have a poor substitute,
but it is a substitute if that were the case.
No child is being used.
It's all animated.
And he-
But would you use the word evil
of animated child pornography?
Because I certainly would.
No, I would use evil only with behavior.
That's where we might differ from forgetting the sex issue.
You can't be evil.
You didn't do evil if you thought evil.
You did evil if you committed-
If I'm masturbating to animated pictures of pornography,
I'm not doing something evil.
That's correct.
Yeah, I think that's despicable.
Yeah.
Really?
Yes, of course.
Who is being hurt?
You have to have a victim.
Oh, I'll tell you, there's at least two people being hurt.
There's the person who's poisoning himself
by encouraging him to think-
Yes, yes, you're right.
Acting out on children.
And there's also the animator-
Okay, wait a minute.
We both are aching for him not to have those fantasies.
I agree with you, but I-
But you won't call it evil.
I won't call a fantasy evil.
There's too much real evil on earth
for me to start being preoccupied with people's thinking.
It's not just thinking.
It's him masturbating to-
Yes, he's okay.
Okay, so the real question about the whole pornography issue
is not pornography, it's masturbation.
There was a Catholic tradition-
I disagree.
I think it's both.
I think both masturbation is evil,
but I think pornography is a greater evil, I would say.
Okay, so I don't think masturbation is evil.
Okay, that's, and by the way,
I admit that within Orthodox Judaism,
there is, when I was a counselor at Orthodox Jewish camp,
the kids were told by some of their rabbis
that masturbation is like murder.
And there was that, there was also that.
There's a statement like that.
I certainly wouldn't make that statement.
Okay, I do believe that in Catholic theology,
there is-
No, no, no.
No Catholic is saying that murder
is equivalent to masturbation.
Okay, all right, good.
You might say that both are grave sins,
but you wouldn't say that masturbation is a graver sin.
Even within murder,
patricide would be a graver sin
than killing a stranger.
So since we both believe murder is always wrong,
obviously self-defense is killing not murder,
so murder is always wrong.
Child molestation is always wrong.
Is masturbation always wrong?
What about a man whose wife, and I had this example,
now you may say, well, if you take an extreme example,
it's not fair.
But if you say always,
I have to take a real life example of a man I knew
who adored his wife.
I knew them when they were both Welsh.
She got Alzheimer's at a very early age in her 50s,
and he dressed her and bathed her
and cleaned her up for a decade.
And if this man, with a wife who no longer recognized him,
masturbated to get rid of his sexual tension
and stayed to take care of his wife,
you would say that was evil?
I would, because I think that evil
is the way things shouldn't be.
And I think the sexual act exists for union,
and to masturbate is to thwart the end of that natural act.
I also think that what we haven't taken into account yet
is an industry that brutalizes women
that's often involved in trafficking women.
Oh, that's why I said, I've against all of that.
I'm on your side on that.
Yes, I was talking about pictures,
still pictures of models.
But I'm still saying that this brutalizes women.
I think it's like, what woman would you like him to look at?
Like your wife, your daughter, my daughter?
Would you be comfortable with someone you know and love
being looked at like that?
I wouldn't. No, but it's, you're using,
you're bringing the emotional.
I would say you're doing that.
I think you're doing that when you use this story.
I would not deny that this is a virtuous man
in many respects, laudable,
who I could learn a great deal from.
Right, but no, no, you use the word evil.
That's right. That's right.
Okay, you define evil in a way I don't.
The way things shouldn't be, I would say.
And I would refer to natural evil.
So if a man is born blind, this is a natural evil.
If a stone is blind, this is not a natural evil.
But I would also refer to moral evil
as this is the way things shouldn't be.
So we disagree on that.
Yes, so I'm trying to think of, okay,
is it, it shouldn't be that kids spend as much time
as they do on social media.
Do we both agree with that, that they spend too much time?
Yes. Would you call it evil
if they did spend too much time?
Probably yes.
Okay, I wouldn't say it was wrong,
but I wouldn't say it was evil.
So I've shared with you how I define evil.
How do you define it?
Is the deliberate infliction of hurt
on another human being?
So I would say that pornography involves
the deliberate infliction of hurt on another human being
through the photographing of a person.
So that would include lingerie models.
Again, I'm not sure.
I don't have a, I don't know.
Men are as capable of masturbating to lingerie models
as they are to awful stuff.
Right. So what I think the goal should be
is to line up the goal of the artist or the photographer
and the goal and the intention of the viewer
with the dignity of the human person.
Because I can view something non-pornographic
and say masturbate to it.
Right.
The problem isn't with the thing I'm looking at.
The problem's with me.
Likewise, likewise,
I could look through a pornographic magazine
and feel nothing but pity
for these women who don't know their dignity.
In that case, objectively, it's photography,
but subjectively, it isn't for me.
So I think you want both to line up
with the dignity of the human person
created in the image.
Wanting to line up with dignity is totally admirable.
Calling the non-lining up is a lingerie model
losing her dignity.
And you may say yes.
Yeah, I think I would say yes.
Yeah, okay.
Yeah.
But again, I want to make a huge distinction
between these gradations.
Well, and so do I.
Something can be far less bad than synchronous.
When people say pornography,
they're thinking of the most awful behaviors.
Well, let me ask you this then,
because it sounded like you were saying
that if a man views pornography
and thereby doesn't commit adultery, it's okay.
No, I didn't say okay.
I said it wasn't awful.
Not horrible, fair enough.
Right.
Thank you for the correction.
Yeah.
But you've also said that you're very much opposed
to violent pornography, obviously.
If a man says I need to watch violent pornography
so I don't commit adultery, do you say,
well, okay, that's less bad too?
Or do you condemn that with a greater severity?
Well, because the odds are
that the people in it are being hurt.
What if they're willing to be hurt?
What if they enjoy being hurt?
So then I more or less subscribe to your vision
of the issue.
But again, I want to remind everybody watching or listening
that my vision was of Playboy of the 1960s
when I was a teenager,
which would be regarded today as...
Not even worthy of Netflix.
I mean, what we once called hardcore,
we now call softcore.
Yes, okay.
But we once called softcore, we now call Netflix.
But I have to ask you and many others
who feel as you do, and I respect it,
is everything...
Well, I did ask you.
I mean, once you say masturbation
under all circumstances is evil,
that I will admit we part company.
Yeah.
And that's fine.
I mean, we knew we would disagree.
Yes, that's fine.
And there's also a lot of things we agree about.
There was one, I don't want to say his name
because I may be wrong,
but I believe there was one major evangelical leader,
I mean, major.
He was a household name for a while.
Dobson, I think.
Oh, so you didn't know what I'm referring to.
I don't want to misspeak here.
Maybe Thursday you can look this up,
but I believe Dobson at one point justified masturbation
in certain circumstances.
See, what I respect about you
and what I respect about Jordan Peterson
is that very often you tell us to take the hard road.
You're like, yes, it's bloody hard, but be a man.
Like rise up, choose the harder path.
Choose the more virtuous path.
I just wish that you or Peterson would be more emphatic
when it comes to sexual sins
that of course you're tempted to it.
Of course you want to do it.
What's interesting isn't why people masturbate to pornography.
That's obvious.
What's interesting is why people decide they don't want to.
Well, again, why not encourage them?
Don't throw in the word pornography.
Masturbate alone is a sin to you and evil.
What if he's masturbating to an image he makes up in his brain?
If he's masturbating to nothing, I would consider it an evil.
Okay, fair.
Okay.
Yeah.
It's...
Dobson?
Dr. James Dobson in about 1987,
the quote appears to be,
it is my opinion that masturbation is not much of an issue with God.
It's a normal part of adolescence.
Indeed, Jesus did not mention it.
Jesus didn't mention a lot of things.
Well, yeah, but well, it's not insignificant,
nor does the Hebrew Bible talk about it.
The spilling of seed with Onan, from which we get Onanism,
the sin was not that he spilled the seed.
The sin was that he didn't have intercourse with his brother's widow.
So, I mean, the Catholic would say that reason would show us
that masturbation is disordered, that pornography is disordered,
because it takes a natural act, which is good,
and it thwarts the end of it.
That's why I use the example of...
What about a man who can't attract a woman?
He should spend his life, obviously, then.
Yes, because masturbation is not like urination.
It's not something you need to do,
or else you're going to become neurotic and die somehow.
You're not going to find anybody in the morgue
with a tag on their toe that says virgin or something.
I think it's a pornified culture that's given us this idea.
Let me say that the ideal life would involve none of this.
I am not preoccupied with the ideal life.
I am preoccupied with a good life.
As I often say, I am not interested in making saints.
I am interested in making good people.
And it is so hard to make good people in a post-communist,
post-Nazi world, post-Islamic...
It's not post yet, Islamic terrorist world.
I admit, I am preoccupied with real evil
rather than non-idyllic behavior.
I admit it. That's where I am...
And maybe to clarify my thought, which might make it more acceptable to you,
I would say that there are circumstances in which
masturbating or even looking at pornography
could be a less grave sin due to habit, due to immaturity.
But see, even in secular culture, we make fun of masturbation.
We don't seem to be proud of masturbation.
Even atheists, there's this big move to stop being a cream puff
and masturbating into a sock.
And instead of that, control your sexual desire.
You're not a dog to be neutered.
You're someone who has mastery over your lower passions.
So I have a desire for food.
But if I eat like a pig, then this is going to be bad for my health
and this would be the sin of gluttony.
I could have the desire to masturbate.
But the difference is you can eat.
The man who cannot have any sex.
No, you're equating orgasm with eating and it's not the same thing.
You did.
No, you're saying that I'm equating them to show that they're dissimilar
in that if I don't eat, I die.
But it sounds like what you're saying is, well,
but the man who never has a woman,
surely he should masturbate or else what?
And I'm saying he's not going to die.
He's not going to die.
Right.
And so I think the man should have mastery over that passion
and use it appropriately.
That's what I would say.
Okay. Ideally, I agree with you.
So one way that's important that I said that.
Ideally, ideally, ideally.
But as I said, like in the case of marriages,
I want them to love each other.
And by the way, let me just, this is not utterly germane to our debate here.
But having spoken to so many couples for so many years,
I have a phrase which is related to this.
But not exactly this, but related.
You should make love outside the bedroom
and have sex inside the bedroom.
I love it.
But I think I know what you mean.
Oh, I'm glad you love it.
Well, it's if I'm ignoring my wife,
if I'm not doing acts of kindness towards her throughout the day,
then to expect to come together and be intimate
in that most intimate of embraces is selfish.
But I want to love my bride throughout the day, sacrifice for her.
Right. But what I'm saying more than that.
Okay.
That, of course, I'm saying that, but I am saying more than that.
I'm also saying that the bedroom might be a place for the non-holy to express itself.
Because we, I believe, were created in God's image and animal's image.
And if we, sex allows the animal under holy circumstances,
which is matrimony for both Jews and Catholics,
that the word for marriage in Hebrew, kiddushin, means holy.
I mean, that is the whole Talmudic volumes on marriage.
And sex is called kiddushin, which means kadoches.
Many Catholics know it means holy.
So I Schmuley Boteath is a bearded Orthodox rabbi.
I don't know if you're familiar with him.
And he wrote a book called Kosher Sex.
His argument is as follows.
And he's very anti-porn, very.
His argument is anything that the couple, the married couple agrees to in the bedroom,
they should do, that that's the place.
And that's why he calls it Kosher Sex.
It wasn't, by the way, universally received well among some religious Jews.
I, your views are not all that different from many Orthodox Jews.
Why was he opposed to pornography?
For the same reasons you are.
Thank you so much for watching that clip.
If you want to watch the entire thing, go over to matfraad.locals.com.
Locals is like a non-woke Patreon.
So if you want to support the work of Pints with Aquinas,
you can do that over there matfraad.locals.com.
And when you do, you get a ton of things in return.
You get bonus podcasts.
You get bonus episodes of things.
You get monthly spiritual direction with Father Gregory Pine.
You get monthly audio books.
You get our print newspaper sent to your door quarterly.
And we even pay for shipping.
There's a ton of things you get.
And you also get the satisfaction of knowing that you're supporting the work of Pints with Aquinas.
Matfraad.locals.com.
Thanks.
Pay Thursday's salary.
Pay Thursday's.
