Many of the basic ideas of quantum information are analogous to classical ideas, communication,
data compression, error correction, computation.
But there is one area, one big chapter in the Quantum Information Theory textbook that
has no analog in Shannon's theory.
That's the chapter about quantum entanglement.
Quantum entanglement between particles has been recognized and studied for a long time,
but the term goes back to Schrodinger, who called it the characteristic trait of quantum
mechanics.
Albert Einstein and Niels Bohr debated its meaning.
And in recent decades, we have probed the phenomenon of entanglement with experiments
of increasing delicacy and sophistication.
Quantum information theory has taught us to think of entanglement as a kind of information.
We can measure it.
We can transform it from one type to another.
It follows definite rules, many of which we've discovered.
It can also have its uses.
The essential idea of entanglement is simple to explain.
For a pair of qubits, we can imagine the state 00, both zeros, or the state 11, both ones.
The quantum rules say that we can also have a superposition of those, 00 plus 11.
That's a definite quantum state of the pair of qubits, in which neither qubit by itself
has a definite state of its own.
The von Neumann entropy of either qubit is one bit, but the entropy of the whole is
zero.
That puts the qubits in a special relationship to one another.
That's entanglement.
So suppose Alice and Bob are in separate places.
They want to produce some shared entanglement.
They want to produce pairs of entangled particles, one of which is in Alice's possession, and
the other one is possessed by Bob.
So they go to work.
They do all sorts of manipulations of quantum information at their separate locations.
They send ordinary classical messages back and forth.
They're allowed to do any local operation or classical communication.
Quantum information scientists call those LOCC operations.
But try as they might, Alice and Bob cannot create any entanglement between them.
LOCC operations are not enough to make entanglement.
To do that, they must exchange quantum messages, quantum information transmitted coherently
with its superpositions intact.
Alice could create an entangled pair of qubits in her own lab and send one qubit to Bob.
Equally well, Bob could create the pair and send one to Alice, or they could both receive
their own qubits from a third-party source of entangled pairs.
In any case, they wind up sharing some quantum entanglement.
What can they do then?
One thing they can do is change the entanglement from one form to another.
So suppose the entangled pairs of qubits are not very entangled.
Their superpositions are 0, 0 plus just a tiny amount of 1, 1.
There's much less than one e-bit of entanglement in them, which is the amount of entanglement
in an equal superposition of 0, 0 and 1, 1.
So by local operations and classical communication, LOCC, Alice and Bob can turn a large number
of weakly entangled pairs into a smaller number of strongly entangled pairs of e-bits.
This is called entanglement concentration.
It is the entanglement version of data compression.
The entangled pairs might also be noisy.
When Alice sends her qubit to Bob, it might undergo some decoherence.
Too much decoherence and the entanglement is lost.
But it might be that Alice and Bob's qubits are still entangled, but in a noisy way.
In this case, by LOCC operations, Alice and Bob may be able to refine their impure entanglement
into fewer e-bits, fewer qubit pairs with more pristine entanglement.
This is called entanglement distillation, and it's the entanglement version of error
correction.
The preservation of quantum information depends on total information isolation, and that means
that the quantum world relies on an absolute privacy that is unlike anything in our everyday
experience.
It's part of the reason why the quantum world seems so strange and elusive to us.
This privacy reaches not just to the behavior of individual particles, but to the relationships
between particles to entanglement.
So I want to share with you a new way of looking at quantum entanglement, based on discoveries
in quantum information theory made in the last few years, that we could begin by describing
experiments involving entangled photons.
But sometimes the best way to introduce a new idea is to embed it in a funny story.
The everyday details in the story make the central point stand out.
So consider a rather preposterous thought experiment.
It's based on an old television game show called The Newlywed Game, which began in the
1960s and has been revived from time to time.
Perhaps you've seen it.
The idea of the TV game is to take a recently married couple and interview each of them
separately.
Each is asked several questions about domestic life, likes and dislikes, and so on.
Afterward, the answers are compared to see if they agree, and the results are often embarrassing
and amusing.
For our version of the game we will make a few changes.
Our couple, Alice and Bob, will again be interviewed separately.
We will ask only binary yes-no questions.
And there are only two possible questions, called them X and Y, and each contestant will
only be asked one of them.
The questions asked might be the same, or they might be different.
Now since each couple is only asked one question each, if we want to play the game many times,
we will need a supply of many couples, many Alice's and Bob's, and we'll assume that
each couple has the same special relationship to each other.
Well what is that relationship?
As far as the game is concerned, that relationship is all about how they answer the questions.
It's an informational relationship.
If we ask either Alice or Bob, either question X or Y, the answer is completely unpredictable.
In probability terms, the probability of yes is one-half, and the probability of no is
one-half.
We have no information about any single answer before we ask any questions.
On the other hand, Alice and Bob's answers are correlated.
If both are asked question X, call that situation XX, then their answers always agree, both
yes or both no.
For any other combination of questions, XY, YX, or YY, they always disagree.
When one says yes, the other surely says no.
So we can summarize Alice and Bob's relationship in a table, listing the probabilities that
their answers agree depending on which pair of questions they are asked.
Now the referees of the game are concerned.
Are Alice and Bob cheating at the game?
Are they secretly communicating to coordinate their answers?
They show no signs of it, and every precaution has been taken, but it is difficult to know
for sure.
Well, here is one sign that they are not.
We could interview Alice and Bob very far apart, on different planets even.
The interviews could happen at the same moment, so that even radio signals traveling at the
speed of light could not pass between them before they gave their answers.
Yet the Alice and Bob relationship displayed in the probability table would be unchanged.
The referees, who are information theory experts, still want to be sure, so they devise a mathematical
test to see whether any secret signaling is happening.
So here's the idea of the test.
If Alice is sending messages to Bob about what happens in her own interview, it might
be possible to trick her into sending a message for us.
So let QA stand for the question that Alice is asked, either X or Y.
And let RB stand for the answer that Bob gives, either yes or no.
The question is whether QA has any influence on RB.
That is, does Bob's answer give any indication what question Alice is asked?
If so, then the interviewers themselves could send their own messages using Alice and Bob.
Alice's interviewer encodes his message in the choice of questions he poses to Alice,
QA.
Bob's interviewer would then learn something about the message from Bob's answer, RB.
If the interviewers could send a message in this way, that would definitely establish
that some kind of signaling is going on.
Therefore, the referees compute the mutual information I of QA and RB, which as we saw
in Lecture 7, is exactly the amount of information about QA that appears in RB.
The referees require as a rule of the game that this must be exactly zero.
This rule is called the no signaling principle.
And zero it is for our Alice and Bob.
Whichever question Alice is asked, Bob's answer will still be yes or no, with equal
probability.
True, Alice's answer and Bob's answer are correlated, but the interviewers do not
control the answers so they cannot use them to send messages.
And the same thing is true in the other direction, I of QBRA also equals zero.
Bob's interviewer cannot send a message to Alice's interviewer using the game.
Since the no signaling principle is satisfied, the referees conclude that there is no evidence
of any cheating by Alice and Bob.
Either they are not signaling at all, or they are doing it in such a way that they cannot
be caught, even in principle.
Now something unexpected happens.
A third contestant appears.
His name is Bill.
Bill claims to have the same relationship with Alice that Bob does.
In other words, he claims that his answers to questions X and Y will agree or disagree
with Alice's answers in exactly the same way that Bob's do.
Could this be true?
Let's test it.
We'll interview Bill along with Alice and Bob all separately.
We will ask Bob question X and Bill question Y.
What we ask Alice will get to in a moment.
Bob and Bill give their answers.
Their answers either agree, both yes or both no, or they don't agree.
So suppose the answers agree, both yes or both no.
What if Alice has asked question X?
Since Bob has asked X and Alice has asked X, their and their answers will agree.
However, that means that Bill will also have to agree with Alice.
But that is wrong.
According to the probability table, when both parties are asked different questions, they
can never agree.
Alright then, suppose Bob and Bill give different answers to their questions.
They disagree.
Now what if Alice is asked question Y?
Since she is asked Y and Bob is asked X, their answers will disagree.
But that would mean that Bill would agree with her.
Then a violation of the table.
If they are both asked Y, they have to disagree.
So either way Bill answers his own question, the same as Bob, or different, there is a
possible question for Alice that would disprove Bill's claim to have the same special relationship
with her that Bob does.
Bill is an impostor.
He must be an impostor.
For Alice, there can be no second Bob.
The relationship between Alice and Bob has to be exclusive to them.
No outsider anywhere in the universe can share in it.
It is perfectly and provably monogamous.
That is an extraordinary conclusion to be able to draw from a simple table of probabilities.
And it does not even depend on Alice and Bob always agreeing or always disagreeing.
For example, suppose we modify the probabilities in the table this way.
A hundred percent agreement becomes eighty-five percent, and zero percent agreement becomes
fifteen percent.
Nevertheless, it is still a relationship that would thwart any impostor Bill.
No matter what answers Bill gives to his question, he will either end up agreeing with Alice
too often, or not often enough.
Of course this whole game of Alice and Bob has been a parable of quantum entanglement.
So let's explain the parable using photon polarization.
Alice and Bob each possess a photon, a qubit.
Alice has photon A, and Bob has photon B. Their special relationship is quantum entanglement
between the photons.
Now as experimental physics goes, it is actually not that difficult to obtain entangled photons.
You do not need a huge particle accelerator or temperatures close to absolute zero.
You only need a moderately bright laser and a crystal of beta barium borate, or BBO.
When you bombard the crystal with laser light from a particular direction, photons from
the laser are converted into pairs of lower energy photons that go zooming off in different
directions.
Those photons are entangled.
We can ask questions of individual photons using a polarization analyzer, which can be
something as simple as a sheet of polarizing plastic and a photon detector.
If we orient the analyzer in this way, we are essentially asking the photon, are you
vertically polarized?
The photon answers yes, vertically polarized, or no, horizontally polarized.
If we orient the analyzer in a different way, we are asking a different question.
For each of our entangled photons, the answer to any polarization is random, yes and no
answers are equally likely, but the answers are correlated, and the details of that correlation
are significant.
If we ask the same analyzer question of each photon, we orient the analyzer along the same
axis for each, then the photons always give exactly opposite answers.
We ask are you vertically polarized, and if photon A answers yes, then photon B will
always answer no, and vice versa.
What if we set the analyzers differently for photons A and B?
Suppose we set their axes at an angle theta apart, then the probability that the two photons
give the same answer follows a simple rule.
It is just equal to the sine squared of theta.
It helps to look at a graph and consider a table of probabilities.
When the angle is zero, zero degrees, the probability that they agree is zero.
The photons never give the same answer.
When the angle is 90 degrees, the probability that they agree is one.
The photons always give the same answer, and that makes sense, the same answer in this
case means opposite, that is perpendicular polarizations.
When the analyzers are 45 degrees apart, the probability of agreement is 0.5.
The photons agree about half the time.
And two other angles are particularly interesting.
At 22.5 degrees, halfway between 0 and 45, the photons only agree 15% of the time.
While at 67.5 degrees, halfway between 45 and 90, the photons agree 85% of the time.
Now here is a really important point.
Entangled photons satisfy the no signaling principle.
If you want to think that entangled photons are secretly exchanging messages instantaneously
across space, well, you are in good company.
Einstein called entanglement spooky action at a distance.
But you will never catch them at it, and you cannot ever use entanglement to send instantaneous
messages of your own.
As far as quantum information is concerned, entanglement is not communication, but simply
an information relationship.
As the philosopher Abner Shimoni put it, not action at a distance, but passion at a distance.
Now at last we're ready to set up our newlywed game photon experiment.
All we need to do is choose some analyzer angles to represent the x and y questions for
the photons.
For photon A, the x analyzer points north, and the y axis is northeast.
For photon B, the angles are a little more complicated, x is east northeast, and y is
north northeast.
The whole point is that the angles between adjacent axes are all 22.5 degrees, but x
A is 67.5 degrees from x B.
Now we can make our table of agreement probabilities for the entangled photons.
And we actually saw exactly this same table for Alice and Bob in our newlywed game thought
experiment.
And so we can draw the same conclusions now that we drew then.
The relationship between entangled photons is perfectly and provably monogamous.
No other particle anywhere in the universe can share in that relationship.
The monogamy of entanglement is the deep meaning of the quantum no cloning theorem.
Suppose we did have a magic quantum cloning machine, a machine that exactly duplicates
the state of a quantum particle.
If we began with entangled photons A and B, and used the machine on B, it would have
to produce a second photon, B' that is entangled with A in exactly the same way as B. But we
know that no such photon can exist.
Any attempt to clone B must fail.
So either the new photon B' will turn out to be unrelated to A, or the cloning process
will destroy the original relationship between A and B in the first place.
So to put it in a nutshell, because of his relationship to Alice, you can't clone Bob.
The unassailable privacy of quantum information and quantum entanglement is a remarkably useful
information resource.
With it we can solve an otherwise impossible problem in the science of cryptography.
The problem of secret key distribution.
As we saw in lecture 12, there is such a thing as a perfectly secure cryptographic system,
the one time pad in which a new secret key is used for every message.
Key information needs to be random, and shared by the users, Alice and Bob, and completely
unknown to any eavesdropper Eve.
But since Alice and Bob consume the key as they use the system, they continually need
new key information.
How can that be distributed to them in such a way that Eve cannot get to it too?
How can Alice and Bob be absolutely sure that their key is secure?
If we stick to the world of classical information, Shannon's world, then they can't be sure.
It's as simple as that.
There is no kind of classical key information that cannot be copied by Eve on its way from
Alice to Bob, and that copying process may involve a one-way information flow from key
to Eve so that no trace of her activity remains behind.
That's where quantum physics comes in.
The first method for quantum key distribution was devised in 1984 by Charles Bennett of IBM
and Gilles Brassard of the University of Montreal.
Their scheme is known as BB84, and its discovery marked the birth of quantum cryptography.
However, as sometimes happens, the first method is not always the best.
BB84 is somewhat elaborate, and it's a little hard at first to see why it does the job.
But a few years later, Archer Eckert of the University of Cambridge realized that the
complications of BB84 obscured the real point of quantum cryptography.
In effect, Eckert showed that entanglement is the key.
Now that sounds like a feeble pun, but it is the literal truth.
Let's see how it might work.
We can produce entangled pairs of photons in the way we have already described, and send
them off, one to Alice and the other to Bob.
Alice and Bob are equipped with polarization analyzers.
In other words, they can ask yes-no questions of their photons.
Each analyzer can be turned to any of the four axes we used before.
We call them XA, XB, and so on.
Now we'll label them Q1 through Q4.
So when Alice receives her photon, she randomly chooses one of four axes, Q1 through Q4, and
finds out if her photon has that polarization.
Bob does the same for his photon.
Since he is choosing his axes independently, he might make the same choices.
Alice or a different one.
They repeat this many times for many pairs of photons.
Once they've acquired all their data, they have a discussion on an open classical information
channel.
That is, a discussion that Eve might listen in on.
They tell each other which measurements they made on which photons, but they do not announce
the results of those measurements.
On about 25% of the photon pairs, they chose the same analyzer axes.
On these entangled photons, that means that their results must disagree, so it's easy
for Bob to negate his results so that they always agree.
And now Alice and Bob each have a collection of random, shared, and completely secret bits.
In short, they have a perfect new key.
But wait a moment.
How can Alice and Bob be sure that Eve did not tamper with their entangled photons?
In fact, they may be suspicious of the source of the entangled photon pairs.
Perhaps that device is being operated by Eve herself, or was bugged somehow by Eve's
agents at the factory.
If you want absolute security, you have to be paranoid.
You must regard everything outside your own little lab as suspect.
You can't even trust the manufacturer of your photon source.
But none of that matters.
Alice and Bob can still achieve complete confidence in the secrecy of their key.
Remember, 75% of the time they choose different axes for their two photons.
These are not as good for building a secret key since they are not perfectly correlated.
Instead, Alice and Bob share these results with each other over their open channel.
And by comparing notes, they can test the probabilities in the newlywed game experiment.
They can test that Q1 and Q2 results agree only 15% of the time, that Q1 and Q4 results
agree 85% of the time, and so on.
And from this data alone, they can establish beyond any doubt that the information relationship
between their photons is completely monogamous.
No matter what tampering Eve may have attempted, Alice and Bob know that she can possess no
particle or measurement record that shares their key information.
Now if Eve did attempt to do something that might reveal key information by using the photon
pair to create a third photon for herself, for example, her activities would necessarily
destroy the monogamous connection between the photons of Alice and Bob, and they would
detect this when they compared results.
Though Eve can interfere with the key distribution process, but what she cannot do is fool Alice
and Bob into using an insecure key to send their secret messages.
She cannot eavesdrop.
Now unlike quantum computing, quantum cryptography has gone far beyond a theory and a handful
of small experiments.
Pairs of entangled photons have been shared over 100 kilometers apart, first using fiber
optic links, and later directly across free space.
In 2012, a research team led by Anton Zeilinger of the University of Vienna shared entangled
photons between mountaintop stations on two of the Canary Islands, from La Palma to Tenerife,
a distance of 143 kilometers, almost 90 miles.
And quantum key distribution has also gone commercial.
There are several companies that now build and sell quantum cryptographic systems.
Some electronic banking transactions in Europe have already been encrypted using key bits
shared via quantum key distribution.
And not long ago, a quantum key distribution link was set up not far from my home.
The Battelle Memorial Institute, a high-tech research and development contractor, installed
a 30-kilometer fiber optic quantum key distribution link between two of their facilities in Columbus,
Ohio.
Outside of some government pilot projects, it's one of the first in the United States.
It almost certainly will not be the last.
And that makes sense.
Most modern cryptography avoids the key distribution problem by using a public key system.
The encryption key is not particularly private, it can be published in the newspaper, but
a separate decryption key remains secret.
Nevertheless, the security of a public key system is only computational, not informational.
In principle, any eavesdropper has all the necessary data to break the code.
The secrecy of the plain text relies on the sheer computational difficulty of that.
It's equivalent to solving some hard mathematical problem, like factoring a large integer.
But someday, perhaps a day not that far off, quantum computers could make factoring a far
easier problem.
If that happens, the public key systems that we use today will become insecure.
Worse, all of today's encrypted message traffic recorded and stored somewhere will then become
readable by any adversary with a quantum computer.
Remember the story of the Vanona Project?
Soviet messages about spies and espionage decrypted by the Americans 20 years after
they were sent still contain valuable intelligence.
There are secrets that need to be kept not just for months or years, but for decades.
On that time scale, one-time-pad encryption, based on quantum key distribution, provides
the only really guaranteed cryptographic security.
Frankly, I'm not sure any of my secrets are valuable enough to warrant such an absolute
approach.
For me, quantum entanglement and quantum cryptography are valuable because of what they teach us
about what information means in our universe.
Alice and Bob live in a complex world full of interacting particles.
The noisy environment that surrounds them, the dense and intricate web of information
exchanges continually nibbling away at every form of informational isolation.
So in such a world, we may imagine three basic information tasks that Alice and Bob
might wish to perform.
First, Alice and Bob may want to transmit quantum information, qubits, from one to the
other, defending against the noisy environment by quantum error-correcting codes.
Second, they may want to share some entangled pairs of qubits with each other, qubits whose
information relationship is provably monogamous.
Third, Alice and Bob may wish to transmit classical messages that are absolutely private,
that is completely secret from any enemy that their environment might contain.
Over the years since quantum cryptography was invented and improved, we have begun to
understand a surprising truth.
Those three things, quantum communication, entanglement and perfect cryptography, are
at root the same thing.
If you are able to do one of them, you can do the other two also.
Therefore, the science of secrets, the shadowy art of cryptography, is not a mere secondary
chapter in the science of information.
It is actually the key to unlocking what information means in the quantum world.
And there is another amazing truth that we have learned.
It is actually implicit in what we have already said, but you may have missed it.
When we showed why the information relation between entangled particles had to be monogamous,
we did not actually use the theory of quantum mechanics at all.
We only used two things.
One, the observed correlations between entangled photons.
These are predicted by quantum mechanics, but they are also directly observable statistical facts.
Two, the no signaling principle.
We cannot use the information relationship of entanglement to send messages instantaneously.
That much is also a directly observable fact.
We have assumed that it is true in general.
Those two things are all we need to prove the monogamy of the entanglement relationship.
What's that mean?
It means that quantum key distribution is secure even if quantum theory itself is wrong.
Logically, quantum cryptography is more firmly established than quantum theory itself.
Quantum theory is after all a theory.
It is a particularly successful theory, the best ever.
Yet the history of science is that even successful theories can eventually be replaced by better theories.
Maybe there will be a better theory as yet unimaginable that supersedes quantum mechanics as it superseded Newton.
What would such a new theory be like?
We obviously cannot say, but one thing we can say with a good deal of confidence,
there will be a place within that theory for absolute privacy.
There will be informational relationships between particles that cannot be shared.
Even if quantum theory itself someday gets placed on the same dusty bookshelf with Newtonian mechanics,
the monogamy of entanglement will be an enduring part of physics, even beyond the quantum.
