Life, in its essence, is a phenomenon of information.
Think about the physical connection between parent and offspring.
That connection can be very small.
A tiny egg or seed or a spore can grow into an enormous animal or plant.
Little acorns grow into great oaks.
In almost all parts of that tree, roots, trunk, branches and leaves are formed from the non-living
matter absorbed by the tree from the soil and the air.
What the acorn provides is information.
The blueprint for the intricate structure and complex biochemical processes of the tree
coded in the molecular structure of DNA.
People used to think that living organisms could emerge from non-living matter.
The idea was called spontaneous generation or abiogenesis.
Frogs and worms might spring from the mud.
Ice could arise from discarded food and rags.
Flies would grow from dead meat.
But the 17th century Italian naturalist Francesco Redi argued the opposite.
Every living thing, he said, is always the offspring of another living thing.
As he put it, omne vivum ex vivo, all life comes from life.
And by the end of the 19th century, biologists like Louis Pasteur had established the truth
of Redi's principle even for the tiniest microorganisms.
All life comes from life.
That's what distinguishes it from other natural phenomena that are superficially similar.
For example, consider tin disease.
The element tin can exist in two forms called allotropes.
The silvery metal form, called the beta form, is stable at room temperature.
But if the metal gets slightly colder, it can turn into a gray crystalline powder called
the alpha form.
The transformation will not occur spontaneously for a long time.
But if for some reason you start out with a little bit of the alpha form, that bit will
rather rapidly induce the surrounding metal to transform as well.
So suppose you have a small spot of the gray alpha form on your tin cup.
It spreads relatively quickly.
In a few days, your cup disintegrates.
That's tin disease, and it really does act like an infection.
If you touch one cup with the disease to one without it, it will spread.
Nevertheless, tin disease has nothing to do with life.
If you make the temperature cold enough, 30 degrees below zero say, then the alpha form
of tin can be generated spontaneously.
Tin disease needs no parent, because it has no genetic information, omnivivum ex vivo.
Yet that leaves us with a question.
Where did the first genetic information come from?
What is the origin of life?
It's one of the hardest unsolved problems in modern science, yet we do know a few useful
parts of the answer.
We know life arose on Earth between 3.5 and 4 billion years ago.
We know something about conditions on that early Earth.
There were minerals and water, organic molecules, volcanic activity and so on.
We also know a good deal about the laws of physics and chemistry, which were just the
same in those days.
And most importantly, we understand the principles of the science of information.
Genetic information is stored in the sequence of bases in the double-stranded structure
of the DNA molecule.
That two-sided complementary structure is ideal for copying the information.
DNA also serves as a template, creating RNA, the simpler one-sided cousin of DNA, which
in turn forms a blueprint for protein molecules.
So let's make a diagram.
The arrows in our diagram represent the flow of information, how the genetic message is
transferred from one kind of molecule to another.
The information in DNA is copied into other DNA, and it is also transcribed into RNA and
then translated into proteins.
Francis Crick, one of the discoverers of the structure of DNA, called this the central
dogma of molecular biology.
Information flows from DNA and RNA to proteins and not vice versa.
Base sequences are translated into chains of amino acids according to the genetic code.
But chains of amino acids are never translated back into base sequences.
A living cell is therefore like a honeybee hive.
There is a queen bee, DNA, and lots and lots of worker bees, the proteins.
The workers do all the foraging for resources and building of the hive.
They are all offspring of the queen.
They get their information from her.
They tend to her and her other offspring, but they have no offspring of their own.
The central dogma is true, but more complicated than it seems.
So consider viruses.
A virus injects its own genetic information into a cell.
There it is copied and transcribed, just like the cell's own genes, and the cell ends up
making more viruses.
Some viruses use DNA as their genetic material.
So the information goes exactly as we have shown, DNA to RNA to proteins.
But there are other viruses, called RNA viruses, which dispense with DNA altogether.
Their genetic material is RNA.
That RNA is replicated along with the virus's proteins inside the cell.
Some of these RNA viruses can cause some nasty human diseases like the flu and polio and
an Ebola, but they have the honor of adding a little loop to our diagram to show that
RNA can sometimes copy its information right back to RNA.
Then there is an even stranger group of viruses, the retroviruses.
They also carry their genetic information in the form of RNA, but inside the cell that
RNA undergoes something called reverse transcription, in which the RNA is used as a template to
produce DNA.
This DNA is actually incorporated into the host cell genome, after which the virus can
be impossible to get rid of.
HIV, the human immunodeficiency virus, is an example of a retrovirus.
So we need another arrow in our information flow diagram, from RNA back to DNA.
But even this picture leaves out something terribly important.
Proteins are the worker bees in the biochemistry of the cell.
They form a good deal of the structure of the cell, and they also act as enzymes.
An enzyme is a biological molecule that works as a catalyst, assisting chemical reactions.
They break molecules apart, or they join molecules together.
The biochemistry in a cell simply cannot take place without a whole bunch of different enzymes,
and almost every enzyme is a protein.
Each arrow in our information diagram, copying, transcription, translation, is a biochemical
process that involves taking molecules apart and putting them together.
Each one is attended by a swarm of specialized enzymes, proteins, that make it all happen.
So in reality, the proteins are present everywhere in the diagram.
So the proteins do not write the books that are stored in the DNA library, but they do
control which books are being checked out and read.
That idea leads to the science, relatively new, of gene expression, called epigenetics.
It's a fascinating subject.
Here's the larger point.
The basic information system of life is complex and interdependent.
It has lots of parts that all depend on each other.
You can't make proteins without nucleic acid blueprints, DNA and RNA.
You also can't make DNA and RNA without proteins and enzymes.
It's hard to understand how an interdependent system can get started in the first place.
That's what makes the origin of life such a puzzle.
Everything has to start very simply.
So imagine a molecule.
It is a long chain of small units, a kind of polymer.
The units are not all the same.
There are two or more different kinds.
The particular sequence of units in the molecule constitutes information.
It's a 1D version of Schrodinger's aperiodic crystal.
Like the sequence of bases in RNA or the sequence of amino acids in a protein.
The environment of the molecule contains lots of the basic units and even some short segments
floating around.
And here's the magic.
It turns out that the chemical interactions among the fragments tend to cause units to
assemble in the same sequence alongside the original.
What we have described is an information bearing molecule that in the right environment
can reproduce itself.
Offspring molecules get their information from their parent.
Molecules with different sequences can compete for resources.
We've stripped away all the complications found in present day organisms and we're
left with a naked genome living in an environment in which spontaneous copying is possible.
Such a molecule might be the beginning of the whole genetic system of life.
And that is just the sort of system that the German biophysicist chemist Manfred Eigen
was thinking about in 1971.
Eigen had already won his Nobel Prize for his studies of very fast chemical reactions.
But now he turned to the problem of the earliest beginnings of life and of course he began
with Shannon's information theory.
Eigen pointed out that any process by which information is transmitted may be subject
to noise.
Errors can occur.
And Eigen realized that errors are important.
So our self-reproducing molecule makes a copy of itself.
Then those two molecules make copies of themselves.
And all of those make more copies and so on.
If the copying process introduces errors, after a while the vast majority of molecules
in the population will have many errors.
There will be many different versions of the genetic information and few, if any of them,
will look much like the original.
This is not a theoretical problem.
Your own body contains tens of trillions of individual cells, but every one of those is
descended from a single cell, a tiny fertilized human egg.
The DNA in each of your cells has been copied many, many times since then.
Of course the cells still have to function, so it is important that their genetic information
has been copied correctly.
The DNA copying mechanism in human cells is a miracle of reliability.
There is a great deal of error correction.
The enzymes that assemble new DNA molecules proofread as they go, actually reversing and
replacing bases that have been added incorrectly.
Other proteins can later find and repair most of the remaining mismatches between bases.
The likelihood that a given base will be copied incorrectly in DNA replication is about one
in a billion.
But in the early days of self-reproducing molecules, there was no fancy enzyme machinery
to speed the copying process along and correct mistakes.
It was a haphazard business.
The error rate would have been fairly high.
So our self-reproducing molecule will produce defective copies, and their copies will be
even more defective.
The genetic information is unstable.
Soon all of the original information would be wiped out by random noise.
We will have a population of random molecular sequences, randomly changing over time.
Interesting chemistry, but not life.
I can realize that there could be a kind of error correction mechanism, even in the
chancey world of reproducing molecules.
That mechanism is natural selection.
Some molecular sequences might be easier or faster to copy.
They might be sturdier and last longer.
Those sequences would have an advantage over their imperfect copies.
So maybe that advantage could be enough to preserve their information over time.
So let's suppose that a particular sequence is s times more likely to successfully survive
and copy itself than other sequences.
The overall length of the molecule, the number of information units it has, is l.
And when one of those units is copied, there is a probability e of an error.
So here's what Eigen showed.
The genetic information of a sequence is stable in the long run over many generations provided
l times e is less than the logarithm of s.
Since l times e is greater than this, then over time errors will destroy the information.
It will become extinct.
That's called the error catastrophe.
So if s equals 1, the right sequence is no better than any other sequence.
So the log of s is 0, and that means the error catastrophe is inevitable.
But if s is greater than 1, then its logarithm is greater than 0.
So some combinations of length l and error rate e are okay.
But even if s is huge, if the right sequence is thousands of times better than its fellows,
log of s is still not very big, less than 10.
A more realistic guess for log of s would be around 1.
That is some advantage, but not a huge one.
We thus expect that l times e cannot be much bigger than 1.
That should be true not only billions of years ago, but also today.
We said that the error rate for the human genome was something like 1 billionth.
e is 10 to the minus ninth.
The size of the human genome is about 6 billion base pairs, so l is 6 times 10 to the ninth.
The product l times e is 6, which is not that much bigger than 1.
And remember, most human DNA is non-coding.
The total length of the genes that code for proteins is 50 times smaller.
The process by which virus DNA or RNA is copied is much more prone to error.
The error rate is about 1 in 10,000, but viruses don't need much genetic information.
The genome of a typical virus is only about 10,000 base pairs long.
The product l times e turns out to be just about 1, just small enough to pass.
Eigan guessed that in the earliest days of life, the error rate might be around 1%.
That would mean that any successful self-reproducing molecule could not be much longer than 100
units, otherwise it would be overtaken by the error catastrophe.
Now, 100 units is an interesting number.
Not long before Eigan's work, the American molecular biologist Saul Spiegelman did an
interesting experiment on self-reproducing molecules.
He started with an RNA virus called Q-beta.
It's a very simple virus.
Its RNA genome is only 4,200 bases long, containing descriptions of just four proteins.
So Spiegelman extracted the RNA from Q-beta and placed it in a test tube, containing a
solution of the raw materials to make RNA, plus a supply of the RNA replicase enzyme,
the same enzyme the virus uses to reproduce itself inside a cell.
The RNA in the test tube began to make copies of itself.
Spiegelman took a tiny sample from the test tube and put it in another test tube, then
he did the same thing again, and again, the time between transfers was only a few minutes.
In other words, Spiegelman was arranging conditions to favor RNA molecules that reproduced quickly.
Something curious happened.
The RNA molecules started getting shorter.
The RNA in Spiegelman's test tubes no longer had to travel from bacterium to bacterium and
no longer needed to manufacture its own replicase enzyme.
It was in molecular paradise, so the molecules could afford to lose sections of themselves
if they could thereby become faster and easier to copy.
So after 74 stages, Spiegelman's RNA molecules were only 220 bases long, but the information
in those RNA sequences was pretty stable.
They were fiercely efficient replicators, just big enough for the replicase enzyme to
do its work.
This shortened, no-frills RNA molecule reproduced like crazy, and they came to be called Spiegelman's
monster.
This was a very artificial experiment, but it tended to confirm Eigen's rough estimate,
and that is a problem.
If the earliest precursors of life were limited to 100 or 200 units, how could more complex
life develop?
The error rate must somehow be reduced.
Modern organisms keep the error rate low by using protein enzymes, but 100 information
units is not enough to code for any useful protein.
The error catastrophe seems like an impassable barrier.
But there may be a way past the barrier.
In 1982, Thomas Check of the University of Colorado made a game-changing discovery.
All RNA molecules can be folded up in specific shapes.
In fact, RNA molecules can act as chemical catalysts as enzymes.
They're called ribozymes, and they are far more than near-chemical curiosities.
In fact, the basic protein-building factories inside the cells, the ribosomes, are made up
of both proteins and ribozymes.
So RNA catalysts do exist, and they play a key role in the central biochemical machinery
of all life.
So perhaps the original molecular information diagram looked like this.
The genetic information in RNA is copied with the help of RNA catalysts.
It's a notion that was christened the RNA world by another Nobel laureate, the chemist
and physicist Walter Gilbert.
In the RNA world, the first life, the carrier of the earliest genetic information, might
have been a collection of relatively short sequences of RNA.
Each sequence was short enough to avoid the error catastrophe.
Some of the sequences acted as primitive ribozymes catalyzing the assembly of new RNA strands
of different kinds.
The whole thing was a mutually supporting system of molecules, what Eigen called a hypercycle.
Very likely, the molecules were weakly attached to mineral surfaces or gathered inside the
cavities in porous rocks.
These surfaces may have contributed some catalytic action of their own.
The RNA system changed as new sequences appeared and out-competed the others.
Other complications arose later.
Proteins which can act as much more efficient enzymes, DNA which is a more stable way to
store genetic information.
The information is on the inside of the molecule instead of the outside.
Little by little, the complex interdependent machinery of life was built up.
The RNA world is an attractive hypothesis and there have been some recent discoveries
that support it.
Many scientists argue that Eigen's estimate of the early error rate, 1%, is probably too
large.
That would imply that longer RNA sequences could escape the error catastrophe.
At Cambridge University, Philip Holliger and his colleagues have been able to find new
simple RNA catalysts.
They do this by a kind of artificial molecular evolution like Spiegelman's experiment, but
what they are looking for is an RNA molecule that can help other RNA molecules to copy
themselves, a kind of replicase ribozyme.
And interestingly, many of these ribozymes work best in very cold water, attached to
ice crystals.
For a long time, the ribozymes Holliger found could only catalyze the copying of RNA sequences
much shorter than themselves, but very recently they have discovered a new mutant molecule
which they call TC9Y.
TC9Y is 202 bases long, but it can assist the copying of some RNA strands up to 206 bases
long.
The dream of the RNA world, a world of nucleic acids that catalyze their own reproduction,
seems more plausible than ever.
But not everyone thinks that it all started with RNA.
Graham Karen Smith is a molecular biologist at the University of Glasgow.
He looks at the problem this way.
The biochemical system of life is like an arch.
Every segment of an arch rests on the others.
If you take anyone out, it all collapses.
Given that, how could the arch have been built piece by piece?
The answer is, there was a scaffold.
The pieces of the arch were assembled on that scaffold.
Once the arch was complete, the scaffold was removed.
We no longer see it.
We just see the complete, self-supporting arch.
Karen Smith believes that the earliest form of life was very different from us.
It stored information, grew and reproduced in a completely different way, but it served
as a scaffold, upon which the other pieces, DNA, RNA and proteins, were added.
The new biochemical machinery turned out to be much more efficient, it developed a complex
system of its own, and eventually became self-supporting, and so it took over, and the old form of
life crumbled away.
So what could have been that lost scaffold for life?
Karen Smith says it might have been crystals of clay.
The mineral kaolin, which is a silicate of aluminum, is extremely common.
It forms readily in water solutions, and its crystal structure can store and copy information.
An ideal crystal is a perfect repeating arrangement of atoms, no information, but a real crystal
is usually more complicated.
In each small piece, the structure is perfect, but the atoms are stacked differently in different
places.
There are boundaries between these domains.
So imagine a flat piece of kaolin crystal, like a plate.
Its structure includes several crystal domains, fitted together.
The pattern of these domains constitutes information.
Now the mineral grows in water solution, getting thicker.
Each new layer replicates the pattern and shape of the layer on which it grows.
The crystal is like a stack of identical plates, each with the same pattern.
The information is copied.
Eventually the crystal grows long and something breaks it, but now each piece can serve as
a template for new growth.
It's like Schrodinger's aperiodic crystal in literal truth.
It does not look much like modern life, but remember, information is information, whatever
its physical representation.
The outer edge of the crystal has a shape that is determined by the pattern of the crystal
structure.
So the growing crystal has grooves and ridges.
Organic molecules can attach to those.
They may form long chains as the crystal grows.
In fact, the crystal and the molecules may form a mutually beneficial system, each supporting
the growth of the other.
But the information is stored and copied in the pattern of the kaolin crystals.
There are many things that make Kern Smith's theory plausible.
Clay crystals are exceedingly common, and they have a wonderful variety of forms.
They can also be excellent catalysts, they are used for that in labs to this day.
If Kern Smith is right, then the original genetic information on earth was contained
in the patterns of self-reproducing clay crystals.
Our kind of information, the information stored in DNA and RNA, arose later and eventually
took over.
The first framework was lost, and with it the old crystalline genetic information.
And that means that our remotest ancestors, the earliest forms of life, were, in an information
sense, not actually related to us.
Yet as Kern Smith points out, a rope might be hundreds of feet long, even if no single
fiber of that rope reaches from end to end.
That rope is the history of life.
The threads are the threads of information.
But where exactly does the genetic information come from?
Well a few years after Saul Spiegelman created his rogue RNA monster, Manfred Eigen repeated
the experiment.
He showed that a single strand of viral RNA was enough to get things going.
Then he tried, starting with no RNA at all.
He set up his test tubes with RNA components and replicase enzyme, and waited.
And sometimes he found a short strand of RNA will form spontaneously and start replicating.
After a while it might get longer.
Under the right circumstances, you can end up with something very much like Spiegelman's
monster.
So consider Eigen's molecule.
Where does that information come from?
It comes from the environment.
When RNA molecules are copied, sometimes errors are made, genetic information is lost, random
bits are introduced.
Natural selection can help fix the mistakes and restore the lost information.
This kind of error correction process does not happen at the individual level.
Each molecule is what it is.
It's a faithful copy or not.
Natural selection affects the whole population of reproducing molecules so that they may
collectively avoid the error catastrophe and retain the genetic information.
But notice that process only happens if there is some correspondence between the molecular
sequence and the environment.
That is, if the original sequence is favored in that environment.
So the sequences that survive and beat the error catastrophe actually form a kind of
record of the environment in which they succeeded.
We have called the process error correction because most of the time it is conservative,
weeding out harmful mistakes in the population.
But occasionally one of those mistakes by chance produces a genome that is a better match
to the local condition, a closer representation of environment information.
Then the error correction process actually favors the innovation.
That's how evolution works.
And it is also the principle behind one of the strangest computers ever built.
In the early 1990s, the computer scientist Leonard Adelman became interested in DNA.
We last met Adelman as one of the inventors of public key cryptography, the A in RSA encryption.
Now he began to think about the complex system of enzymes that molecular biologists use to
manipulate the information in the DNA molecule.
Adelman decided to make a DNA computer.
The computer was designed to solve something called a directed Hamiltonian path problem.
Computationally it is quite a difficult problem, though Adelman chose a very small and simple
version.
So imagine seven cities numbered one through seven connected with a network of roads.
Some of the connections are one way, some go both ways.
The problem is to find a road that starts at one and ends at seven, having traveled through
each city exactly once.
That's called a Hamiltonian path.
In the network Adelman considered, there is only one Hamiltonian path, one to four, to
five, to two, to three, to six, to seven.
Adelman represented the cities by short strands of one-sided DNA, each of them containing
coded names for the cities.
Other one-sided strands represented the roads, with complementary DNA sequences of the cities
at the endpoints.
He mixed them together in a solution with an enzyme.
In less than a second, the short strands linked together.
They linked together in all sorts of ways, forming billions of strands, each one representing
a possible path among the cities.
Then Adelman performed a series of steps that ensured that the only DNA strands that could
easily make copies of themselves were those with three characteristics.
They started at one and ended at seven.
They included exactly seven cities, and they included every city at least once.
The resulting sample of DNA consisted of molecules that encoded the Hamiltonian path.
The molecules had found the solution to the problem, one to four, to five, to two, to three,
to six, to seven.
Adelman's DNA computer was the first, but it has not been the last.
New techniques and new experiments had led to increasingly sophisticated DNA computations.
Despite the the jittery molecular environment and the almost complete lack of control, the
molecules evolved their way toward the desired result.
There is even a DNA computer that can play tic-tac-toe.
Because of the difficulty of reading the molecular information at the human scale, the computer
doesn't play very fast.
How did Adelman's computer find the solution to the directed Hamiltonian path problem?
Where did that information come from?
It came from the environment of the DNA molecules in his experiment.
Those few molecules that happened to encode a correct solution were strongly favored
to copy themselves.
The resulting molecular population reflected that natural selection.
And in the same way, the genetic information in living cells is the result of eons of natural
computation.
Their DNA contains a deep record of the whole history of life, of the chemical facts and
environmental forces that have shaped life at every stage.
One of that record is extremely ancient, billions of years old, as old as life itself.
With the help of the science of information, we are slowly beginning to read it.
