Do you know how many continents there are?
No.
Who fought in the Civil War?
I don't know.
Do you know what 3 times 3 times 3 is?
No.
Who the president was before Trump?
No.
The average individual today spends around 7 hours a day on the internet
with almost 3 of those hours spent on social media.
The latest figures suggest that by the end of this year alone
we will have spent upwards of 12 and a half trillion hours online.
The effects of a society that's terminally online are starting to show.
Debate and discussion are dead, replaced with Twitter threads.
Political discourse reads like a Reddit forum.
In a world with information available at our fingertips,
the average person is becoming more and more uninformed,
opting to read clickbait headlines that distort our view of the world and of each other.
This begs the question, is social media making us dumber?
This is Eric Fransen, professor of computer science at KTH University.
His research focuses on short-term memory and methods of neurological impairment.
He says that,
a brain exposed to a typical session of social media browsing
can easily become hobbled by information overload.
The problem begins in a system of the brain known as working memory.
Working memory enables us to filter out information and find what we need in the communication.
But it's also a limited resource.
At any given time, the working memory can carry up to 3 or 4 items.
And when you try to store many things in your working memory,
you get less good at processing information.
The constant distractions we are experiencing make it impossible to work or study.
Take for instance the average TikTok session where videos are typically under a minute long.
Users scroll through hundreds of videos destroying their short-term memory
which can only focus on a handful of items at a time.
Imagine this issue compounded over weeks, months, and years,
chipping away at our brain's capacity to process information,
making us a shell of our former selves.
And the results are finally starting to show on a societal scale.
They used to say you're an average of the five people you surround yourself with.
That saying is outdated.
Social media is now what you spend the most time with
and it's influencing how we think on a massive scale.
They don't call them social media influencers for no reason, do they?
So this begs the question, how exactly does it influence us?
As human beings, we require observation of our surroundings to build mental models
and understand the world around us.
Therefore, whoever owns what we see owns what we think.
Social media companies do this by distorting our view of the public square.
Take, for instance, Twitter, where the top 10% of tweeters are responsible for 80% of tweets,
where users are on average younger, more formally educated, and wealthier than the average American.
Is this truly representative of society at large?
Of course not, but it's designed to seem that way.
It produces something called the herd mentality,
where people can be influenced by their peers to adopt certain behaviors.
For instance, if everyone on your feed seems to be doing something,
well, chances are you will too.
Can't believe they caught me lacking.
Huge ceiling tile is gone.
View board pens have been finessed.
Was able to stop a kid from taking this though.
Stay...
This was the devious licks trend, which caused pandemonium over schools in the US.
Students began stealing from their school and posting it under the hashtag devious licks,
amassing millions of views.
The algorithm pushed this because its main purpose is to increase engagement and keep you on the app.
Millions of dollars worth of property damage later,
and after rounds of negative publicity, TikTok finally removed the hashtag but the damage was done.
This proves that millions of people can be pushed to do something just by having it show up repeatedly in their feeds.
No wonder why we are losing the ability to be creative and critically think.
If everything we do is simply what we've seen on social media,
are we truly unique or simply carbon copies of what's trending?
There are even services available that allow you to purchase likes and followers on TikTok, Reddit, and many other social media platforms,
leading many to question how organic these trending pages are, if at all.
Comparison is the thief of joy,
and in this attention economy, all we ever do is compare because that's what these apps promote.
Think about it.
When's the last time you've seen the TikTok algorithm promote a healthy lifestyle filled with purpose and meaning,
rather than vanity and avarice?
In fact, according to TikTok's own internal documents,
they instructed moderators to suppress posts created by users deemed too ugly, poor, or disabled for the platform,
reducing a human being to our most primal of instincts.
Looks.
Social media is causing body dysmorphia at record rates never seen before.
Apps like Facetune, which are used to enhance photos, are exploding on the App Store, garnering hundreds of millions of downloads.
In fact, Facetune recently raised $130 million from investors after 90% growth in their user base during lockdowns.
The constant push for unrealistic and frankly impossible beauty standards is causing many to feel depressed and anxious,
pushing them towards plastic surgery, which is booming like never seen before.
All this is destroying people's self-esteem, causing them to hate themselves and their genetics,
reducing us to a lifestyle of eat, sleep, and scroll, day in and day out,
wasting our life force enriching and envying others while doing nothing to improve ourselves.
Imagine a life without social media, a life filled with purpose and meaning,
a life where we're free from the constant competition and envy,
a life that we can have simply by turning off our screens and returning to the way we've always lived.
