Welcome back to Meaning From Data, Statistics Made Clear.
Every day we make decisions about our personal health, it's one of the most important things
that we think about, of course, and our state of health is often measured by data and the
kind of data that we are interested in are things like our weight, our blood pressure,
the levels of our cholesterol, and other various chemicals in our bloodstream.
And these data present to us a picture of our well-being.
So the kinds of questions that we're constantly asking ourselves about how to treat our own
physical condition are questions such as, should we take vitamins?
We don't want to get rickets.
Scurvy is bad, we should probably take a lot of vitamin C.
Should we take cholesterol-lowering medication?
Should we take aspirin to reduce the chance of heart attack?
That's kind of a question.
Or, this is an important one, should we take Dr. Quack's super snake oil when we're just
not feeling quite up to par?
This is the kind of question that we need to make decisions on.
And of course, a lot of the ways in which we make decisions in reality are that we use
anecdotal information.
That's one way.
But sometimes our decisions are based on studies that have been conducted.
And the way that we use the results of studies are that typically we read about a study and
we compare the numbers that we have, our measurements of ourselves, compared to the
numbers that were obtained in some study that involve a large number of people.
And then that's what we use to make a decision.
For example, suppose that a study showed that on average people who have a certain cholesterol
level that's higher than a certain number suffer more heart attacks than people who
have a lower such number.
Well, if our cholesterol number is higher than that bad number, then our doctor may
very well suggest to us that we take some cholesterol lowering medication.
And of course, the doctor will also tell us that we should eat more healthfully and exercise
more.
That is, the doctor will always say that.
Well, so what I would like to do is to look at a chart involving this issue of interpreting
data about cholesterol in order to make a decision and discuss how it is that such decisions
might well be made.
Suppose that the data from this study about cholesterol indicates a chart such as this.
And of course, by the way, this is just a summary.
This is not a complete picture of the kinds of data one would get about cholesterol or
other studies.
So this is just for the purposes of our understanding statistics, illustrating a statistical principle
not for getting medical advice.
So here's the kind of a chart, though, that might come about through a study about the
levels of cholesterol.
The study might involve 1,000 people.
The sum of these numbers is 1,000, of which perhaps 500 of them have a low cholesterol
reading overall, and another 500 of them have a high cholesterol reading overall.
It may be that there are other tests, more elaborate tests, that allow a doctor to evaluate
a risk factor for heart disease.
So for example, a sonogram or injecting a radioactive dye into the blood system in order
to detect whether or not plaque is building up on the inner parts of the arteries.
So using other kinds of tests, it may be that the doctor can evaluate the risk level
for the different people in the study, and the kind of result would be indicated in this
sort of chart, namely, for the people who are in the low cholesterol group, below some
sort of a threshold, it might be that 400 of those out of the 500 are at low risk for
heart disease, and 100 are at high risk for heart disease, even though they do have low
cholesterol.
And on the other hand, for the high cholesterol group, perhaps it's the opposite, that 100
are in the low risk group for coronary disease, and 400 are in the higher risk group.
So this is the kind of chart using which a person needs to make a medical decision.
But actually, in evaluating these studies, we actually have to ask several additional
questions.
For example, how much higher is the rate of heart problems in the group that is indicated
as having a higher risk?
In other words, is it significant in the sense of being important, or is it just significant
in the sense of being statistically significant, meaning that there's a detectable difference
in the rate of heart disease, but it may not be an actually important difference?
It's so small, it may not be important, but it is detectable and real.
So that's one question we need to confront.
Another question that we need to confront is the question of how are the various effects
distributed over the spectrum of people with different cholesterol levels, meaning this.
Are people who are just over the threshold line of having too high cholesterol, are they
at much greater risk than those with lower cholesterol, or are they really about the
same risk as people with lower cholesterol, and it's only people with very high levels
of cholesterol that have significantly higher risks?
Or alternatively, maybe the risk is fairly evenly distributed for people with the higher
levels of cholesterol, and there's sort of a threshold issue, and having more doesn't
make it much worse.
So those are the kinds of questions that we would want to know in interpreting the data
of the studies, but there are other features that we'd like to know about the studies.
Specifically, frequently, the studies involve a lot of people who are in many ways not like
us, so they may have, say, a different weight relative to their optimal weight than we do,
or they may be of a different gender or a different race.
It may be that their inheritance is different.
That is, their parents may have had different levels of cholesterol and different profiles
than our parents did.
What we would really like, what we'd really like, is to have a study involving people
who are as much like we are as possible, because you see, the reason for that is then we could
be more, that the people would more apt to react to the interventions that are suggested
or have the distribution of calamities that are portrayed.
Those responses are more apt to be similar to how we respond if the people involved in
the studies are more like we are.
So let's do a specific little study associated with our cholesterol one, so let's look at
a specific similarity that might be important in evaluating these cholesterol levels.
What we, one thing that we might like to know is how the study evaluates people who have
the same HDL versus LDL profile as ours.
Our HDL stands for high density lipoprotein and LDL stands for low density lipoprotein
and the low density lipoprotein is the bad cholesterol and the high density lipoprotein
is the good cholesterol.
So what we would like to do is to condition the overall study data on several variables
looking at the subset of the study data that match us with respect to those variables.
Conditioning the data means just looking at those people who have the same condition
as we do with respect to one or more of the different variables in the population.
So let's see what we might see if we look at the overall cholesterol risk analysis but
we condition it on the levels of HDL to LDL ratio.
In other words, we look just at those people in the population of the study who had for
example a high HDL to LDL ratio.
Well first of all, for purpose of illustration, I just assumed that half of the people in
the study had this higher HDL to LDL ratio and notice what happens if we compare the
data from this study conditioned on the high HDL to LDL ratio, in other words having a
lot of the good cholesterol compared to the bad.
Notice what happened.
For the low cholesterol, this is the low overall cholesterol group, the ratio of low risk to
high risk people, which previously was 400 to 100, remained the same.
The ratio was the same, 200 to 50.
Whereas in the high cholesterol group, notice that the risk factor altered in proportion.
Namely, notice that originally there was a 4 to 1 ratio of high risk to low risk.
Whereas in the case of just looking at the people in the population who have this lot
of the better cholesterol, we find that the better cholesterol has somewhat mitigated the
risk and left all of these 100 people who were in the low risk area are still having
low risk and a lot of people who previously were at high risk, having an overall high
cholesterol level, no longer are there.
So the point is that if we personally had a knowledge of our own cholesterol and happened
to have this good high level of the high density lipoproteins, then this is the kind of a study
that we would prefer to look at in order to make a medical decision about whether to intervene.
So the point is that we'd have a sense that the studies pertain specifically to us because
they involve people who were like us in the important ways, in ways that we think are
important to making this decision.
So an intriguing possibility is to use the computational capabilities of modern computers
to find people in scientific studies on which we could determine the efficacy of medicines
where we just choose those people in the studies whose characteristics are similar to our own.
In other words, we would have the raw data of the statistical study and then perform a
personal statistical analysis on that subpopulation.
So for example, on the effect of cholesterol lowering drugs, we would tailor the study
to our individual needs and as we saw in the case of the HDL result, we might get a rather
different statistical impression of the results if we based it on that subpopulation rather
than on the whole population.
And first of all, I want to say a couple of things about this.
First of all, in the case of HDL, it's standard practice now to use the HDL ratios as part
of the discussion.
But on the other hand, suppose that you're a child of parents who live long and healthy
lives but had high cholesterol, maybe an analysis restricting to just those people would show
a different concept about whether it's prudent to take cholesterol lowering drugs.
We don't know.
So the point of this discussion is that conditioning data on a particular subpopulation is an interesting
possibility.
And let me repeat the caveat that all references to specific diseases and treatments and all
data and interpretations are not to be viewed as medical advice, they're not correct.
These were made up numbers for the purpose of illustrating a point, not for giving advice
about cholesterol or anything else.
The goal here is just to think about statistical ideas.
But the possibility of tailoring statistics to individual personal health situations seems
to me that that could conceivably provide a greater increase in personal health benefits
in our society than would improvements in the treatments themselves.
We know for sure that some ways that we deal with medications are simply wrong.
For example, if you take a bottle of aspirin and you look at the dosage recommendation
on the bottle, it says two aspirin or something, completely ignoring whether the person is
a 300-pound football player in his 20s or an 80-pound 100-year-old in a nursing home.
And surely we can't really believe that the dosage for those two people should be the
same.
But of course people have to make these sort of generalizations.
And I admit in hospitals sometimes the dosages are varied depending on the weight, or in
fact I think it's more the surface area of the patient.
And of course people respond to medicines in different ways.
Some people respond very dramatically to little doses, and some people don't.
And each of us lies somewhere on a continuum of responsiveness to medications.
And determining the right amount might be quite a different enterprise than the way
that dosages are currently determined.
So tailored statistics might lead to an incredible increase in personal health improvements.
And maybe it brings up the prospect that maybe each of us will have to hire a private statistician
to take the raw data from scientific studies and analyze that data to make the best inferences
that apply to us.
And maybe it'll be part of the doctor's procedures to look at such data.
You can easily imagine that.
And of course doctors already are aware of how individual patients react.
That's one thing when you get to know a doctor, to some extent they do try to tailor their
treatments to the individual, and they use their own experience.
And the details of an individual's case to modify the treatment.
And of course that's good, using the doctor's experience is good.
But it also is somewhat problematic because an individual doctor sees many fewer patients
than there are in good statistical studies, and so may be biased by small sample issues
that we've seen before.
Now let's look at another example associated with health decisions, and this is the following.
Suppose we need to make a decision about what hospital to use.
And we have some data about a hospital, and we're about to enter the hospital for some
serious operation.
So we decide to be prudent about this and look at the facts.
And so we go to some database and we see that there are two hospitals in our city that
we could consider for attending for this serious problem.
And we notice that these are the results.
In hospital A, of the last thousand patients who entered the hospital for this disease,
71% survived.
And hospital B, only 54% survived.
Well, we might say it certainly seems clear from this data, from these data, that hospital
A is the preferred hospital.
Let's go to hospital A. But wait a minute, let's suppose that we look at the data broken
down a little more specifically into subgroups.
So here we go.
Here are three subgroups of different patients, the condition that the patients were in before
they entered the hospital.
So you see, we have, if for example we're thinking about a person with a heart condition,
they may enter in fair condition, serious condition, or critical condition.
Suppose in hospital A, most of the patients who enter hospital A are in only fair condition,
which is the better condition, the least of the seriousness, 700 enter there, 200 are
in serious condition, and only 100 enter who start in critical condition, whereas hospital
B has a different profile of patients upon entry, namely only 100 who enter in the rather
benign fair condition, whereas 700 enter in critical condition.
Now we could have data about all three of these subpopulations.
And look what happens in these subpopulations.
For those who enter in fair condition, in hospital A, 600, that is 86% survive, whereas
in hospital B, those among the 100 who enter in fair condition, 90, or that is 90% survive.
Those in serious condition, 200 in each hospital, but only 100 from hospital A survive, 50%
rate, and 150 from hospital B for a 75 recovery rate.
And then for those who enter in critical condition, only 100 enter in hospital A, but only 10
of them survive, that is to say only 10% of the critical condition patients for hospital
A survive, whereas 43% from hospital B survive.
The effect is, the overall effect is what we had before.
We didn't change the absolute numbers.
But by looking at these subcategories, we see that in fact hospital B actually has a higher
success rate on each of the subpopulations, suggesting that it's actually hospital B that's
the hospital that you should consider in this serious condition.
And by the way, this might be the case if hospital B is a teaching hospital or research
hospital that gets the more serious cases.
So this is an example that we actually have seen before, and that is Simpson's Paradox.
Remember we saw it before in lecture 13 when we saw the gender discrimination case and
how the view of that gender discrimination example switched when we broke down the case
into the subcategories.
Well, okay, so let's move on to another question that we need to answer when we're trying
to make health decisions.
And that's a question that arises when we're trying to distinguish between a quack medicine
and a real medicine.
And there's a comic line which says, the following says, if you take this cold medicine, you'll
be well in seven days.
If you don't take it, the cold will linger for a week.
So this is a possible outcome of taking a medicine.
But to determine whether a medicine works, we should compare it to no medicine at all
or to a placebo as we've discussed before in double blind experiments we did this before.
But it turns out that there's a good reason why quack medicines work, namely people usually
recover from minor diseases without any intervention, without any medicine.
So if you're ill and you take a medicine that has no effect whatsoever, it's likely that
you'll get better.
And so if you interpret this happy result as an effect of the medicine, what will you
do?
If you take medicines in your neighbors and soon, a new medical miracle will be upon us.
And in fact, of course, the medicine may have had no effect at all or may even have impeded
the healing.
So quack medicines appear to work because of a phenomenon called regression to the mean.
Let's think about this.
If you have a baseline health profile, you're usually at a certain level of health.
If you get ill, then you're going to expect later to return to your baseline, to return
to your average.
And so suppose that we perform a statistical analysis of a totally bogus medicine and see
what happens.
And the treatment consists of giving the medicine to a person who has, say, a cold and then
seeing whether the person is well in a week.
So suppose we just try that.
Well, the result will be that we'll get a statistically significant result that more
people are well after the week than they were when they started.
But it would be wrong to interpret this as an effect of the medicine.
And here's a chart that might indicate what I'm talking about.
So here is our, let's suppose that these dots represent a sort of random scatter of
how you feel from day to day.
And the baseline is this horizontal line in the middle, and you sort of randomly feel
better or worse from day to day.
Suppose on the days that you feel particularly bad, such as this day, you take the medicine.
Then look what happens just by randomness.
You see all of the six dots, which are the subsequent dots in the week, are higher than
where you started.
And this would happen if we look at a lot of these dots here where you're sort of on
the very sick side, you tend to be better afterwards.
This is called regression to the mean.
By the way, there's another example of regression to the mean that's sort of interesting, having
to do with child rearing.
And some people who have reared children sometimes have the impression that what we say to our
children has no effect whatsoever on their behavior.
Now, so let's just assume for a moment that this is true and see, look at a statistical
analysis that might lead us actually to a different conclusion.
So suppose that every time the child does something especially good relative to that
personal behavior, we praise the child, a perfectly natural thing to do.
And suppose that when the child does something that's particularly bad, we punish the child.
Let's see what happens.
In each case, and once again, let's assume that neither praise nor punishment has any
effect whatsoever on the child.
Well let's see what happens.
The child will tend to return to his or her average behavior.
And that's what it means.
That's the definition of the average behavior.
So if something deviates to below its average, it'll tend to come back to the average.
And if it's above, it tends to go down.
So when we interpret this effect of praise and punishment, let's think it through.
If the child is better than average and we give the child praise, what happens?
The next thing that happens is the child returns to the average.
That is, gets worse.
And on the other hand, if we punish the child who is behaving worse than normal, what happens?
Just by no effect at all, the child tends to return to his or her average and therefore
it gives the impression that punishment works.
So it's similar to quack medicine.
In both examples, it's that something appears to have an effect, but the actual explanation
is regression to the mean.
And by the way, this occurs in all sorts of areas.
Once you get attuned to this concept of regression to the mean, you see it everywhere.
Athletes who appear on the cover of sports illustrated tend to do worse right afterwards.
Why?
Well, why are they on sports illustrated?
Because they did something especially good.
And what's going to happen?
They're going to return to their more average behavior, which means to get worse.
So there is, in fact, a well-known curse of being on the cover of sports illustrated.
If you install a camera at a dangerous intersection where there's been a spate of accidents, then
what happens?
If your accidents will happen, why?
Because it'll return to its average.
And if you think of the opposite, if you put a camera at an intersection that has never
had an accident before, then it's sure to have the effect of causing an accident.
If ever an accident happens, you could blame it on the camera, easy.
So these are all examples of regressing to the mean.
Another example is the children.
Children of tall people, on average, tend to be shorter than those people themselves.
And children of short people tend to be taller than the parents.
But they're regressing toward the mean of the overall population.
So I think this regression to the mean is really interesting.
Well let's now turn to one of the most common issues in the realm of personal health management.
And that concerns dieting and weight.
And many of us have dealt with the problem of keeping our weight at the correct level.
And I'm going to use me as an example.
So now it used to be that I would play racquet sports very vigorously four or five times
a week.
And we would play squash and racquetball and tennis and so on.
And my opponents, we'd play so vigorously that we had the rule that a victory wouldn't
count unless you could make it to the car under your own steam.
That was just one of the rules of the game.
So you always had a chance, even if you lost.
You know, that sort of gave you hope.
But what happened is that I overdid these racquet sports and my knees gave out.
And so I was unable to play racquet sports.
But I discovered that I was still able to eat at the same rate as before.
And in fact, my eating habits are illustrated by this sweatshirt that some friends of mine
gave me that sort of gave an indication of my eating habits.
It says, I don't know if you can read it.
It says, life is uncertain, so eat desserts first.
And from my point of view, eating desserts first did not necessarily mean you wouldn't
also eat them after the meal.
You understand?
So it was just, you know, done.
Well, in any case, after I quit playing these racquet sports, I discovered that after a
certain amount of time, I was about 15 pounds heavier than I had traditionally been.
And so I started taking a weight chart, and every morning I would weigh myself and keep
a record of this weight.
And the reason I want to bring this up is that the question of how much do you weigh
sounds like such a simple question.
But as a matter of fact, it's not a simple question.
What does it mean that you weigh a certain amount?
Every individual day, you gain and lose several pounds.
The range is several pounds for every day.
So one way to take a weight is to just keep one weight, weigh yourself in the morning.
So what I did is I'd weigh myself before breakfast every day, every day that I was home and that
I'd remember.
I would put a dot on this chart.
And the dots on the chart would indicate the reality of my weight.
It's not just a single number, it's actually a distribution of numbers.
So during a period when I really weighed the same, when I wasn't gaining or losing weight,
the kind of chart that we would see is a chart like this.
We would see a scatter of points, not just they won't all be the same, but in fact there'll
be a scatter of points that somewhat cluster around a mean value.
And so the best description of one's weight would be the mean of those collection of weights.
And by the way, this is called a time series, meaning that at every day or at every time
you take a value, and that's a time series.
And you can see that in days where there's a gap, you would just have a gap and no dots
and then there would be other dots when you get back to weighing yourself.
By the way, this is a histogram of the weight measurements during a period of time, and
you can see this is what you'd expect, that you'd expect the weights to be hovering, having
probably some sort of a somewhat normal distribution centered around a single value.
If you want to know whether or not you're actually losing weight, what you should do
is take a, one way to do it would be to take a time series where for every day you put
your weight, weight say in the morning, and if you found that there's a correlation that
is statistically different from zero between the days and the weight, and if it has, and
if the least squares regression line has negative slope, then that would be an indication that
you are indeed losing weight.
A lot of weight loss programs, by the way, tell you only to measure once a week.
What I think the reason for that is that they think they're not working with people
who are sophisticated at interpreting statistics because people who understand that there's
going to be variation and that we're just looking at these cloud of points and summarizing
them by regression line would actually get better data by taking more weights per time.
So it's been my pleasure to talk to you about some issues about personal health, and next
time we will take on the topic of economics.
