Welcome back to Meaning From Data, Statistics Made Clear.
In today's lecture, we're going to be talking about economics.
And economics is certainly one of the most common arenas in which we think of statistical
data as being centrally important, and it is.
We measure incomes and wealth, we measure the balance of trade, the deficit, the stock
market, consumer price index, employment levels.
All of these data are indications about the economic condition of the world.
And these data make a real difference in our daily lives.
So we're going to start this lecture then by talking about the consumer price index,
how it's defined and how it's used, what it means.
The consumer price index shows how the value of the dollar changes over time.
It's an abbreviated CPI, consumer price index, and it's a very important economic indicator
for many reasons that I'll explain in a minute.
But the consumer price index makes us deal with the challenge of measuring how the price
of items alters from year to year or month to month when people buy things for their
daily living.
So the basic idea of the consumer price index is that it just looks at how much various
items cost from month to month and compares them.
And so if the cost of items goes up, then the consumer price index records the amount
more that we must pay to purchase the same items.
So that's the basic idea.
So its goal anyway is to give a sense about how much more or less it costs real people
in the United States to buy a cross-section of goods and services.
In other words, it's just a measure of the cost of living over time.
So to produce the consumer price index, there's a specific collection of goods and services
that's called the market basket.
So this is going to set the standard.
And each month, employees of the Bureau of Labor Statistics go out and see how much it
would cost to buy that market basket of goods.
And they go to different cities in the country and so on, and they find out how much would
it cost to actually go into the stores and purchase those exact items.
And then the cost from month to month is compared.
Well, that's the basic idea of the consumer price index.
And it sounds like a simple idea.
There are a couple of wrinkles when we get to reality that complicate the situation,
as you might imagine.
One is that people buy different things, different products over time.
Different products are on the market.
It wouldn't be sensible to compare only the items in the 1965 market basket to the costs
of those same items today.
For example, some items that were common purchases in 1965 would barely be available
today.
This orange drink tang comes to mind as a possibility.
I think that was probably around in 1965.
But many items today, on the other hand, such as computer-based goods, weren't even invented
in 1965.
And yet now, of course, they form a significant part of consumers' purchasing.
So all of these features lead to complicated strategies for adding and removing items from
the market basket.
But nevertheless, the concept is the same.
So the concept is that if, over a certain number of years, it costs twice as much to
buy what you might call, or morally, the same collection of things, then we'd be able to
assert that inflation has doubled the prices.
So the consumer price index is the thing that measures the value of a dollar.
It tells us what a dollar is worth.
It's measuring inflation over time.
So let's say that we wanted to compare how well compensated people are in different sectors.
So we might ask ourselves, well, how much was a beginning teacher in some city paid
in the year 1970?
And then we ask, how much is that same beginning teacher paid in today?
And of course, the actual dollar amount today will be a much higher number.
But the question is, how can we make a comparison that would be meaningful to know whether the
person is actually being paid more or less relative to the ability to purchase things?
Well, in order to do that, we would have to look at the consumer price index.
So here's a chart, by the way, of the consumer price index.
And if we looked at this chart, this chart is based on dollars that were viewed as the
amount that the actual dollar was in 1983.
So in 1983, it's standardized at 100.
We could choose any year to make as the baseline year for the consumer price index, because
just everything is relative to some arbitrarily chosen year.
So in this graph, it's 1982 to 84 time frame that is viewed.
That's 1983.
We go up and we sit at 100.
That's the base of this consumer price index.
And then if we wanted to see, for example, how much a dollar in 1970 was worth compared
to a dollar in the year 2000, we would simply go up from 1970, see what the index indicates,
and then go up to the year 2000, see what the index indicates, and see what the ratio
of the actual dollar changes from one time to the other.
So in between 1970 and the year 2000, there's roughly a ratio given by the consumer price
index of about 4.5 to 1.
In other words, a $1 in 1970 had the purchasing power of about $4.50 today.
So that is the kind of equivalency that you would want to use if you wanted to argue that
teachers beginning salaries today were on average either more or less than they were
before.
Is the teaching profession valued more or less than it was in 1970?
That's the kind of comparison that you would do.
The consumer price index, by the way, is used in many arenas.
And many social programs are legally influenced by the consumer price index.
All 50 million people who get social security benefits, the amount they get is adjusted by
a formula that uses the CPI as one of its features, federal civil service and military
pension payments change based on the CPI.
The food stamp program changes the payment of more than 20 million food stamp recipients
based on the CPI, changes the cost of school lunches.
It's used in the federal income tax to adjust tax brackets and the standard deductions.
And these are all legal parts of the law that specifically refer to the CPI.
In a lot of collective bargaining agreements, they will involve the CPI to protect the salaries
and benefits from the effects of inflation.
So if we want to understand how different parts of the economy are changing, independent
of inflation, we would use the CPI to put the measures of the wealth and the income,
everything in terms of constant dollars.
And then we can compare conditions over time in a more meaningful way.
So one thing that this does is it tempers our sense of when we look back nostalgically
at old times and we say, oh, I could have bought a cup of coffee for 25 cents back in
ought three, that it gives you a sort of a different sense.
I guess it's 19 ought three, but it gives you a more refined sense of how to evaluate
the real buying power of a dollar at different times.
One thing that we can look at is other trends in the economy.
The national debt is an example of a trend that we can graph over time.
This is a graph of the national debt over the century.
But if we wanted to see this national debt from the point of view of constant dollars,
we could adjust the national debt using the consumer price index to get a different graph.
And here is the different graph adjusted for constant dollars.
So this is the national debt in terms of 1983 dollars.
And you can see some interesting things just by looking.
The national debt was rather low until this point, 1940.
You see there's a very sharp spike, and you can understand that.
That comes from the World War II.
There was a big spike in the national debt.
And notice that from the period from about 1950 all the way up to 1980, notice that the
national debt was really almost stable relative to, if we put it in standard, 1983 dollars.
So that's rather interesting, that we have this long period of stability.
And then in 1980, it starts to shoot way up.
So this is an example of a way to look at a trend and view it from a different perspective.
Here we can look at other kinds of graphs such as the Dow Jones average.
And you see that this is the Dow Jones average just in the dollars of the day.
It shows a consistent increase.
And if we put it in constant dollars, so adjusting for inflation, we'll see that even
after the adjustment, we still see a very sharp increase in the Dow Jones average during
the late 1990s, which was this big bubble in the stock market.
But let's see if we can bring this discussion down to more immediate issues.
And that is for an individual investor.
An individual investor in the stock market really wants to choose investments that will
go up in short periods of time.
So looking at a century may not be of most pertinence.
And what you want to do if you're trying to invest is you want to look at the data to
try to predict the future, future performance of things.
And so a very natural strategy, of course, is to look at past data for guidance about
the future.
What else are you going to look at, in a sense?
But when you do that, you should do it with caution.
Data mining is the term that refers to the process of taking an existing collection of
data and looking at it to find patterns or trends.
So data mining can be a very valuable strategy for identifying features of the world.
But there really are dangers, and so we want to talk about a few here.
The main dangers are that if you have a large data set, then you should expect there to
be patterns that occur by random chance alone.
So if you're looking for patterns, you'll probably find them.
Another thing that you can expect if you have very large data sets is that rare events will
occur just by chance alone.
So the appropriate use of data mining is to find patterns and then undertake new experiments
to confirm or reject the hypothesis that's suggested by what you find from this data
mining.
But it's tempting to celebrate too soon or to take action too soon.
For example, suppose that we use data mining technique to choose good investments, and
our goal was to choose a stock that was likely to go up.
Well, here's a very natural strategy.
We could simply look at which stock increased in value during the last year and buy it.
It's a simple strategy.
Unfortunately, that's a very reasonable sounding strategy, but it's a very poor investment
strategy.
We would find that you would not, in fact, have done well to use the buy the best of
last year strategy.
But an analogy makes this point even more clearly, and that is to think about the lottery.
Suppose we didn't restrict our investment options just to the stock market, but instead
we also included all sorts of different possible investments.
Well, we would find that among all the investments that anybody ever did last year, the best
investment was to pay $1 for the winning lottery ticket and earn $100 million.
Now that is a really good investment.
Well, following the logic of investing in the manner that worked best last year, we
would just buy a lottery ticket, maybe even buying the exact lottery ticket with the same
numbers that won last year and feel that we were on our way to riches.
By the way, it wouldn't be any worse to buy exactly the same numbers that occurred last
year.
They would be just as likely to win and, of course, just as likely to lose.
Well, anyway, obviously buying the lottery ticket is generally not a good investment.
So you might prefer instead of picking an individual stock to try to predict the whole
market trends and then use the image of the market trends to make a decision.
But one way to do this would be to look for some other trends that matched the market
rise, the rises and falls.
And if we could find something that exactly predicted the market, the way the market works,
then we could use that as a predictive tool and follow its pattern.
Well, it turns out that people have actually done this and looked for the best predictors
and they found that there was a very good predictor for a standard and poor 500 index.
And that was the butter production in Bangladesh.
It turned out to follow the standard and poor thing just exactly right.
Why?
Because if you mine data, a lot of data, you will find correspondences that are just ridiculous,
but they happen accidentally.
A good use of this, by the way, that you probably have heard of using data mining was involved
in leading to the best-selling book, the Bible code.
That was an example of data mining.
You had all this data and you just searched in it and sure enough you found all of these
different patterns and at least it led to a best-selling book, so maybe that's not so
dumb after all.
In any case, data mining has its dangers.
But now we come to the good part of the lecture.
Over this course of these 24 lectures on statistics, there have been some examples of unexpected
phenomena.
But I think the record is this one right here that I'm going to be talking about today,
and that is the issue of Benford's law.
When we think of economics, the first thing that we think of, when we strip away all of
the extraneous issues such as the meaning of the numbers, what we think about is that
economics has a lot of numbers, long lists of numbers.
That's somehow fundamental.
Our whole course has been about making sense of the meaning of the numbers, but for the
moment, instead of looking for the meaning, let's just look at the numbers themselves.
That is, we're going to look at the digits that make up the numbers on these lists.
This sounds like a completely crazy thing to do.
But I want to tell the story of how this surprising observation, which I haven't told you yet,
came up.
It came up in 1881.
There was an American astronomer by the name of Simon Newcomb who noticed that the logarithm
books that they had in those days.
They had tables of logarithms.
Remember, of course, back in those days, people had to do computations using logarithms.
There were no calculators or computers.
In order to multiply numbers or to raise numbers to a power, you would look up the number
in the logarithm table, and then the logarithm tables allow you to add numbers instead of
multiplying them, and then you'd look up the anti-logarithm to do a multiplication.
Well, Simon Newcomb noticed that the logarithm tables that were lying around had the property
that the front pages of the logarithm tables were more soiled, more worn, than the later
pages of this logarithm book.
Now, this is very puzzling.
Why would logarithms have, it means that the numbers that started with the numbers like
1 and 2 were more frequently looked up than numbers that started with 8s or 9s?
Well, he wrote a paper about this observation, and the paper was ignored in 1881.
And then, 50 some years later, 1938, the same peculiar observation was repeated by Frank
Benford, who then was the one for whom the law is named, which I still haven't told
you what the law is.
But Frank Benford, in 1938, did a study of some 20,000 data sets of numbers that came
from data on economic issues to sizes of lakes and all sorts of crazy random things, numbers
that appeared on the first pages of newspapers, all sorts of random things.
And he discovered that in most of these cases, approximately 30 percent of the numbers begin
with the digit 1, rather than being evenly distributed.
You would think that you should expect about 11 percent of the leading digits of every
number to be 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9.
You see there are 9 possible numbers, and so you'd expect 11 percent if these numbers
were evenly distributed over starting values from 1 to 9.
But in fact, that didn't happen.
It turned out that the proportions of the leading ones, he made graphs of these and
calculated the percentage of leading ones, leading 2s, leading 3s.
He discovered that in his long list of numbers, the proportion of the numbers that start with
a 1 in almost all of these sets of data turned out to appear 30.1 percent of the time.
And that the number 2 as the leading digit of these lists of numbers appeared about 17.6
percent of the time.
Leading 3, 12.5 percent of the time, and you can see that these numbers are decreasing.
The percentage of time that the leading digits are these various digits decreases down to
the number 9 appearing only 4.6 percent of the time.
Now this law is actually made into a formula here where the fraction of the numbers in
a list starting with the various digits, the digit D, is the log base 10 of 1 plus 1 over
D. So for example, for the number 1, the log base 10 of 1 plus 1 over 1, that's the log
of 2, is 30.1 percent.
And likewise, 1 plus 1 over 2, so that's 1 and a half.
The log base 10 of 1 and a half is 0.176, 17.6 percent, and so on.
So this is the actual mathematical description of the fraction of the digits that start with
these different digits, and here are the percentages actually listed.
This seems crazy, and I would think that many of you who are skeptical would say, you've
lost your mind, why in the world would I think that just random data would have this property?
So the first thing I want you to do is to invite you personally to just do it.
In other words, go to some thing, some book like an almanac, or go to the web, look for
lists of numbers more or less randomly that you pick.
It's not true, by the way, that every single set of numbers has this property, but if you
take just most economic issue numbers or even the areas of lakes in the country or the populations
of counties in the country, more or less anything you can think of, and just look, and you will
see that indeed the number 1 appears a much more greater percentage of the time than you
would expect.
It appears about 30% of the time.
Here is an example just to show you.
This is a list of the gross domestic product in the year 2004, and it just lists all the
country in order of their gross domestic product, and here we've highlighted those countries
whose gross domestic product starts with a 1, and you can see that quite a few of them
start with a 1.
These start with a 1, and look, these all start with a 1, almost all of them start with
a 1.
Of course, these are descending order of gross national products, so you'd expect the ones
to be clustered, but the point is that in that list you saw a lot of highlighted numbers,
and in fact we made a histogram here of the percentage of these gross domestic products
that started with the different digits, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and you can see that
the histogram, that is the bars, are telling the actual values from that chart, and then
this curvy line here is telling the values expected from Benford's law, and you can
see that in fact the fraction of the leading digits does seem to accord to Benford's law.
Rather interesting.
Now, this is a chart, the same kind of chart, showing the populations of world countries,
and showing what fraction of those populations start with the digit 1, and this seems just
so crazy.
I mean, it means, but this is true.
You can see that these populations follow pretty closely the prediction from Benford's
law.
So of course you must be asking, why is it possible that Benford's law is real?
Why is it possible?
So I'm going to give you an indication of why you might expect more ones than you think.
So here's the way I want to think about it.
Suppose that you have a bank account, and you put in a certain amount of money, and
every year it grows by a fixed percentage.
In order to, I know bank accounts don't usually make 10%, but let's just assume 10% because
it's easy to compute.
Suppose that every year you put in some money, and then the next year it's 10% more.
Let's just see what happens to the leading digits.
So here we go.
Suppose you put in $1 as your initial investment in this bank account.
Then these numbers here will show you the amount of money in your bank account in the
various years, reading across like this.
So you start with $1, go to $1.10, $1.21, and so on.
Every year it's increasing by 10%.
Now for the first 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 years, you always still lead with the digit 1.
But look what happens when you get to the digit 2.
Well, when you have $2, and this is $2.14 in your bank account, and you get 10% more
every year, notice that you make bigger jumps than you did when you only had $1.
From $1 to 10% more just was a jump of 10 cents, whereas from $2, 10% of that jumps
you to more than 20 cents.
So notice you only stay in the 2s then for 1, 2, 3, 4 numbers before you leap into the
3s.
And then every 10% increase increases the 3s by at least 30 cents, so it goes, it stays
in the 3s for only 3 3s before it gets to the 4s.
The 4s then go up by 10%, leaping into the middle 4s and then into the 5s, the middle
5s and then into the 6s, the middle 6s into the 7s, and then the 7s, you see 10% of $7
and something is at least 70 cents, so it goes all the way into the 8s, goes into the
8s, there are 2 in the 8s, but then it goes into the 9s immediately, and then we're back
to the 1s.
Now look what happens when you've now accumulated $10.
Well 10% of that only adds a 1 in the second digit, so it stays in the 1s for much longer
before it gets to the 2s, you see?
So this is an example that shows why it is that if you have exponential growth at least,
you can see why it is that you would expect Benford's law to accrue, namely that the bigger
numbers, the ones that start with 8, are going to come up much less often because you leap
over into the next digit much quicker.
So this is an example and you can see highlighted the values as we go on, that once again 30%
of them will have starting with the digit 1, and here is once again the histogram of
actual values in that chart with their different proportions of leading digits, and then the
prediction from Benford's law, which you see, it follows quite closely.
Now there's something interesting about Benford's law that you might wonder about, and you might
say, well, I mean, I hope at least that you're at least somewhat skeptical still about Benford's
law, it seems so crazy.
But one thing that you might be skeptical about is, it seems as though Benford's law
couldn't be right because suppose you changed the, from dollars into some other currency,
for example, then that same bank account, you might think, oh, well it's just going
to be off, it would no longer accord to Benford's law.
But look what happens if we, for example, consider changing each dollar to a rupee.
See, now this exchange rate, by the way, is not even true today.
I used it only because 40 was easier to multiply in looking at than the actual exchange rate.
But look what happens if we change, we take our chart of values, the same values that we
had in our bank account in dollars, and we changed them to rupees.
Look what happens.
What happens is that when we get to $2.50, when we multiply by four, we get something
that starts with a leading one.
And then all the way down to two times as much, that is down to, from $250 down to $5,
all of those times four will lead to having a leading digit one.
So all of the numbers that originally started between $250 and $5, all when multiplied by
four give leading digits one in the rupees column.
And it, in fact, keeps the same numbers.
That is to say the proportion in the rupees will still be 30% leading with ones, even
though you've changed from dollars to rupees.
It turns out that this weird observation is not only intriguing, but it's also useful.
People are using Benford's law to detect fraud.
You see, because when data are made up, rather than coming from reality, people tend to make
up numbers that are more evenly divided.
In particular, they tend to use a lot of fives and sixes because they're sort of in
the middle, you see?
So you can compare the number of leading digits in an accounting sheet to Benford's law.
And then any material deviation from Benford's law is an indication that you'd better audit
that book a little bit more carefully.
Well, so Benford's law is another example where we can expect regularity in the aggregate
that arises actually from randomness.
And as always, understanding what to expect from randomness allows us to compare expectation
with data in order to find convincing inferences.
And among them, in this case, inferences about possible fraud.
So this is, I think, it's an extremely surprising fact about the world of numbers which you
can personally investigate on your own.
I'll see you next time.
