Nowhere are the challenges of working with robots in the wild or in the lab more clear
more murky than when we talk about working on and in water. To work in a river, lake,
or ocean, every aspect of the robot has to be totally redesigned. The challenges are
especially severe if you aim to have your mobile robot go underwater where we would
call it an autonomous underwater vehicle or AUV for short. The body, energy supply, actuators,
sensors, controller and communication systems of an AUV all operate differently than they
do on the land or in the air. Now if you think about drastic differences in structure and
function that you might see among fish, mammals and birds, then you really get a sense for
the differences that need to happen and how things function in the water versus elsewhere.
So we're going to talk about four big differences that we have to pay attention to for the robotics
of aquabotic things. So water and electronics do not mix and that's sort of rule number
one here. The problem is, whoop, got these robots going here, the problem is that water
conducts electrical current. It acts like a wire, particularly salt water, which is
a thousand to a million times more conducive than the freshwater that I've got here. So
that can create pathways between electronic components that were not meant to have those
connections. By creating those wires, we actually do something called short circuiting the electronics.
How many of us would be willing to drop our smartphone into a sink? It's not a good idea.
So one of the things that goes on is you have to take a robot like this, which is an aquabot
built by Hexbug, and you have to very carefully compartmentalize whatever's happening inside.
Now these are little beautiful toys. These are autonomous robots. And what's really cool
is they take advantage of the fact that water does this conduction to create a sensor so
that when I put this in the water, that sensor senses the water and actually starts the behavior
of the robot up. So that's actually a very clever design to make use of what's happening
there with the differences between operating in the air and in water. Now I'm going to
tell you a story of a mistake I made working with a beautiful robot called Robot Madeleine.
And I actually got in big trouble in water. So my research team at Vassar College learned
the hard way of what can happen. So Robot Madeleine is actually built to go in the ocean, but
we were testing her out in the pool. All her sensitive electronics are sealed in what we
call bottles. These are containers that are sealed up with a set of double set of O-rings.
And I had personally, before we were going to take Madeleine over to the diving well,
I personally checked those waterproof seals for grit, lubricated them with silicon grease,
and then pressure fit those two main chambers. And then what we do is we apply a vacuum to
those chambers. And when we seal up and stop that vacuum, we measure the pressure to make
sure that that negative pressure relative to ambient can be maintained. That tells us that
those chambers are sealed. Well, those seals were great. And when I stopped that, the negative
pressure of the pump. And so we knew, I knew, okay, we were ready to go. No leaks. So we packaged
up Madeleine in her special container, took her over to the pool. Now, the thing about Madeleine
was we know that water is a problem. And so we had designed her to have sensors inside her
waterproof chambers to detect leaks, very similar to the sensors you see here in these aqua
bots. So in addition to just detecting those leaks, and we could get a message from Madeleine,
if there was a problem, we also had programming on board Madeleine that when she discovered it,
she would very quickly come to the surface. Well, I had checked for leaks in the lab. And I made
a fatal mistake, though, I didn't check for leaks when we got to the pool. So I had done this many
times before it hadn't been a problem. What we figured out had happened was we think that during
transport, those seals must have shaken loose a little bit. So we never had a problem before.
And there was no problem until we had this particular problem. So what happened was Madeleine
was swimming underwater. She's a four flippered robot. And she flooded so quickly that there
wasn't time for her to get to the surface. The electronic components were destroyed,
all the computers on board and things like that. Lesson learned, expensively. Now what's really
interesting is you can actually get a robot like this Hexbug Nano that's built to be on land. You
can actually get a little bit of behavior out of it when you put it in fresh water. So I'm going to
pop it into the tank there. And it's not moving around, but I can feel on the tank that it's
actually buzzing. So your robot might not die right away. And even if it survives, one of the
problems you have to deal with is if you've made those metal contacts wet, eventually they will
rust. So even when we build robots for being on the surface of the water, like this robot here,
we have to take special precautions. This is a robot from my lab called a nerd. And you can see
it's made out of a food container. And so we took advantage of a top that is meant to be
waterproof. And that seals pretty much everything around there and protects us from splashing.
And so all the wires go down through a central hole here. So we wouldn't want to submerge the nerd,
but it is going to be splash proof for us. Now I should tell you that nerd stands for neuro-evolving
robotic device. I kind of think that's the best name ever for robot. Now let me just show you this
nerd working here since we've got it in the pool. We've actually got it designed so that it won't
start swimming until we first turn off the lights. So I'm going to do the equivalent of turning off
the lights here by putting a sort of hat over it. So now the nerd is swimming. And you can see it's
got a propulsive tail off the back. And it doesn't generate a lot of splash. So we're in pretty good
shape this way. And it's got two eye spots. So it's built for following light gradients. And it's
got IR sensors along the side so it can detect other objects that are swimming with it on the
surface of the water. By the way, you can see what's happened with these aqua bots here. They stopped
swimming. They have a timer after five minutes. And so I take them out of the water, put them back
in, and there's a trigger for those aqua bots to start swimming again. And let's just see here.
If I pull out the nano, the nano is still working. But I don't recommend this because what's going
to happen over time is it's going to actually rust inside here for our nano. I love working with
robots in the water. I think the challenges make it really interesting. So we've talked about the
challenge here of what goes on when you've got water mixing with electronics. And now we'll talk
about the electronics themselves. Let me clear this away and we'll get to sensors underwater.
All right, let's talk about the second difference between working in water
and working in air or on land. The sensors we use in air or on land and land often work poorly or
not at all in water. And here's why. Radio waves work well in the air, but they don't work well
underwater. The problem is that the frequencies that work well in air, which are about 10 centimeters
to 10 meters long, those are normal radio waves, as soon as you put them in the water,
they don't work. They attenuate. So we use them well in the air, but when we put them in water,
they don't work. So we can't use radio waves. We have to use something else. So this is one reason
submarines need to come to the surface occasionally. They need to come up and communicate and then get
navigational fixes using those radio waves. Now, radio waves are part of the electromagnetic
spectrum, which also includes microwaves, infrared waves, which we've talked about with sensors with
infrared emitter and detectors, visible light waves, and so on, each of which are shorter than
those radio waves. Now, visible light also has problems penetrating the water. Oceanographers
refer to the region where visible light penetrates sufficient for photosynthesis
as the photic zone, with a cutoff point defined where less than 1% of visible light from the
surface can penetrate. That distance, where over 99% of the light doesn't get through,
is only down to about 200 meters. So in order to propagate long distances in the water, electromagnetic
energy needs a wavelength of over 100 kilometers. That's long waves. These are extremely low
frequencies, right? And they've been used actually for communications with submarines,
but it's a real challenge. Those low frequencies mean that messages have to be short. And they can
only be one way from the station, which is on the land, to the sub, because you need a huge
antenna to create those giant waves. And even a submarine, a big one, is too small to be able
to generate a wave that is that long, or to carry an antenna that's long enough to do it.
A different kind of wave that does travel well underwater is a pressure or acoustic wave, sound.
Submarines can communicate underwater using acoustic transmission systems with a speaker
and a hydrophone. But these pinger systems, very much like the pingers that we talk about in air,
we can use sound systems as well as air, they only travel short distances. So they suffer from noise
created also by reflections and other noise that's in the water. So we get attenuation.
Those particles can scatter, the pressure waves can scatter off of particles in the water.
Also, the amount of information that you can transmit with a pinger is very small,
since all that you can vary to represent information is the pattern, the pulse of the sound,
the rhythm. An underwater acoustic modem system is the most often used form of communication
in underwater marine robotics. Now the most sophisticated systems offer short-range communication
over the range of a kilometer in shallow water situations. Now the rate of data communication
is up to 30 kilobits per second. Now this is pretty slow compared to wired or wireless transmission
rates on land. A few dozen kilobits per second was already possible on land with a cable back in 1942
with an early modem developed by IBM. These days, my own wireless modem at home communicates its
speeds of up to 300 mega kilobits per second, so it's 10,000 times faster than an acoustic modem
that you'd find in the water. We've talked about acoustic modems as a standard way to communicate
wirelessly underwater. You can also use a wire, a communications tether, and that's very common
as long as your robot is working very close to the ship that's controlling it. In the first
version of robot Madeleine that we built, we actually controlled her with a remote control
cable. And as long as you don't have to have your robot swim very far away, a communications tether
can give you great control over your robot. Using a tether to communicate with an underwater robot
allows you to do jobs like you can inspect ship's hulls, underwater storage tanks, bridge pilings,
and dams. And you can also scan a coral reef from your boat, which is pretty cool too, right?
So underwater robots with a tether are much more likely to have remote control and or
energy supply coming through that tether as well. Now, let's say I'm using a 500 foot long cable for
a search and recovery mission in near shore waters, shallow waters. What's really important here is if
the robot is at that depth, I probably can't look over the side and see where that robot is.
I have to rely on a bunch of onboard sensors to help me keep track of where I've got that submarine
going. Now, local sensors operating over short distances also offer a creative way around the
limitations of radio waves, acoustic signals, or tethers. Here's a really cool solution that has
been prototyped by European roboticists in a project called Kokoro, which stands for Collective
Cognitive Robotics. The idea they have is to use blue light to flash communications between
robots underwater. The distance of communication is achieved by a bucket brigade approach.
Use a swarm of robots arranged in a linear chain. A signal at one end propagates from
one robot to another robot to another robot along that chain. So a Kokoro system, for example,
could have a search and rescue swarm with some robots at the bottom of the ocean looking for
a plane's black box, for example, and others scattered through the water to the surface,
and then you have a surface robot that communicates with people on a ship or a satellite via radio
waves. Even though Kokoro uses blue light for communication, just like all the other kinds
of signals except the acoustic one underwater, that signal of flight degrades very quickly
with distance. So in fact, the real innovation is to show that a swarm of robots arranged in
a line can extend communications to new lengths, and in fact they can use light or they can use
radio at those small distances as well underwater. This swarm-based collective communication system
is still in the earliest stages of development. A common replacement for vision underwater
is sonar, which stands for sound navigation and ranging. This is another use of sound underwater,
by the way, with active sonar systems. The sensor sends out a sound pulse or train of pulses and
then listens for the return, what we call the echo, right? And depending on how long it takes
that pulse to return and how strong the signal is, the robot can use sonar to detect objects
underwater and to map terrain. For example, the PAVE robot has a 3D sonar that looks forward
and a 2D profiling sonar that looks down. PAVE stands for, by the way, prototype autonomous
inspection vehicle. PAVE has a navigation system that includes a compass and inertial guidance
sensors. PAVE also has an acoustic communication system and yes, it does have a camera and lights
to be able to gather pictures where it's dark. The reason to carry what might seem like redundant
sensors, sonar and camera, is that they work well together as a team. Sonar is great for murky
waters, object detection at a distance and for measuring the shape of complex surfaces.
A camera is better for close-ups and for identification of what certain types of objects
are. Now, the PAVE robot was jointly developed by sub-C7 and Seabite and, as I mentioned,
it stands for prototype autonomous inspection vehicle, so it's still under development.
PAVE is a large hover type robot weighing over 700 pounds in air and able to dive to depths
of a thousand meters. That's pretty impressive. Battery-powered, the goal with PAVE was to develop
new methods of close maneuvering that could be done autonomously. So, get rid of that tether and
let that robot operate by itself and the key to autonomous movement is to link information
from sensors to the control of actuators. And because sensor-guided movement is at the heart
of autonomous robotic behavior, the choice of those sensors is very important part of the design.
As we've seen, sensors underwater face a number of challenges because of the physical properties
of water and operating in the wild. Video systems, for example, only work if the water is clear and
the light is available. Go into murky waters of a delta or into the deep and you are in trouble
if you are relying on vision. The mission concept for PAVE is to operate as an autonomous
inspection system, as the name implies. For example, we humans have sunk all kinds of
electrical and communications cables in the oceans and lakes, and these cables need constant
maintenance that can be directly assessed by close-up inspection. So, PAVE locates the cable
riser using sonar and then using sonar up close, it moves along the cable, delivering video images
of the cables, and then floats along the way that a topside human can review. So, sonar is
clearly the primary sensory system for this system. Now, keep in mind that sonar is augmented by the
onboard compass and inertial guidance systems to keep track of heading and the distance traveled.
PAVE can navigate to the bottom and inspect pipelines that are along the bottom, and one of
the virtues of autonomous robots like PAVE is that because they lack tethers, they can move in and
around complex three-dimensional structures without fear of tangling. Like PAVE, the very first underwater
water robots lacked tethers. They also did not communicate with humans once launched,
so they operated autonomously. Let's talk about the next big difference between
operating robots in air or on land and underwater. The bodies of aquatic robots have to be very
different and they form a distinctive group of robots. The first autonomous underwater robot
was a torpedo. Now, while torpedoes are weapons, the physics that makes them torpedoes and makes
them efficient has inspired a whole body type among modern autonomous underwater vehicles
that are used for many other purposes. In the search for the missing Malaysian airliner in 2014,
torpedo-shaped underwater autonomous vehicles were used to scan the ocean floor in search of debris.
Bluefin Robotics has a torpedo-shaped AUV called the Bluefin 21. The tail doesn't have the protruding
control surfaces of your standard whitehead torpedo, no rudder and no elevator. That sleek
design reduces the chances of the tail getting hung up on cables, seaweed or things like that.
Now, the torpedo shape tells us a lot about the physical challenges of moving in water.
A torpedo is an example of a streamlined body. A streamlined is a visualization technique to
see how smoothly the water moves around a body as that body moves through that water.
Shapes like torpedoes or robot Madeline for that matter are tapered in the front and the back to
make for very smooth waymaking through that water. They're said to be streamlined,
which means they're more energy efficient to move. In contrast, an un-streamlined shape would have
blunt ends and be boxy in shape. This means that you can tell right away when you look at an underwater
robot if it is built to cruise like a torpedo or to hover. Cruisers are streamlined and hoverers
are box-like. For its torpedo-shaped robots, Bluefin has designed the tail cone as a ducted
thruster that is articulated. So that connection of the tail cone to the hull is like a ball and
socket joint. A swiveling joint like this gives two degrees of freedom for the adjustments of
thrust. That tail cone can pitch or yaw or move in some combination of those two. The AUV steers by
rotating that tail cone to direct its thrust in different directions.
Let's take a moment to learn how the three-dimensional motion of ships is characterized
using six independent degrees of freedom. We use three degrees of freedom that are in rotation,
pitch, yaw, and roll. So pitch, sorry, pitch, yaw, and roll if I'm a vehicle. And we use
three translational degrees of freedom. Surge, sway, and heave. So let's see if I can do this.
Surge is forward and backward. Sway is side to side. And heave is up and down. There. Now you can
start to speak like a pirate. Aye, this ship, she is rolling arg. Damn the torpedoes. Actually,
let's not damn the torpedoes. They're actually very interesting robots. And the Bluefin-21 is
built for deepwater surveys and search and rescue. And it was used, as we mentioned, to help search
for the Malaysian Airlines Flight 370 in 2014. Smaller torpedo-shaped AUVs, like the Bluefin-9
and 12, are built for shallower operations. There are two categories of autonomous vehicles that
we haven't talked about yet. The spray glider, which looks like a torpedo with wings, and the
HAUV, where the H stands for hovering. And AUV, of course, stands for autonomous underwater vehicle.
The type of body in an HAUV is called an open space frame. What all these AUVs are designed
to do can be understood by looking at what sensors are available on Bluefin's version
of an HAUV. Choosing different sensors lets you customize your AUV for that particular job that
you have in mind. There are imaging systems that include cameras and sonars that you would use
for mapping tasks. There are navigation systems that include compass, GPS, and inertial navigation
systems that work by detecting the acceleration of the AUV. Scientific sensors include things like
a CTD sensor, which measures conductivity, temperature, and depth. And remember, we're
interested in conductivity, and it's measured because it's the ease of passing of electrical
current through water. And guess what? It's used as an index of salinity. So we're interested in it
because of that our worry about electronics and flooding our compartments. But it's also a basic
property of water that we want to keep track of. So as we mentioned, salty water conducts electricity
even better than fresh water. Now, temperature is measured with a sensor called a thermocouple,
which uses the flux of heat across the sensor to measure temperature.
Depth is measured with a force transducer, a device that changes its electrical resistance
as it is deformed by the pressure of the water. AUVs also have a variety of ways of communicating
with their topside operators, including if they're at the surface, direct radio frequency,
and satellite uplinks. Let's peek inside the navigation systems to see how AUVs are getting
around. Dead reckoning is a very common way of navigation. In dead reckoning, you start by knowing
where you are. An AUV might get its coordinates from GPS at the surface, and then it dives.
While submerged, the AUV uses its compass to head in a particular direction. It keeps track of how
far it has gone using a sensor suite called a Doppler Velocimeter log. It uses Doppler effect
to measure the motion of the bottom as you're moving past it or through the water column relative
to the motion of the AUV. In water, as in air, once you have your heading from your compass
and velocity in the time that you've been at that heading in velocity, you can estimate
where you are relative to where you started. You have to know what that is. So you need eventually
a navigational fix, and a navigational fix is short for fixed position. And blue fin AUVs get
this by surfacing and using GPS, the global positioning system that's provided over high
frequency microwave signals by satellites. This approach allows for autonomous operation out of
sea and in constrained environments like harbors. Another way to estimate how far you've traveled
is using a sensor suite called an inertial measurement unit or IMU. And we mentioned it
without explaining before what we were talking about with the PAVE robot. This sensor has
kinematically independent accelerometers and gyroscopes to estimate velocity and orientation
in three dimensions. Submarines often use a similar set of sensors.
All right, so that covers a whole lot of territory here. And let's get on now
to a final difference between operating robots in the water and operating them in air and on land.
And that has to do with energy supply and actuators. These have to be very different as well.
Bluefin's torpedo AUV works using batteries, and they have a mission life of about 24 hours,
and that's pretty impressive. And that's great for mapping near shore, but there are times when you
want your AUV to have missions that last even longer. For example, extensive monitoring of
sea surface temperatures, which is vital for predicting El Nino events, for example, requires
time on station that we would measure in weeks or months. One way to extend mission time is to
reduce the amount of energy that you spend on propulsion. You might even decide to just float
along with currents or tides, but then you aren't an AUV because you aren't self-propelled.
You'd be a sensor buoy that floated along and collected data. Now, a very clever way to be
self-propelled, but to do so with minimal cost, is to glide. And here's where those
Slocum gliders come in that we mentioned, that class of AUVs that look like torpedoes with wings.
So Bluefin has a spray glider, they call it, and gliders are very efficient, and they take very
little energy to operate because they can operate on differences in buoyancy and don't need a
propeller. They can run on a single mission for over six months, and let me tell you about the
secret of making a glider work. I mentioned buoyancy differences. Gliders work by changing
their density relative to the water. An object that is more dense than water, we call it a
negatively buoyant and it will sink like a stone. An object that is less dense than water, we call
positively buoyant and it will float and rise. So what a glider does at the surface of the water
is make itself negatively buoyant, so that it sinks and uses that sinking motion to allow it to
move forward thanks to its wings. This kind of controlled gliding is just like what we see
in electric rays, but unlike an electric ray that is always negatively buoyant, an AUV glider
gets to the bottom of its downward glide path and then it changes its density. The glider is able
to become positively buoyant, which causes it to float upwards, and again it uses its wings
to convert that vertical motion into a forward glide path. Most of the energy of propulsion
in the glider comes from this gravitational effect. So we talk about these AUVs as having
a buoyancy engine. I say most of the energy because it does take some energy to change
the density. What has to happen is that that AUV pumps mineral oil back and forth from an
internal to an external bladder. When the mineral oil is in the external bladder, the density of
the incompressible aluminum hull has been decreased below the density of water, so its buoyancy
becomes positive. Pretty cool trick, huh? Now when the oil is pumped back inside the hull,
its density has increased to more than the density of the water, so buoyancy becomes negative.
You can think of a buoyancy engine as sinking a ship by flooding one of its compartments
and then floating a ship by bailing out that same compartment. This idea was patented by Ian Fallin
in 1965. He was inventing a vehicle for divers, but the basic propulsive mechanism works for
diverless AUVs too, and it works incredibly well. In 2009, RU-27, a modified Slocum glider AUV,
which was dubbed the Scarlet Knight by the Rutgers engineers who built it,
became the first robot to cross the Atlantic Ocean underwater,
transiting from New Jersey to Spain in 221 days. Very cool. And when it traveled, it took data,
data on sea temperatures and water conductivities. Sound familiar? Gliders are the long-distance,
low-power champions on the opposite end of the AUV spectrum from the hovering AUVs like the PAVE
robot. Hovering AUVs are vehicles designed not to go very far at all, but to just run for a few
hours. These are hovering AUVs like the HAUV from Bluefin. Hovering AUVs perform close-up
inspection of hulls of ships, submerged piers, or rocky bottoms. To hover and hold station,
they maximize something that gliders and torpedoes are very bad at. Maneuverability. The HAUV
inspected, for example, the USS Constitution, and I can survey the same lawnmower pattern
that the Bluefin-21 used using its sonar to scan the complex three-dimensional geometry of the
propeller of a different ship. So most hovering AUVs, like the ships that they survey, rely on
propellers that spin. These are small, propeller-based thrusters, and they are usually set up in
opposing pairs to generate the countervailing thrusts that allow them to so precisely maneuver.
The champion of long-distance and long-duration robots is Waveglider. Built by liquid robotics,
it looks a lot like a surfboard with a couple of antennae. Now what makes Waveglider such
a nifty example of robots in the water is a completely novel kind of propulsion. Waveglider
has two main parts. The float is a lot like a surfboard, and it floats at the surface,
and it carries with it a solar panel to charge batteries that power sensors and communication
systems. The other part of Waveglider is the sub. The sub is part of the propulsion system,
and it's inspired by the way by the flukes of whales. Now if you gently push on the wings of
the sub, what happens is they will tilt down but not up. If you were trying, if you're going to try
and pull the sub up vertically in the water, the wings would all tilt down and then deflect
as you were trying to pull it up. If you are a swimmer or a paddler, you may recognize this
process as what we call sculling. What is functionally significant about sculling
is that we move the wing or the paddle in one direction and we generate thrust perpendicular
to that direction. If you look just under the water, right where the Waveglider 3 is being
deployed, you can see a whole set of what look like wings. Those wings are lowered down, kept
attached to the surface, vessel by a flexible umbilical cord that the sub is connected to.
Now here's where that magic happens. Waves power the Waveglider. When a surface wave
moves that surface vessel upward, it pulls the wings upwards too. If those wings are angled
correctly, they can, like the wings of a glider, pull the surface vessel forward. So get this,
all of the power of propulsion is supplied by waves. In 2013, a Waveglider named Benjamin
Franklin completed a journey of nearly 8,000 nautical miles. Benjamin survived shark attacks,
overcame severe currents, and ended his travels navigating through a cyclone to reach the southern
most part of the Great Barrier Reef. Benjamin arrived at Lady Musgrove Island near Bundeberg,
Queensland, Australia on the 14th of February 2013. On May 15th of that same year, Benjamin was
awarded the Guinness Book of World Records for the longest journey of an autonomous surface vessel.
Robots at work on and in the water differ from other robots in design and purpose. They offer us
remote presence and depth beyond what we humans can withstand. And they work autonomously to map
the seafloor and act as our first responders in search and rescue. Autonomous aquatic robots
serve as our mobile sensors monitoring ocean conditions and marine wildlife. The unstructured
environment of the aquatic world offers tremendous challenges to roboticists. And when those
challenges are met, they can lead to unique solutions and some of the most exciting robots on the planet.
