Robots with legs offer some of the most extreme challenges in all of robotics.
The physics of dynamic walking, whether with two four or six legs, is a balancing act similar
to an inverted pendulum, and just as unstable.
Even more extreme is the physics of running, which we can compare to a pogo stick, where
balancing is interspersed with short periods of flight.
Military pack horse robots like Big Dog and the LS3 already confront the challenges of
dynamic stability, and those challenges become even greater in some of the largest, fastest
and smallest of all legged or limbed robots, which makes them some of the most extreme
robots of all.
The Guinness Book of World Records certified a dinosaur-sized machine called Tradino as
the world's largest four-legged walking robot.
Tradino was designed and built by a German company, Zollner Electronic.
Tradino weighs in at 22,000 pounds, close to the mass of a tractor truck.
It's about 50 feet long, if you include its tail, and has a diesel engine producing about
140 horsepower.
Tradino's top speed is officially listed at 1.8 kilometers per hour, or about 1.1 miles
per hour.
Now, no worries here, right?
You and I walk at about three miles per hour, so we are not going to be chased down by Tradino
in the next version of Jurassic Park movie.
But to be fair, Tradino was not built to be fast.
It was built to be large, extremely large.
Among legged robots, a speed demon is Outliner, which runs 20 miles an hour and faster.
It's built by Robotics Unlimited.
It's about two feet tall and weighs in at about three pounds.
Remote-controlled, it has six legs that spin around a motor-driven axis.
As each leg hits the ground, it flexes under the load just like our legs do.
Everything of a structure is a property called compliance, and it allows the legs to act
like elastic springs to store and then release energy.
Even faster is Cheetah, a four-legged robot created by Boston Dynamics.
Cheetah weighing in at about 70 pounds ran on a treadmill at speeds of up to 29 miles
per hour.
But unlike Outliner, Cheetah needed to be tethered and run under controlled conditions
to keep it from crashing.
In addition, the hydraulic pump powering the robot was off-board, leading some to say
that this version of the Cheetah was cheating a little.
A version carrying its own power was developed to run outside, and that version is called
Wildcat, and it could attain speeds of 16 miles per hour.
Now notice that these fast robots are small compared to Tradino and with good reason.
In physics, the laws of physics create a trade-off between size and speed.
Now the study of size and how it matters is called scaling, and the most fundamental scaling
law is purely geometric.
It's the surface area to volume ratio, and that's also known as the square cube law,
and that impacts form and function in biology and engineering.
Let me explain.
This is a can of tuna.
Its shape is known technically as a right circular cylinder.
Now a big can of tuna is also a right circular cylinder.
As long as the ratio of the diameter of the diameter to the height of the can is the same
in both, and they are, then we can say that they have the same shape even though they
are of different size.
So this is an example of isometric scaling, where the prefix iso, which means equal, and
metric means measure.
Any variation from isometric scaling is called allymetric scaling, where the prefix allo
means different.
So let's think about area to volume ratio of our size changing tuna fish cans.
If we make the height of the can always equal to its radius, then the surface area of a
right circular cylinder is the product of 4 pi and the square of the can's radius, radius
to the power of 2.
The volume of the same can is the product of pi and the cube of the radius, radius to
the power of 3.
If we double the radius of the can, say from 10 to 20 centimeters, we increase the surface
area 4 fold.
On the other hand, the volume increases 8 fold.
So at a radius of 10 centimeters, the ratio of area to volume was 4.
At a radius of 20 centimeters, that same ratio has fallen by half to 2.
So as these ratios show, the increase in surface area is not enough to keep up with the increase
in volume.
So this is a giant warning that the square cube law broadcasts.
Isometric enlargement grows volume faster than area.
An important sequel of the square cube law is that the mass and weight of an animal or
robot usually increases in direct proportion to the volume.
Now let's look at how this isometric scaling of the area volume ratio impacts the movement
of animals or robots at extremes of size.
At very small sizes and speeds, movement through air and especially water is dominated by the
effects of viscosity, a measure of the stickiness of the fluid.
For us to experience this effect, imagine jumping into a swimming pool full of syrup.
The dominance of viscosity is why tiny medical micro robots from about 25 to 60 microns long
cannot glide.
Because of their shape and their size and spiral shape, they're called artificial bacterial
flagella by researchers at the University of Zurich.
By placing a small head of nickel on one end of the micro robots, the researchers can use
a fluctuating external magnetic field to propel and steer these micro robots.
They corkscrew their way forward, moving that way they may be able to deliver drugs and even
genes to targeted cells.
At the other end of the scale, for the big and the fast, fluid forces are dominated by
the effects of inertia, the tendency for objects to keep moving once in motion.
For terrestrial animals and robots, those that don't move in fluid, the first challenge
is to be able to hold up their weight, at least while they're standing still.
Weight is the force generated by gravitational acceleration acting on our body's mass.
Let's think about terrestrial robots supporting their weight.
We'll suppose that they are, how about right circular cylinders?
These cylinders, let's just pretend have a height that is twice the size of the radius,
as we've been saying, and the small cylinder that we're going to think about here, let's
say has a height of 20 centimeters, so a bit bigger than this.
You might think about this in terms of size and approximate mass, like a dog.
Now let's imagine a larger cylinder that stands two meters tall, so you might think of it
about the size in terms of mass of a cow.
Let's assume that the density is the same for these two cylinders, so their mass then
is just a function of their volume, which is a thousand times greater for the larger
cow-sized cylinder, so that's a difference of three orders of magnitude.
Now instead of metal in a can, let's imagine that these mammalian masses are supported
by bone that forms the exterior of the cylinder.
So starting with the dog cylinder, let's make the bone have a thickness of one hundredth
of the radius, or about one millimeter.
Now that's pretty thin, but bone is a remarkable material with high strength and compression.
If the bone is all that's supporting that six kilogram mass and its associated weight,
then we calculate the stress in the bone as the weight divided by that bone's cross-sectional
area.
The bone sustains a stress of about nineteen point one megapascals, which it turns out
is well below bone's compressive strength of one hundred and seventy megapascals.
Phew!
Now, if we keep that bone that same size relative to the radius, then we run into a problem
with our cow cylinder.
The compressive stress within the bone is one hundred ninety one megapascals, above
bone's strength limit of one hundred and seventy megapascals.
Our cow cylinder has just collapsed under its own weight.
Now take a look at some real bones here.
This is the long bone from a cow sold as a chew toy for dogs.
To be fair to the cows, I thought I'd show you a long bone from a dog too.
So here's the long bone from a dog.
Take a look at the thickness of the bone in each of their cross-sections here.
There are extreme differences.
You can see in the cow the additional bone that is needed to compensate for the square
cube law.
But compensating with more brown bone brings up another problem.
Bone is twice the density of muscle and water.
And since density is the ratio of mass per volume, if you converted your body to a hundred
percent bone, you'd have twice the mass and twice the weight for the same volume.
The mass matters for movement.
Newton's second law tells us that if you keep the force constant, then if you double
the mass, you're going to have the acceleration.
In the case of muscles, the force that they can generate is proportional to the cross-sectional
area of those muscles.
As animals get bigger, the square cube law tells us that the animal needs to get bigger
muscles or they'll only be able to accelerate more slowly.
In robotics, one way to postpone this trade-off between size and speed is to build walkers
with very light skeletons.
In a people-powered giant spider walker, you can see a trust design, also called a
space frame, that allows for a cadence very close to that of a human walker, about one
cycle per second.
So a totally different way to solve this problem of getting bigger is to build more
forceful motors.
The challenge is to increase force and power without increasing weight, friction, or resistance.
A team led by Dan Granit, a former engineer with NASA, is working to create a new kind
of power system for large robots called hydraulic accumulators.
Powered by a diesel engine, the hydraulic system is pressurized and that potential energy can
be released quickly to rapidly move joints.
As an attraction at monster truck shows, they envision using this hydraulic system to power,
ready for this, a 70-foot tall robot called Bug Juggler.
It's to be large and strong, strong enough that it can juggle three small-sized cars.
The bug in its name refers to Volkswagen Beetles, affectionately known as bugs.
Isn't that crazy?
So the giant Tradino robot that we've already talked about also uses a hydraulic system.
It has a turbo diesel engine that pressurizes 20 gallons of hydraulic fluid fed through
a series of tubes and into leg actuators.
That hydraulic fluid moves the pistons that in turn create the torque that powers the
joints of the legs.
Now Tradino is remote-controlled, it has literally several thousand parts including 262 sensors
and over 40 different hydraulic motors.
So it can't be controlled by a single human, way too complicated.
So what Zollner did was to create functional modules.
Each module has its own localized control, mostly autonomous, that is then controlled
with an overarching control system into which the human taps.
With high-level commands, the human guides the control of head, tail, and legs.
Making Tradino walk was a serious challenge.
The legs have to support the weight of the robot and move in just the right way, a pattern
of footfalls that we call a gate when we are thinking about humans.
To build a gate involves careful coordination.
The engineers had to carefully examine animals and their movement patterns in order to solve
this problem in Tradino.
Now why do two of the world's largest-limbed robots, Bugjuggler and Tradino, use hydraulic
systems?
Hydraulic systems are useful because they allow the motor to be centralized.
The alternative we tend to see in smaller robots, like Hexie here from Archebotics,
is to put a motor in each joint that's associated with a limb.
Let me get Hexie up and running here and show you what's going on.
So I'm going to plug in Hexie's power and then the USB here to the computer and I'm
going to call up the program Pomoko that Archebotics makes available for you to run
Hexie.
And let's ask Hexie to use its motors, let me get the cord out of the way, to stand up.
There we go, very cool.
So Hexie is standing up.
Now a great thing about all these individual motors is that you can easily program different
behaviors by controlling each motor.
So Hexie can stand as you can see.
Now I'm going to control these motors here and Hexie is going to point, sometimes he
tips over, so give him a little slack, pointing, very nice, Hexie, thank you very much.
And you know what?
We're even going to try Hexie dancing.
So now we'll get Hexie moving here.
Hexie, dance, all right, we need some music, I'm not sure what the theme music would be
here for Hexie dancing.
So if you think about Hexie scaling up in size, you can see the problem that's introduced
by Newton's laws, right?
If we have big motors in each joint, then they have to be accelerated with each step.
So here are the servo motors.
So here's the servo motor out here that controls this joint, here's the servo motor right
here that controls that one, and the servo that controls this one is there.
So the motors are out in the limb.
So as Hexie grows, more and more of the motor's torque goes just into accelerating the motor,
and eventually a giant sized Hexie couldn't even move.
With hydraulics, you keep the motor or motors inside the body, and you use fluid to transmit
the force out to the joints.
So for very large robots, a hydraulic system is a clever way around a physical limit.
If we look deeper into the design of Bug Juggler, we can see that the plan for juggling cars
represents another kind of extreme, largest exoskeleton robot.
The Bug Juggler idea is to put a human juggler inside the head of the robot.
He's inside there and attached to a haptic sensory feedback interface.
Basically, he straps on sleeves and gloves that take the movement of his arms and translates
them to the movement of the robot.
Now you sci-fi fans, you may be saying it's about time, remember the Jager Max and the
movie Pacific Rim?
No?
Well, how about the Armored Personnel Unit Corps and their mechanized bipedal combat
suits in Matrix Revolutions?
Or how about Amplified Mobility Platform by the soldiers at Hell's Gate in Avatar?
Robot Fighters and Robot Jocks, Iron Man, these are all powered exoskeletons that increase
the capacity of human beings, their strength, speed, size, ability to use, and wield weapons.
These sci-fi exoskeletons are mobile robots, but Bug Juggler at 70 feet is not.
A tall robot tossing cars and rotating limbs has a big problem, balance.
It would take additional power to move legs around and to control posture and balance.
So if you want a big robot to toss around large objects, the practical first step, so
to speak, is to anchor that robot underground using steel eye beams.
Do we see the same kind of trade-offs happening at the other end of the scale?
At the really small?
But we see challenges for sure, but of a different kind.
You've already seen the tiny capsule robots that you can swallow when we talked about
medical robots shrinking the explorers in the Amazing Voyage movie.
These capsule robots are not the smallest robots around, however.
There are many robots based on the bodies of flies and bees.
Robotic flies and bees, tiny micro-flyers.
This clip shows a robo-bee from Kevin Ma's project in Dr. Wood's Microrobotics Lab at
the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences at Harvard University.
The quarter is shown for scale, and what's impressive is that the tiny little robot flies
at all.
To build a micro-machine that flies and can be powered and controlled with lateral maneuvers
has been a big challenge.
For small robots, a major problem is having enough fuel, enough energy, as we've been
calling it on board.
As Ma and his colleagues have said, quote, long-duration power autonomy awaits advances
in small, high-energy density power sources.
In other words, we need better micro-batteries.
Another problem related to power is that electromagnetic motors, like we've used to
power the wheels or flap tails in our robots, don't scale very well to small sizes.
The magnetic and electrical fields at very small sizes just don't produce much force.
The robo-bee team addressed the tiny motor problem using piezoelectric flight muscles
that converted changes in electrical voltage into a change in length of the tiny motor,
unlike muscles, and better frankly, these little strips of bistable ceramic crystals
can pull like muscle, but can also push like muscle cannot.
A linkage system in the transmission amplifies that small displacement of the piezoelectric
strips into the larger motion driving the wings.
To minimize the power that it takes to flap those wings, a flapping frequency is used that
lies close to the resonance frequency of the whole flight system.
You can think of as the note, the pitch produced when you plucked the string on a guitar.
The robo-bee's wings have a resonance frequency too, and it doesn't take much power to keep
a guitar string or the bee's wings flapping once you get it plucked and you get it moving.
One problem trying to flap the wings near this resonance sweet spot is this, how do
you adjust thrust?
So you don't want to change the frequency, what Ma and his team did was to design a control
scheme where they would instead change the amplitude of the wing beat.
Larger wing beat amplitudes create more thrust.
So to have a robot turn in flight, they could take advantage of having a separate motor
for each wing, changing the amplitude of each wing independently.
The robo-bee is something mighty small indeed, with a wingspan of just over an inch, about
three centimeters, and the robot itself weighs only 80 milligrams.
For comparison, a penny weighs in at 2,500 milligrams, nearly 30 times much as the robot.
The plan in Dr. Wood's micro-robotics lab is to make robo-bee autonomous, both in terms
of carrying its own energy supply and in terms of behavior control.
They imagine swarms of these robo-bees working as pollinators.
To do this, each robo-bee will need to be able to collect and then distribute pollen,
hence the tiny appendage that hangs off the bottom of robo-bee.
Now you may ask yourself, why build a robot to pollinate plants?
Don't we have bees to do that?
Well, you may have heard that the honey bees we depend on to pollinate our fruit bushes
and trees are in trouble, suffering from what is called Colony Collapse Disorder.
These could serve as stand-ins in situations where live bees are unavailable.
Making robo-bees autonomous highlights the trade-offs, by the way, that you encounter
when you try to make micro-robots.
The longer that you want to make your micro-robot to operate on its own without a tether, then
the bigger you have to make the battery, and bigger batteries mean bigger robots.
One intriguing way around the problem of putting energy and control on board a tiny robot is
to build a world outside the robot that contains both.
If you can't modify the robot, modify the environment.
That's one of the principles of robotics that we've been learning.
This approach is allowing nanobots to be created.
With nanobots, the idea is to make tiny robots that operate on the level of molecules, the
same scale as we saw with the molecular electrical motor.
First, let's get ourselves oriented to the size scale we're talking about with nanotechnology.
The scale is typically from 100 nanometers down to 1 nanometer, which is 1 billionth of
a meter.
At this scale is where single molecules, like DNA, live.
So when we talk about building nanomachines, we are talking about being able to manipulate
single molecules.
You've probably worked with molecules yourself before, and the field is called chemistry.
But traditional chemistry is manipulating billions or trillions of molecules and not
individual ones.
So amazingly, a team at Tufts University has built an electric motor from a single molecule.
They bind a single molecule of butyl methyl sulfide to a conductive copper surface.
Using a scanning, toning electron microscope, they then place an electric charge on that
molecule.
The charge causes side changes of the sulfide molecule to rotate, and changes in temperature
control the rate of rotation.
And while these nanoscale motors aren't yet ready to start powering nanorobots, there
is work elsewhere on nanoscale walkers.
Kyle Lund at Arizona State University and his colleagues built what they call molecular
robots, and using DNA is the key.
Other researchers had figured out that a molecule of DNA could walk along a track of DNA, built
of DNA, if you will.
And these are called DNA walkers, or nanowalkers.
Now one thing about DNA that you probably remember from biology class is that it prefers
to bind with itself and to create double strands.
So you can take advantage of this self-attraction and build the track itself out of DNA strands.
A random process known as diffusion will swing one of the legs free of the walker and into
position to hybridize with the track.
That chemical change of the walker signals the trailing leg to release.
So what Lund and his team did was to figure out a way to make that walking not random
but directed.
So rather than trying to program the DNA with those instructions, they built the track with
directionality on it.
In other words, they put the information for the control of movement into the environment.
And because these directed walkers have three deoxyribosome legs carrying another molecule,
they're often called molecular spiders.
And because they can move autonomously and in a predictable way, Lund calls them molecular
robots.
And they're just four nanometers long.
So what's really impressive about the molecular robots is that Lund and his team could build
an environment out of what is called DNA origami that contained information for the nanobots
to start, follow, turn, and stop.
One trade-off that nanobots encounter is that they move slowly.
Lund's molecular robots, when they are really moving quickly, can move about 90 nanometers
in 30 minutes.
That's about three nanometers per minute.
And remembering that the molecular robots are about four nanometers in size, then they
move a little less than one body length per minute.
For a crazy comparison, let's think about how fast Tradino walked.
In absolute speed, Tradino moves much faster than our DNA molecule robots, 1.8 kilometers
per hour, 30 meters per minute.
Now let's think about how the speed converts to body lengths per second, or body lengths
per unit time.
Tradino is officially listed as having a body length of 15 and a half meters.
We divide 30 meters per minute by 15 and a half meters, and we get a relative speed
of almost two body lengths per minute.
By this measure, we have the largest and the smallest robotic walkers moving at about the
same relative speed, one to two body lengths per minute.
Very cool.
Now in absolute terms, OutRunner moves at 33 kilometers per hour, and Tradino at 1.8,
so OutRunner is almost 20 times faster in terms of absolute speed.
But the difference is even larger, stated in terms of body lengths.
OutRunner stands about 0.6 meters tall, so let's put its speed in terms of that body
length.
If we take a speed of 33 kilometers per hour, or 33,000 meters per hour, we get 55,000 body
lengths per hour.
We divide that by 60 minutes to get an amazing 900 body lengths per minute, a speed in terms
of body length that is hundreds of times faster than Tradino or our molecular robot.
So what's going on here?
Why is it that robots at this intermediate size can be built to be the fastest-legged
creatures?
Well, let's start by looking at how OutRunner works.
OutRunner is biologically inspired.
The legs are key here, acting like individual pogo sticks in much the same way that your
legs work when you are running.
And as your leg hits the ground, it compresses storing energy in internal springs, and that
spring energy can be reused to help propel us, or OutRunner, forward and upward, pushing
it as the leg rotates backwards.
Now OutRunner is remotely controlled, turning by virtue of shifting its center of mass like
leaning into a turn, and the speed of rotation can also be controlled, and that helps.
So OutRunner is very efficient.
What that means is per step, per body length, very little energy is used.
The battery on board will last for two full hours.
That's outstanding mission time for something moving so quickly.
Another aspect of OutRunner's design that makes it efficient are those spring-like legs,
which we mentioned, which store and return energy for propulsion.
In addition, those legs are lightweight, and they don't have to be accelerated back and
forth like our legs do, right, we're doing this.
We're rotating around in a circle like a wheel, and so you avoid the inefficiencies
of swinging.
In robotics, we refer to a wheel-leg hybrid as a WEG, W-H-E-G.
So strictly speaking, OutRunner might not be the fastest legged robot after all, but
it's great for seeing how fast legs can go.
So let's get to the basic mechanics of legged locomotion.
As any sprinter knows, speed is the product of your stride length and your stride frequency.
What limits your speed as you walk or run in part is that your stride length is limited
by the length of your legs.
When you run, one of the nifty things that happens is that you actually launch yourself
in the air.
You're leaping from one foot to the other, and that aerial suspension actually increases
your stride length.
Based on stride length alone, we would expect the largest animals, then, to be the fastest.
A horse is a great example of a big and very fast animal that takes advantage of its long
legs.
Secretariat holds the record for the fastest running of the 1.2 mile Kentucky Derby.
He did it in just under two minutes, so Secretariat clocks in with an average speed of 37 miles
per hour.
So the trick, if we were to redesign OutRunner to make it faster, would be either to make
the legs longer or have the legs spin faster.
Would there be any limits?
Let's do this thought experiment.
We keep the legs spinning at the same frequency, but we make them longer.
As their length grows, so does the velocity of the foot, the tip.
No problem.
But as velocity grows linearly out there at the tip of the foot, kinetic energy grows
with the square of velocity.
So if you go twice as fast, the kinetic energy of impact, boom, when you hit the ground,
would be four times as great.
Now what does that mean in practical terms?
Lengthen the legs, speed up the feet, and then you'll break them off.
They'll start snapping.
So what to do?
Obvious.
Make the legs stronger.
Using the same materials you have, you can do that by adding material, making the legs
thicker.
But that adds mass.
But added mass also acts to increase the energy of the impact of the foot with the ground,
so you still break legs off.
Now after that mishap, you might start looking for a different kind of material, something
like carbon fiber that is stronger without adding more mass.
But there's no infinitely strong material, so legs will break if they are long enough
or spin fast enough.
The team building the Cheetah robot broke dozens of legs on their way to setting a new
indoor speed record.
So the general take home message here is that scaling works for animals and robots.
You need to scale your skeleton, your support structure, allometrically, not isometrically,
to compensate for volume and mass increasing faster than the bone's cross-sectional area
or muscle's ability to generate force or a motor's ability to generate force.
So this is one of the major trade-offs in legged robots.
Robots longer need to be stronger.
Speed and size are linked to each other by the laws of physics.
The ability to generate more force per unit mass is key for the largest limbed robots.
To reduce mass as we push the upper limits of size, we can use strong materials and lightweight
structural arrangements to overcome problems that come along with simple isometric scaling.
The ability to have energy and motors on board are challenges for the smallest robots.
You've probably thought a way around this whole problem with legs, by the way, turn
them into wheels.
Well, wheels have a distinct advantage of not impacting feet, they roll over the ground,
and this does indeed let us spin wheels quickly.
So why bother with legged robots?
After all, wheels can spin quickly, carry heavy loads, and are less likely to break.
Well, ever try to get a baby carriage or a wheelchair up steps?
Ever go hiking over boulders?
Legs can be picked and placed, lifted up and over obstacles or steps, and that's very
hard to do with wheels.
Yes, tracks offer great traction compared to wheels in rough terrain, and on soft ground,
tracks can be more stable than legs, but the losses to friction from tracks are considerable.
And for truly uneven terrain, legs will continue to offer a couple of tantalizing advantages.
Robots with legs have the potential, unlike robots with wheels or tracks, to crawl and
climb over obstacles taller than the robot itself.
Robots of extreme size or speed pose extreme challenges for robotics, and using legs increases
those challenges even more, but for moving through extreme environments, robots with
legs will not be the only cool examples of what is possible, but they will be the extreme
examples of what is useful.
