With great autonomy comes great responsibility, and that means that robots like Baxter need
to first and foremost do no harm to humans or to themselves. It also helps, too, if they
can act intelligently in the process to do their jobs. Let's watch Baxter do its job here.
Excellent. I like my robots to be intelligent. In the case of Baxter, its maker, Rethink
Robotics, calls it the world's first robot with common sense. Baxter's common sense starts
with sensors. Right now, as it's operating, it has four sensors in its wrist that can tell
when it's actually picked up a cup. If it drops a cup, it's aware of this as well. So
it's got in each joint sensors that allow it to know position and velocity in each of
its arms and each of its joints here. So this gives it an incredible ability to repeat its
motions and when we train it to learn how we want it to move. So each of Baxter's hands
also has a three-axis accelerometer that's located in the cuff. It's in the same plane
as the electrical grippers that you see operating here. So each sensor gives Baxter a piece of
intelligence and how does that work? Well, you can think of a sensor as being in charge
of answering a question for the robot. The camera on the wrist, let me show you here,
the camera on the wrist asks the question, where is the object on the table? Now in this
particular task, which is called a pick and place task, it's actually doing it blind.
It's not using the camera. But we can do a pick and place task where Baxter will actually
use that camera. There are four sensors that know when these fingers have hit something.
So Baxter has loaded with this kind of intelligence. It can ask things, questions like, am I picking
up an object? Have I just dropped an object? Is the object here or is the object there?
Let's get Baxter going again here. Here we go. Alright, getting it back to work. Here
we go. Baxter is on the job. Now one of the great things about Baxter is in terms of doing
no harm. It can't hurt me, right? It wants to do its job, but it's going to stop moving
if it senses that I'm present. Sensors answer all our questions. A sensor is any device
or mechanism that registers something happening in the world and converts that event into
a signal that can be transmitted to other parts of the robot. Sensors respond to many
different kinds of events, everything from changes in light to the presence of dangerous
gases. In this day and age of electronic systems, sensors convert the response into a common
currency, an electrical signal that the robot's computer can read. For robots, sensors determine
what you know about the world. The best way to explain how sensors work is to show you.
Because the common currency of sensors is electricity, we can look at how sensors change
the resistance, currents, or voltage in an electrical circuit. Let's look at a bunch
of sensors here. We have photoresistors that are sensitive to light. Let me show you one
of those. Here is a close-up of a photoresistor on this circuit board right here. We have
switches that can act as a touch sensor. This is a giant switch. This is a classic sort
of telegraph switch that acts as a sensor. We have things like a ping sensor, which is
a rangefinder that can figure out how far away an object is. We have another kind of
rangefinder, which is an IR proximity detector. A potentiometer right here is a variable resistor
that can be used to signal rotational position. And keep in mind that something like a potentiometer
is used in a servo motor, part of the feedback system, to allow for that motor to achieve
precise control of its motion. We have accelerometers. And right here, I have an accelerometer,
which can convert mechanical vibrations caused by acceleration into an electrical signal.
And they actually work by having tiny micro-electromechanical accelerometers, things that are common
in our smartphones and in our robots. And they work by converting the deflections of
tiny cantilevered beams with a mass at the end into a change in electrical voltage.
Cantilevers can also be of a larger size, like this beautiful baby that I made and I'm
very proud of. This is a force transducer. And when you hang on to one end and then you
hang a weight off the other end, it generates a change in resistance that can be converted
to a change in voltage that can be measured. The way that this force sensor works is this
is a foil strain gauge that is actually glued on to the face of this aluminum. I've got
silicon on the top to keep it waterproofed. Now, that is so tightly adhered, that resistor,
that if you were to take this beam and do this, the tiny little micro-strain that occurs
when I attempt to bend this beam, even though we can't see that bending, would actually
cause a change in resistance of that sensor. And we can pick that up as force. So we see
sensors like this in the arms of Baxter and in bathroom scales and things like that. Now,
what else do we have? We have microphones, which take sound pressure waves, convert it
into electricity. And it does this by vibrating a membrane that's inside, which oscillates
a small magnet that induces a change in an electromagnetic field. Now, we also have,
and we've got Arduino robot as an example of this, we've got on some robots a little
compass, a digital compass. Now, a digital compass is a tiny magnetometer that is sensitive
to the Earth's magnetic dipole and converts that field that wraps the whole Earth into
an orientation relative to magnetic north. So on the screen right here, we have a desired
heading that the robot is trying to navigate towards, and there's an actual heading measured
relative to that magnetic north. So this robot can actually navigate using a compass. So
over here, we have a photoresistor. I've already showed you one, but I'm going to show you
one in action. These are also called, these photoresistors are also called light dependent
resistors because they change their resistance based on how much light is falling on them.
I'm going to turn on this device, which was created by my colleague Larry Doe at Vassar
College and we'll talk about what it's doing here. It's flapping a toy fish. What's really
pretty is there's a mechanical linkage under here, and I can just tilt this back and show
you that mechanical linkage. There's a mechanical linkage that converts a DC geared motor's
motion into this cranking action here. Now, where does the light sensor come into play?
This photoresistor actually controls what would be the equivalent of turning on this
device. So if I put my hand in front of the photoresistor and block the light, you can
see this whole device turns and I remove my hand like so. So this is a great example,
and it all is up here in this simple circuit. This is a great example of hooking up a very
simple sensor like a photoresistor to an actuator to get sensor guided movement. I'm going to
do the same thing in a simple circuit that I have right here as well. This is a little
clearer to see where that photoresistor is, and the circuit includes, let me point this
at this with this piece of wire, there's a transistor which acts as a switch and a fixed
resistor and our variable resistor that we call a light dependent resistor. I'm going
to hook up some power here to this system and what we're going to see on this DC motor
is a little flag that's on there is going to spin. So you can hear and see that change
is based solely on how much light is falling on that photoresistor. So that's a great
example of a really annoying little device there with that noise, but that's a great
example of how to hook up a sensor through a simple circuit into a motor and actually
control the behavior of that motor. So we have our photoresistors here. Let's see, what
other kinds of resistors do we have? We have a whole bunch of simple switches. Switches
turn out to be contacts that are made that create an electrical circuit. This is a beautiful
old knife switch that my friend and colleague Larry Doe has loaned me and you can see right
away what happens when you connect a circuit. These pieces of metal connect to these pieces
of metal and imagine wires coming out on either side. That completes an electrical circuit.
So we know about switches from things like flashlights. I've actually had my colleague
Carl Birchie cut away this flashlight for us so we can see inside here, here's a connection
for a battery and what this switch does is it actually moves a piece of metal that contacts
this upper part of this light source here. So we have simple mechanical switches in lights.
We talked about this telegraph button here and this is a classic toggle switch and you
can see we would wire in the circuitry below here and by turning this one way or another
we'd either complete the circuit or disrupt that circuit. We can put switches into action
and robots as well. This is a robot that's called TootBot. TootBot is so called because
it's short for tutorial robot and if you're interested in the circuit this is made available
by Jerry Jones from his work on robotics and what we have here again is energy supply.
We have a simple circuit and I'm going to turn this on now. I'm just going to show you
what's happening here. Without anything happening we have the wheels moving the vehicle forward.
Now watch what happens when I hit this little button up here. So I'll do it really quickly
here on the tabletop. TootBot moves back when you hit that little button. Okay I'm going
to turn that off because that's kind of annoying too making all that noise. What these little
buttons are is they're very simple little switches. When we throw that switch in what's
essentially a bump sensor what happens is that causes relays that are in this circuit
to change the direction that current is flowing through the motors. So when we change the
direction of the current with that simple switch the direction of the wheels reverses
and that gives us this backup motion and if we had room to show you TootBot what you would
see is it would back up. One of the wheels would turn off sooner than the other one
and it would tilt and we could have wall following behavior which we've seen in some of our other
robots. The difference in how long each of those wheels actually keeps moving depends
on the energy that goes into these two devices which are called capacitors. That's just a
neat part of our circuit. Capacitors act as temporary batteries. Alright so that's what
we can do with switches so we tend to see a lot of switches in robots. Okay so we've
also seen switches working in sophisticated robots like Roomba and Roomba works in a much
more sophisticated way than what we see in TootBot. In fact Roomba is actually sensitive
to where on its bumper you hit it so it can change direction depending on which side you're
hitting it on. So Roomba also has a number of other sensors that are very much like this
IR sensor that we talked about. It's got an array of them on its front bumper so when
it approaches a wall it can actually kick in an avoidance behavior. So Roomba is in action
when it's using this kind of sensory system to go through legs of tables and things like
that without having to bump them. Okay I want to show you another kind of sensor called
a ping sensor. It's an active sensor. One side sends out a signal and the other side
is waiting for that signal to return. The signal is actually ultrasound. We can't hear
it. Okay and so it's coming out and coming back at the speed of sound. This robot Sparky
has a ping sensor right up here what kind of looks like its eyes that you see here. I'm
going to turn Sparky on. Sparky is set up to be having the ping sensor which is really
an ultrasonic range sensor. Send out a signal and since Sparky doesn't have a front bumper
what we're going to see here is I tilt Sparky down. The range sensor goes red. Sparky backs
up. I'll show you that in a second. I'm going to have to set them up like this. Goes forward.
Sparky has this manipulator up front so it doesn't want a bumper and so there it detected
my hand. It backed up so it has a virtual bumper. Sparky is never going to run into anything
using its ping sensor. You can also use a range finder to figure out how far away something
is so they're very useful and I want to talk about them in the same way that we've talked
about these IR sensors before. These IR range sensors also send out a signal. This is light
and they're not looking at the speed at which it comes back but they're looking at the intensity
at which the light is reflected back. Both of these sensors are active sensors. They
both emit energy and wait for that energy to return and figure out something about the
world based on that. Now that's quite different than the photoresistor that we talked about.
The photoresistor is a passive sensor. It is not emitting energy at all. So that's a basic
fundamental dichotomy in the way that sensors work. They're either passive or they're active.
So that's really important when we think about how to use sensors in designing robots here.
I want to show you another really cool implementation of an IR sensor. This is from Hexbug. They
call it a larva. Out in front, this larva has an IR sensor. Watch how it uses this IR
sensor. Now here, it's easier to show here. It never touches me. Thank goodness. It's
kind of creepy looking. It uses the IR sensor to, without having to hit anything, know that
it's about to hit something and then it backs up. Another implementation by Hexbug of sensors
includes this Hexbug original which has two passive sensors. It's got a touch sensor which
is basically a switch on its antennae here and then it has in the back a microphone which
causes back up. So we've got in Hexbugs great examples of passive sensors and active sensors.
You know, these are really cool robots. We've got active passive sensors. They do a lot of
things with it. I love the compass navigation, but we're missing something. We're missing
vision. Vision is something that as humans and mammals, we rely heavily upon. So where
does that fit in with robotics and sensors? Here is a camera that's built to be part of
a robot system. We've used these cameras before to do things like detect objects. Now you
have to, when you detect an object, be very careful that you color that object and what
you usually do is you look for color blobs that are unique in that particular environment.
And in fact, that's how Baxter works when we use Baxter's vision to detect objects.
Let's go back here and revisit our buddy, Baxter. So we had talked about Baxter's sensors
that are in the joints. Baxter also has cameras and ultrasonic ping sensors. Let's talk about
the cameras first. I'm going to grab Baxter's wrist and I'm going to ask it to do what
we're going to call a new task. And I'm going to hit the action button here and then I'm
going to select landmark. And what landmark does, you're going to move Baxter's screen
around so that you can see what's happening, is Baxter has turned on a camera that's in
its wrist. Isn't that just the weirdest thing to say? I'm going to look through my wrist.
So you can see here that Baxter's actually looking down at my feet here in the floor.
You can actually see, if I put my hand here, you can actually see the two fingers that
are part of Baxter's manipulator. So the idea with this camera in Baxter is that you can
use things like color detection to figure out if you're looking at an object that you
want to pick up. So this is great. It allows for a very flexible kind of pick in place
that's not a blind pick in place, but that's actually active sensing using camera as your
visual system, as your sensory system. So cameras are very useful, but they're also
very difficult and require a lot of processing in order to work. And that's really shown
here when you look at this camera, look at all the electronics behind this camera to
make it work. There's a lot of processing that has to go on in order to do something
simple like detect color blobs and use them. Now, when we start thinking about sensors,
we've been talking about them as though they exist as individual sensors. We had looked
at the bump sensor here in TootBot, and we'd seen two switches helping us out. But there's
another way to think about building sensors, and that is as a raise of sensors. And this
is a device that my colleague Larry Doe built, which is actually using an array of emitters
and a single sensor to build what's approximately an IR rangefinder. So each of these are LEDs
that are emitting infrared light. In the middle is an infrared receiver, and that's
covered up by black, so it's not affected by the light that's being emitted here. So
this array of sensors and emitters is a way to build from scratch a combination of devices
to give us range finding. Now, we can also use the same principle. So this is a less
pretty device, so clearly I built it. I don't have Larry's skill here. With help from my
friend Bob Souter, I built a device called an IR Tecometer. What's very common is that
in robotics is we want to do things like keep track of how many times a wheel has been revolving.
Let me pick up one of our wheeled robots to explain why that's an important thing to
understand. So when a wheel is moving, if we keep track of how many revolutions it's
made, if we can sense that motion, we can figure out by knowing the size of the wheel
what the speed of that robot is. If you know speed and the time that a robot's been going
at that speed, the product of the two allow you to calculate the distance that you've
covered. This is going to be really critical when we talk about navigation of robots, and
it's the essence of the kind of navigation that we call dead reckoning. So sensors and
tecometers help us figure that out. So a tecometer counts the number of times something like
a wheel has made revolutions. So what we do here is we have, just like you saw on that
other device, we have an IR emitter, an LED, and a receiver, and what we're doing is we're
having them talk right to each other, and if you can imagine the spoke of a wheel that
is breaking through here, that's not a good example because that's too far away. Let me
push these a little further away. So if you can imagine the spoke of a wheel coming through
here, once a revolution, we would see a little change in signal that we could detect, and
that would allow us to keep track of wheel revolutions. Another type of sensor makes
use of the Hall Effect, which was first discovered in 1879. And the Hall Effect is a sideways
disruption of the flow of electrical current. That disruption may be caused by a magnet,
and it creates a change in voltage that can be detected and measured by a Hall Effect sensor.
And that's not goodness. By careful placement of magnets, Hall Effect sensors can be used
to measure electrical current flow, as well as the position and velocity of motors and
other moving parts. So you can use them in the same way to count wheel revolutions. So
we can really understand the importance of sensors if we think about what life is like
for any robot without sensors at all. The first factory robots had none, by the way. They
were robotic manipulators, arms, that would go through the motions with very high speed
and accuracy, but without having any feedback at all. See no evil? Hear no evil. Imagine
how this would be. I'll move my arm here, open my fingers, move down two centimeters,
and pick something up, close my fingers, lift my arm, rotate shoulder in here, open my fingers
over and over. This works wonderfully if you want to have a conveyor belt that's always
putting something there for me to pick up and play somewhere else. But if you wanted
to play a trick on me, like my sisters, you could always move the world, right, and make
sure there was never an object near. So I'm always trying to pick something up, but I
never did any work, and I would never know it. All my efforts would be for naught. So
just to make clear, that kind of movement without sensing is not intelligent in the way
that we're talking about it with modern robotics. Baxter, by the way, avoids having this problem
by having force sensors in its fingers. It can tell if it's holding something or has
dropped something. Now, let's think about a counter example. All sensing and no movement.
Is there such a thing? Yes. It's called a weather buoy, and they are located in the
ocean. That's one such device without any actuation and just sensors. Now a weather
buoy that's floating on the surface of the water carries a variety of sensors. It has
an anemometer on the tip of the pole that measures the speed of the wind. That same
sensor can measure the direction of wind using a weather vane. The buoy can also be outfitted
with sensors to measure the temperature of the air and the water, barometric pressure,
humidity, wave action, currents, water chemistry, environmental factors, and pollution. This
weather buoy may be floating freely or it can be tethered, and the solar panels charge
onboard batteries that power those sensors, its data logger, and its communication system.
So the weather buoy communicates via satellite to computers on land. Now, is the weather buoy
intelligent in the sense we talked about maybe somebody like Sparky being intelligent with
sensor-motor interactions? Well, we saw Sparky's response to me putting my hand in front by
changing its behavior. That's really movements with a purpose, like moving and not trying
to hit something. And those are the hallmarks of an intelligent robot. So robots are built
to move themselves like Sparky or to move objects like Baxter using the cameras to sense
what it has or whether it's got something in its manipulators. So without moving itself
or objects in response to sensor readings, I'm sorry, but I'd have to say that the weather
buoy isn't intelligent. And to be fair, it isn't a robot either. What are you going to
do? Another way to think about active sensors working is that they are actually communicating
with the world. They send out a signal and wait for its return. A great example of this
is what we see in a remote control unit. And most remote controls, including ones for Roomba
and other robots, work on the IR system. So the same kind of emitter detector system that
we have here in that ticometer device that I showed you is what's happening here in a
remote control unit. So it is sending out a signal and there's a receiver on the other
end that's waiting for that signal. So for short distances, that works really well for
that kind of communication. Now, the coolest example I know of using visible light for
communication comes from underwater robots that operate in a swarm and rely on communication
with flashing blue lights. And let me just say, I said visible light here, this is actually
light that's coming out, we just can't see it. So you can actually, like Paul Revere,
use flashing lights and that's what a really nifty project called Kokoro, which stands
for Collective Cognitive Robotics uses. So this is a lily robot that you're seeing and
a lily robot moves underwater and uses blue lights on its body to signal other lily robots.
So those other robots have sensors that can detect when blue light is on. Notice the similarity
here with our homemade proximity detector that I was showing you or a remote control.
So we have a signal sent and a signal received. The difference with the lily robots is that
the sender and the receiver are on two different robots. So when we see lily in action, what
we see happening is that we're looking into a pool and we can see seven lily robots, three
of which have their blue lights on. They are signaling that they have seen blue lights
on and at least one other robot. The robot that has all got all this started is called
a Jeff robot. And it's down at the bottom of the screen underwater below the bottom
of the most lily. Now what's really nifty is that a single lily robot can communicate
to a robot on the other end of the swarm by using the lily robots that are intermediate
to form a string or a chain of messengers. Isn't that cool? You can think of this as
roughly the equivalent of using mountaintop fires to communicate an emergency signal or
a call to arms or think of the chain as a bucket brigade. And what's impressive about
the Kokoro project is that many different types of signals can be communicated. The
whole swarm of robots can learn about a local situation by watching and communicating with
different patterns of visible light. So a sensor is any device or mechanism that registers
something happening in the world and converts that event into a signal that can be transmitted
inside a robot and to other parts of the robot. We have two main types of sensors that we've
talked about, passive and active. Passive sensors, like the cameras, are built only as
receivers. Active sensors, like our IR proximity sensors, are built to send and receive, communicating
with themselves, if you will, by way of echoes and reflections off the world. We can split
apart the sender and receiver of active sensors, put them on different robots like we just
saw with the lily robots, or we can put humans in the sensor loop and then we have a communication
system. For robots, the specific sensors deployed, whether single in arrays or of different types,
determine what you can know about the world. What you do with that information, how you
act in response to your sensor reading, marks the origin of intelligent behavior in robots.
