Over a million robots are at work in factories all over the planet.
In every year, 100,000 new industrial robots and more are purchased with numbers led by
factories in Japan, China, the United States, Korea, and Germany.
These robots help us manufacture cars, electronics, medical devices, medicines, pharmaceuticals,
food and beverages, metals, chemicals, plastic, and rubber, lots of stuff.
One of the largest producers of the industrial robots is the German company KUKA, which has
been building robots since 1973.
And robots even help us manufacture other robots, something the Japanese company FANUC
pioneered back in 1985.
There are even robots to maintain other robots.
Virtually all of these robots are not humano.
They're specialized robotic manipulators, and their workplace is the highly structured,
highly predictable world of the industrial factory.
The tasks of robotic manipulators involve repetitive, quick, and highly accurate movements
to grasp, move, manipulate, assemble, and tool.
With tools in hand, these robots can file, and paint, and assemble, cut, polish, flame,
weld, bond, glue, and seal, inspect, and sort.
Industrial robots all began as variations on a theme, a robotic arm.
The link is a rigid body that maintains the distance between joints and often contains
the motors that power the movement of neighboring joints.
The joint of robotic manipulator is usually of one or two types, Revolut or Prismatic.
Revolut joints rotate or revolve, and Prismatic joints slide.
We humans have mostly Revolut joints, and many of these joints revolve around a hinge,
so-called hinge joints.
Now a classic hinge joint is our elbow, and I've got an upper arm and two lower arm bones
of a human skeleton here.
So an elbow rotates through a single kinematic degree of freedom.
Kinematics is the study of motion without considering the forces that generate those motions.
Include forces, and if you include forces in your study of motion, it's called dynamics.
So kinematics and dynamics are hugely important in factory robots because we want a machine
whose motions can be controlled precisely, and you have to control those motions by understanding
forces as well.
Now when a joint has a single degree of freedom, in kinematic terms we say its position can
be described with a single mathematical variable, which we typically measure in a Revolut joint
anyway as an angle.
So your elbow has a single degree of freedom that can rotate through an angle of about
150 degrees or so.
Now anatomy is at once an inspiration and a challenge for roboticists.
Let me take you through a wonderful joint that we all possess, the shoulder joint.
Technically it's known as the glenohumeral joint.
The glenohumeral joint is sometimes called a ball and socket joint because the head of
the humerus is hemispherical, half a ball, and fits into a socket.
This depression in the scapula, the shoulder blade, is called the glenoid fossa.
I have here, this is the forelimb of a pig, to show you the head of that humerus bone
right here, here's the scapula or shoulder blade, and they come together in that ball
and socket joint.
So the head of the humerus can rotate in three rotational axes, each with their own range
of motion.
I actually can't do it on this skeleton because it's linked together in order to keep it in
one place.
Now let me do it with my arm instead.
If you think about my arm here as an aerial vehicle, we talk about three axes of rotation.
So there's pitch, which is up and down, yaw, this way, and roll, this way.
Now in anatomy, we talk about abduction, which is going this way so that upper arm moving
away from the body, adduction is the opposite for pitch.
For flexion and extension, we have this going this way, up and down, and medial rotation
is this rolling motion I was doing, medial rotation and lateral rotation.
So how is all this motion controlled?
Well, depending on how you partition and name your muscles, one shoulder joint has motion
controlled by at least 10 different muscles.
Now let me show you something amazing that our shoulders can do.
I'm going to close my eyes and, you ready?
Clap my hands.
I know it doesn't seem amazing, but as we get older, we're very happy to be able to
do simple things like that.
But really, what's amazing is that I not only controlled 10 muscles in both my shoulders
on both sides, but I also controlled the rest of my muscles in my arms and my wrists.
Blind, I was able to take all of these motors and degrees of freedom, plan and then enact
a collision between my end effectors, my hands.
Now what makes this possible for all of us is that we have what is called proprioception,
a bunch of sensors that notice the position of our joints and the effort of our muscles.
These sensors are stretch receptors embedded in our ligaments and tendons.
I can clap my hands with my eyes shut or open because this is all about sensor guided movement.
Even though this is easy for us, for a roboticist coordinating even just 10 different motors
though, a single arm is a nightmare.
So many motors make predictable, accurate control of motion, extremely difficult even
when you have sensors to monitor every position of every joint.
So what's a roboticist to do?
Designing robotic manipulators always involves trade-offs and those trade-offs come between
the range of motion and the control of that motion.
So one common engineering trick is to constrain every joint to be a single degree of freedom.
This allows you to simplify the motion and its control.
Then you can add degrees of freedom back in with more single degree of freedom joints.
You can also make more complex joints like the ball and socket but you just won't find
these on most robotic manipulators and that's because the fundamental function of a robotic
manipulator is simple pick and place.
Pick and place.
Picking something up and placing it somewhere else.
We have humans have been doing this for as long as we've been on two feet picking fruit,
wielding tools, right?
The first record we have on the other hand of a programmable pick and place robot is
actually quite recent from 1938.
Griffith P. Taylor published an article called an automatic block setting crane, mechano
model controlled by a robotic unit and he published this in Meccano magazine.
Now at first glance his model looks like a fancy toy but if you read the article you
can see the system is programmable and that's really fantastic.
What the machine does is to pick up a series of bricks and create a circular stack automatically
in about 50 minutes.
If we look at the degrees of freedom in joints in Taylor's robot we see that it has one rotational
degree of freedom that allows the arm to swing around.
It has another rotational degree of freedom that allows the grip out at the end of the
dangling cable to swivel and then the gripper itself has jaws that rotate to hold the bricks.
These joints are all revolute.
In addition Taylor's robot has two translational degrees of freedom with prismatic joints.
Let's look at these joints carefully.
This is the equivalent of being able to change the length of the sections or linkages on
your arm.
First, the rigging that's hanging down can move in and out along the main truss that
creates the horizontal part of the arm.
Translational degree of freedom number one.
Second, the cables themselves arranged in block and tackle scheme can change their length.
Raising or lowering the grippers.
That's translational degree of freedom number two.
In total Taylor's robot has five degrees of freedom to allow it to pick and place bricks.
It is automatically controlled and reprogrammable by the tape that Taylor mentions in his article.
Taylor's pick and place robot from 1938 fits the international definition by the way for
industrial robots which was created by the international organization for standardization
and it's listed as ISO number 8373.
Quote automatically controlled reprogrammable multipurpose manipulator programmable in three
or more axes which may be either fixed in place or mobile for use in industrial automation
applications.
End quote.
Very cool.
So you can see why some people consider Taylor's invention to be the very first robotic manipulator
ever.
Now as so often happens it takes years for an idea for a robot to be translated into
commercial applications.
The first U.S. patent for a commercially successful industrial robot was actually granted in 1961
to George Duvall.
The patent was called programmed article transfer.
Not particularly exciting title I know but what it did was really important.
Article transfer is a fancy name for pick and place.
What you see when you look at the figures from this patent are tracks along which the
transfer apparatus moves.
Parallel to those tracks runs a conveyor belt.
The arm of the transfer apparatus reaches across the conveyor belt, grabs cartons from
the pallets and then transfer those cartons back to the conveyor belt.
A farsighted feature of Duvall's patent was a feedback loop between the sensors detecting
the position and the program controller.
So Duvall's patent envisioned the robot knowing that its armor gripper has gotten into the
right position because the sensor detects that motion.
So think about all the sensors that are in our arms or in the arms of Baxter.
So just like as we've been talking about when it works this is proprioception, though reliable
sensor based movement turned out to be an ongoing challenge for robotics.
Now by the time that Duvall received his patent in 1961 he'd already formed a company
back in 1956 when he had first applied for the patent.
The company formed with serial entrepreneur Joseph Engelberger was called Unimation which
was short for Universal Automation.
Unimation became the first company to build robots that went to work for industry and
those robots were called Unimates.
The first Unimate robot was installed in 1962 in a General Motors factory.
The Inland Fisher Guide Plant in Turnstead, New Jersey.
GM used the Unimate to lift hot pieces of metal from a die casting machine and stack
them.
In this classic film taken in the 1970s you can see a Unimate in action.
The worker is first adjusting the gripping system for the task at hand.
You're actually going to see several different Unimates here.
The first is showing off in the showroom swinging around, raising and lowering its arm, then
it rotates its gripper, extends its arm and picks up an object.
I count five degrees of freedom there.
Then precision placement of objects into a hole is what we see next, where a Unimate
is on an assembly line picking up hot die cast metal, cooling it off in a water bath
and then placing the piece on a conveyor belt.
Accurate, repeatable control of robotic manipulators was critical for their development
and two different ways of thinking about movements developed.
Forward and inverse kinematics.
In both approaches we are interested in the position and orientation of that end effector,
the hand, just like when we grab something.
In forward kinematics we can compute the end effector position by measuring the joint angles
and knowing the lengths of the links.
Trigonometry will do the trick mathematically and it allows us to transform what we call
the joint space of angles into the Cartesian space of the XYZ coordinates of the effector.
Now with forward kinematics it's easy to move the robot and then calculate its position.
In inverse kinematics we pose the problem the other way around.
This may be much harder to do.
First we have to identify the position that we want the end effector to occupy, perhaps
some constraints about the path to take and then calculate the movements of the arm that
will do the job.
We can think of that inverse kinematics problem this way.
If we want the end effector to be at position XYZ then calculate all possible combinations
of joint settings that would make that possible.
Now we've already talked about the trade off between the range of motion and the control
of motion and inverse kinematics is the formal way to wrap our heads around that problem.
Let's start with a simple example of design, an arm with a single degree of freedom.
Like here actually in clawbot where we have just a single degree of freedom in that joint.
So we have a revolute joint with a base and then a linkage here.
If you know the length or the radius in this case of the linkage then the angle of 45 degrees
tells you exactly where the arm and the end effector is in the plane of rotation.
So you can see right away that the problem with a single degree of freedom is that the
tip of your robotic arm where you are likely to have a gripper or something that's holding
on and doing some work, it can't be in very many places, it can only be along that circumference.
That end effector is constrained to that circumference.
So how do you set it free?
Well you add a second hinge joint so now your arm has two degrees of freedom.
To describe the position of the tip of the arm you need the angle that describes the
position of the two linkages of the arm.
In the case that I've got the position of the arm is described by just two numbers then.
45 degrees and let's say negative 30 degrees.
So now we can think of how a controller might control the motion and position of the arm.
Let's call our original joint joint A.
The second joint we added joint B.
The plan that the controller is putting into motion is to tell the actuators which are
the motors that control the position of each joint to move joint A to 45 degrees and joint
B to negative 30 degrees.
Now given this trade off one of the most important things to consider when building or buying
an industrial robot is the minimum number of degrees of freedom that you need.
Every time you increase your range of motion by adding a degree of freedom you exponentially
increase the computational problem of controlling that motion.
So in practice the range of possible solutions are usually obtained by imposing additional
constraints.
So far we've mostly been describing what might be called numerically controlled machine
tool or a blind robot in an open control loop.
But if we want a robot that knows whether its arm is in the right place then here's
where the sensors come into play.
Sensors can measure the actual position of each joint and provide feedback to the controller
for possible adjustments.
The sensors are providing information to the controller.
Is a joint at 45 degrees?
Is a joint at 30 degrees?
So clawbot has external sensors so you're right here to keep track of the motion of
this part of the joint and down below clawbot has external sensors to help with motion control.
These are electrical switches that are used as limit sensors.
When clawbot moves its arm if it moves to the end of its range it hits a limit sensor
which turns off the motor powering it.
The sensors that robotic manipulators use to measure the position of their joints and
end effectors vary.
If the joints are powered by servo motors sensory control is actually built into the
motor.
So I've got a servo motor here.
Inside the servo you have the electrical motor and the equivalent of what we call underneath
here a potentiometer.
I just pointed that out on clawbot's arm it's basically a volume knob.
It's a variable resistor that signals angular position by changing voltage in a circuit.
And then on the top of the servo here we have a bunch of gears that connect up the motion
of the motor and the potentiometer which is right here.
Now instead of servos many industrial robots use stepper motors which are more powerful
and precise than servo motors but stepper motors don't have built in sensors so we
have to use external sensors.
Servo and stepper motors measure and adjust position continuously.
Now from the perspective of range of motion one of the amazing things about adding a degree
of freedom is that by the laws of combinatorics the number of possible positions or states
of our system explodes.
The blue band represents any of an unimaginable large number of positions the tip of our robotic
arm could occupy.
I've copied a few of the circles created by our second linkage the one that rotates thanks
to joint B to show you the geometry of how this works.
In real industrial robots the degrees of freedom that you add don't need to be kept in a plane.
If you want your arm to reach around in three dimensions then you need to have one axis one
joint that is oriented perpendicular to the axis of the other joints.
The increased range of motion plus control over that motion is more flexible and it gives
what we call in robotics dexterity.
We also call it that in humans too right?
So the challenge as we increase the range of motion and dexterity the complexity of
our control system has to increase too.
Let's look at some of the key approaches for handling the trade-offs between the range
of motion and the control of motion.
In 1973 the KUKA Robot Company made headlines when they introduced the first industrial
robot with six degrees of freedom.
The robot was called Famulus and it was built for automotive manufacturing as about a third
of the industrial robots are still today.
Famulus was an articulated robot which means it had any number of revolute joints.
You'll see articulated robots in the food industry for example.
In a bread factory KUKA robots pick up containers of bread and transfer them to pallets building
stacks of bread that will be carted off to market.
A very different kind of manipulator is a Cartesian robot which has three prismatic joints
remember those are telescopic joints and the three prismatic joints are arranged perpendicular
to each other.
Because those joints are sliding they can also be made into very long treks into what
are called gantry robots.
The robots at the Mansuedo Library of the University of Chicago are giant gantry robots.
A spherical or polar robot replaces the revolute elbow joint of an articulated robot with a
prismatic joint.
The term sphere refers to the shape of the working space of the end effector.
The unimate robots were spherical robots with a telescopic joint that allowed them to reach
for a sample or to weld a particular spot and then retract to get out of the way.
Because spherical robots have just three degrees of freedom they too are easier to control
than articulated robots which now usually have six.
But because they lack a large range of motion we tend not to see many spherical robots in
operations these days.
So in between the spherical robot and the Cartesian robots is the cylindrical robot
where the working space is a cylinder.
To get this shape we need the first joint to be prismatic raising the arm up and down.
A revolute joint spins to create a circle and a second prismatic joint telescopes a
revolute wrist joint.
Cylindrical robots are used in applications like spot welding.
Now a big breakthrough for simplicity came in the late 1970s when the first SCARA robots
were developed supposedly inspired by a Japanese style folding screen.
SCARA stands for Selective Compliance Assembly Robot Arm.
But the trick was not in saying that but in redesigning the work into a series of simpler
tasks to suit the simpler robot.
SCARA robots have three revolute joints but unlike ordinary articulated robots all three
joints operate in the same plane so that SCARA robots can move the end effector very precisely
more precisely than articulated robots.
The end effector is located on a fourth joint a prismatic joint that is perpendicular to
the plane of the revolute joints.
Because the three revolute joints aren't restricted in size by needing to move perpendicular
to each other SCARA robots can also have very large motors to power the joints making them
some of the fastest robotic manipulators available.
SCARA robots are very good for things like the surprisingly difficult task of placing
and tightening screws.
I know I find that frustrating.
While the early industrial robots did the same job all day long day after day a breakthrough
for flexibility came with PUMA robots.
These were programmable robots PUMA stood for Programmable Universal Machine for Assembly
developed at Stanford and supported by General Motors.
Finally, the world's fastest robotic manipulators are typically parallel robots.
The idea is to build multiple arms in parallel working together like pairs of arms.
The trick here is to move rapidly without crushing the food so the arms tend to be very
low mass and that allows very rapid accelerations and decelerations.
Because robotic manipulators work very rapidly often with a lot of power part of the design
of the robot is also to design the workplace.
Safety is a big consideration.
In 1979 in a Ford Motor casting plant Robert Williams became the first human killed by
a factory robot.
Reports say that the robot had begun moving more slowly and Williams tried to climb into
a storage rack to remove parts by hand when he was hit in the head by the one ton robot
and he was killed instantly.
The standard way to make it safe for humans and robots to work together is well to keep
them from working together at least physically.
The work areas for industrial robots in traditional factories are very clearly defined and humans
are kept out of those areas which are called safety cages.
As you can imagine though these restrictions limit the work that robots do.
What about creating a robot that can not only work solo but also on an assembly line and
can do so next to a human without injury?
Flexible easy to use robots that can work alongside humans were the goal of Rodney Brooks
when he created the company that is now called Rethink Robotics.
It created the robot Baxter which it commercially released in 2012.
Now let's compare Baxter to earlier industrial robots we've been discussing.
First Baxter is lightweight compared to standard industrial robots weighing just 165 pounds
without its pedestal which is down below.
For comparison the popular KR210R2700 extra robotic manipulator by KUKA weighs over 2000
pounds.
Now Baxter has far less mass and hence can do far less damage.
As a trade off and to be fair to KUKA Baxter can also only lift a much smaller payload
about 5 pounds maximum.
Now second most industrial robotic manipulators have 6 degrees of freedom in an arm.
Baxter has 7, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 here.
An extra degree of freedom is in that end effector manipulator.
So the extra degrees of freedom gives Baxter the ability to make fine scale movements and
adjustments as it approaches a target and it places a target somewhere else.
This gives Baxter more dexterity.
Baxter has two industrial arms and they each have dynamic awareness of each other.
It's like we've got two robots welded together here, two machines in a single one.
Let me show you how they interact which is not at all.
There's a force field when I try to bring these arms together.
I'm actually trying to slam these arms together and you can see they're bouncing apart and
that's just a really cool interference that's built into Baxter to keep it from the arms
from slamming into each other.
So Baxter's controller sends signals that keeps the arms apart and here's the key.
The arms have to know where they are and the overall robot has to know where each of the
arms are relative to each other.
Fourth, even more important, Baxter's joints are compliant.
See this sort of springiness that's in here?
That's compliance.
So because they're not stiff, when we interact with Baxter, its joints give way and this compliance
is made possible by serial elastic elements that are actually inside, we can't see them,
that link the motors to the joints that they control.
These elements are springs and they make sure that if Baxter does happen to run into anything
like me, it will immediately pull on the spring and not send a lot of force from the motor
into that collision.
Fifth point, if you are running your own small manufacturing business, one of the great features
of Baxter is you don't have to be an engineer to program it.
You just grab onto the wrist here like this and then you guide Baxter to do the motions
that you want it to do.
That's so cool, right?
Baxter learns by doing.
Now let's get Baxter to do what Taylor did in 1938 and his robot used bricks to build
a structure.
So I'm going to set this up.
We've previously trained Baxter to do this.
Let's get him going here.
All right, Baxter, do your thing.
So what we're doing here is the kind of task that in 1938 Taylor had his robot do, which
is to use bricks to construct a structure.
Let's see if you can tell what we're making here as Baxter makes it.
So this is dual pick and place tasks happening with each of these arms, which is really two
different robots.
We already know that they can't collide, so they're built to not interact and you can
see they're taking turns.
So we've sequenced how they're working here.
That final right arm is going to do the final move here of the pyramid.
Oh, I gave it away.
I asked you what it was.
The pyramid structure that we built here, ta-da, Baxter has done the task here.
Very cool.
And remember, we programmed this in a matter of minutes.
So Baxter is the next generation of robots for the factory.
It's built to be easily and quickly programmed by direct training, and it's completely safe
to operate around humans.
So I can imagine having Baxter in a small factory setting where he produced different
kinds of products on different days would be easy to adjust Baxter to the new object
to move every day.
Because Baxter's safe to be around, I wouldn't hesitate, for example, to have it loading up
boxes with custom chocolates or electronics or whatever I was making in my sort of home
office or home factory.
Thanks, Baxter.
But what's the trade-off?
I know I keep asking that question, but there are always trade-offs in robotics.
And Baxter, unfortunately, is no exception.
Now Baxter is lightweight, but the maximum weight he can actually handle is five pounds
per arm.
Baxter is easy to train, safe to work around, and highly dexterous with seven degrees of
freedom in both arms.
However, Baxter is not as fast or precise as a SCARA or parallel robot, and not as powerful
as the classic articulated robots that work in automobile factories.
But that's alright.
As one of the first collaborative robots, or co-bots for short, Baxter is defining new
roles for industrial robots and really helping to bridge from industrial robotics to what
we are starting to call service robotics, where robots are designed from the start to
interact safely with humans.
Now other robotic companies are also working to make robots more collaborative with humans.
KUKA Robotics, one of the world's leaders in articulated industrial robots, is making
slower, lightweight robots with compliant joints for work as service robots.
So you can see where we've come with industrial robots.
Starting with Taylor and DeVall, we have the origins of the robotic arm, a highly successful
class of robots that has forever changed the nature of work and the factory.
And now we have newer robots like Baxter able to work alongside humans and able to learn
by doing, so they can quickly be incorporated into lower volume, lighter load situations
where the work changes quickly.
It's the beginning of interactive robotics.
So what do you say, Baxter?
How about a high five?
Yeah!
