Britain and the United States have been blessed by political stability.
Britain has had no revolution in over 300 years and the United States none in over 200,
even though every other industrialized nation has been through the ordeal, sometimes repeatedly.
Conservative writers and politicians, impressed by this stability, have been anxious to preserve
it and fearful lest it be destroyed by radical new political or social movements.
John Stuart Mill once described conservatives as the stupid party, because they seem to
oppose all innovations and to reject all novel ideas.
It's probably true that the most prosperous, most self-satisfied and least curious members
of any society have a direct incentive to be conservatives.
When conservatism is merely the defense of privilege by the privileged, it's neither
impressive nor interesting.
Anglo-American conservatism, however, is much more than that.
It has a rich and varied lineage and has accumulated a great fund of ideas and principles, while
attracting some of the most gifted members of every generation.
In this course, I'll describe and explain the history of conservative ideas and politics
in Britain and America and the connection between the two.
My starting point is the glorious revolution of the late 17th century, at which point royal
power was curbed and Parliament became the central feature of the British political system.
My end point will be around the year 2000, when it was clear that the Western democracies
had not only outlived but had defeated the great totalitarian menaces of the 20th century,
Nazism and Communism.
Along the way, I plan to introduce the most brilliant theorists and practitioners of conservatism.
Among the former, the theorists are Edmund Burke, the Anglo-Irish politician and writer,
who gave us the most astringent denunciation of the French Revolution that was ever written,
just as that revolution was getting underway.
And Henry Adams, the gloomy American genius of the late 19th century, who told his contemporaries
that industrial dynamos were a far less impressive symbol of civilization than the stained glass
windows of Sharp's Cathedral, which had been crafted 600 years earlier.
Among the latter, the practical politicians are Alexander Hamilton, who helped put the
United States on a sound political and economic footing in the earliest days of the Constitution,
and Winston Churchill, the uncompromising and inspiring leader of Britain, when alone it
faced the mendacious power of Nazi Germany.
As you watch or listen to these lectures, you'll probably wonder where I stand on these
issues, whether I'm a conservative too, and if so, of what stripe?
I believe a historian's principal concern should be to describe and explain, while keeping
his or her opinions as far in the background as possible.
With luck, you'll be as mystified about my political views at the end as you are at the
beginning.
But you'll have no doubt that I find the history of conservatism in the English-speaking
countries extremely interesting.
Well what is conservatism?
At the most fundamental level, there's a strong human propensity to keep things the way they
are.
Think about children, for example.
Children love familiar people and familiar places and familiar objects.
Nearly every kid attaches themselves to one or two particular things.
Children love familiar stories, around which they orient themselves and feel secure.
Most people throughout world history have always stayed where they were born, and even
those given the option to move have preferred to stay with what they know and with who they
know.
Even among people who migrate to other countries, very often out of economic need, usually prefer
to retire to their home country if they possibly can.
In American history, one of the great themes of US history is the history of immigration.
But perhaps less thoroughly studied is the phenomenon of birds of passage.
That is, people who came from a faraway country to America and often spent their entire working
lives there, but always with the intention of going back again.
That's particularly characteristic of Italian Americans.
Many of them went back to spend their retirement years in Italy.
I can give you an anecdote out of my own life, which I think perfectly illustrates the propensity
of people to stay where they are.
After I'd been living in America for a few years, I saw the sister of one of my old school
friends.
And she said, oh, when are you coming back to live here in Derby?
Derby's the name of my hometown in England.
And I said, well, I'm not sure I am coming back, because I've got such an interesting
life in America.
She said, you really should, because Derby people are the best people in the world.
I said, how do you know you've never been anywhere else?
And her answer was, I don't need to go anywhere else, because the best people in the world
are already here.
That's a lovely illustration, I think, of what's called the little Englandism, the
belief that right here in this particular place is where life is right and where it's
best.
Think about your own attitude towards music or foods or ideas about clothes and manners.
In the last few decades, we've had repeated generational clashes, because members of older
generations tend to favor traditional ways, or at least the ways in which they were brought
up, even though by now, for several generations, each new set of parents has been baffled at
the changed tastes of their own children.
And there's a strong, strong propensity to stay with the ideas and the fashions and the
foods and the beliefs that you grew up with.
Think about this, at the end of even an exotic vacation, who doesn't feel glad to be home
again, surrounded by everything familiar after the strangeness of the place you've been to
visit?
That's the basic sensation, which at a much higher and more complicated level, gives
rise to conservatism, the idea that there's something good, intrinsically good, about
what's already here and what already exists in front of us.
Well, now, in politics, the world is always changing.
Conservatism in politics is an attitude, an attitude towards change.
It favors cautious and prudential changes, rather than opposing them at all costs.
Conservatism is skeptical about radical changes, and much prefers to stay with what is familiar
and what has withstood the test of time.
Conservatives tend to take this view, if the world is the way it is, that must be because
we intended it to be this way, or because we found that in practice, it works.
Now, of course, the obvious rebuttal to a claim like that is, well, the world does work
very well for some people, but unfortunately, it lets them prosper at the expense of others,
victimized by the world as it is.
Conservatism can't simply turn its back against all possible forms of change.
It tends to be accepting of moderate changes, and sympathetic to the idea of redressing
obvious injustices.
But it always cancels patience rather than perfectionism.
Built into conservatism is the idea that the world is never going to be made perfect,
and that, unfortunately, the attempt to make the world perfect can sometimes do more harm
than good.
In particular, conservatives have always been skeptical about the idea that you can make
a blueprint, a plan, for creating a new society right from first principles.
Conservatives say it's not possible to create a new society from scratch, because planners
can't possibly encompass the full complexity of the world as it is.
And they say the attempt to make a planned society is likely to be very, very coercive
in practice.
They can certainly quote as examples things like the Soviet experiment.
It isn't that the intention of the Russian revolutionaries was to repress the population
living under them.
It's simply that the reality was that the Russian people and the people of the other
Soviet republics had all sorts of different ideas about how they would like to live, which
didn't correspond with the ideas of the Bolshevik revolutionaries, who therefore gradually found
themselves using more and more coercive power to compel people to live according to the
model of society that they had got.
And say conservatives, it's very difficult indeed in a planned society to accommodate
the fact of social change.
Because history is always moving on, if a new society starts in one way, what's going
to happen when new technologies or new problems or new diseases or new opportunities develop?
Now then can things like that be written into the plan themselves, since at the time
the plan was made, these new possibilities didn't exist.
Conservatives say planned societies are coercive and repressive because they resist the reality
of human variability.
After all, isn't it true that different people want different things?
We actually love cultural variety.
We like the fact that at different times in our lives, different things appeal to us.
Some people want to work very, very hard to make great gains, people want to become
wealthy.
Others, particularly in many societies outside of the English-speaking world, have valued
leisure perhaps more highly than we do.
Ideas about what we want differ not only from person to person, but even within particular
individuals at different times in the life cycle.
Now trying to plan all these infinite complexities would surely be impossible.
Another strong, strong characteristic of conservatism is the belief that human nature
is the way it is and it's not going to be changed or transformed.
I think one of a useful way of thinking about this is to pick up on the religious idea of
original sin, one of the foundational concepts of the Judeo-Christian tradition.
This idea that there's a deep-seated human propensity to go wrong and this doesn't have
to be thought of explicitly in religious terms.
You can think of it in purely secular ways.
We know what we ought to do, but we don't always do it.
We rationalize our actions to suit our interests.
We never consider the effect of our actions on people we don't know with the same attention
we give to their effects for ourselves.
This again ought to be a, is constant with the idea that planning a society is impossible
because the planners themselves are going to be more attentive to their own ideas about
what's good and right than everyone else.
Just think about the way in which our sinfulness affects our everyday conduct.
Even people who know that there is starvation in the world can enjoy restaurants.
Why?
Because they live far enough away from the victims not to confront their suffering directly.
And probably when people are out celebrating in restaurants the very last thing they want
to be reminded of is the way in which they're wasting resources which could actually be
used to save the lives of suffering people elsewhere.
In the same way we know that driving fast endangers the lives of other people, but we
break the speed limits anyway.
These are all little forms of our imperfection.
Now conservatives take the view, since people are like that we've got to plan society, we've
got to organize society in a way which takes, which makes full recognition of these imperfections
rather than hoping that somehow people will become better.
Another classic example of the conflict between conservatives and their adversaries is the
conservative belief that war is a permanent part of the human condition.
As far back as we look in history there have always been wars and therefore it's very,
very reasonable to think sadly but truly that war will continue to be an integral part
of the human condition for the indefinite future.
There have always been wars and there have always been lesser forms of conflict because
of human egotism.
Egotism persists, ambition persists and it will generate new conflicts.
They often come up in ways which haven't been anticipated but nevertheless they're very
powerful in each new generation.
So say the conservatives, the sensible approach is to assume that warfare will continue and
then to prepare to meet the contingency while doing whatever possible to avert it.
Since we also know that war is not necessarily a chronic condition.
In practical terms this often means for example that when liberals take the view, perhaps
we should go and undertake a phase of disarmament.
Conservatives tend to answer, you could see this for example in the America of the 1980s,
oh no, warfare will continue therefore it's much more sensible for us to prevent war by
being terrifyingly strong than by being even potentially vulnerable.
You stave off war by threatening potential adversaries with their overwhelming strength.
It's not a pleasing view but it's a realistic one.
Woodrow Wilson, the American president at the time of the First World War, famously
claimed that the war was the war to end all wars, the war to make the world safe for democracy.
Those are exactly the kinds of claims that conservatives do not make because they say
unfortunately war is an intrinsic part of what it is to be human.
Now think about economics for a second, when conservatives think about economic questions
they again accept the principle that people are going to be overwhelmingly self-interested
and therefore even if it's sad, even if it's regrettable, it's nonetheless true and therefore
the economy has got to be organized around this truth.
How can we find ways to manage society most of whose members are deeply economically self-interested?
It may not be inspiring or elevated but since it's true there are ways of making private
gain contribute to public welfare.
In fact this is really the single great insight of capitalism which has been the prevailing
economic system of the last 250 years in the English-speaking countries of the world.
Its self-interest linked to the idea of social and political stability.
Now another characteristic of the conservative frame of mind is the assumption that all the
really important questions facing humanity have already been asked and answered.
Now that has important educational implications because it implies that the insights of ancient
writers like Plato and Aristotle and the authors of the Hebrew Bible are likely to
be able to give us relevant answers to the questions which continue to confront us even
though we're living thousands of years later.
So you could take the view that our world is so different from that of the ancients that
they no longer have much to teach us but conservatives are much more likely to take
the view that similarities outweigh the differences and therefore the wisdom of the classics
is still relevant to us today.
More generally thinking about historical study every generation has to think about this problem.
Are we essentially the same as our ancestors or are we essentially different from them?
Now on the whole it's a generalization but that's what I'm doing in this lecture is generalizing.
Conservatives tend to minimize the differences.
They tend to say if we were to encounter people from any period in the history of the world
we'd recognize our essential sameness with those people and we'd be able to find close
analogues from our problems with their problems.
Conservatism in the Anglo-American tradition has usually been reactive, responding to different
perceived threats in different eras.
It isn't as though it's a set of ideas which always acts in the same way whatever happens.
For example sometimes conservatism supports strong centralized government particularly
if the perceived threat is one of fragmentation or even anarchy.
An obvious example here would be the Federalists of the 1780s and 90s Alexander Hamilton and
George Washington and John Adams and Madison the authors of the American Constitution.
They wrote the Constitution and they tried to strengthen the powers of the central government
the federal government because of their perception that otherwise the New Republic was going
to break up.
It didn't have a sufficiently strong centralizing principle.
Similarly in the 1960s at a time of great social turbulence in reaction to the Vietnam
War and the civil rights movement and the student movements President Nixon and Ronald
Reagan who was then the governor of California had the idea that repressive force of the
government might sometimes be necessary as a way of preventing anarchy.
Now on the other hand there are times in conservative history when the conservatives have supported
the decentralization of power especially when the perceived threat is that of tyranny
of the opposite pole from the fear of anarchy.
An obvious example here would be the conservative reaction to the New Deal in the 1930s when
Franklin Roosevelt became president in the election of 1932.
He greatly strengthened the powers of the central government the federal government
and took more and more powers away from the localities and from the states and conservatives
in the 1930s people like Herbert Hoover and Robert Taft were afraid that Roosevelt was
making himself a tyrant and they even compared him sometimes to the great tyrants of Europe
of the same time Hitler and Mussolini.
Again in 1994 when the Republicans won the midterm election one of their slogans was
starve the beast and there was don't let the federal government continue to be so massive
because in doing so it's usurping the real liberties of the rest of the country.
Now another paradox of conservative history is that at different times the same set of
ideas can seem either radical or conservative.
Let me give you the example of capitalism which I mentioned briefly before.
Supporters of the free market economy were radicals in the late 18th and early 19th century
in Britain.
But yet supporters of the market economy in America in the 20th century and in Britain
are conservatives now to believe in capitalism is a very conservative thing.
Adam Smith the great theorist of capitalism who wrote his book The Inquiry into the Wealth
of Nations in 1776 had the radical idea as it then was of sweeping away government interference
with the economy.
But in the 20th century the threat of communism made defense of the free market a conservative
idea even though capitalism has probably done more than anything else in world history
to transform the world.
It's a paradoxical thing and it's a problem which I'm going to be kind of unraveling quite
a bit over the course of this series of lectures.
Now conservatism has usually been elitist and hierarchical but more recently particularly
in the 20th century universal democracy has also given rise to populist forms of conservatism.
An example here can be offered from the 1870s.
Hultingly over the course of the 19th century Britain gradually became more and more democratic
by a series of political reform acts first of 1832 then of 1867 then of 1884.
More and more people in Britain were getting the right to vote still men in those days.
And Benjamin Disraeli the prime minister in the 1870s faced this conundrum now that members
of the British industrial work in class are voting they're only going to vote for us the
conservatives if we offer them something in return something to vote for what he came
up with was love of the empire and British imperial jingoism is really a conservative
idea of the late 19th century.
In the 20th century I could give you the example of McCarthyism in the 1950s this sort of the
populist belief that communism that the ordinary American people are immune from communism
and that the people are most tempted by it are elitists.
One of the things McCarthy often did was to bait people like Dean Acheson president Truman
secretary of state with the allegation that he was a Democrat who was a little bit too
sympathetic to almost communist ideas.
More recently in our own times the new Christian right of the 1980s and 90s and the first decade
of the 21st century also had the idea where the ordinary folks were ordinary conservative
folks and were protesting against the ideas of an overeducated elite on issues like creation
science for example.
Another strong theme in conservative history is the idea of conservatives as the guardians
of an endangered civilization.
One of the books we'll be looking at in a few lectures time is Mont Saint Michel and
Chartres by Henry Adams or his book The Education of Henry Adams both of which are books of
lamentation about the fact that civilization is beautiful but fragile thing is now threatened
by the rise of a mass industrialized democracy which is going to sweep away all its beautiful
and generous and great about the ancient civilization.
Much more recently in our own times a famous book from 1987 was Alan Bloom's book The
Closing of the American Mind and Alan Bloom who was a professor of philosophy at the
University of Chicago wrote in horror of what he saw as the ignorance and brutality of youth
culture the horribleness of rock music and the ignorance of generations of students even
those whom he was teaching at University of Chicago and emanating from Bloom's book
is the idea that civilization itself even though it's been passed down to us through
multiple generations is now in danger this beautiful heritage won't be passed on.
We'll see many cases in the course where conservatives give voice to that idea.
One of the two major political parties in Britain for more than a century has been named
the Conservative Party whereas in America conservatives can be found at different points
on the party spectrum.
There are clearly times when the Republican Party is the more conservative of the two
and there have been times when the Democrats were the more conservative of the two and
there's not the same instant identification in American politics as there is in Britain.
Now what I'm going to do in this course is periodically talk about people and call them
conservatives even though they didn't give themselves that name in other words it's
a useful labeling device to explain certain kinds of characteristics.
In the 19th century in America it was quite common for people to use the word conservative
as an adjective to say I've got a conservative view of that problem but it was very unusual
for Americans to use the word as a noun and to say I am a conservative.
We're going to be looking at people like the federalists I mentioned Washington and Hamilton
we're going to be looking at people members of the Whig party like Daniel Webster and Democrats
like John C. Calhoun all of whom I think it's reasonable to think of as conservatives but
of course because it wasn't the name that they gave to themselves it's also necessary
to be a little bit cautious about how to use language of that kind.
Now another difficulty with a course like this is deciding where to start and in British
history there are many places which lend themselves as plausible starting points it's certainly
possible to make the case for a real conservative tradition beginning either in the late 17th
century or with the Viscount bowling broke in the early 18th or with Pitt the Younger
prime minister in the 1780s and 90s in the Napoleonic era or with Robert Peel in the 1830s
and 1840s inevitably there's going to be a certain amount of terminological in exactitude
but what I'm going to do is to talk next time about the early auguries of conservatism that
we can find in early parts of British history and the way in which they gradually channeled
into the creation of a very emphatic definite conservative movement in England.
In the United States there was no self-conscious and self-declared conservative movement really
until the 1950s. That came about when William Buckley Jr. founded the National Review in
1955 and helped to create the Barry Goldwater movement which came to power inside the Republican
party in 1964 and led to his presidential candidacy. It was unsuccessful but then the
later candidacy of Reagan in 1980 succeeded. But of course even though the conservative
movement was something new in America in the post-Second World War era the impulse was
there earlier in certain parties and certain individuals and their people whose lives will
be investigating. Now the fact that Britain and America have been politically separated
since 1776 also means that the particulars of conservatism in each country differ widely
even when the impulse is similar. I'll give you an example from the ideas about hunting.
In America it's common for a conservative candidate to claim that he or she is a hunter
because it carries the implication of strength and vigor and resilience. But it's the claim
that a British candidate would never make, it would ruin a British conservative candidate's
chances of being elected because in Britain hunting is perceived as cruel and it's perceived
as haughty the preserve of the old aristocracy. So again the symbolic meaning of hunting
in the two countries is very different. Britain and America differ widely in the political
uses of religion by conservatives. Britain's a far more secularized country than the United
States by now. So to have our religion in public life in Britain would seem like a slightly
crackpot notion. Whereas in America for a conservative candidate it's almost indispensable
to claim to be religiously active. And it's certainly an issue that has to be addressed.
There is also of course a great array of religion related issues in American politics of which
abortion is probably the most salient. Very much an issue which every American conservative
has to come to terms with but not at all in the United Kingdom where only a tiny, tiny
handful of Catholic politicians ever even mention the question. So we have this paradox
that conservatives in each country favor policies that would be anathema in the other. British
conservatives for example are staunchly against the idea that ordinary citizens should be
allowed to own guns. And they're steadily supportive of the idea of the National Health
Service whereas American conservatives almost overwhelmingly tend to be against or in favor
of the idea of gun ownership but against the idea of a nationalized health service.
So profound differences for us to understand which in each case flow out of the traditions,
the preceding political traditions of the particular country. Many dynamic intellectual
and political figures in the Anglo-American tradition have espoused conservative ideas.
This course is going to study the work of such writers as Edmund Burke, the first and
most eloquent philosophical critic of the French Revolution. I'm going to explain his
book Reflections on the Revolution in France from 1791 and the way in which themes from
that book have descended to subsequent generations of conservative writers like Russell Kirk.
I'm also going to consider writers like Adam Smith and John Stuart Mill who were not conservatives
in their own day. In fact as I mentioned they were radicals, these theorists of the capitalist
revolution. But later on they became members of the conservative pantheon. I'm also going
to be addressing the work of practical politicians. In the United States these include Abraham
Lincoln, Theodore Roosevelt and Ronald Reagan. In Britain they include Benjamin Disraeli,
Winston Churchill and Margaret Thatcher. Now I'd like to end this first lecture by talking
about another of the difficulties that we have to think about when we consider any kind
of historical problem. Conservatism in Britain traditionally included sharp class distinctions
and the belief that those class distinctions were right. British conservatism believed in
the monarchy, believed in the aristocracy, believed in the idea of the unification of
church and state, not separation as America prefers, but unification and believed in no
votes for women. Now today there's plenty to feel uncomfortable about in an array of
ideas like that. Similarly in the American conservative tradition for a long time it
was an argument against democracy, against human equality and in favor of slavery. There's
plenty for American conservatives to feel uncomfortable about there. Here's the point
I want to emphasize and one that I'll come back to repeatedly over the course of these
lectures. History is strange, it's alien and it won't give us what we would like to have.
If you hear a historical story and at the end you feel thoroughly satisfied by it and
you find that it perfectly coincides with your own political inclinations, it probably
means that you're actually listening to ideology or mythology. History won't oblige us and
much of its challenge and interest come from its immovable differentness from us and from
our own world. So what we have to do is to approach it as calmly as possible.
