17th century England was torn by civil war,
regicide and revolution. In 1688 the disastrously inept King James II,
having alienated almost every source of support in the kingdom, abdicated and fled to France.
Parliament invited the Statholder of the Netherlands, William of Orange,
to take his place and become King William III. William accepted, but from then on,
Parliament, not the King, held supreme political power. Political tendencies,
Whig and Tory, not so well organized as modern political politics, formed in the ensuing decades.
In Tory ideas about politics, we can find some of the origins of English conservatism.
Tories, despite the example of James II, believed in the sanctity of the monarchy as a
counterweight to Parliament. They would have preferred the legitimate Stuart line of succession,
if only the Stuart's had not been Catholics. They were torn because they also believed that
the established Church of England, uniting church and state, was vital. When it's 1715,
the Tory leader Henry St. John, the Vicent Bowlingbroke, fled to France and the service of the
Stuart's in exile. He tainted the Tory name with allegations of treason that took a long time to
live down. Bowlingbroke himself was a shrewd political writer, as well as a politician,
and a friend of such leading Tory writers of his era as Jonathan Swift and Alexander Pope.
His arguments in favour of what would later be called the loyal opposition,
making an honoured place for the party out of power in a parliamentary system,
was to influence generations of subsequent English and American politicians.
Well, there's no indisputable point at which to begin a history of modern English conservatism,
but a strong case can be made for 1688 to 89, because that was the last time that the British
nation suffered a revolutionary upheaval. Every society has to answer the question of who holds
ultimate power and how that power is to be circumscribed. It's certainly possible to go as far
back as Magna Carta in 1215. That can be seen as the first document in the English tradition to
limit the king's arbitrary power. This is during the reign of King John, and the Magna Carta was
issued by a group of rebellious barons who were protesting against King John's high-handed rule.
They were able to corner him on the island of Runnymede in the River Thames and force him
to accept the principle of certain limitations on royal power. It specified the right to habeas
corpus, the right to jury trials, the right to face one's accusers, and the idea of due process.
It also established a committee of 25 barons whose job was to advise the king and, if necessary,
to overrule him. This is one of the origins of the House of Lords, which eventually became
part of the permanent structure of Parliament. Perhaps a more convincing and more defensible
place to start this history is in the 17th century. I'd like to look briefly at the civil wars of the
1640s and 50s, because this was the great conflict which disputed the question of whether the king
or parliament was supreme. The monarchy had been calling parliaments for two or three centuries
by the 1640s, and normally what happened is that when the king needed some money, he called parliament,
they'd appeal for redress of their grievances, and then the members of parliament, who were also
the gentlemen of the counties and the cities, would disperse into England to raise the money for
the king. Now in the 1620s and 30s, under the reign first of King James the First and then King
Charles the First, parliament refused to grant any money to him until he agreed to redress their
grievances. Each claimed that it had a prior concern to be addressed. An escalating conflict
took place until finally King Charles the First decided that he was going to rule without the
help of parliaments altogether. He believed in the divine right of kings, that is that kings
weren't simply warlords who'd asserted their power and come to authority because of their ability
to defeat their enemies. They'd actually been appointed by God himself. Throughout most of
the 1630s, Charles was able to rule without parliament, reviving various ancient forms of
taxation to raise money for himself. But in the late 30s, a Scottish rebellion forced him to call
parliament again, so that he could get money sufficient to raise an army to prevent a Scottish
invasion over the English border. Again, parliament insisted on redress of its grievances, and specified
that the king would have to execute, put to death, his chief minister, the Earl of Straford,
and the Archbishop of Canterbury, William Lord. The king refused and reacted by declaring war
against parliament, and between 1642 and 1645, two great armies fought it out in the British
countryside, the royalist army and that of the parliamentarians. Now, gradually, a very, very
effective fighting force developed on the parliamentary side, the new model army, whose most famous
member was its cavalry commander, Oliver Cromwell. In 1645, after the Battle of Naseby,
Cromwell's army won the war. The effective resistance by the royalist army came to an end,
and the king was taken prisoner. But then, the victorious parliament began to negotiate with
the king. What form the constitution would now take? How was power going to be distributed?
What was the role of parliament going to be in British life from now on? The king completely
denied parliament's right to negotiate in this way, and continued to insist upon his royal,
his divine prerogative. And when he got the opportunity here, escaped, raised more forces,
and resumed the war. Cromwell, again, was able to defeat him, and this time was determined to
destroy him. Cromwell organized a purge of parliament in 1649, leaving in place only those
who were willing to go along with his view that the king had now got to be dispensed with altogether.
The king was put on trial, sentenced to death, and executed in 1649, even though he was a sitting
king. And this is the famous regicide. Now, after that, Britain had to, or England, had to find a
way to conduct itself without a king at the time, a very, very unusual situation to be in. Some
historians refer to this period of the 1640s and 50s as the English Revolution. Cromwell rose to the
position of Lord Protector. It was a kind of military dictatorship in 1653, because he was the
decisive figure both in parliament and in the army, where he'd become the commander. But when he died
in 1658, there was no viable successor who shared the loyalty of the army and parliament equally.
His son Richard Cromwell became the second Lord Protector briefly, but failed in the office,
because the army didn't feel a loyalty to him, such as they had felt to his father.
Well, parliament's inability to find a successor to Oliver Cromwell in 1660 led to the restoration.
That is, the leading aristocrats in Britain, even those who had been sympathetic to the
parliamentary side, said, we're in constant danger of revolution from below. This period of upheaval
has given potentially dangerous political ideas to the lower classes. We need to have the king
again to restore order. And so they invited back the exiled king, Charles II, oldest son of King
Charles I, who had been killed. And he once again became king and was king from 1660 to 1685,
and certainly never forgot the fact that his father had been killed and that he himself had been
forced into a humiliating exile in France. But when he died in 1685 without any legitimate
children of his own, his brother became King James II. And James II had none of Charles's shrewdness.
James had become a Catholic, even though that was perhaps the most intolerable thing to the great
majority of the British ruling class, the aristocracy. James wasn't content merely to be a private
Catholic either. He wanted to actually reverse the entire trend of the Reformation, which by now had
been central to British life for a century and a half. And one by one, he alienated all the groups
who had hoped for the best with King James II, until finally almost nobody was left in England
supporting him, at which point he was obliged to flee to France. Now at that point, Parliament convened
and invited William, the Statholder of the Netherlands, to come and be king instead. William was married
to Mary, the woman who became Queen Mary II. And she was the daughter of James II, but she was
still a Protestant. What made them attractive was that they had this link of legitimacy that
Mary was herself one of the stewards and that they were Protestants. So William and Mary ruled
jointly in the 1690s, but now it was absolutely clear that ultimate power rested with Parliament,
not the King. The Bill of Rights enacted by Parliament in 1689 limited royal power and
went a long way towards contributing to political stability. The Bill of Rights of 1689 strongly
influenced the American Bill of Rights, that is the first ten amendments to the U.S. Constitution,
which were written a hundred years later in 1789, just after the enactment of the American Constitution
itself. They include themes like this, no taxes by royal assertion, no royal interference with
the letter of the law, no peacetime standing army, freedom of speech in Parliament, and freedom of
election to Parliament. Again, it asserted habeas corpus and denied the government the right to
impose cruel and unusual punishments on malefactors. All these rights were vitally important because
all of them had previously been jeopardized and what Parliament was doing now was to it was
asserting itself as part of a constitutional monarchy. There is a King, but the King's power
is limited and ultimate authority rests with Parliament. Now, of course, it's very easy for
us to forget how precious these rights are because we're so familiar with them, but how hard they
once had to be fought for and how generations of strife were necessary to establish them as rights.
The Glorious Revolution, these events of 1688-89, called Glorious because there was no actual bloodshed,
inaugurated the long history of political stability and the gradual decline of the monarch's power.
English kings remained influential through the 1700s, though they could no longer act in an
arbitrary way and power had clearly now shifted to Parliament. The Triennial Act of 1694 specified
that Parliament would meet every three years, or that it would meet every year and that there'd
be elections every three years. In other words, again, it would be regularly incorporated into
political society. It became so hectic, the rapid recurrence of elections, that Parliament passed
the Septennial Act in 1716 that there should be one election at least once every seven years.
By then, less frequent elections meant more political stability. The Act of Settlement of
1701 specified that the monarch must always be a Protestant. Now, as it happened, William III
and Mary II had no direct heirs, and neither did their successor, Queen Anne, who was the younger
daughter of James II. She had many children, but they all died from a congenital defect before
she did. And that meant, of course, that on her death there was going to be another succession
crisis. All this time, First King James II is still living in exile in France at the Court of
Louis XIV. And then his son, and then eventually his son, continued to assert a Stuart claim to the
throne, which was always feared by the British governing classes because it was also a Catholic
claim. So in 1714, the succession went to the electors of Hanover. Hanover was then one of the
many German principalities because they were the closest Protestant claimants, even though in other
respects their claim was much weaker than that of the Catholic stewards. There was a constant fear
that just as Charles II had come back in 1660, so it might still be possible that the old pretender,
that is the son of James II, might come back, perhaps even raise a civil war in England.
And it was to prevent this from happening that the Protestant succession was so clearly specified
from then on. Now meanwhile, several English writers had already begun to outline a political
theory that we might recognize as being conservative, some of the ancestors of
recognizable conservative themes of our own time. One of the first ones I'd like to mention is the
theologian Richard Hooker, who lived from 1554 to 1600, and who argued very strenuously against,
well against two ideas, one against the idea of the divine right of kings,
on the other hand against the idea of the Puritan theocracy. In his book of the laws of
ecclesiastical polity published in 1594, he was living and working in the reign of Queen Elizabeth
I. And one of the things he was trying to do was to justify the existence of the Church of England,
as it had been created by Henry VIII at the time of the English Reformation,
and as it was sustained by Queen Elizabeth I, after her older sister Mary's attempt to
reverse the process of the Reformation in the 1550s. Now what Richard Hooker said was,
the monarch is not arbitrary, but must rule within the traditions of the law. In other words,
the monarch is not free simply to do whatever it is that he or she might wish. But on the other hand,
the Puritan claim, which is then being made by the immediate predecessors of the people who came
to found New England, the Puritan claim to rule by the elect, that is those who say that they've
been chosen by God, was also unacceptable. Why? Because it's a form, it's a sinful form of intellectual
pride. After all, Calvin and the Puritan divines always specified, we're never certain who exactly
has been chosen for salvation by God. And although we're constantly looking for signs,
we can never know for certain. So there's a great danger that their dogmatic certainty
might create an alternative form of tyranny. So in other words, what Hooker's trying to do is to
guard against royal tyranny on one side and Puritan tyranny on the other. And he thought that the way
to do that was to get royal supremacy under the law and the bishops of the Church of England,
and then a policy aim to keep as many people as possible inside the state church. That's
something that the Church of England has always emphasized right up to the present,
keep as many of the people in and avoid having excessively strenuous rules,
which might have the effect of driving some of them away. Hooker used the phrase the middle way,
and this is one of the favorite phrases of British conservatives down through the following
centuries, compromise and finding the middle. Now, Hooker did believe, as so many of his
successors did right into the 20th century, that the unity of church and state were necessary
for political stability. It isn't until we get into American history that we find powerful
arguments for the idea that it's possible to have political stability with the separation
of church and state. But unification, the state church, became a hallmark of English
conservatism, one of the many mildly insulting definitions for the Church of England is
the Tory party at prayer. I'd like to talk second about Edward Hyde, the Earl of Clarendon,
who lived from 1609 to 1674, and is another of these writers in whose work we can find many
of the auguries of what subsequently became English conservatism. At first, in the English
conflicts of the middle 1600s, he was a parliamentarian because he was also opposed to the idea of
divine right, especially if it was accompanied by the idea that nothing the King did was wrong,
that the King was entitled to arbitrarily assert his will. So at first, Hyde was a part of the
parliamentary opposition, but he was horrified by the radical steps taken by Cromwell and the
Regicides, and so he went into exile with Charles II after the death of King Charles I,
and then returned with Charles II after the restoration to become the Chief Minister of
the King from 1660 to 1667. Now in his political writings, one of the people whom he was particularly
critical of was Thomas Hobbes, the political theorist. He said, the problem with Thomas Hobbes is
he thinks about politics as though it were a branch of mathematics. In 1651, that is right in
the middle of these great upheavals of the English Civil Wars, Hobbes had written the book Leviathan,
which has remained a very, very influential text in British political theory right down to the
present. And Hobbes had the idea that there was once a state of nature in which men lived entirely
without society and without government, and it was a place which Hobbes thought of as absolutely
horrible, a war of all against all, so that the life of man is solitary, poor, nasty, brutish,
and short. Hobbes had the idea that men therefore give up this independence, this terrible independence,
that give it to a king in exchange for his protection, but that then the king's word becomes law.
Now, Edward High, the Earl of Clarendon said, you know, the problem with this is that
Hobbes appears to have no sense of how societies actually develop and how they actually live.
It isn't as though there's ever been a time in world history where people did live as isolated
atoms. Hobbes has gotten no conception of families, the organizations in which in fact we come into
the world. Just these odd unhistorical atoms. Clarendon said, rightly, that Hobbes had no experience
of actual politics, whereas he, Clarendon, had a lifetime of practical political experience
and understood the actual factors affecting government. And because of that experience,
when he theorized about what makes it, he was able to draw on that experience rather than on
abstractions. A third example would be George Saville, the Marquis of Halifax,
one of the first advocates of political moderation, living in an age of political extremism.
And Halifax is very explicit that moderation is itself a good thing, that it's dangerous to
take your principles too far. As Britain awaited the death of Charles II, he favored the idea
that James II ought to become king even though he was a Catholic. But he cautioned James II that
once he did become king, he ought to restrain his inclination to transform Britain and take it
back into the embrace of the Catholic faith because he could see that that was going to cause
political strife. The historian Antony Quinton says of him,
his unremitting determination to resist political extremism in either direction
earned him the celebrated nickname of Trimmer bestowed in a probrium, but happily accepted by
its bearer. This genial and unpompous reaction is a representative image of Halifax's persistent
humanity, which at a deeper level set him against violence and cruelty. It is to this humane
disposition that Halifax's being the first truly secular conservative can be largely attributed.
He saw dogmatic religion as the chief cause of the public cruelties of the age. He had a
settled hostility to the intolerance of churches and churchmen. But he too favored the Church of
England, the established church, so long as it was mild and had a unifying effect. One of the
things he opposed was enthusiasm. Now the word enthusiasm has been through a great change.
In the 1600s, it was a very negative concept. We think of enthusiasm as a good thing and we say,
oh, so and so, wonderful enthusiastic person. But then it meant what we'd used the word zealotry.
Enthusiasm was excessive conviction that one's ideas, either in religion or in politics, are right.
And because he was a moderator, a man of conciliation, Halifax feared enthusiasm and wrote
against it. He was one of the advocates of a constitutional monarchy, a mixed government,
taking advantage of the country's inherited traditions.
Now perhaps the most striking of all these early advocates of what we might think of as
English conservatism was Henry St. John, the Viscount bowling broke, the most influential
Tory of early 18th century England, whose writing has had a lasting influence on British
conservatism down to the present. His personal life and his political fortunes were turbulent
and he was never conservative in temperament. Obviously we sometimes say of people, oh,
he's got very conservative tastes. That was something that could never be said of bowling broke.
He engendered strong feelings in his contemporaries. Some of them loved him. Jonathan Swift, the
author of Gulliver's Travels wrote, I think Mr. St. John, Mr. St. John, the greatest young
man I ever knew, wit, capacity, beauty, quickness of apprehension, good learning and excellent
taste, the best orator in the House of Commons, admirable conversation, good nature and good
manners, generous and a despiser of money. In other words, he wasn't mercenary, that means.
He was hated by others. For example, the weak Prime Minister, Robert Walpole wrote of him.
He thinks of himself as a person of so great an extensive parts and of so many
eloquent eminent qualifications that he looks upon himself as the only person in the kingdom
capable to conduct the public affairs of the nation. We may suppose this leader not really liked by
any, even of those who so blindly follow him and hated by all the rest of mankind, void of all
faith and honor and betraying every master he ever served. Can there be imagined a greater
grace to human nature than such a wretch as this? So, strong feelings pro and con over,
over bowling broke. He was a religious skeptic and a rake in his early personal life. He lived
a disillusioned sexual and personal life. But nevertheless, through political ability,
he became the chief minister to Queen Anne in the early part of the 18th century. But,
when she died, and it was clear that the electors of Hanover were to become the new Protestant
kings of England, he fled to join the stewards, that is the English monarchy in exile in France.
This was surely his greatest blunder. He was afraid that when George I came to the throne,
he, bowling broke, and the other senior Tories would be arrested on suspicion of conspiring with
the, the stewards, the Jacobites, that is the followers of King, Old King James. But, of course,
his defection to France confirmed Whig and Hanoverian ideas that he was a traitor. And he
never quite lived it down. Well, he soon found that the, the English court in exile, the stewards
still hoping to get back to their throne, and to re-catholicise England, were hopeless. They
were living in a completely, in a, in a false paradise. And eventually, he made his peace with
the British government in 1723, after being in exile for about eight years. He was allowed to return
to England, and he devoted the rest of his life to supporting Taurism and opposing the Whig leader
and Prime Minister, Sir Robert Walpole, whose opinion of him I just read. But he was never
permitted to return to Parliament, despite his great political gifts. Instead, he had to organise
the opposition to Walpole through a weekly journal called The Craftsman, which he edited from 1726
to 36, and in which he was one of the principal writers. He developed the idea of the loyal opposition.
That is, the people who are out of power, but who have an important role to play in government,
by keeping pressure on the, on the ministers to avoid abuses and to avoid corruption.
And in fact, The Craftsman made the most sustained, continuous attack on government,
on any government, probably in history, up to that time. It had contributions from many of the most
talented political writers of the day, Jonathan Swift, Alexander Pope, and Bolingbroke himself.
He was a master of clever political rhetoric. Now, the fact that Walpole, the Prime Minister,
was willing to permit attacks upon himself of such virulence was itself a sign of the
increasing political stability of Britain. Walpole was confident that a fairly high degree of freedom
of the press was permissible because the vast majority of people in Britain were committed
to the idea that the regime was there to stay. And so it's very much to Walpole's credit that
he's willing to put up with opposition of this kind of intensity.
Bolingbroke himself, his writings disclose a conservative view of society far more than
his actions do. First of all, like Clarendon, he regarded the family and not the individual
as the basic unit of society. Today, living in modern America, we tend to assume that
society is made up of individuals. But Bolingbroke would have said, and there's a long
conservative tradition of saying, what's the basic unit of society? The family.
Bolingbroke himself was a religious skeptic, but nevertheless he understood the social and
moral value of having an established Church of England. He persuaded most of the Tories to
give up on the idea of the divine right of kings and to give up on the idea of Stuart
Legitimism. In other words, he said to them, we're never going to be able to successfully
get the Stuart Kings back, and it's hopeless to carry on pursuing this chimera. It's a doomed cause.
That's also a good conservative principle. You've got to be realistic about what's politically
possible. Now to us, one of Bolingbroke's most unattractive characteristics is that he was
highly critical of non-conformists, that is people who weren't inside the Church of England.
We believe in religious freedom as a great good, but he didn't. He was afraid that on the one hand
Catholics and on the other hand Quakers and Congregationalists and Presbyterians and Baptists
were menacing to society because they were outside the embrace of the Church of England.
When he was the Queen's senior minister, he supervised passage of the Schism Act of 1714,
which was designed to repress dissenters, religious dissenters, and prevent them from
running schools of their own. In a letter to Jonathan Swift, he wrote that dissenters were,
quote, the pests of society because their endeavors are directed to loosen the bonds of it
and to take at least one curve out of the mouth of that wild beast man when it would be well
if he was checked by half a score others, that wild beast man, the dangerous, the danger of human
nature, which is more likely to be dangerous if it's set free from religious constraints.
He also feared that the rising power of the merchants and the bankers in British life
and fear that they were corrupting British life. Now in the 1720s, 30s, and 40s, great fortunes
were being made in the British colonies, India and the West Indies particularly.
And people would come back from these colonies and buy their way into power and influence in
England, mainly members of the East India Company and slave traders. Robert Walpole,
a longtime Whig Prime Minister, used their wealth to create a bribed and docile majority in parliament,
strengthening the executive at the expense of the legislature and at the expense of the
independent landowners, the Tory Squires, whom Bolingbroke represented. Now there was a very
strong idea in the 18th century that to belong to a political party was wrong. It was a nathema
because it implied that you were more interested in the interests of a particular group rather than
in the national interest. And it's ironic that Bolingbroke himself should have become the spokesman
for the idea of the loyal opposition, the party in opposition, which again we're entirely familiar
with. Bolingbroke said that the Whig selfishness was leading them to monopolize the king's favor,
but that in doing so they were inadvertently opening the way to tyranny. He wrote,
one party, meaning the Whigs, one party had given their whole attention during several years
to the project of enriching themselves and impoverishing the rest of the nation.
And by these and other means of establishing their dominion under the government and with the favor
of a family who were foreigners and therefore might believe that they were established on the
throne by the goodwill and strength of this party alone. This party in general was so intent on
these views. And many of them, I fear, are so still that they did not advert in time to the
necessary consequences of the measures they abetted, nor did they consider that the power they raised
and by which they hoped to govern their country would govern them with the very rod of iron they
forged and would be the power of a prince or minister not that of a party long. In other words,
inadvertently the Whigs are sowing the seeds of their own downfall as the monarchy will seize
the opportunity once again to become tyrannical. And there's a very, very strong premonition in
this rhetoric from Bolingbroke of the rhetoric of the American revolutionaries of the 1760s
and 70s who began to claim also the monarch is becoming tyrannical.
Bolingbroke made a sharp distinction between the men of landed property,
he was entirely in favor of them, and the moneyed interest that is the new commercial
wealth rising in Britain, which he thought of as as bad as dangerous. He said the landed
men of the true owners of our political vessel, the moneyed men as such are no more than passengers
in it. And finally, Bolingbroke did a very characteristic conservative thing. He romanticized
the distant past. He said there was an age of true English liberty which has now gone.
When was it? It was long ago in a golden age before the Norman conquest, and one that was
briefly regained in the age of Queen Elizabeth I. In other words, he thought that this English
liberty was part of a tradition, not something to be arrived at through abstract reasoning.
While romanticizing a golden age in the past is a constant temptation among conservatives,
but of course the reality is that there's never been a golden age. No matter how far back we go
in history, we can always find that in every age, the people at the time were thinking, oh, if only
we lived in the olden days. This constant looking back, political nostalgia is kind of intrinsic
to the conservative temperament, and it's something we're going to encounter regularly in many of
the coming lectures.
