The
French Revolution aimed at the kind of radical new beginning that had fascinated the philosoph,
the French philosophers of the Enlightenment in the mid-18th century. But it dismayed their
British counterparts. Unlike the peaceful British Glorious Revolution of 1688 to 9,
the French Revolution of 1789 soon became bloody and vengeful, culminating in the terror of 1793,
in which the royal family and much of the French aristocracy died under the guillotine.
Reacting to the first stages of the revolution, Edmund Burke, an Anglo-Irish quick politician,
already famous as a political writer and parliamentary strategist, published Reflections
on the Revolution in France. Many conservatives, especially in recent years, have regarded
Burke's reflections as the founding text of their political creed. Condemning the French
Revolutionaries for their temerity in believing they could construct a rational society, he asserted
the superior wisdom of British tradition, of taking the world as it is, and of recognizing
the limits of rationality in social planning.
Society is an organism, said Burke, and can no more be remade in the middle of its life
than a person can decide to start his life over again. Burke never denied that society changes,
but he insisted that change should be incremental, always respecting the accumulated wisdom of
prior generations, and that it should always take into account prior customs, traditions,
and prejudices. For Burke, prejudice was a positive concept, since he regarded society
as bound together by the shared pre-judgements, or prejudices, prejudices, of its people.
His reflections correctly anticipated the bloodletting of the terror and the rise of
a military strongman, though Burke himself died in 1797, just before Napoleon seized
power.
Well, Burke's early political life as a Whig shows that he could be sympathetic to political
reforms. He worked very hard for the marquee of Rockingham and for his faction of Whig politicians,
who were nearly always in opposition. He denounced King George III and his ministers for dangerous
innovations, and he supported the concept of political parties at a time when they were
still widely suspected. And like Bowlingbroke, he pointed to the benefits of opposition in
preventing arbitrary conduct by the King's ministers. In other words, the opposition
has an important job to do, which is constitutionally defensible.
He was a friend of many of the important literary and political figures of his day. He was a
friend of Dr. Johnson, the author of the World's First Dictionary, and of Edward Gibbon, the
man who wrote The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.
As an Irishman trying to make his way in England, he favoured a policy of tolerance towards
Roman Catholics.
Now because of this, some historians have speculated that Burke was himself a Catholic.
His father may have been a convert to the Protestant Church of Ireland, and his mother
certainly was a Catholic.
Other commentators doubt that he was a conventional Christian of any kind, but nevertheless he
was horrified at the casual dismissal of faith by the French radical philosophers of the
Enlightenment. One of the themes of his work that's very strong is this. Don't tear down
the veil of convention. The Enlightenment conveys the idea that the clear, bright light
of reason ought to be shone on all things. But Burke often says, no, we don't want to
look too clearly at what's going on, especially if in doing so we destroy traditions and conventions.
And that's one of the tensions in the dialogue between Burke and his rivals, but that the
Enlightenment itself is wrong.
Burke worked as an agent for several of the American colonies before their breach with
England. This is in the late 1760s and the early 1770s. He worked as colonial agent.
One by one, the colonies up and down the American Atlantic seaboard had seen the value of having
a representative in parliament who could speak for their interests. They were indignant
not to have direct representation, but in the meantime they did have these colonial agents.
And several times Burke spoke in parliament in 1774 and 75 as the pre-revolutionary crisis
was rising against the idea of taxing the Americans without their consent. He warned
his fellow members of parliament that eventually the Americans would stand up for their rights
as Englishmen by rebelling against England. And that is, of course, the paradox of the
American Revolution, which we'll look at in a few lectures from now. In a speech to
parliament he said, let the colonies always keep the idea of their civil rights associated
with your government. They will cling and grapple to you and no force under heaven will
be of power to tear them from their allegiance. But let it be once understood that your government
may be one thing and their privilege is another, that these two things may exist without any
mutual relation. The cement is gone. The cohesion is loosened and everything hastens to decay
and dissolution. Well, these are prescient words, of course, because he accurately foresaw
the onset of the revolution.
Burke was also the principal figure in the impeachment of Warren Hastings in the years
between 1788 and 1795, on behalf of the principles of responsible government. Now, in the 1750s,
Britain, the East India Company, which was the British trading company in India, had
suddenly become much more powerful, partly because it had displaced the French, and partly
because at the Battle of Plessy of 1757, Robert Clive had won, in effect, had won power over
the whole of Bengal, which is the northeastern part of India. A succession of British merchants
and politicians went out to India, one of whom was Warren Hastings, and became incredibly
wealthy through unscrupulous conduct which looked to Burke like plundering of the Indian
people. He accused Hastings of arbitrary and tyrannical conduct, unbefitting any Englishman
anywhere, and used a great deal of lurid phrases to condemn Hastings, although in the
end the impeachment trial, which dragged through many sessions of parliament, was so overdone,
his rhetoric was too violent, that a reaction set in in favour of Hastings, who was acquitted.
But, nevertheless, reforms in India did follow, and it's interesting to us, I think, that
one of the British governors sent out to India was Lord Cornwallis. This is the man who lost
the Battle of Yorktown, the last Battle of the American Revolutionary War, but it didn't
ruin him at all. His British superiors regarded Cornwallis as an excellent administrator and
sent him to India, where he introduced various principles of responsible government there,
partly in reaction to the Hastings trial, so that India could no longer be a zone in
which unscrupulous adventure has generated plunder.
In his speech to the electors of Bristol in 1774, Edmund Burke argued the merits of direct
and virtual representation. This is another of the issues, which is being closely scrutinised
in America and in England at the same time. And it's this question, which we still confront
today. Is a member of parliament or a member of congress, is that person's primary job
to represent the interests of the people of the constituency, or is it rather to be a
wise man who has been chosen by that constituency to represent the most virtuous political path?
Now Burke strongly believed that the representative's job was not direct representation. In other
words, Burke's view is, the electors choose him and then he uses his own judgment, sometimes
against their material interests. He said, your representative owes you not his industry
only, but his judgment. And he betrays instead of serving you if he sacrifices it to your
opinion. In other words, you've got to own up to the fact that you might be wrong and
that as your representative with my superior wisdom might in fact be able to judge what
your real interests are better than you can yourselves.
Well now the outbreak of the French Revolution in 1789 quickly aroused Burke's fear and
anger and provoked the writings for which he is now most famous and best remembered.
There was a long succession of them, the reflections on the revolution in France, the letter to
a member of the National Assembly, the appeal from the new to the old Whigs, the letter
to a noble lord and thoughts on a registered peace, all from the period 1790 to 96. Burke
was never a systematic political or philosophical writer. He didn't write what we'd regard
as tracts in political philosophy. And one of the reasons that he's such an interesting
figure and that so many interpreters have descended upon his work to try to unravel exactly what
it meant is because of the unsystematic way in which he wrote it. So there's a great deal
of controversy in the interpretation of Edmund Burke, especially since the Second World War.
There's been virtually a cottage industry in the interpretation of Burke. But what I
want to do for the remainder of this lecture is outline the main themes which are really
not in dispute about the significance of his work without getting too far into the fine
points. Some of what I'm going to say is rather theoretical, but I hope I can make it plain.
It's significance with suitable illustrations.
Well this book Reflections, which is the most important of all these works, though it was
written in response to the immediate situation in France, did make profound arguments about
the nature of politics, which it's easy to see as continuing in their relevance today.
It appeared before the revolution had turned violent, but it emphasized the hazard in apparently
benign principles then being advanced by the French revolutionaries, principles like liberty,
equality, fraternity, who could complain about things like that. Well Burke certainly did
and showed why. Now because of his history up to that point, some of the French writers
believed they might be able to enlist Burke's sympathy, since he'd long been a critic of
George III and of Tory governments, just as they were critics of Louis XVI.
Thomas Paine thought that Burke might sympathize. Thomas Paine was the author of Common Sense,
the pamphlet which had inspired the American revolutionaries in 1776 to declare their independence
from Britain. Paine himself was English, but had been living in the colonies since 1774.
In 1789, Paine was in France. But in fact Burke, far from sympathizing with the French
revolutions, turned against it at once. He emphasized in his reflections that the events
in France were in no way comparable to those which had taken place in Britain's glorious
revolution. His account of 17th century British events minimizes the violence. He passes very
quickly over the period of Cromwell and the Regicide, and Burke praises the glorious revolution
of 1688 to 9 for the degree to which it did not break with tradition. In other words,
he said, it's noteworthy that at the time of the glorious revolution, the parliament
found the most legitimate successor it could in the line after James II, that is, James'
daughter married the second who was married to William III. And then in the act of succession,
although it stipulated a Protestant, it was still eager to find a Protestant who had some
claim to dissent from the previous monarchs. And in this book, Burke famously warned against
the illusion of human equality. Now again, conservatives today sometimes feel a little
bit uncomfortable when they see how far Burke went to scotch the idea that people are equal
to one another. Because obviously human equality is one of the central beliefs of our own age,
but it's definitely not one of the central beliefs of Burke's age. But right, believe
me sir, those who attempt to level never equalize. In all societies, consisting of various descriptions
of citizens, some description must be uppermost. The levelers therefore only change and pervert
the natural order of things. They load the edifice of society by setting up in the air
what the solidity of the structure requires to be on the ground. The associations of tailors
and carpenters of which the Republic of Paris, for instance, is composed cannot be equal to
the situation into which by the worst of user patience and user patient on the prerogatives
of nature, you attempt to force them. He's saying that in other words, human inequality
is natural. And if you try to force people into a false condition of equality, if you
imagine that for example, some of the craftsmen of Paris can run its government instead of
the aristocracy. You're building a structure in the middle of the air. It's pure fantasy
and it's a dangerous fantasy. Now, does that mean that Burke was opposed to all forms of
what we call social mobility? That is the ability of people to move up in society. No, he wasn't.
But he did think that even though there'd be mobility up and down, nevertheless the hierarchy
of society would remain, that we weren't moving, we ought not to move towards a condition of
general equality. He said poor men of exceptional ability should have the chance to rise. Surely
he was thinking about himself there. But in general, a society of different ranks of
status and wealth is stable and it's right. And he goes on to say, for though hereditary
wealth and the rank which goes with it are too much idolized by creeping psychophants
and the blind abject admirers of power, they are too rashly slighted in the shallow speculations
of the petulant assuming short-sighted coxcoms of philosophy. Very irritable there. In other
words, just because wealth is vulnerable to criticism doesn't mean it's wrong. Now again,
as I mentioned earlier, Burke uses the language of veiling and drapery as a contrast to the
French philosopher's language of enlightenment. He says we benefit from having certain ugly
operations of society and politics hidden from us. Now at first it's easy for us to think
what an awful idea. But then he makes an interesting comparison. He says just as we have manners,
manners make society much more attractive because it means that the various unpleasant
functions that our bodies all have to do are disguised by the way in which we've laid
over them certain forms of veiling and disguise. The same is true in politics. Let's not lay
bare the nature of society too harshly. Interestingly in the reflections he wrote a lavish encomium
to Marie Antoinette and to Louis XVI, the royal couple, even though in private correspondence
he ridiculed them for their follies. In one slightly purple passage Burke says about Marie
Antoinette, surely never lighted on this orb would she hardly seem to touch a more
delightful vision. I saw her just above the horizon decorating and cheering the elevated
sphere she just began to move in. Glittering like the morning star full of life and splendor
and joy. Oh what a revolution and what an heart must I have to contemplate without emotion
that elevation and that fall. Later on in the same passage he makes a eulogy to the idea
of deference. The idea that people in lower social ranks should gladly abase themselves
before people who are above them in the hierarchy. Going on about Marie Antoinette. I thought
10,000 swords must have leapt from their scabbards to avenge even a look that threatened her with
insult. But the age of chivalry is gone. That of sophistas, economists and calculators has
succeeded. And the glory of Europe is extinguished forever. Never, never more shall we behold
that generous loyalty to rank and sex, that proud submission, that dignified obedience,
that subordination of the heart, which kept alive even in servitude itself the spirit
of an exalted freedom. It was a lovely succession of paradoxes in that phrase. Proud submission,
dignified obedience, subordination of the heart. In other words, you really become free
by abasing yourselves before people of a higher social rank, particularly if they're royalty.
Burke emphasized throughout the reflections the importance of accepting the accumulated
wisdom of the past rather than attempting to start the world over again. He said, society
develops slowly and it develops through trial and error. It doesn't imprison naturally
free men as Jean-Jacques Rousseau had suggested. Rousseau began with the famous remark, man
is born free but is everywhere in chains. From Burke's point of view, that was just
about as wrong as it could be. It isn't that you're free in nature and that later on you
become enchained by society, not at all. If you're ever free at all, it's because you
live in society. Society is what brings out the best in men and restrains their evil and
their ignorance and prevents their arbitrary behavior. Burke admitted that change was necessary
but he said that it should always be gradual, always mindful of the circumstances preceding
it and he was horrified by the idea that new schemes for the organization of society could
be actually written out as planned documents. He said, I cannot conceive how any man can
have brought himself to that pitch of presumption to consider his country as nothing but carte
blanche upon which he may scribble whatever he pleases. He said, revolutions are almost
pure destruction. Rage and frenzy will pull down more in half an hour than prudence, deliberation
and foresight can build up in a hundred years. The errors and defects of old establishments
are visible and palpable. It calls for little ability to point them out. No difficulties
occur in what has never been tried. Criticism is almost baffled in discovering the defects
of what has not existed. An eager enthusiasm and cheating hope have all the wide field
of imagination in which they may expatiate with little or no opposition. Now that's
a slightly complicated passage. What he's saying there in a tone of high irony is it
may be true that the world we've got is vulnerable to criticism. Of course it is because it
actually exists. On the other hand, the worlds we imagine are almost invulnerable to criticism.
Why? Because they don't exist, but we'll soon find with a horrible jarring surprise that
if we try to bring them into existence, especially in violation of our accumulated wisdom and
knowledge that things are going to go dreadfully wrong. Another of his favorite ideas was that
society is an organism rather than a mechanism. It's not a sort of machine that's been put
together, but rather it's a living thing and it's a spiritual unity across the generations.
So being English to Berg entails a sense of ancestors of the present generation and of
those to come, linked to one another organically, linked through their families, the basic
institution of society and all linked to God together. He said also, we should cultivate
particular and local loyalties rather than adhering to grand abstractions. Another thing
he very much disliked about the philosoph, these great political planners, was the way
in which they relied upon the great abstractions. He said, no, no, let's start with something
humble. Let's start with the family, the little platoon to which we all belong. Let's think
small and work out our ideas about society from the most basic levels. And another brilliant
rhetorical stratagem, he said, we should be proud rather than ashamed of our comparative
unimaginativeness. Why? Because it saves us from utopian folly. At one point he even
speaks of, quote, the cold sluggishness of our character. Now you wouldn't think that
being accused of having a cold sluggishness in your character was a good thing, but to
the work it was. Because it meant people lived in, followed a familiar rut and that's what
they're supposed to do. He was uninterested in individualism. Again, it's something we
cherish, but he didn't. He says, most men have got nothing to offer when they stray
from the familiar way. This leads back to a point I made at the beginning, that for
him, the idea of prejudice is an entirely positive concept. He says, we're guided by
our prejudices, luckily, which means that we don't have to think out each new situation
from first principles. On all the really important questions, we already know what we think.
And that means that we can act decisively in a crisis rather than having to agonise
from the very, very first principles of philosophy. We've already got a set of ideas and we know
what to do with them when it comes to the point. One of his sympathetic interpreters,
Russell Kerr, writing in the 1950s, says, referring to Burke, prejudice is not bigotry
or superstition, although prejudice sometimes may degenerate into these. Prejudice is pre-judgment,
the answer with which intuition and ancestral consensus of opinion supply a man when he
lacks either time or knowledge to arrive at a decision predicated upon pure reason.
For Burke's book, the reflection on the revolutions in France was controversial right from the
beginning and it generated numerous replies, of which the best remembered is Tom Paine's
The Rights of Man. Tom Paine argues directly against almost everything that Burke stands
for. He says, Paine says, human rights originate in nature and the role of government is to
uphold natural rights, whereas as I suggested, for Burke, rights only exist in civil society.
It's only when a society has restrained the chaos of humanity that the idea of rights
can amount to anything. Tom Paine was in favor of democracy. Burke was against it. Paine
was in favor of abolishing the monarchy and abolishing the aristocracy, all forms of hereditary
privilege. Burke was against and believed that the monarchy and the aristocracy were
vital, the central supports of society. Now, Tom Paine was living in France. He was tried
in his absence for seditious libel for publishing The Rights of Man. But ironically, he then
fell afoul of Robespierre in France as a new faction came into authority and was imprisoned
and in danger for his life, the kind of thing that Burke would have foreseen, that revolutions
create instability and turbulence and sudden changes of fortune. Paine's life was probably
spared because the American minister to France, James Monroe, later to be President Monroe,
helped to spare his life from the guillotine and enable him to get back to America.
Now, here's the English historian Norman Gash talking about Burke's importance. He says,
the importance of the reflections was that for the first time it provided an explicit
and penetrating philosophy of conservatism, marked by observations of enduring value for
the study of politics and expressed in a superb literary style. It has remained a treasure
house of precept and quotation for conservative writers and politicians ever since. His work
outlived his age because it was based not simply on the historical circumstances of
his time, but on a profound insight into the nature of man in society. While the development
of the French Revolution after 1790 fulfilled many of Burke's worst fears, he'd been one
of the first to realize that liberty, equality and fraternity was not an adequate set of
principles on which to base a new government. Readers who'd been sceptical at first began
to recognize Burke's prescience as the situation in France deteriorated in the ensuing years.
First of all, the king was deposed and imprisoned in 1791 and a republic declared. Then the
revolutionaries turned against the French Catholic Church and expelled many of the priests.
Then the French declared war against the Holy Roman Emperor, the Austro-Hungarians. In 1793
the terror began with the guillotining of the king and the royal family and then much of
the aristocracy, some of whose survivors fled in disarray to England. Britain itself declared
war against France in 1793 and between then and 1815, or almost constantly at war, first
against France, then against Napoleon. Meanwhile, the fear inside Britain that the French Revolutionary
contagion might catch on on this side of the English side of the English Channel led to
repression by the government. This is a point I'm going to make in the next lecture about
William Pitt. At first there had been many sympathizers in England for the French Revolution
and the British government was terrified of them, not knowing that there wasn't going
to be a French Revolution in England too. Burke himself recognized the war against France
as something qualitatively new and kind. In a letter of 1794 he wrote, I cannot persuade
myself that this war bears any of the least resemblance to any that has ever existed in
the world. I cannot persuade myself that any examples or any reasonings drawn from other
wars and other politics are at all applicable to it. And I truly and sincerely think that
all other wars and all other politics have been the games of children in comparison to
it. In other words, for the first time now this isn't simply a war between two great
dynasties, two monarchies competing with one another. It's a war of ideas instead and the
French armies are supercharged with revolutionary zeal, which might have the effect of overthrowing
the constitution of society as we know it altogether. Burke certainly dreaded the outbreak
of revolutionary activism in Britain as well. When he wrote his letters on a registered
piece in 1796 he bespoke his fear that an armed doctrine of revolution had crossed the
English Channel. Now Burke said, Burke was the first to see that, suddenly now England
was fighting a war of ideas and it was fighting against one of the most radical French groups,
the Jacobins, a war against Jacobinism. One of the reasons that Burke's ideas became so
popular in 20th century America was because it was possible in the years after the Second
World War to make a comparison between the British situation in the 1790s fighting against
the French revolutionary idea and the American situation after World War II fighting against
the communist idea and certainly a generation of American scholars of Edmund Burke made
this analogy directly. Just as Burke had to fear the Jacobins, so we Americans in the
1950s have to fear communism. They're these terrifying revolutionary doctrines which can
shatter our civilization. Burke to the end of his life argued that the principle of democracy
was a dangerous abstraction and he supported government moves to suppress its advocates.
Now throughout the whole of the rest of this course we're going to see regular recurrence
of these themes from the work of Edmund Burke, obviously being modified to fit new circumstances.
Certainly Burke's interpreters in 1950s America didn't speak out against democracy and against
equality. They realized that to do so would have made their ideas completely unacceptable.
But nevertheless there is much in Burke which has, to his supporters, has persisting value.
The idea that equality is unstable, it's wrong, it's potentially dangerous. The idea
that democracy is also vulnerable to demagogies and deteriorating into the worst form of the
human passions. The idea that deference and disguise are better than frankness and full
disclosure. And perhaps above all one of the strongest ideas which comes through in all
of Burke's work. The idea that our civilization which has been built up over generations is
fragile and vulnerable. And that what we need to do is to live according to the accumulated
wisdom of our tradition.
