We know that the American Revolution created a republic that by 1820 was the most democratic
country in the world and a source of inspiration to revolutionaries everywhere.
Most of the American leaders of the 1770s had no intention of bringing about that situation.
From the Stamp Act crisis to the Declaration of Independence, many of them justified their
conduct as an attempt to preserve their traditional English liberties against a king and a ministry
that they believed were threatening innovations that would make them tyrannical.
When Patrick Henry declared give me liberty or give me death, he was appealing explicitly
to a long British tradition of liberty under limited government, the heritage of the glorious
revolution.
Many of the American leaders saw themselves more as more as restorationists than as revolutionaries,
even when they came to believe that only independence would enable them to restore the conditions
of the old order.
They did not anticipate, and often did not relish, the drastic internal changes that
followed from their victory.
Well, if the leaders were not in most cases full blown revolutionaries, how much less
so were the Americans who favored loyalty to the British cause, fought on the British
side and went into exile when the war was won and lost.
These loyalists, aptly nicknamed Tories, are probably the least known major group in American
history, but their story is integral to the history of Anglo-American conservatism.
I think it's a great anomaly actually in the study of American history.
Everyone think it was very hard in the study of the American Civil War not to include the
story from the Confederate point of view, but hardly anybody seems to think it's hard
not to include the loyalists in studies of the revolution, except as two dimensional
bad guys.
There were a lot of them, they were, many of them were highly respected people who played
an important role in American society up to the time of the war and in the early years
of the conflict, and yet now they've been very, very largely forgotten.
It's even possible to make the argument that the American Revolutionary War was really
more of a civil war than the event we remember as the American Civil War, because there was
far more geographical intermixing of loyalists and revolutionaries during the revolution
than there was at the time of the Civil War, where there was actually a very sharp geographical
separation.
Ex-Confederates called it the war between the states, and in some ways that's a more
suitable name for the conflict of the 1860s.
Well, historians have long debated whether the events of the 1770s and 80s should be
thought of chiefly as a war of independence or as a revolution.
It certainly wasn't the same kind of shattering social transformation as took place in France
a few years later, or as took place in Russia in, in and after 1917.
The American Revolution was procedural, it was orderly, it was led mainly by lawyers,
and merchants, and planters, all men of property who were very, very attentive to the preservation
of their own favoured situation.
Now, clearly there are some elements of the American Revolution which do have a radical
flavour.
Contract theories of government, the work of John Locke was very influential to many
of the American Revolutionaries.
And some clearly radical figures were at work.
Samuel Adams, the leader of the, one of the leaders of the Boston Revolutionaries, who
organised the Boston Tea Party, mob actions and intimidations of undecided citizens.
The work of Tom Paine was obviously very important.
I mentioned him in each of the last two lectures as the, as the author of Common Sense, the
pamphlet which inspired the writing, or helped to inspire the writing of the Declaration
of Independence.
But there's also a great deal of conservatism about the American Revolution, and it's
possible to argue that in the Constitution, it was that kind of conservatism which won
out in the long run.
Now in the escalating crisis of the 1760s and 70s, the American colonial leaders argued
that their rights and liberties as Britons were under threat from an innovating king.
They venerated the glorious revolution just as much as most Englishmen.
Here's the historian, Edmund Morgan, who writes,
Being English meant having a history that stretched back continuously into a golden age
of Anglo-Saxon purity and freedom.
It was a past in which freedom, born among the Anglo-Saxons, was submerged by the Norman
conquest and only gradually recovered, the final triumph occurring in the glorious revolution
of 1688.
Even those parts of English history that had occurred since the founding of the colonies
were chairfully appropriated, and in the ensuing years of strife with the mother country, there
was no repudiation of the heritage.
Throughout the war and after, Americans maintained that they were preserving the true tradition
of English history, a tradition that had been upset by forces of darkness and corruption
in England itself.
The American Revolutionaries identified closely with the opposition Whigs in England, who
had criticized the Hanoverian kings and criticized the Prime Minister, Robert Walpole, in just
the same kind of way as had Bolingbroke and other critics of George I, II and III.
They idolized the glorious revolution, and they were very, very suspicious of royal innovations.
One source of particular resentment was the way in which Walpole had used patronage to
buy the compliance of important parts of the nation, particularly the rising merchant classes.
The American colonial leaders felt that the royal government was doing the same thing
by appointing royal governors and judges and customs officials, all of whose livelihoods
were directly dependent on the goodwill of the monarchy itself.
And there was that old fear, which I mentioned in the context of Burke and Pitt, that luxury
might sap the citizens' virtue.
Now the Stamp Act was particularly offensive.
The Stamp Act is usually the event which marks the beginning of the revolutionary ferment
of the 1760s.
It was particularly offensive to the American colonists because they were denied the chance
to participate in assigning taxes that they would have to pay.
This is where we first start hearing the phrase, no taxation without representation.
A petition from the colony of Massachusetts said that the Stamp Act deprived them of the
most essential rights of Britons.
They admitted that Parliament had the right to create duties to regulate trade and to oversee
the welfare of the whole British Empire.
But they denied that Parliament had the right to impose duties whose function was to raise
revenue because that would strike at the safety of their own property.
I should just digress for a moment here to say that from the British government's point
of view, they were doing something very reasonable because the French and Indian War had just
come to a highly satisfactory conclusion.
The menace of French conquest had suddenly diminished sharply because now the British
were the dominant power in Canada.
And the British took the view, we've made the situation so much safer for the Americans
but it's cost us greatly, surely it's reasonable for us to ask them to contribute to paying
for it to pay off some of the debts of the war.
But the Americans, because they weren't represented, didn't see it that way.
The colonists claimed that their colonial assemblies under the King played the same role
for them as did Parliament under the King in England.
This is one of the great ironies of the events which led up to the declaration of independence.
To quote Edmund Morgan, the historian again, he says,
As they prepared to cast off the authority of Parliament, Americans were genuinely eager
to keep their grip on the past.
They had ransacked English and colonial history for precedents to justify their constitutional
position to show that they were still true to the traditions of Englishmen and they had
been remarkably successful in finding the precedents they wanted.
Now among the colonial leaders there was a great interest in classical models, both in
England and in America.
There's a constant looking back to great earlier periods in the past and particularly looking
back to Greek and Roman heroes.
One of the most popular figures in the 18th century on both sides of the Atlantic was
the austere classical hero Cato, a Roman and a Stoic, famous for his absolute moral rectitude
in an age of corruption and as one of the defenders of the Republic, the Roman Republic, against
the user-patient of Caesar.
Joseph Addison had written a famous play called Cato, which was first staged in 1713.
It was his first performance as a famous moment in England because it was a veiled
attack on royal corruption.
And it appealed to the colonists for the same reason, George Washington among many others
knew the play well, quoted it often and had it performed at Valley Forge during the desperate
winter of 1777 when the Continental Army was beleaguered there.
So these are the American revolutionaries appealing to an ancient tradition of citizens
virtue.
One of the puzzles for historians is that even after the fighting began at Lexington and
Concord in April of 1775, another 15 months went by during which although they were fighting
against British troops, the Americans continued to say that they were fighting for their rights
as Englishmen.
It wasn't until July 1776 that they finally wrote and endorsed the Declaration of Independence.
So in that period of more than a year, the revolutionaries claimed that they were fighting
for their rights as Englishmen over against a corrupt ministry which has deceived the
king.
They sent the olive branch petition to George III, appealing against his corrupt ministry.
I think that suggests that at every step of the way, they acted as reluctant revolutionaries.
Now among the leaders of the revolutionary forces, John Adams, George Washington, Alexander
Hamilton did not believe in equality or democracy, just as their English counterparts did not.
Washington in fact modeled himself on another classical hero, Sincinatus.
Sincinatus was famous for being called from the plough when the Roman Republic was in
danger, fighting successfully as a general against Rome's enemies.
But when the enemies were defeated and he had the opportunity to make himself into a
tyrant, surrendered power and went back to his farm, back to the plough.
And Washington was very self-conscious in modeling himself upon this classical hero,
Sincinatus, and was proudest in his own career, first of giving up power when he surrendered
the Continental Army at the end of the Revolutionary War, and then again at the end of his second
term as president in 1796 in giving up power.
That is, the relinquishing of power is the great act for a virtuous citizen, because
it prevents the danger that a military strongman will seize power and turn himself into a tyrant
or a dictator.
But here again, they're constantly looking backwards for inspiration, not forwards.
All the Virginia leaders, including Washington, were aware of the paradox that they as slaveholders
were fighting to prevent their enslavement by a tyrannical king.
Now in 1913, a historian named Charles Beard did a close study of the material interests
of the founding fathers and came to the conclusion that most of them had been fighting for very
obvious selfish reasons.
He even claimed that, the book was called An Economic Interpretation of the Constitution,
and he said that there were mainly men of property who were afraid that they had a lot
to lose if the British government could make arbitrary incursions against their property.
And it's an influential study, but the prevailing wisdom now among historians is that Beard
told a kind of half-truth.
They were the pillars of society, these men, and they did have a lot to lose, but nevertheless
they believed in their rights as Englishmen and they risked their lives on behalf of these
rights.
To participate in a revolution is, of course, one of the most dangerous things you can possibly
do because to be defeated would almost certainly mean execution for treason.
I'd like to say a word now about the loyalists.
Loyalists made up about half a million people or about one-fifth of the white colonists of
North America.
There were a lot of them and they were important people.
They identified emotionally and materially with Britain and they continued to do so even
after the outbreak of the fighting and even after the Declaration of Independence because
they thought it was unjustified.
Here's the historian William Nelson in a study of the loyalists.
He says,
In and around the seaboard towns, two or three generations of successful commercial intimacy
with Europe had produced a class of merchants and professional men with gentile aspirations
and a cosmopolitan outlook.
These people may have been increasingly estranged from the life of rural America, but they were
less remote from England in fact and feeling than in earlier times.
They found much to admire in the social and political system of 18th century Britain.
They envied the easy and efficient intimacy between wealth and government in England and
sought to reproduce it in America.
One of these men was Joseph Galloway of Pennsylvania, a loyalist who's been to some extent overlooked
by the historians.
His hope in the 1760s and 70s was to create even closer ties between Britain and America
rather than to sender them.
One of his close friends was Benjamin Franklin, the leading citizen of Philadelphia.
And both of them shared the view that Pennsylvania ought to be taken over as a royal colony away
from the Quaker proprietors who'd founded it in the first place and whom they found
very irksome because of the Quakers refusal to fight even when they were under attack
on the frontier by Indians.
Galloway was afraid of the rough Scotch Irishman on the Pennsylvania frontier.
He supported the idea of giving America members of parliament to strengthen the ties between
the two countries.
All his instincts were for compromise and to prevent conflict.
When the fighting broke out it was easy for Galloway to stay with the British.
When the British army took over Philadelphia he became its governor.
When they evacuated so did he and he lived out his life in England, condemned in his
absence by the Americans as a traitor to the revolutionary cause and had his estates confiscated.
Another good example would again, very closely, even more closely associated with Benjamin
Franklin would be Franklin's son William who also became and remained a loyalist.
William Franklin was born in 1731 and worked as an assistant to his father in the famous
experiments with electricity, the kite experiments.
He spent long periods studying in England and living there and he felt himself to be
an Englishman whichever side of the Atlantic he might be on.
Benjamin Franklin himself, who was slow to become a revolutionary, petitioned in London
in the 1760s for his son to get the job of governor of New Jersey and he got the job.
When the war broke out William Franklin responded by remaining loyal to the British.
He was imprisoned by the revolutionary government from 1776 to 8, later released and went to
New York and from there migrated back to England and lived out the rest of his life there.
Now many of the loyalists denied the intellectual claims being made by the revolutionaries.
They didn't think that the revolutionaries had accurately interpreted the British tradition
of limited government and they certainly didn't think that the Americans were justified
in rebelling.
Here's Charles Inglis, one of the most articulate of the loyalists.
He wrote a pamphlet called The True Interest of America Impartially Stated.
This is an answer to Tom Paine's common sense which was written during the lead-up to the
Declaration of Independence, the pamphlet war of 1776.
He explicitly denied the idea that man originally lived in the state of nature and said no,
we're born into society, we're born into families.
He agreed with Richard Hooker whom I mentioned back in the second lecture of this course
that God himself has placed men in society.
Society needs laws and law needs government.
And government's not some kind of necessary evil as Tom Paine implied, but a positive
good ordained by God himself.
Another of these pamphleteers was Samuel Seabury, author of the Letters of a Westchester Farmer,
which is another of the best remembered of the loyalist tracts.
He warned New Yorkers that busybody revolutionary committee men, many of them born in the lowest
social classes, were now going to seize power in the revolutionary committees and were going
to regulate the details of citizens' lives, sometimes even breaking in their homes to
make sure that, for example, they weren't drinking tea or other prohibited commodities.
And Seabury says, will you submit to them should they be chosen by the weak, foolish,
turbulent part of the country people?
To as you please.
But by him who made me, I will not.
No, if I must be enslaved, let it be by a king at least and not by a parcel of upstart
lawless committee men.
If I must be devoured, let me be devoured by the jaws of a lion and not gnawed to death
by rats and vermin.
You can see the intensity of this rhetoric, the idea that the common people of New York
State are rats and vermin, despicable people, and he's saying they're going to start pushing
into your affairs and denying you the elementary privacy that you've always enjoyed under
the British.
Now quite a lot of people in America owed their livelihood directly to the British government.
Those who were officials or state governors or very often Anglican clergymen were directly
dependent on British patrons for their livelihood.
Anglican clergy such as Jonathan Boucher were prominent conservative loyalists as you
might expect.
Now the Anglican clergy had been struggling for the appointment of a bishop in the 1750s
and 60s.
Each minister of the Church of England has to be anointed by a bishop and that meant
that because there wasn't a bishop in America, each of them had to take the very, very hazardous
trip back to Britain in order to be ordained.
But there'd been a lot of fear in the colonies that an Anglican bishop would be the beginnings
of an attempt to deny religious freedom to the other religious groups and particularly
in New England which had strong Puritan populations.
That was feared in the same way that Archbishop Lord had been feared as a repressive Archbishop
of Canterbury before the English Civil Wars.
So to the annoyance of many of the Anglican clergy, a bishop had never been appointed.
Boucher was an Anglican minister in the colonies since 1759.
He was a close friend of George Washington and in fact for a while he was the teacher
of George Washington's stepson, John Park Custis.
By the early 1770s as the revolutionary movement was gaining steam, he was the vicar of St Barnabas's
Church in Upper Marlborough, Maryland.
He revived the old arguments of Sir Robert Filmer, one of the defenders of absolute monarchy,
who again denied the idea that men once lived in a state of nature.
Filmer's idea, which is echoed by Boucher, is that authority grows from patriarchy, that
the basic institution of society is the family and just as the father is the head of the
family, so the king is the head of the much larger family which is the nation itself,
the kingdom itself.
Once again he's rejecting these contract theories of government such as that of John Locke and
of course has good historical evidence to support his position.
And emphatically Boucher is denying the principle of individualism.
He asks the question, what is society for?
It's not for the good of man, but for the glory of God.
Of course as soon as you think that, that's necessarily going to change the way in which
you think about the proper constitution of society.
As the crisis worsened in 1773 to 4, he started preaching with a pair of pistols in the pulpit
you can imagine how engaging it must be to listen to the minister with the knowledge
that he might aim a pistol at you.
He preached this farewell sermon in 1775 after the fighting had begun to a divided congregation,
some of whom sympathized with his loyalist position and some of whom definitely favored
the revolutionary position.
But he ended by saying, I will continue to pray for the king and all who are in authority
under him.
As long as I live, I will proclaim, God save the king.
Perhaps the most famous of all the loyalists was Thomas Hutchinson, the last royal governor
of the Massachusetts colony.
And he was in the embarrassing and awkward position of deploring the British government's
conduct in the 1760s and 70s, but nevertheless still remaining loyal to it.
His view was that though it was mistaken, nevertheless that didn't justify him in rebelling
against it.
He'd warned Westminster, he'd warned the London government that the Stamp Act was going to
cause bitter protests, but still when it was put into effect, he accepted its legality.
A Massachusetts mob ransacked his house and destroyed his valuable library, almost tore
the place to pieces.
In 1770, he became the governor of Massachusetts and John Adams, obviously soon to be one of
the revolutionary leaders, admitted, have not his countrymen loved, admired, revered,
rewarded, they almost adored him, have not 99 in 100 of them really thought him the greatest
and best man in America.
Now Hutchinson, clearly a widely respected person, thought that the revolutionary leaders,
many of whom he knew individually in this small face-to-face world of America in the
1770s, he was struck by their ambition, by their envy, or in the case of people like
John Hancock, by their eagerness to be popular and renowned.
He thought that many of them had ulterior motives, what he regarded as vulgar motives,
for thrusting themselves forward into the political conflict.
In the escalating confrontations of 1774 to 5, he was finally forced to flee under threat
after the Boston Tea Party, and he ended his life as an exile in England.
Now when the fighting began in 1775, nearly everybody was forced to take sides, including
those who would much rather have preferred to stay out of harm's way.
A very good military historian named John Shy, has estimated that only about a fifth
of the people living in the colonies were actively in favor of the revolution, probably
about a fifth were actively opposed to it, and the great majority were just dismayed
that it had happened, and were eager to keep their heads down and stay out of the way,
which is actually what you'd expect when you think of the dangers that are inherent in
the outbreak of a revolutionary war.
But very often the revolutionary leaders would compel men to join the militia as a way of
forcing them to take some kind of direct action, which would declare them to be, from the British
point of view, in treasonable rebellion against Britain, forcing people to take sides even
if they'd rather not.
At the end of the fighting, thousands of loyalists left America altogether, where they went to
live either back in Britain or in Canada rather than living in the New Republic, though there
were many who also made their peace with the New United States and lived out the rest of
their lives in the New Republic.
But what I'd like to emphasize particularly is that there were a lot of them, that there
weren't some marginal or freakish group in America, but well-known, widely liked people
interrelated closely with many of the revolutionaries, an important part of the population, who to
some extent historians have overlooked.
Now, the Constitution, jumping forwards now ten years, the Constitution was an attempt
to make America more stable by strengthening its central government and curbing its radical
tendencies.
From the time of the Declaration of Independence, the colonies or the new states were bound
together under the Articles of Confederation, but under the Articles, the central government
was very weak, so weak that the Union appeared to be breaking up.
There was a chaotic variety of types of money, for example, no universally agreed upon currency.
There was great indiscipline in the frontier, constant incursions and raids against the
Indians.
There was no adequate government leadership from the center during a commercial slump.
And all these problems were brought to a crisis by Shea's Rebellion, an uprising of debtors
against their creditors.
It was even possible, and it was certainly feared, but on the part of pre-Seant Americans,
that the British might seize the opportunity to re-conquer the states, or that the Spanish
might make a military expedition, or that a low level of warfare might even break out
between squabbling states and that they'd become chronically permanently at war.
These were the circumstances in which the Constitutional Convention gathered in Philadelphia
to discuss the possibility of writing a new instrument of government, a new constitution.
And the group was given instant prestige by the presence of Washington, George Washington
outstandingly the most famous and most revered man in America, and also by Benjamin Franklin.
Now at that time, John Adams and Thomas Jefferson were both working in Europe as ambassadors
of the New Republic, although they also sympathized with this new venture.
And in 1787, in Philadelphia, James Madison Drafted and the founding fathers hammered
out this new instrument of government.
I mentioned earlier the historian Charles Beard, who said, all these men held government
securities.
They stood to lose severely by the failure of the Articles of Confederation or the breakdown
of the New Republic.
Charles Beard's work was effective in bringing them down to earth and showing them, showing
that they were real men with flesh and blood and material interests, not demigods.
But still, that doesn't lessen their achievement in any way in creating a very durable Constitution,
which is still in use now more than 200 years later.
It was strong enough to hold the nation together, but it was flexible enough to adapt to new
conditions and a transformed world.
The founding fathers also were not radical Democrats.
The whole point about the Senate, which in those days was not popularly elected, but
rather had its members appointed by the state governments.
And the whole point of the judiciary was that it was designed to be insulation against
the electorate.
The idea was the electorate is vulnerable to transient passions, and so the Constitutional,
though it will have a democratic element, the House of Representatives, will also have
non-democratic elements, the Senate and the judiciary, to offset them.
Those widespread fear of democracy expressed at the Constitutional Convention, because
to many of the founders it meant sudden swerves in the transient will of an ignorant mob.
For example, one of the delegates, Elbridge Gerry, said, the evils we experience flow
from the excess of democracy, the worst of all political evils.
Like many of the founders, he favored a republic, but not a democracy.
There was no assumption at the founding convention that the two go together.
To the founders, virtue was much more important than democracy.
That's why they created the Electoral College.
That's why they had the indirect election of senators, which wasn't switched to direct
election until 1913.
That's why they favored the idea of appointing judges and then having them approved by the
Senate, rather than making them susceptible to popular election.
The House of Representatives was the one democratic element, and the House members had these short
two-year terms, so that they could represent the short-term interests of the population.
And that was too much for some of the delegates.
Roger Sherman of Connecticut even argued that state legislatures should elect the House
of Representatives, because he wanted more insulation from democracy.
He said, the people immediately should have as little to do as may be about the government.
They want, in other words, they lack information, and are constantly liable to be misled.
In our practice, the founders accepted slavery, and they agreed not even to raise the question
of abolishing the slave trade until 1808.
This was a necessary compromise if the Constitution was going to be passed.
Just as the three-fifths rule, artificially enlarging the population of southern states
for purposes of election, was another necessary compromise.
Perhaps the most striking way in which the American revolutionaries emphasized their
own continuity with their British traditions is the passage of the First Ten Amendments.
They gave them the same name, the Bill of Rights, as those enumerated rights passed
by parliament a hundred years earlier at the end of the glorious revolution.
So I think it's clear from this that in many respects the American revolution itself was
a very unrevolutionary revolution, and that the people who carried it out were still thinking
in terms of what was best in their British heritage.
