In their day, the pioneers of free market capitalism were widely regarded as radicals.
Some of their admirers still call them classical liberals.
It is appropriate to consider them at this point in the course, however, for chronological
reasons, and because the ideas they developed were to become central to 20th century conservatism.
Adam Smith's Inquiry into the Wealth of Nations, published in 1776, argued against
protective tariffs and government monopolies and in favor of the free market.
The invisible hand of the market, wrote Smith, will adjust the economy more accurately and
more equitably than the interfering hand of government.
Consumers will flourish and consumers will enjoy ever-improving goods at ever-decreasing costs.
David Ricardo, a wealthy businessman who took up economics after reading Smith's great
work, explored the advantages to the nation of economic specialization just at the time
that Britain's textile magnates were learning how to mass-produce goods, subdivide labor
and enjoy massive economies of scale.
James and John Stuart Mill, principal figures in the early history of utilitarianism, dismayed
the conservatives of their own day by favoring the separation of church and state, denying
the existence of natural law and arguing that women should have political rights.
Their individualism and their central principle that society should be conducted for the greatest
good of the greatest number have nevertheless been important elements of the libertarian
side of modern conservatism.
We saw last time how Peel, by repealing the Corn Laws, was bringing Britain more nearly
to a condition of free trade than ever before.
He was ultimately responding to these theorists and demonstrating British conservative acceptance
of modern capitalism.
Well, I think it's important, first of all, to recognize that there's nothing natural
about capitalism.
It had to be invented, and its inventors had to overcome many practical and intellectual
obstacles.
British life in the 18th and early 19th centuries was only gradually emerging from tradition-bound
relationships.
One of the most important ideas, which had a very tenacious hold on the minds of generations
of people, was the idea of the just price.
It was still widely accepted.
Over decades or even centuries, some prices, like the price of a loaf of bread, stayed
the same.
And if prices went up because there was a shortage, there were food riots.
Because the rioters felt that there was a violation of the just price, and we've got
records of rioters seizing bread, but then actually paying the old just price, but refusing
to pay the new higher price.
It was widely believed, particularly among economic theorists, that the poor must be
kept poor, or they would do no work.
In other words, that as the Bible says, the poor you shall have always with you.
There will always be poverty.
This isn't something which is going to be abolished.
In our day now, we hold out the prospect the hard work will make you prosper.
But then the feeling, which was expressed by Bernard de Mandeville in the early 18th
century, and by many other writers on economics, was that the poor must be kept poor.
The theory was, if wages rise, it isn't that the poor will get wealthy, it's that they'll
work for fewer hours, and then they'll drink away their earnings.
So it's also socially important to keep the poor poor, to keep them at work.
Now the prevailing theory before Adam Smith was that of mercantilism.
And one of the governing assumptions of mercantilism was that one nation's gain was another
one's loss.
There were intense trade wars in the 17th and 18th centuries, because the British and
the French and the Dutch all assumed that if one nation got wealthier, it could only
be because one of the others had got poorer.
Only very, very slowly and gradually did they realize that economic activity can increase
everyone's wealth.
In other words, that it's not a zero sum game.
As the reach of European colonial empires increased in the 18th century as Britain began
to conquer India and create literally a world bestriding empire, the old ideas came to
seem more implausible and the possibility of collective enrichment became possible.
Well important economic ventures prior to 1750 were nearly always undertaken through
the grant of royal charters that excluded competition.
It's like the East India Company, which had a monopoly right to trade beyond the cape
of good hope.
The Virginia Company, which set up some of the American colonies.
And of course they exercised all the usual abuses of monopolies.
The prices they charged were too high, the goods they produced were of poor quality and
because they were monopolies, they were permitted to become inefficient.
Mercantilism and inefficiency and monopoly, these are all the things that Adam Smith was
opposed to.
He was a Scottish intellectual and in 1776 he published an inquiry into the wealth of
nations.
Now Smith's title is itself a very illuminating one.
He says this, I'm inquiring into why certain nations are wealthy.
In other words, the thing that has to be explained is wealth.
We don't have to explain poverty because we've always had plenty of poverty with us.
What's surprising and noteworthy is that now we've got some wealth as well.
That's the thing that's got to be explained.
We today live in a very, very wealthy society where we can afford to ask the question, why
is there still poverty?
But throughout most of world history, that never had to be explained.
It was just obvious.
Adam Smith brought together the insights of numerous writers on economics, philosophy
and politics to create a kind of general theory of capitalism.
Smith showed that individuals serving their self-interest will also provide everything
that the society needs.
This is what's so seductive about Smith's theory.
It isn't because people are altruistic that society is well-served.
It's because they're selfish that it's well-served.
Individuals provide goods and services because other people will pay for them.
Smith says at one point, it is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer or
the baker that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest.
We address ourselves not to their humanity, but to their self-love and never talk to them
of our necessities, but of their advantages.
Smith recognized that competition will ensure a steady fall in prices and a steady rise
in the quality of goods on sale.
After all, if ten different companies are all trying to produce the same commodity,
all ten of them have got an incentive to improve the quality of the good and also to reduce
the price of it because better quality and lower price will attract consumers.
And that means that if you've got competition, you've got the built-in probability of the
improvement of the goods and the decline in their prices.
And Smith showed price mechanisms will ensure that supply meets demand.
If the price of a commodity is high, more people will enter the competition to make
it because they see a profitable opportunity in being able to sell that commodity.
Again, they enter the competition for purely selfish reasons, but in making more of the
commodity, they tend to bring its price down and they tend to improve its quality.
That's why competition is so good.
And he says, even if the makers of a commodity, the many different makers, create a price-fixing
agreement to try to create an oligopoly, someone outside that arrangement is going to be drawn
in to make the items and undersell the cartel.
In other words, it's very, very difficult to preserve a monopoly position if any number
of actors are entitled to enter the market freely.
And that's why government-supported monopolies are so bad.
Smith made one very, very important, crucial conceptual breakthrough.
He assumed that societies are dynamic, not static, and that their economies will develop.
Again, for generations, the assumption had been that there's a more or less fixed amount
of economic activity in the world and that some people are getting more and some are
getting less.
But Smith starts to think about it in a different way, to think that the whole situation is
being transformed by economic activity.
Profitable manufacturing, said Smith, leads to accumulations of money, i.e. capital.
And that can be invested in bigger ventures, which will employ more people and make more
goods and enable them to be distributed more widely.
And, said Smith, everybody benefits.
Even the poor men in industrializing Britain, although they were poor, they were less poor
than their predecessors.
They were living better than ever before.
It's true that their homes might look rough, but, he says, they have clothes, they have
knives and forks, cutlery, plates, windows in their houses, and many other manufactured
items.
Quote, the accommodation of a European prince does not always so much exceed that of an
industrious and frugal peasant.
As the accommodation of the latter exceeds that of many an African king, the absolute
master of the lives and liberties of 10,000 naked savages.
In other words, even our peasants are becoming as wealthy as the kings of the Africans.
Smith also noted that population was rising as productivity increased, partly because
improved wages tended to reduce infant mortality.
More children lived in a wage economy than had previously been the case.
Now, in a famous early chapter of the Inquiry into the Wealth of Nations, Smith also talked
about the division of labor.
And he describes the way in which pin making, the making of pins, has been transformed in
Britain.
There was a time when a master pin maker would do every process on his own.
But then the industrial pin manufacturers brought together lots of men, and each one
would just do one very, very simple task.
And he said there's a massive increase in efficiency when you break down the various
components of the job.
It isn't as though 20 men make 20 times as many pins per day, they make about 100 or
150 times as many as one pin maker working on his own.
The division of labor is crucial to Smith's scheme.
Now, of course, he also admitted that the downside of the division of labor is that
the work becomes more and more boring and limited and stultifying.
And less skill is needed.
An old master pin maker had to be able to do many processes, whereas the new factory
worker just has to do one and it can be learned very quickly and it's dreadfully boring.
Smith in fact said, the government ought to intervene to be sure that everyone has some
education, partly to offset the monotony which they're going to have to endure in their working
lives.
Smith rejected the idea that government-granted monopolies were necessary or beneficial.
And he rejected the idea that the government ought to impose tariffs on trade.
He also favored the repeal of legislation that limited the mobility of laborers or restricted
the size of enterprises.
All these things should be left alone.
Let the market decide what's going to happen.
If a man wants to move elsewhere to look for work, let him do so.
If an industrialist has got the enterprise and the energy and the capital to set up a
big industry, let him do so.
Central to Smith's thinking is as much economic laissez-faire as possible.
And of course that's why the rising capitalists of England who felt themselves to be excluded
from power, that's why they liked him and the book caught on among them.
Even though the Inquiry into the Wealth of Nations is littered with ruthless and harsh
remarks against about the rapacity of the capitalists, he certainly didn't idealize
them at all.
In other words, there didn't seem to be anything conservative about it at the time.
It was a manifesto of a transformed world.
The early advocates of these ideas were called radicals, and for their time they were radical.
Smith's successors, the next generation of economic theorists, indicated some of the
complexities that develop in an industrial system and the class conflicts that they were
likely to produce.
One of the most famous is Thomas Malthus, a clergyman, and one of the reasons the economics
is sometimes called the dismal science is because Malthus had such a gloomy outlook
about the prospects for economic changes.
He said, it's true that we're getting more economic growth, but we're also getting
more population growth, and the population is rising and is always going to rise much
faster than the growth in the food supply.
The food supply always grows at an arithmetic rate, whereas the population grows at a geometric
rate.
When you have more people surviving, they give rise to many more children themselves.
That means that very quickly, rising populations are always going to bump up against famine.
Famine, hunger, malnutrition, war, and epidemic to Malthus.
Those were what we now call the Malthusian checks on the development of population because
the poor always breed faster than the ability of the land to feed them.
Malthus says, it seems kind to feed the poor, but if in doing so you enable them to reproduce,
you're really being cruel because you're bringing more mouths into the world that cannot be
fed.
Malthus doubted whether moral restraint or delays in the age of marriage would be sufficient
to counteract his logic.
In other words, he could see if people didn't marry and didn't have sex until they were
30, then the restricted fertility, which would ensue, would mean that populations could restrict
themselves and then perhaps we'd get rising wealth without continued chronic poverty.
But he said, I just can't imagine that people will have the self-discipline to do that.
Another of these theorists was David Ricardo.
He was particularly interested in the relationship or conflict between the landed wealth and
the industrial wealth, something we've already looked at in its political manifestations.
Ricardo was an English Jew who married a Quaker and he made a great fortune on the stock market.
He was a shrewd investor in the era of the Napoleonic Wars.
He was an expert at creating powerful abstractions to understand economic processes, that is to
look at the complicated reality and strip it down to the essentials and then look at
the way in which various factors in economics interacted, the abstractions which are central
to macroeconomics.
In the last years of the Napoleonic Wars, the landowners favored by the Corn Laws, were
favored by the Corn Laws which kept out cheap foreign food supplies.
We looked at this in the previous lecture.
The industrialists felt aggrieved by the Corn Laws because high food prices forced them
to pay higher wages.
After all, from the factory owner's point of view, even keeping the workforce at subsistence,
the workers have to be fed enough to live or there's not going to be any work at all.
So that meant from the industrialist's point of view that the actual profits of industrialization
were accruing not to the industrialists who'd taken all the initiatives, but to the landlords
whose rents kept rising.
Ricardo was a gifted parliamentarian, a member of parliament, and he spoke passionately against
the Corn Laws, but he didn't live to see their repeal.
In the next generation was John Stuart Mill, one of the most interesting people in British
intellectual history.
He brought together the insights of libertarian philosophy with classical economics.
Apart from anything else, John Stuart Mill is the author of one of the very best autobiographies
of the Victorian period.
It's a great classic in its own right.
His father, James Mill, was himself a philosopher, but worked as an official of the East India
Company.
James Mill, the father, believed that in education of children, a lot of time was wasted and
that he taught not to.
So when John Stuart Mill, the son, was just barely three, the father started teaching
him Greek.
And in the autobiography, he talks about his astonishing achievements, first in Greek
and then in Latin, when he was five and six and seven years old.
And as a way of emphasizing the importance of learning his lessons well, his father said
to John Stuart Mill, the oldest, now you've got to teach your younger siblings.
So we have the vision of these children who are just barely able to walk about, already
studying the great classical authors.
Father and son went together on bracing morning walks, and as they did so, John Stuart, the
son, had to summarize history lessons he'd read the day before to his father.
He had a phenomenal memory and was an incredibly learned person in his teens, but at the age
of about 20, had a complete nervous breakdown.
Nevertheless, he had great faith in the essential rightness of his father's ideas, even though
he'd grown up in this kind of hot house environment of intense intellectual effort, he believed
it was entirely justified.
Later on in life, John Stuart Mill fell in love with the lady next door, Harriet Taylor.
But she was married, and for 20 years, with his full knowledge, John Stuart Mill declared
his love for Harriet, and they had an intense, but as far as we know, platonic relationship.
When the poor old husband, Mr. Taylor, finally died, John Stuart Mill was able to marry her,
and he credited all his good ideas to her, although nobody else who knew them seems to
think that the ideas came from her, they think they all came from him.
Now in economics, John Stuart Mill's most important book was The Principles of Political
Economy, published in 1848, just two years after the repeal of the Corn Laws, and it
brought together the insights of Adam Smith and David Ricardo and Thomas Malthus, linking
them to the principles of utilitarianism, which he'd learned from his father and from
Jeremy Bentham.
Utilitarianism was a very down-to-earth philosophy.
It took the view that society should be conducted in such a way as to yield the greatest happiness
to the greatest number of people.
It completely left out all spiritual considerations.
John Stuart Mill pointed out that the laws of economics, as evolved by Smith and Ricardo,
applied principally to questions of production, not distribution, and that societies always
decide how wealth should be distributed.
In other words, a society can decide that there should be no political interference
in distribution, but it doesn't have to decide that.
In other words, any sort of political, any sort of economic arrangement has got political
implications, especially at the distribution end, so that political intervention in the
economy is, strictly speaking, both acceptable and unavoidable.
No one form of distribution is any more natural than any other, despite what Smith and Ricardo
had sometimes implied.
Now John Stuart Mill's classic work On Liberty made the case for a maximum freedom of speech
and maximum freedom of action for everybody, so long as they did not impinge on the freedom
of others.
Like Smith, Mill could see the shortcomings of grasping capitalists, but he also admitted
that society probably progressed because of their work.
In other words, they're not lovely, but they're necessary and they're adequate.
Here's what John Stuart Mill writes.
I confess I am not charmed with an ideal of life, held out by those who think that the
normal state of human beings is that of struggling to get on, that the trampling, crushing, elbowing,
and treading on each other's heels which form the existing type of social life are the most
desirable lot of humankind, or anything but the disagreeable symptoms of one of the phases
of industrial progress.
But that the energies of mankind should be kept in employment by the struggle for riches,
as they were formerly by the struggle for war, until the better minds succeed in educating
the others into better things is undoubtedly better than that they should rust and stagnate.
While minds are coarse, they require coarse stimuli and let them have them.
That's a typical capitalist declaration.
It's not as though it's particularly marvellous, it's just that it's much better than all
the alternatives.
Now John Stuart Mill then went on to argue against Malthus and Ricardo that the working
classes would learn to restrict their fertility.
They would make permanent gains in wages as capitalism matured, and then the society could
set about refining its attitudes towards questions like justice and liberty, rather
than this overwhelming stress on production, which is the great emphasis of the early capitalist
era.
And incidentally, he's been born out by reality, when demographers are now familiar with what's
called demographic shift.
That is, when a society is predominantly agricultural, it'll tend to have a very, very high birth
rate, but also a high infant mortality rate.
And then, as societies go through the industrial revolution and become more urbanized, the
birth rate tends to fall, the infant mortality rate falls, and rate of population rise tends
to diminish.
In other words, the very, very best way to regulate populations is through industrialization
and through the enrichment of the ordinary working people.
Mill himself deployed poverty and favored a mild form of non-coercive socialism.
That was his distributional idea.
He was particularly indignant about inheritance.
He said, what's particularly galling about inheritance is that very often children have
done nothing to deserve advantages, are given advantages because of the work of their fathers
or grandfathers or great-grandfathers.
So he favored very heavy inheritance taxes, so that each new generation would have to
shift for itself and work hard if it wanted to prosper.
John Stuart Mill was also one of the very first economists to see a question which would
loom very large for 20th century conservatives, that having thousands of independent economic
actors is much better than having a monster-centralized state whose practical effect would be coercive
and would impose what he called a tyrannical yoke on individuals' freedom.
Now in the years after the Russian Revolution, this was to be right at the heart of conservative
anti-communism.
It's much better to have economic power dispersed among dozens of different economic actors
rather than concentrated in an all-powerful state which has both political and economic
absolute power.
So John Stuart Mill is a complicated and fascinating person.
He's the ancestor equally of 20th century liberalism in questions like his belief in
women's rights, the rights of minorities, freedom of speech and thought, and the ancestor
of conservatives, particularly in his dedication to utilitarianism and free markets.
The rise of socialism in the early and mid-19th century gradually converted the advocates
of capitalism into conservatives.
The great figure here of course is Karl Marx, who lived from 1818 to 1883.
Marx's view was that capitalism is essentially exploitative of labour, and he prophesied
that there was going to be an inevitable class war that would eventually lead capitalism
to its own self-destruction.
He said, what happens in industrial societies is this, the industrial working class gets
bigger and bigger, and through competition the number of bourgeoisie, that is the number
of employers, gets smaller and smaller, until in the end the sheer numbers are so discrepant
that the immiserated proletarian majority will overthrow the bourgeoisie, the employers.
The Communist Manifesto of 1848 forecast the doom of the bourgeois world, and that year's
revolutions, the revolutions of 1848 in Europe, again including in France and in Germany,
briefly made the threat seem realistic.
But after about 1850, British holders of landed an industrial wealth, these two different
forms of wealth, recognised that it was possible that they might all suffer at the hands of
lower class revolutionaries, and that more factors bound them together than kept them
apart. In other words, that the landed interest and the commercial interest, which had been
at loggerheads, began to recognise a common interest.
The comparative fluidity of the British class system also enabled growing numbers of aristocratic
and industrial families to intermarry. Although Britain was a hierarchical society, and although
snobbery is a very, very important factor, it's not absolutely impermeable. I mentioned
last time the life of Robert Peale. He was the son of a textile millionaire, but the
father had bought his way into the landed aristocracy so that Peale and his descendants
could become parts of the upper classes. Intermarriage became steadily more common, and you can read
about it in the wonderful novels of Anthony Trollop in series like The Palaces. He talks
about the way in which industrial wealth is marrying into the aristocracy.
The aristocrats needed the money, and the industrialists needed, or wanted, the social
prestige, which came with identifying their fortunes with the ancient landed families.
That's another example of Britain's ability to absorb drastic changes procedurally rather
than through revolution. The Paris Commune of 1871 was yet another of these great scares
when a working class revolutionary group briefly took over the city of Paris. And as I've mentioned
repeatedly, France was punctuated with revolutions through the 19th century, and it was very
close. So the fear of socialism long before the Russian Revolution is already becoming
very, very keen indeed.
The rise of socialism and the relative decline of landed wealth left the defense of capitalism
as a defining characteristic of 20th century conservatism. It was a gradual process, especially
in Britain, where the aristocracy remained important well into the mid-20th century.
Even in the government of Margaret Thatcher in the 1980s, it was still quite common to
have ministers, conservative ministers, sitting in the House of Lords, the inheritors of ancient
titles. But of course that's a demonstration of the fact that the Conservative Party proved
to be very talented indeed in absorbing the men it once denounced as the radicals. That
shows the power of British proceduralism and adaptability, for which the nation is
truly striking in its ability.
Conservatives learned to accept the abolition of traditional labour rules, the abolition
of just prices, the abolition of prescriptive status, of occupation and of hierarchy, and
yet still think of themselves as conservatives.
Now of course it's particularly paradoxical that in our day the defenders of capitalism
should be called conservatives, because surely nothing's done more to transform the world
than capitalism. It's a system which is based on transformation and not leaving the world
the same. But nevertheless the mechanism itself has come to be seen as something very much
worthy of conservation, even though it's a system which has got great transformative
powers.
Another thing which was happening from about 1850 onwards was that conservatives learned
that they'd got to disprove parts of Marxism. Marx thought that he wasn't merely making
predictions, he was making scientifically accurate observations which were incontrovertible.
That's what Marx's view was.
But what actually happened is that the conservatives themselves with a lively fear of what Marxism
might lead to, realised the importance of making judicious concessions to de-radicalise
workers. And they were in fact successful in showing that capitalism enriches everybody,
as Adam Smith had said, and that Marx was vitally wrong on this point. Marx had believed
that the working class, the proletariat, was going to get poorer and poorer and poorer.
Whereas what actually happened in the industrial societies was that the industrial working
class gradually got richer, not as rich as the rich, but much richer than their own ancestors
had been. And in fact ironically, even the Marxists themselves noticed. Friedrich Engels,
Marx's great friend and disciple, wrote him a letter in the later days of Marx's life
in which he says he writes, the English proletariat, the English working class, the English proletariat
is becoming more and more bourgeois, so that this most bourgeois of all nations is apparently
aiming ultimately at the possession of a bourgeois aristocracy and a bourgeois proletariat as
well as a bourgeoisie. It was a brilliant comment by Engels and a very, very accurate one.
So to conclude, the libertarian side of American conservatism finds its historical antecedents
among the once radical British economists, an odd mixture of Jefferson and John Stuart
Mill and Adam Smith.
