After the Civil War, American industrialization accelerated. Until by 1890, the United States
was rivaling and beginning to surpass Britain in productivity.
A generation of industrialists and their sympathizers in law and politics argued that optimal conditions
for business benefited the nation as a whole. They shuddered at the rising specter of socialism,
with its challenge to the legitimacy of capitalism. Andrew Carnegie, the iron and steel magnate,
justified his wealth with arguments that borrowed from Darwinian evolutionary theory.
At the same time, however, he insisted that the creation of great wealth brought great responsibilities.
His Gospel of Wealth argued that entrepreneurs must now be charitable and paternalistic,
distributing their largesse to the less fortunate, in the same way aristocrats had done in former ages.
Carnegie was conservative only in a paradoxical way, since his way of life was profoundly innovative.
Intellectuals whose family fortunes had been made earlier, meanwhile, shrank in distaste
from what to them was the ostentatious vulgarity of Carnegie and the other robber barons.
Mocked in their day as mugwumps, they were conservatives of a different stripe,
lamenting the eclipse of old Republican virtues and looking back nostalgically to the quieter days of their youth.
Henry Adams, whose grandfather and great-grandfather had both been presidents, looked even further backwards.
In The Education of Henry Adams and Mont-Saint-Michel and Scharch, his best-remembered books,
he wrote a scathing indictment of industrial society, describing it as inferior to the society of faith
that had created the great cathedrals of the Middle Ages.
Conservatives in his own day and since have admired his style but found little or nothing of value in his vision of society.
While the new industrial giants and their intellectual supporters argued for a political and economic system
that maximized their opportunities, owing more to Adam Smith and John Stuart Mill,
they were conservatives only insofar as they were trying to forestall socialism.
Andrew Carnegie is perhaps the best-remembered of them, someone who was active as an industrialist
and as a commentator upon it, and he preached the gospel of wealth.
His life story is itself fascinating.
He was the son of a Scottish handloom weaver.
The handloom weavers who'd made fabric by hand for generations had been almost entirely put out of business
by the industrialization of the textile business, the handloom weavers were becoming poor.
And the Carnegie family, unable to carry on in this way of life in Scotland,
emigrated to America when Andrew their son was 14.
He was extremely ingenious and hard-working, made his way rapidly up until he was in a commanding position
in the iron and steel business.
In the years after the Civil War, he bought out his competitors
and relentlessly updated his equipment.
Every time somebody came up with a new invention in the iron and steel business,
he'd at once invest in it to make sure that his company was running as efficiently and as massively as possible.
He also experimented with huge economies of scale,
so he was able to produce higher and higher quality iron and steel at a lower and lower price.
He was a hard-driving boss, too. The workmen hated him.
He was an anti-union man and a strike breaker.
But he loved America for the opportunities it had given him.
In his writing, Carnegie was an outspoken opponent of aristocracy and monarchy, hereditary systems.
He had bad memories of his British childhood of being at the very bottom of a class system,
which, as he saw it, had excluded him and denied him opportunities,
opportunities of the kind which he had got once he came to America.
He agreed with the principle of equality,
but to him that meant equality of opportunity, not equality of outcome.
In fact, Carnegie wrote, inequalities of outcome were benign.
He wrote,
The conditions of human life have not only been changed but revolutionized within the past few hundred years.
In former days, there was little difference between the dwelling, dress, food and environment
of the chief and those of his retainers.
The contrast between the palace of the millionaire and the cottage of the laborer with us today
measures the change which has come with civilization.
This change, however, is not to be deplored but welcomed as highly beneficial.
It is well, nay, essential for the progress of the race
that the houses of some should be homes for all that is highest and best in literature and the arts.
And for all the refinements of civilization, rather than that none should be so.
Much better this great irregularity than universal squalor.
The good old times were not good old times.
Nay, the master nor servant was as well situated then as today.
A relapse to old conditions would be disastrous to both,
not the least so to him who serves and would sweep away civilization with it.
In other words, Carnegie was entirely unsentimental about the past.
He certainly wasn't the kind of conservative to eulogize older eras
and took the view that the present was better than the past had ever been.
Carnegie also used Darwinian categories to explain and justify his success.
Now, in 1859, Charles Darwin, the English biologist,
had published his book on the origin of species by natural selection.
And it's one of the two or three most influential books of the entire 19th century.
Darwin said, when we look at the natural world
and the incredible way in which everything in it seems to fit together,
we're not looking at the outcome of God's handiwork.
We're looking at the outcome of the struggle of all against all.
We're looking at a world of constant predation
in which both within species and between species,
there's a perpetual contest going on for survival.
Darwin was writing about biology, but in the later decades of the 19th century,
in a wide variety of fields,
other writers began to use the Darwinian idea
and apply it to other areas of human endeavor,
particularly to sociology and economics.
Carnegie and many social Darwinist economists said,
just as there's a struggle in nature, so in the economy.
And in the economy also, it's the fittest to survive.
It's right that they should do so,
because they're the people who are making the best commodities for the lowest cost.
And they're driving out their competitors who are not so well adapted,
again using a Darwinian term, as the ones who succeed.
Carnegie tempered these arguments with the reminder
that possession of great wealth also conferred special responsibilities
for enlightened redistribution.
And Carnegie wrote,
the man who dies rich dies disgraced.
He favored high death taxes to encourage the rich
to give away their wealth during their own lifetimes,
so that they wouldn't become the heads of parasitic dynasties
of the kinds which he'd so much resented in his British childhood.
And Carnegie himself was a philanthropist on a massive scale.
All over the United States and Britain and Canada and Australia,
he funded libraries.
He was very grateful to a man who earlier in his own life
had given him access to his books
and recognized that access to libraries
was itself a great component of civilization,
one through which aspiring young men might rise.
He gave organs to dozens of churches.
He funded universities both in Scotland and in America,
as the name Carnegie Mellon might suggest.
He founded the Carnegie Foundation.
He was an active pacifist in the years leading up to World War I.
Another new defender of capitalism
was William Graham Sumner.
He also offered an intellectual rationale for free market capitalism.
And Sumner was an interesting person.
He was anti-philosophical, aggressively materialist,
and he saw himself as a scientist of economics
and prided himself on his unsentimentality about it.
He told a Yale faculty meeting.
He was a professor at Yale.
He told a Yale faculty meeting
when it was considering hiring a new philosophy professor.
Philosophy is in every way as bad as astrology.
It is a complete fake.
He said it should be removed from the Yale curriculum
as an anachronism.
We might just as well have professors of alchemy,
or fortune-telling, or palmistry.
He was intent on freeing economics
from its old links to Protestant morality
and looking at it in cold scientific terms.
Sumner had trained as an Episcopal minister in the 1860s.
But once he was invited to Yale, his alma mater,
to become a professor of political economy,
he said he put his faith into a drawer
and stopped thinking about it.
And when he looked in the drawer again years later,
he found it wasn't there anymore.
So he made a little joke about the loss of his own Christian faith.
Now, in his view, capitalists are the great benefactors of mankind.
And civilization, as Sumner defined it,
is the accumulated ingenuity of inventors and businessmen
over the centuries.
He gives this example.
If you buy a spade, you can farm far more effectively
than your ancestors who had to farm with mere sticks.
But you pay only the price of the spade itself,
although the great benefit comes from the invention,
although that comes to you free.
In other words, it's a free gift from the accumulated heritage
of your civilization.
Sumner wrote,
it is the utmost folly to denounce capital,
to do so as to undermine civilization,
for capital is the first requisite of every social gain.
He's also often described as a social Darwinist,
favoring in economics, in the economic world,
the war of all against all,
as recently explained in Biology by Darwin,
is a close parallel to Carnegie's thinking.
And he also gave this intriguing example.
He says,
if the police rescue a drunk from the gutter,
they and the courts and the prison to which the drunk is then taken
are all being paid for by, quote,
those of us who have resisted vice.
He goes on to say,
it may shock you to hear me say it,
but when you get over the shock,
it will do you good to think of it.
A drunkard in the gutter is just where he ought to be.
Nature is working away at him to get him out of the way.
And he goes on to say that society will benefit
from the drunk's extinction.
Again, he's using a fairly obvious comparison there
with the member of a species,
which in Darwinian terms isn't fit enough to live
and will become a victim of some form of predation.
He admitted that compassion was okay in families,
but it certainly ought not to be the basis of social policy.
Sumner was a passionate hater of socialism.
He wrote, the old classical civilization fell
under an eruption of barbarians from without.
It is possible that our new civilization may perish
by an explosion from within.
And he said, the advocacy of equality is a mistake.
Civilization thrives on economic inequality,
and it benefits everybody.
Well, Sumner was a passionate advocate of capitalism,
but he was never a mere flak for the great entrepreneurs
because he condemned tariffs.
He spoke out always on what he called the forgotten man.
Now, after the Civil War,
as America became a more and more powerful industrial nation,
the Republican Party,
which was mainly in office in those years,
favored high tariffs to protect growing American industries
and to protect them against cheap British imports.
As we saw last time, Britain by now
and appeal had converted to a free trade regime.
But Sumner favored free trade for America as for Britain,
and he despised tariffs because he said
that they politicized the economy,
and they gave an unearned advantage
to the organized manufacturers
who were able to lobby in Washington to get high tariffs
at the expense of the consumers who now had to pay more.
Sumner's view was, if British manufactured goods
can come in cheaper than American ones,
the Americans ought not to be able to making them,
until they could do it with the same competitiveness.
And Sumner refers frequently to a character called
the forgotten man.
He says, who is the forgotten man?
He's the clean, quiet, virtuous, domestic citizen
who pays his debts and his taxes
and is never heard of out of his little circle.
Yet who is there in society of a civilized state
who deserves to be remembered and considered
by the legislator and statesman before this man?
The forgotten man's hard work, his punctuality,
sobriety and self-discipline
make him the most valuable part of the whole population.
Well, this is Sumner singing the praises
of what we often call the Protestant work ethic,
but in an entirely secular format.
He's making no appeal here to spiritual values at all,
but solely talking about what qualities are good in a citizen.
The mugwumps, the mugwumps were
educated patrician intellectuals.
They deplored the rampant corruption of city government
and they campaigned hard for urban and civic reforms
in the 1870s, 80s and 90s.
City government was becoming a notoriously corrupt affair
in most of the new industrial cities.
The most famous example is that of Boss Tweed,
who was the head of the New York City government
under the rule of Tammany Hall.
They were Irish immigrants and their immediate descendants.
They dominated the political machine in New York
and gradually in many other cities too.
The mugwumps, these old patricians were appalled
by the decline of republican virtue
and they campaigned for civic reform.
They raised the question again,
of whether democratic majority should always get what they wanted.
Now, because after all these Irish machines
often were urban majorities
but were ruling in a very corrupt way.
But the mugwumps view was that virtue
should trump mere majorities.
Numbers don't count most, virtue counts most.
One of them was George William Curtis
who campaigned for an end to what he called the spoils system.
According to the spoils system,
when a man got one office of mayor,
for example, in one of the cities,
he handed out jobs to his relatives and friends and family
and also to people who were willing to pay bribes for them.
Curtis said, no, what we ought to have in city government
is civil service examinations which are impartially administered
so that the people who are very best able to do the jobs
get the jobs and that the government then
in the city should be run entirely without recourse
to bribery and special favours.
Well, from Curtis' time right up to the present,
that's been a constant struggle in American cities
to get rid of the temptations of bribery
which are just about universal in urban government.
One of his colleagues was E. L. Godkin.
He was a crusading journalist, the editor of The Nation,
and he campaigned very hard against currency manipulation.
In the period between the 1860s and the 1890s,
that was a period of prolonged deflation
when the price of many things tended to be going down
even though the population was rising
and productivity was rising
because there wasn't enough money in circulation
and there were various theories about how to increase the supply of money
and in doing so stimulate inflation.
The Greenback movement of the 1870s was one of them
and the Free Silver movement of the 1880s and 90s was another.
But ideas like this horrified Godkin,
he said, this is a way of political manipulation
which by causing inflation will enable debtors
to avoid the full repayment of their debts.
He said, in ancient times, adulteration of money or coin clipping
was a shameful expedient.
It certainly happened, but people were ashamed of it.
Quote, that it was a fraudulent device
and that it was a thing if possible to be concealed,
nobody ever denied.
But then he went on to say, now in the election of 1896,
the Democratic candidate, William Jennings Bryan,
openly sought the votes of southern and western farmers
with the promise of the coinage of Free Silver
that is expanding the currency basis from gold to gold and silver.
It was an openly avowed policy objective
which seemed downright criminal to Godkin.
He wrote, until it is well established
that the currency will not come up as a question
to be settled by the popular vote at every presidential election,
there cannot be any industrial or commercial peace or tranquility.
Well, the Mughwumps became advocates of immigrant exclusion,
particularly once immigration started to come more and more
from southern and eastern Europe, the Slavic countries and Italy,
and Poland, bringing to America people with no experience
of republican government.
Curtis, the civil service reformer, wrote,
This enormous influx of foreigners has added an immense ignorance
and entire unfamiliarity with republican ideas and habits
to the voting class.
It has brought other political traditions, other languages
and other religious faiths.
It has introduced powerful and organized influences,
not friendly to the republican principle of freedom of thought and action.
After all, if immigrants from Italy or Poland,
which weren't democratic,
came to America, became citizens and got the vote,
they wouldn't know about this long history
of the importance of virtue in a republican citizen,
and in fact demonstrated by their conduct in the cities
that they were willing to cooperate with corrupt systems.
In addition to the new defenders of capitalism and the Mughwumps,
the post-civil war years also gave rise to an anti-modernist movement
whose nostalgic traditionalists eulogized earlier eras
in American or European history,
over against what they saw as the frenzy and bustle
and heartlessness of their own industrial society.
The two most interesting members of this group
were the Adams brothers, Henry and Brooks.
Let me talk about Brooks first.
He theorized the cyclical rise and fall of civilizations
in such a way as to denigrate his own era
and exalt the Middle Ages.
He was the grandson of John Quincy Adams
and the great-grandson of John Adams,
two presidents from earlier in the Republic.
In 1895, he published a book called
The Law of Civilization and Decay,
and it was perhaps the first general theory of history
ever attempted by an American.
Brooks Adams argued like this,
every age has a characteristic emotion
and various attributes follow from it.
In the medieval era, the dominant emotion was fear.
But from fear sprang a sense of piety in the face of God
and an intense military vigor,
and these were the characteristics which made
the Middle Ages such an impressive era
from his point of view.
In particular, they led to the inspiring achievement
of the Crusades.
And Brooks Adams wrote this,
in that age of faith, no such mighty stimulants
could inflame the human brain as a march to Jerusalem.
A Crusade was no vulgar war for a vulgar prize,
but an alliance with the supernatural
for the conquest of talismans
whose possession was tantamount to omnipotence.
Pope Urban's words at Claremont,
when he first preached the Holy War,
have lost their meaning now,
but they burned like fire into the hearts of his listeners then,
for he promised them glory on earth
and felicity in heaven.
So the Crusaders rode out to fight
the originals of the fairy knights,
clad in impenetrable armor,
mounted on miraculous horses,
armed with resistless swords
and bearing charmed lives.
They can see from that passage
that it's a florid account.
Religious awe, said Brooks Adams,
and fear had also led to the building
of the great cathedrals of Europe.
But later on,
the rise of trade and business in Europe
displaced piety and fear
with a new dominant emotion,
the emotion of greed.
But he said,
and in the end it will lead to a reversion
to pre-civilized barbarism.
In other words, this was a total repudiation
of the economist's idea
of the benefits of economic self-interest,
an idea which was so persuasive to Adam Smith
and to Carnegie and to Sumner and many others.
Totally different also from Edward Gibbons' idea
that it was the peaceful doctrine of Christianity
which had led to the downfall of the Roman Empire.
Different also from the widely shared
19th century view
of progress and steady upward achievement,
the belief which Carnegie was expressing
in the same years,
that the world had never been so good
as it was now.
Brooks Adams' brother, Henry Adams,
wrote two masterpieces
also on this anti-modernist theme.
The first of them was called
Mont Saint-Michel and Chartres,
written in 1904.
In it he argued the superiority
of the great northern French cathedrals
over any modern structure.
Henry Adams traveled very widely
and he loved conveniences like steamships
and motorcars.
At one point he even writes that his idea of a good day
is to ride in a motor car
at 30 miles an hour, then at high speed,
towards a French cathedral.
But he loved the medieval structure's best.
He shared his brother's view
of the supremacy of the Crusades
as one of the supreme moments
in the history of European civilization.
He called them the most interesting event
in European history.
Never has the western world
shown anything like the energy and unity
with which she then flung herself on the east.
Well, this wasn't really historically accurate.
He implied
that the cathedrals were solely
constructions to the glory of God.
Whereas the reality was
that they were often monuments
to the prince-bishops who'd built them.
Certainly subsequent generations of medievalists,
although they've loved Henry Adams's prose,
have said he doesn't really give you an accurate picture
of what was happening in the Middle Ages.
The education of Henry Adams,
a book he wrote in 1907
but that wasn't published until 1918,
lamented what he saw
as the decline from grace
of his own world
in his own lifetime.
While Darwinians were claiming
that the world is somehow advancing,
is evolving, he said,
the world's getting steadily worse.
And in a humorous society, he says,
you've only got to compare the U.S. presidents.
Look at the first one,
George Washington, and look more recently,
Ulysses S. Grant,
whose presidency had been so unsuccessful.
That itself will explode the idea
of evolutionary progress.
In that book, there's a famous chapter
on the Virgin and the Dynamo.
He compares the Virgin Mary
and the dynamos he saw
at the Paris Exposition of 1904.
And he was impressed by the dynamos.
He said they're powerful and mysterious enough
to tempt him almost to worship them.
And yet not they,
but the Virgin represented
the highest energy ever known to man,
the creator of four-fifths
of his noblest art,
exercising vastly more attraction over the human mind
than all the steam engines
and dynamos ever dreamed of.
He was sure that all the steam
in the world could not,
like the Virgin, build charge.
Other American traditionalists
condemned democracy
from the very past ages
to eulogize.
Another fascinating one was the practicing architect
Ralph Adams Cram.
Surely the best neo-Gothic architect
in American history.
And he agreed with the Adams Brothers
about the superiority of medieval styles.
He lamented the fact that the Gothic style
had been abandoned at the time of the Reformation.
And he sought to re-vivify it
and make it once more a living tradition.
He was an absolutely unashamed elitist.
He argued that American architecture
had become horrible
at just the same time
as the rise of Jacksonian democracy.
And as far as he was concerned, that was no accident.
Ralph Adams Cram did build
many beautiful buildings,
some of the great buildings in America today.
The Cathedral of John the Divine in New York,
many of the buildings at West Point,
much of Rice University in Texas,
and perhaps best of all,
his masterpiece, the Chapel at Princeton University,
and many of the building of the dormitories
and the graduate school at Princeton as well,
where for several decades
he was the chief architect.
Cram's view was that
buildings served to educate us
about the superiority of former ages.
Another of these
backward-looking
traditionalists was Barrett Wendell,
a Harvard literature professor.
He believed that democracy
was going to destroy the precious
but fragile substance, the heritage
of Western civilization.
In his view, democracy brings out
the worst in men. It encourages envy
and manipulation, not
virtue and austerity.
Barrett Wendell wrote,
Democracy, in old world or in new,
seems little better than a caricature
of government.
Power, wherever it resides,
seems bound to develop the hateful traits
of human nature, tyranny, dishonesty,
petty baseness,
corruption.
In a government of the better classes,
at least those traits are balanced
by certain external graces
and dignity, and often
by some sense of personal consequence.
In any democracy, they are at their
worst.
Wendell was an intense anglophile.
He loved Queen Victoria and wept
openly at the news of her death
in 1901.
Another interesting phenomenon
of the very late 19th and early 20th
century was the decision on the part
of many wealthy Americans
using art treasures from Europe.
Again, that's a demonstration
of their sense that they also belong
to a long civilization
with a continuous tradition.
They began to scour Europe for available
treasures, implicitly paying tribute
to the superiority of an older civilization.
And this was one of the great
enthousiasms of the super-rich
of the late 19th century.
Guggenheim, Frick, J.P. Morgan,
the basis of many of the great art collections
of today began then.
The so-called cottages, actually
mansions at Newport Road Island
were stuffed with treasures from Europe.
Several of them hired Bernard
Berenson, a Harvard-educated connoisseur
to validate the authenticity
of some of the things they were buying
because, of course, European forgers were quick to
start coming up with fake
old masters as these American
buyers came on the market.
One of the most interesting of these new buyers
was Isabella Stewart Gardner.
She built a Renaissance-style palace
in Boston and was among the most conspicuous
of all the new collectors.
There's a famous portrait of her
by the artist John Singer Sargent
called Woman and Enigma
from 1888.
She met Bernard Berenson and she paid for many
of his early trips to Europe.
His teacher was another of the great old
Mugwumps, Charles Eliot Norton,
Professor of Romance Languages at Harvard.
When Isabella Stewart Gardner inherited
a great fortune in 1896,
she began to build Fenway Court.
She refused to use modern building materials.
There was no steel and no
concrete. She imported craftsmen
from Italy and she liked the idea
of herself as a Renaissance princess.
She could be imperious too, perhaps
like Catherine de Medici. Then she could
be gentle and compassionate in quick succession.
And she laid down in her
will a very, very rigorous description
of exactly how the palace
and its contents were to be
viewed. So if you go to Fenway Court
today in Boston, it's still accessible.
You see it very, very close
to the way in which she left it
at the time of her own death.
One more American
who found
the old European civilization to be
superior to the new European one,
to the new American one
was Henry James, the novelist.
He expatriated himself and spent most
of his adult life living in Europe.
He said,
Europe, old Europe,
offers itself as the place in which
fiction can be written in the way
that raw young America doesn't.
America can't yet give rise to a
high literary art because it doesn't
have a long medieval past.
He was back briefly in
America for a visit in 1904
after 20 years continuously
in Europe. And Henry James found
America jarring, lacking in
manners, lacking in deference,
constantly in flux. He particularly
hated the New York skyscrapers
which were then beginning to rise
so once architects had worked out
how to build high-rise buildings.
In Henry James' view, they were monuments
solely to capitalism and greed.
He wrote,
they never begin to speak to you in the manner of
the builded majesties of the world
as we have here to for known such
with the authority of things
of permanence or even of things
of long duration.
Worse, they now rose insultingly
above the beautiful gothic spire of Trinity
Church, leaving it, said James,
caged and disarmoured.
Well, these
traditionalists obviously were a counter
point to the new enthusiasts for
capitalism, a very different
manner of conservatism.
But as socialism began
to develop, particularly in Europe,
conservatism of all types in both
countries began to recognize that they
had a common heritage which they needed
to protect against this new
threat.
