Benjamin Disraeli, who lived from 1804 to 1881, is one of the great larger-than-life figures
of British history.
Starting as an outsider to British life, he converted from Judaism to Anglicanism and
enjoyed a meteoric ascent through the ranks of the Conservative Party, many of whose members
never entirely trusted him, even when they found him too useful to discard.
A brilliant speaker and a talented writer, he made a reputation as a novelist and as
a leader of the Romantic Young England movement of the 1840s.
Embittered by his exclusion from the government of Robert Peale in 1841, he rose to prominence
after Peale's discredit in the Cornelaw Repeal Crisis of 1846.
First as leader of the Conservatives in the House of Commons, then as leader of the whole
party, he became Prime Minister in 1868, just after supervising passage of the Second Reform
Act in Parliament.
He and the Liberal leader William Gladstone vied for power over the next 13 years, with
Israeli benefiting from the support of Queen Victoria, whom he appointed Empress of India.
He understood that, as Britain became more democratic, the Conservatives would only flourish
if they could win the support of the working-class majority.
Unlike his predecessors, he encouraged popular support of the British Empire and he tried
to enlarge Britain's imperial holdings during the scramble for Africa of the 1870s and 80s.
He also borrowed millions of pounds from the Rothschild family in order to buy for Britain
a major share in the Suez Canal, which a French engineering company had completed in 1869.
Much of the structure of the modern Conservative Party was created by Israeli, especially at
the constituency level, and he remained an inspirational figure to the party for more
than a century.
But Israeli's life and career bear witness to the permeability of the British class structure
to people about standing talent and determination.
There clearly was a hierarchy and clearly it was difficult to cross the lines as Andrew
Carnegie had discovered.
But it was possible.
Here's the historian W.D. Rubenstein commenting on Israeli's career.
He says,
Benjamin Israeli was probably the most unlikely man to rise to the highest ranks of European
politics during the 19th century.
A Jew by birth, Israeli was converted to Anglicanism at the age of 13 with his family, but remained
centrally conscious of his Jewish origins throughout his life.
He did not attend a public school or a university.
He had no profession or business apart from writing novels and some singularly unsuccessful
financial speculation.
He owned no land and no country house until he was well over 40.
He did not marry into the aristocracy or have any aristocratic connections.
Essentially, Israeli was a pure intellectual and an adventurer, although one remarkably
adept at sophisticated political intrigue and also paradoxically a man of deep if eccentric
fundamental beliefs which animated his whole career.
One of his early books was The Vindication of the English Constitution published in 1835
and it was a criticism of utilitarianism and a reassertion of the principal ideas enunciated
by Edmund Berg in the 18th century.
In Israeli's opinion, a people must have a government fitted to their traditions, to
their national character and to their way of life.
Utilitarianism, said Israeli, excludes spiritual qualities and has a much too narrower definition
of happiness.
Some of these ideas he put into practice in the Young England movement of the 1840s,
which aspired to the romantic ideal of a national unity.
The Young England movement was made up mainly of aristocratic young men who had been to
Eton, which is the most prominent of what in America would be called the prep schools
and in Britain they're called the public schools, first to Eton, which has been a cradle of
prime ministers for two centuries and then to Cambridge University, one of the two great
English universities.
He'd been to neither place, but nearly all the members of it had, Lord John Manners,
George Smythe, Alexander Bailey Cochran, they were the people who admired Israeli enormously
and became his early followers.
They were conservative backbenchers, impressed by Israeli superb debating skills and his
writing style.
Young England was affectionate for an imaginary feudal past, like the American anti-modernists
whom I mentioned last time, they loved to idealize the feudal past and middle ages as
the greatest era of social contentment and justice, all under the benign gaze of an absolute
monarch and a benevolent church.
There was zealously anti-benhthalite, anti-utilitarian, anti-industrialization.
In fact they blamed industrialization and the new capitalist radicals for undermining
the traditional way of life and faith.
They claimed that capitalism had deprived the common people of their old benefactors
and they encouraged the upper classes, whom they themselves represented, to take up once
again the old traditions of no bless oblige, the belief that one's special privileges confer
a duty on you to look after the lower orders.
One of the most interesting questions that historians have asked about industrialization
is this, did it make the poor even poorer or did it actually make them relatively less
poor?
And I think the answer is that it made them less poor but it made their poverty more visible
because now it was gathered together in the cities where previously it had been dispersed
in the countryside.
It's a little bit more difficult to identify chronic rural poverty because it isn't aggravated
by the concentrations of places like the new industrial cities.
During England was a political parallel to the Oxford movement of the same time.
This was a revival of high Anglicanism inside the Church of England by Frederick Faber and
John Henry Newman and it was a rebellion on their part against the Puritan tradition
which was also one of the important heritages of the Anglican Church.
In the end John Henry Newman damaged the credibility of the movement by converting
to Roman Catholicism but the Oxford movement itself emphasized the beauty of holiness
that was one of its favorite phrases and Young England emphasized the beauty of feudalism.
It was unhistorical but it was generous spirited and the elements of it persisted into the
later 19th century when Disraeli's government of the 1870s passed some moderate social legislation
and restricted the rapacity of industrial laissez-faire.
Well lacking the conventional formal education of his peers, Disraeli came to prominence
first of all as a popular novelist and he was very very highly regarded as a writer
and would be remembered in British literary history even had he not been a politician.
Three very fine early novels are Koningsby, Sibyl and Tankred from the mid-1840s and they
were fictional advancements of the ideas of the Young England movement.
They make a very harsh judgment on the industrialists.
Disraeli says it's significant that the factory owners talk about the men who work
in their factories as hands, that is they use the synecdoche taking just one part of
the man to represent the whole of him and it's significant that from the factory owners
point of view that's what they are, they're pairs of hands rather than real people.
The factory owners are so unlike the older gentlemen whose privileges have been accompanied
by a sense of social responsibility.
He always tended to idealize the squires, the country squires for caring for their retainers
although in reality some had and some hadn't.
Koningsby, one of these novels is the tale of a romance between a representative of the
old aristocracy and a representative of the new commercial classes very much to the benefit
of the old order.
But Disraeli was prophetic in foreseeing the gradual joining together of these two powerful
groups in the conservative party of the later 19th century which he was then going to lead.
Although he'd converted from Judaism he always remained fascinated by it and he loved the
idea of the extreme antiquity of the Jewish people which coincided with his respect for
the old aristocracy of Britain.
In one famous bitter parliamentary exchange with the Irish nationalist leader Daniel O'Connell
whom I've mentioned earlier in the course O'Connell taunted him as a Jew and Disraeli
answered yes I am a Jew and when the ancestors of the right honorable gentlemen were brutal
savages in an unknown island mine were priests in the temple of Solomon so marvelous come
back to an antisemitic insult.
He supported the weak prime minister Lord John Russell in advancing legislation for Jewish
emancipation and the point was finally achieved in the late 1850s for the first time Jews
who had not converted to Anglicanism could now become MPs so Jewish emancipation lagged
about 25 years behind Catholic emancipation.
The Baron Lionel Doroth's child was allowed to take the oath of a member of parliament
without affirming that he was a Christian in 1858.
While all these qualities along with the reputation for being a womanizer and for not getting along
very well in the clubby world of men made Disraeli something of a lifelong outsider.
He didn't even win a seat in parliament until his fifth try but as the history of the conservative
party suggests repeatedly perhaps most recently in the example of Margaret Thatcher to be
outside the clubby world of men has advantages as well as disadvantages.
Exclusion from Peel's government in 1841 turned Israeli into a lifelong enemy of Robert Peel.
From the late 1840s to the late 1860s, Disraeli organized the minority conservatives in the
House of Commons while benefiting from the patronage of Edward Stanley the Earl of Derby.
Stanley and the Lords and Disraeli in the Commons led the old protectionist conservatives
who'd split irrevocably from Peel in 1846 over the question of the Corn Laws.
Disraeli and Derby continued to believe that the party had been justified in supporting
the Corn Laws and that Peel of them had been a betrayal of conservative principle.
Briefly they formed minority governments.
The first of these was in 1852 and it's remembered in British history as the who-who government.
Here's why.
By this time the old Duke of Wellington the hero of the Battle of Waterloo was a very
ancient man but still very much the grand old man of British military and political life.
When this new government came into office he asked to be, he asked one of his supporters
to read him a list of who the new cabinet members were and as each name came up the
Duke of Wellington said who, who, implying I'm nearly deaf and I've never even heard
of these people.
It was an insulting way of emphasizing the obscurity of these people.
Briefly Disraeli was again a minister in a government of 1858 to 59 but because it didn't
have a parliamentary majority it was very frail.
As soon as the other members of parliament united to vote them down they were forced
to resign.
Well to enhance Disraeli's credibility as the leader of the party in the commons, the
party of the landed gentlemen, he became the owner of Hewenden Manor in Buckinghamshire
thanks to the generosity of his friends who bought the estate for him.
One of the most controversial events in Disraeli's political career was the fact that after
opposing a liberal proposal for a second reform act in 1866, Disraeli then guided another
reform act through parliament greatly extending the franchise.
At the first reform act and seemingly again at the time of the second the Conservatives
were against it and yet here's Disraeli on the side of reform, it's one of the great
mysteries that the Conservatives should have ushered it through parliament.
And historians have long asked the question why, what was it that motivated Disraeli in
this way?
All answers suggest themselves.
One is that further parliamentary reform was inevitably going to come and that Disraeli
recognised the advantage of taking the initiative partly to attract lower class sympathisers
to his party by showing that the Conservatives were sympathetic and to make sure that the
terms of exactly who got the vote were going to be as favourable to his party as possible,
in other words it was a form of enlightened self-interest.
Another theory is that the Conservatives had been in the wilderness for such a long time
for the last, almost for the last 20 years since 1846, that they were now very eager
for the chance to show that they could deliver effective up-to-date government.
A third theory is that reform, passing the reform act, enabled them to keep the Liberals
divided because one Liberal faction led by Robert Low was passionately anti-democratic
and they would have been very difficult for the Liberals to agree, to agree about how the
new franchise was going to be arranged.
Well Disraeli lost the election of 1868 but then sat about overhauling the Conservative
Party's organisation throughout the entire country.
He created the Conservative Central Office with a cadre of permanent professional officers
and staff to co-ordinate the nationwide activities of the Conservatives throughout Britain.
Permanent members and there was not members of Parliament but people whose job was to
run the Conservative Party as a central body.
The office nurtured intense loyalty among volunteers over the next century or more
with a long-standing record of success and as principal agent for the party, Disraeli
hired JC Ghorst, who was himself an extremely talented political agent.
Ghorst began arranging for Conservative candidates to contest every parliamentary seat in the
country.
Until then it had still been common for uncontested elections to take place in many localities.
But the Conservative Party established as a principle in the 1870s that they would have
a candidate in every constituency so that potentially at least they could win everywhere.
Disraeli also helped organise the National Union of Conservative and Constitutional
Associations, particularly in working class districts, as a way of organising working
men who are now getting the vote for the first time and again trying to make sure there was
one of these organisations in every constituency.
So in the 1870s it really did become a nationwide party with branches everywhere.
In a pair of important speeches from 1872, Disraeli paved the way for his next electoral
campaign which was to be successful in the general election of 1874.
He made a very explicit appeal to social issues and therefore to working class votes.
On the question of health, for example, he declared that a question of health to one
of the labouring multitudes of England is a question of life and death.
The hereditary, the traditionary policy of the Tory party that would improve the conditions
of the people is more appreciated by the people than the ineffable mysteries and all the pains
and penalties of the ballot bill.
Why?
The people of England would be even greater idiots than the Jacobinical leaders of London
suppose if they should not have long seen that the time had arrived when social and not
political improvement is the object to which they ought to pursue.
He continued to express his sterling support for the House of Lords and for the hereditary
peerage.
He said, the problem with having life peers, that is people who are Lords only for their
own lifetimes, or a Senate of the form which the United States uses, is that in those circumstances
you tend to think in the short term, particularly if you're sitting just for a short elected
office, you think in the short term because you're thinking about re-election.
But if you're a hereditary peer, you tend to then think about the effects of a policy
on Britain over the centuries because you're looking back to an unbroken line of continuity
across the generations.
You're not simply saying this is what they did in the 1700s.
You're saying this is what my particular great grandfather did in the 1700s.
Here's what I'm doing today and here's what my great-great-grandson will do in the 1900s.
They represent continuity and an aristocracy sees itself as trustees beholden to their
ancestors and to their descendants.
Just like he said in one of these speeches, I confess I am inclined to believe that an
English gentleman born to business, managing his own estate, administering the affairs
of his county, mixing with all classes of his fellow men, now in the hunting field, now
in the railway direction, unaffected, unustentatious, proud of his ancestors, if they have contributed
to the greatness of our common country, is on the whole more likely to form a senator
agreeable to English opinion and English taste than any substitute that has yet been produced.
As Prime Minister, beginning in 1874, Disraeli presided over the expansion of the British
Empire and induced a popular enthusiasm for it among the fast-growing industrial working
classes. He was 70 years old when he finally became Prime Minister with a solid majority.
It's easy to forget that the great part of Disraeli's maturity had been spent constantly
in these years of frustrated opposition. He'd worked briefly in minority governments but
it had been a lifetime full of anxiety about whether he'd ever actually become Prime Minister.
When he did become Prime Minister, he said, I finally got to the top of the slippery pole.
His rivalry with William Gladstone was one of the great political combats of the late
19th century. It had begun in 1852 when Disraeli was briefly Chancellor of the Exchequer in
the Hu Hu government. Gladstone then took over from him as Chancellor and the two of
them sparred from then on, right up to Disraeli's death in 1881 and they alternated as Prime
Ministers between the 60s and the 80s. As promised, Disraeli's government undertook
social legislation as a way of preempting the Liberals and preserving working class support.
For the first time, Parliament began to pass legislation affecting the sale of contaminated
food and drugs and for the first time, environmental legislation affecting the pollution of rivers.
Now again, that might seem like an odd policy, especially a hundred years before American
legislation on clean rivers. But if you read books like Frederick Engle's book on the condition
of the working class in England, written in the 1840s, there are incredible and harrowing
descriptions of just how incredibly filthy the English rivers were. They were regarded
simply as dumps and a place where you could throw any kind of rubbish and so in the industrial
cities they'd become filthy and really concentrations of epidemic diseases.
Factory acts were passed by Disraeli's government in 1874 and 1975 to regulate the hours of
work that people could do, no more than 10 hours work in a factory, and regulate conditions
gradually and slowly over the 19th century. Conservative governments had also legislated
to prevent child labour and the forced labour of women and children in coal mines. So bit
by bit, the condition of the industrial working people is getting better due to Conservative
legislation. Trade unions received better legal protection than they'd ever had until
that time. For the first time in Disraeli's government, they were exempted from the possibility
of prosecution for criminal conspiracy. You see, prior to that it would be very difficult
for a strike to work because of the range of legal redresses that the employers could
have recourse to.
From then on up to the present, the Conservative Party has always had an eye out for conciliating
working class opinion while denying the theory and practice of class warfare. I mentioned
Karl Marx a couple of lectures ago and it's important to emphasise that from the Marxist
and the Socialist point of view, class warfare is inevitable in a capitalist society. It's
intrinsic to capitalism, said the Socialists, that there is class warfare. That what's in
the interest of the bourgeoisie is not in the interest of the proletariat. Now that's
an argument which the Conservatives always emphatically denied. They said, no, there's
a harmony of interests. Although there are sometimes occasions when the employer and
the workman might be out of sympathy with each other, these are issues which can be
redressed and then together they can create a harmonious society from which everyone benefits.
The common benefits distribute the goods unequally, but nevertheless they distribute them to everyone
and the society as a whole advances. So it's always been central to Conservative social
theory that essentially capitalism is not exploitative.
However, I don't want to exaggerate the social sympathies of the Israeli government. The measures
passed were always moderate and they were never very costly and they were always calculated
not to offend the heart of Conservative support, which was the property-owning middle classes
and the small but politically very powerful upper classes.
Israeli himself had little interest in administrative detail and he left that to his subordinates.
In 1876, controversy over the Bulgarian atrocities, a foreign policy question, offered a foretaste
of 20th century political debates over morality in foreign policy.
During his government, Israeli saw Britain's interest as tied to an alliance with Turkey,
the Turkish Empire was already called the Sick Man of Europe, a declining empire. But
it made sense to be allied with the Turks to prevent the expansion of the Russians into
the decaying Ottoman Empire and particularly to prevent the Russians from moving south
into India, a British holding, or west into the Mediterranean.
But Gladstone, the Israeli's great rival, galvanized audiences all over Britain with
writings and speeches about the Turks' massacre of the Bulgarian Christians, which was then
part of the Turkish Empire. 12,000 Christians were massacred by the Turks and Gladstone
wrote a book about it, The Bulgarian Horrors and the Question of the East. Gladstone believed
that personal morality could be a guide to foreign policy.
Israeli denied it, but suddenly he faced hostile public opinion. And public opinion
was starting to matter more in politics as more and more people became involved in political
life as education gradually improved, as more people were literate, as more people were
capable of taking an interest in matters which didn't directly and immediately concern them.
It recovered some of the advantage when Russia and Turkey went to war, because that had the
effect of reviving the ancient British Russophobia, a long-standing hatred of the Russians. But
it was a warning for the future of the way in which public opinion and diplomatic interests
might very often pull in opposite directions. In the 1870s, British troops overcame defeats
in Afghanistan and South Africa, and Israeli used their exploits to encourage Imperial
Jingoism. Jingoism was a word invented in the 1870s to mean the whipping up of enthusiasm
for the Empire. Early defeats in both places had been dangerous. A British column was massacred
by the Zulus at Isandalwana, and the dead bodies of the soldiers mutilated. Gladstone
was able to imply at that point that the Empire was not only immoral, but was also incompetently
run, and very costly. But then the British army recovered itself, fought a brilliant
rearguard at Rauch's Drift, an event still commemorated in the movie Zulu, and then
an overwhelming victory against the Zulus at the Battle of Ulundi. These military successes
were exploited by Israeli to generate vivid public enthusiasm. This was some of the early
stages of the great scramble for Africa, as all the European powers sought to create colonial
empires of their own.
Israeli was very artful in his courtship of Queen Victoria. He named her Empress of India
in 1876. This was a way for her to keep up with the Tsar of Russia and the Kaiser of
Germany. Germany had been unified in 1870, so the old kings of Prussia now renamed themselves
the Emperors or the Kaisers of Germany. So making her an Empress, it didn't really mean
anything, but it was a way of catering to her sense of pride, and her idea that she
was the matriarch of a world-spanning empire. She was particularly fond of her Indian servants.
Now, Israeli did a very important job with Queen Victoria. Ever since the death of her
husband, Prince Albert, back in 1861, she'd been almost constantly, she'd become reclusive.
She'd refused to go to the State Opening of Parliament. She'd refused to play her role
as the figurehead of the nation. Her oldest son, the Prince of Wales, had a very bad reputation
for immorality, and some radicals like the Lord Mayor of Birmingham, Joseph Chamberlain,
were calling for the abolition of the monarchy for turning Britain into a republic. Gradually,
she came out of her shell and she recovered from this long, long period of mourning under
the gentle chiding of Disraeli. She now became fiercely conservative for the rest of her reign.
She always hated Gladstone and said that he addressed her as though she were a public
meeting, but perhaps that's not surprising because she never let Gladstone sit down in
her presence. In fact, the only Prime Minister who was allowed to sit in her presence was
Disraeli. Disraeli also gratified her by buying a controlling interest for Britain in the
Suez Canal in 1875 from the bankrupt Kedive or Sultan of Egypt. Disraeli borrowed four
million pounds from the Rothschilds to do so. The Suez Canal was a very important routeway
to India. It was much quicker to get to India from Britain through the Mediterranean and
the Suez Canal than it was to go around the Cape of Good Hope. And now that steamships
have been introduced, it was also the logical way, so Britain recognized a strategic interest
in Suez and was able to become a major shareholder in the canal.
Disraeli was the first Prime Minister to link together the great themes of conservatism,
empire and national greatness. Until then, although the empire had become enormous, it
had been a pragmatic reality, but not a special source of national enthusiasm. Even Disraeli
had earlier called it a Millstone Round and Necks, but now he began to view it as an asset,
especially in the public image of Britain. Disraeli did link them explicitly and this
was a premonition of the way in which Winston Churchill later on was going to use the idea
of the empire too. Listen to a speech by Disraeli in 1872.
I express here my conviction that there never was a moment in our history when the power
of England was so great and her resources so vast and inexhaustible. And yet, gentlemen,
it is not merely our fleets and armies, our powerful artillery, our accumulated capital
and our unlimited credit on which I much depend, as upon the unbroken spirit of her people,
which I believe was never prouder of the imperial country to which they belong.
He said that liberal skeptics had made the mistake of viewing everything in the financial
aspect and totally passing, passing by those moral and political considerations which make
nations great and by the influence of which alone men are distinguished from animals.
The historian Robert Blake comments about this.
Disraeli managed with remarkable prescience to acquire for the conservatives a monopoly
in the partisan expression of a new zeitgeist, the incoate, half-romantic, half-predatory
emotions and ideas inspired by the idea of empire during the last quarter of the 19th
century.
While these ideas remained vague and almost mystical, they had an appeal to the imagination
which constituted one of the party's great assets. And it's certainly true that love
of the British Empire remained a standard conservative quality right into the 1960s
as the empire was disappearing.
Germany himself was made the Earl of Beaconsfield in 1876 and moved up to the House of Lords
though he continued to run his government from there.
One of his great diplomatic triumphs was the Congress of Berlin in 1878.
Germany had been unified and was a huge rising power which was going to cause a great deal
of difficulty in the near future.
But Bismarck, its chancellor, called this meeting to settle the affairs in the Ottoman
Empire, the unsettled area about which Gladstone had been protesting.
It recognized Israeli's interest, Britain's interest, in preserving Turkish power as a
counterweight to Russia. It excluded the Russians from the Mediterranean, a British sphere
of influence, and it gave to Britain effective control over Cyprus for the next century,
a good naval base in the eastern Mediterranean, close to the Suez Canal. This was all part
of the long-run prelude to World War I, but in the short term it seemed like a great
personal victory for Israeli.
The way in which Britain was becoming more democratic was visible in Gladstone's next
great tactic, the Midlothian Campaign. Gladstone realized that as the electorate was growing,
it made sense to campaign by speaking in many constituencies, many cities, not just the
one where he was standing for his own seat in Parliament. And in 1879 he made a series
of incandescent speeches which are collectively remembered as the Midlothian Campaign. He
was becoming a master of a new style of politics, politics which incorporate public opinion
and the mass of the voters. It was a sort of triumphal procession, captivating and moralistic
oratory to a newer and wider electorate. And it proved highly effective in paving the way
to Gladstone's comeback. Although in practice having won the election of 1880 he found it
was impossible to run his foreign policy moralistically, a discovery that President Jimmy Carter was
going to make all over again nearly a century later after the American election of 1976.
So it is really lost the election of 1880 during an economic recession and he lived
only another year. But he was energetic and industrious to the end, leading the Tories
in the House of Lords and finishing yet another novel and even starting another still, a satire
against his great enemy, Gladstone. This is the way in which the rivalry between Gladstone
and Israeli can be seen as the adaptation of both the great parties of that period,
the Conservatives and the Liberals, to the new fact of British political life which was
indeed more democratic than it ever had been up to that time.
