Racism was intellectually respectable in the late 19th and early 20th centuries and one
version of it, popular on both sides of the Atlantic, was the idea that the Anglo-Saxons
were destined, either by God or by nature, to rule the rest of the world.
Cecil Rhodes made a fortune in the South African diamond and gold business, then built a semi-private
empire, Rhodesia, based on this idea.
The Rhodes scholarships, to which he bequeathed his fortune, were originally designed to create
a secret society of Anglo-Saxon rulers who might unify the world around a nucleus of
Britain and its colonies.
Theodore Roosevelt, meanwhile, was one of the Americans who aspired to create a colonial
empire for the United States that could vie with Britons and believe that it would carry
the blessings of Anglo-Saxon commerce, Christianity and good government to the benighted parts
of the earth.
Roosevelt, though a politician familiar with the rough and tumble world of democratic politics,
also held a high ideal of public service and a sense of noblesse oblige toward the
less fortunate.
Like fighting aristocrats of earlier times, he exalted the warrior virtues and despised
the softness of a peaceful commercial world.
Anglo-Saxon advocates in Britain and America alike dreaded socialism and advocated a kind
of race purity that would later come to seem sinister and disgraceful.
Well, many British and American conservatives shared the idea that as Anglo-Saxons they
belonged to a master race that was destined to dominate the world.
There was nothing new about racial discrimination in the late 19th and early 20th centuries,
but it now enjoyed the support of science.
I mentioned previously how the economists adapted Darwinian ideas.
Darwinian ideas are also adapted by ethnologists, who regarded the Anglo-Saxons as the fittest
in a competition among the earth's different races.
This is a theme which crops up in a lot of books of those years.
For example, William Z. Ripley wrote The Races of Europe, published in 1899.
He was an anthropologist and a professor of economics at Columbia University, certainly
not regarded as a crackpot in his day.
He divides the peoples of Europe, essentially into three main groups.
The Teutonics, who come from Northern Europe, the Mediterranean's and the Alpines.
And they're clearly in descending order of quality as you go further south.
And below them, in places like North Africa, are what he refers to as the scrub races.
This is an attempt to say, even within Europe, there are several different racial groupings.
Another such book is Madison Grant's book, The Passing of the Great Race, from 1916.
It's a kind of lament for the fact that the Anglo-Saxons are in danger.
Madison Grant was anti-immigrant and he was in favour of eugenics.
Very often Anglo-Saxonism and eugenics went together.
By that is meant the idea that criminals should be sterilised, so should degenerates, to prevent
them from reproducing.
And that on the other hand, we should encourage the breeding of the racially most favourite
people, which in his case meant the Anglo-Saxons.
He was fascinated by doctrines of racial hygiene and fears that indiscriminate immigration
to America was leading to what he called race suicide.
The idea of immigration restriction had come up among the mugwumps and was intensified
in the first two decades of the 20th century, ultimately leading to immigration restriction
laws in the 1920s.
Well, Madison Grant was the head of the New York Zoological Society, interested in biology.
On one famous occasion he put a pygmy from the Congo, a man named Otto Benga, on display
besides the apes and the chimpanzees in a cage adjacent to the orangutan.
The man's family had been massacred in the Belgian Congo, one of the most disgraceful
arenas of Western imperialism.
Madison Grant's agents got him from a tribal slave trader.
Now ironically, in the end, this show had to be ended because of the protests by Baptist
clergymen who didn't like the idea of an exhibit that argued along Darwinian lines, in other
words emphasising the similarity, or the alleged similarity, of a man with an animal.
Madison Grant's point was, we can see this evolutionary procession taking place, and
the Baptist minister's view was, no we can't, God made man once distinct and was completely
different.
Ironically, the most consistent opponents of eugenics throughout were the evangelical
ministers.
Well scientific racism was not intrinsically conservative, and indeed it appealed to many
progressives.
Because we look back on eugenics through the Hitler period, and because we know of the
outrages which were undertaken in the name of eugenics, were instinctively horrified,
but in the early 20th century, many people who thought of themselves as politically
progressive were attracted to the idea that you ought to be busy trying to make a better
population as well as a better society.
Still it is true that eugenics and the idea of Anglo-Saxon supremacy suited very well
the outlook of the British and American Empire builders.
Certainly it was central to the conservative's intellectual justification of the British
Empire.
Now in our era, empire building is also very out of fashion.
One thing we need to remember as we study these people from 100 or 120 years ago is
that the Anglo-Saxon Empire builders were not ashamed of their conduct, on the contrary
they were very, very proud of it.
They took seriously the idea that they belonged to a race which was particularly privileged
and particularly gifted, and better able to run the world than anybody else.
There was certainly one of the governing ideas in the life of Cecil Rhodes whose diamond
and gold businesses and his political adventures expanded the British presence in southern
Africa.
He made his first great fortune in diamonds at Kimberley in the 1870s which is in South
Africa and then he got into the Johannesburg gold mining boom in the 1880s.
He was the head of a private company, the South Africa Company, and it undertook the
annexation of the country to the north of South Africa which it then named after him.
Rhodesia or Rhodesia is a place named after him.
He also was able to take advantage of the new machine guns then recently invented by
Hiram Maxim to annihilate the natives.
Small forces in Rhodes's company were able to take on and defeat much larger groups of
African tribesmen because of their immense technological superiority of their weapons.
Southern Rhodesia is now called Zambia and Southern Rhodesia is now called Zimbabwe.
Rhodes planned a railway to run all the way from the Cape of Good Hope at the southern
tip of Africa all the way up to Cairo in Egypt and his hope was that he would run all the
way through an unbroken line of British colonies.
Everybody would benefit from it, he said.
Quote, we are the first race in the world and the more of the world we inhabit the better
it is for the human race.
This was also the idea behind the Rhodes Scholarship which remains popular right up to the present,
prestigious too.
Rhodes's idea originally was that it should be a secret society of Anglo-Saxon leaders
gathered from all over the Anglo-Saxon world.
That's why it was accessible to Americans, Canadians, Australians, New Zealanders, whites
South Africans and Germans because these were the Teutonic or the Anglo-Saxon people.
The idea was that they'd all come together at Oxford University, the ancient center of
this civilization and then radiate out from there to create an English-speaking governing
class for the entire world.
In its secrecy and its dedication it was supposed to be comparable to the Jesuits.
Lord Milner, another of the great British Empire builders in Africa coming in the generation
immediately after Rhodes, said,
My patriotism knows no geographical but only racial limits.
I am an imperialist and not a little Englander because I am a British race patriot.
It is not the soil of England which is essential to arouse my patriotism but the speech, the
traditions, the spiritual heritage, the principles, the aspirations of the British race.
Another of these Anglo-Saxon enthusiasts was Lord Cursan who linked these racial ideas
with traditional ideas about social hierarchy and saw those together as the key to Britain
holding on to its grip on its great empire in India.
Lord Cursan came from an aristocratic family in Derbyshire.
I grew up just a few miles away from his great house, Kedleston Hall.
Cursan was the viceroy of India before the age of 30.
He was very much a brilliantly gifted politician and very well connected too.
He favoured in India the very maximum of hierarchy among the British.
In fact, under his organisation the whites in India were divided into 77 distinct ranks
and he tried to induce among them a general craving for status and honours as a way of
getting everybody to work hard and to aspire up.
He also created a parallel but much lesser status pyramid for the Indian princes.
One of the ways in which the British were able to rule India with very few of their
own people on the ground was by keeping in place many of the old Indian princes who simply
had to pay regular tributes to the British and otherwise were left largely alone to
run their own affairs.
So Lord Cursan hated the idea of equality.
That was anathema to him.
The ideal rather was one of a feudal pyramid.
It was a great way of running the empire on the cheap but always subject to ultimate
British approval.
Cursan also introduced or intensified the elaborate rituals of the empire in India.
The architecture itself was significant.
The viceroy's house in Calcutta was an exact copy of his ancestral home, Kedilistan Hall.
The great Durbar of 1903, held to celebrate the coronation of King Edward VII, brought
together many of the Indian princes and they rode in a vast procession of elephants.
The king's message, which was probably written by Cursan himself, said this.
His empire is strong because it regards the liberties and respects the dignities and rights
of all his feudatories and subjects.
The keynote of British policy in India has been to conserve all the best features in
the fabric of native society.
By that policy, we have attained a wonderful measure of success.
In it, we recognize an assured instrument of further triumphs in the future.
Well, describing the people as feudatories and subjects rather than citizens is itself
a way of summoning up ancient traditions.
Now in the House of Lords Crisis, which I spoke about last time, I think it's significant,
the Lord Cursan, who by then was back in Britain, was at first one of the ditchers determined
not to yield to parliamentary reform and to the diminution of the powers of the House
of Lords.
But ultimately, fearing the denigration of the power of his noble title, he switched
his position and became a hedger, so that the exclusivity of the aristocracy would go
on, undiminished.
The idea of the special responsibilities and duties and privileges and benefits of being
an Anglo-Saxon comes through very vividly also in the most famous, the work of the most
famous poet of the British Empire, Rudyard Kipling.
In a poem named The White Man's Burden, he argues that it's a necessary burden for the
Anglo-Saxons to rule people throughout the rest of the world in light of their superior
civilization, their greater ability in politics, and their religion, Christianity.
So imperialism, as Kipling presents it, is a form of self-sacrifice and self-denial.
Listen to the first verse of this famous poem.
Take up the white man's burden, send forth the best ye breed, go bind your sons to exile
to serve your captive's need, to wait in heavy harness on fluttered folk and wild, your
new court sullen peoples, half devil and half child.
This idea that the native peoples of the world were half devils and half children was typical.
It's insulting and condescending at the same time, but the kind of sentiment which is very
popular in its day.
Now this poem in particular was written to urge the United States to take on an imperial
mission of its own at the time of the Spanish-American War, which broke out in 1898, and as a result
of which the United States took over Cuba, Puerto Rico and the Philippines.
Take up the white man's burden as Kipling, saying to the Americans, don't be afraid
to do it too, your Anglo-Saxons as well, and should do this.
Now there certainly were plenty of people in the United States who agreed with this
idea and were eager for the United States to become an empire builder as well.
One of them was the Indiana Senator, Albert Beverage.
He denied that the conquest of the North American continent had brought to an end the
mission of manifest destiny.
This idea which had been so strong in the 1830s and 40s particularly, that God himself
had given to the Americans the mission of spreading across the whole continent.
After the census of 1890 demonstrated that there was no longer a recognizable frontier
line, many Americans said, what's going to happen now that we've lost that defining feature
of our national life of the preceding decades?
Well Senator Beverage's answer is, now it's time for us to spread into the Pacific as
part of our mission to civilize the rest of the world.
Here's what he said to the U.S. Senate in the speech of January the 9th, 1900.
The Philippines are ours forever.
We will not repudiate our duty in the archipelago.
We will not abandon our opportunity in the Orient.
We will not renounce our part in the mission of our race.
Tea under God of the civilization of the world.
My own belief is that there are not a hundred men among them, meaning the Filipinos, who
comprehend what Anglo-Saxon self-government even means and there are over five million
people to be governed.
It has been charged that our conduct of the war has been cruel.
Senators, it has been the reverse.
Senators must remember that we are not dealing with Americans or Europeans, we are dealing
with Orientals.
In other words, again, clearly a double standard.
Our rough and ready methods of warfare might not have been suitable with the European enemy
but so long as we are treating with Orientals it is entirely appropriate.
Well there is no more famous American imperialist or aspiring American imperialist than Theodore
Roosevelt.
He longed for the United States to emulate Britain's empire building role and his outlook
bore a striking resemblance to that of Britain's conservative imperialists.
Theodore Roosevelt himself was an unashamed elitist.
He regarded himself as one of the natural rulers in his community.
He had been born in 1858 and it was the source of lasting regret to him that he was too young
to take part in the American Civil War and throughout his early life he longed to have
a war in which he too could participate.
He came from the patrician class in New York, didn't have to work for his living and he
deplored those members of his class, his social class, who shirked what he saw as their duty
of political leadership.
Now that the government of New York City and to some extent state had fallen into the hands
of the Tammany Ring and the immigrant grafters, most of the patricians shied away from doing
it but Theodore Roosevelt was willing to get into it.
He said it was necessary to get his hands dirty in the rough and tumble of Tammany politics
because otherwise he'd betraying his class's duty of leading the people.
A sense of no-bless oblige was very strong in him to help those less fortunate around
him through political action.
Roosevelt, like so many in his class, detested socialists, anarchists and all forms of utopians
who as he saw it misunderstood the hard, unchanging realities of human life.
Of all the people who've been president of the United States, Theodore Roosevelt is far
and away the best writer and he was a prolific one too.
In his books about the history of the early republic he was full of praise for the Federalists,
the Conservatives of the 1790s and full of scorn for the Jeffersonians.
Famously called Tom Paine, the radical pamphleteer, a filthy little atheist.
Theodore Roosevelt favored the summary execution of anarchists.
At the time of the Haymarket strike in 1886 in Chicago when an anarchist bomb was thrown
into a crowd he wanted to line up a group of anarchists and shoot them right there on
the spot.
In 1901 he became president because another anarchist, Zoglosh, had shot President McKinley
to whom he was vice president.
Theodore Roosevelt wrote, it was a crime against free government, a thousand times worse than
any murderer of a private individual could be.
We should war with relentless efficiency not only against anarchists but against all active
and passive sympathizers with anarchists.
He was dismissive also of radical proposals for social change.
He despised William Jennings Bryan, the Democratic candidate of 1896 and several subsequent elections,
the candidate who favored the coinage of free silver.
In 1896 Roosevelt wrote that William Jennings Bryan threatened a frightful disaster that
would plunge all our people into conditions far worse than any of those for which he sought
a remedy.
Now one of the ways in which Theodore Roosevelt marks himself out as a conservative I think
is that he believed that war was a permanent part of the human condition and that men were
destined to fight.
They always had done and they always would do.
No amount of goodwill or sentimental optimism was going to change the ineradicable human
propensity for fighting and for the quest for power.
His writings always glorified warriors and denigrated pacifists.
It's significant that when the 1880s went for a while he lived in the Great Plains in
the Dakotas, he was totally unsentimental about the displacement of the Plains Indians
who'd lived there right up until the Battle of the Little Big Horn in 1876 after which
they'd been forcibly rounded up and placed in reservations.
His view was in war the whites defeated the Indians.
He described the Indians as a set of treacherous, revengeful and fiendishly cruel savages.
They might have been picturesque but they'd been defeated and they must go.
He advocated the strenuous life.
He said, especially now that America is becoming an industrial nation, more and more of whose
population live in the cities, there's the danger that American men are going to lose
the warrior virtues, they're going to become soft and we've got to do everything we can
to prevent that from happening.
As a teenager he'd also been asthmatic and weak and some other boys had once bullied him
and he was so ashamed of the memory of that incident that he put himself into a very intense
training regimen to make himself a boxer, to make himself capable of fighting.
He loved hunting and wrote several books on hunting, meanwhile becoming an expert on
the game animals that he liked to pursue.
It's highly characteristic of Theodore Roosevelt that he should go into these questions in such
detail that in the 80s and 90s he was recognized as one of America's leading experts on several
animals of the kind which he himself hunted in the American West.
He favored universal military training.
Finally in the late 1890s, in 1898, he had the chance to participate in a war.
By that time he'd risen up through Republican Party ranks and had got a lucrative and important
position as Assistant Secretary of the Navy.
But at once when President McKinley declared war, he resigned this office so that he could
raise a regiment of soldiers and take them off to fight.
And this regiment was the famous Rough Riders.
His book, The Rough Riders, which he wrote immediately after the campaign in Cuba, is
a vivid evocation of the regiment he raised.
It was a mixture of old Dakota Cowboys whom he'd met in the 80s when he was working on
his ranch out there, friends from Harvard and friends from Wall Street, businessmen.
The whole point of The Rough Riders was it was meant to be a symbolic regiment, a cross-section
of society showing how men great and small from all parts of American life could get
together.
And in his view, they were a perfect manifestation of the great Anglo-Saxon virtues.
At one point in the book, Roosevelt actually writes,
We drew recruits from among men in whose veins the blood stirred with the same impulse which
once sent the Vikings overseas.
This idea that the Rough Riders are themselves descendants of the Vikings, one of these great
Teutonic peoples.
The regular army hated The Rough Riders and hated him in particular because they could
see that he was a media hound.
He loved to draw as much attention as he possibly could to himself and as a practiced politician
he was very, very good at drawing the favorable attention of the journalists.
He was a constant violator of the chain of command, but of course the journalists loved
his swagger and his daring and his outspoken statements.
Regular army officers take pride in keeping their casualties as low as possible.
But Roosevelt welcomed a high casualty rate because he thought that every man who died
in The Rough Riders would be kind of annealing himself as a martyr to this sacrificial union
of the Anglo-Saxon peoples.
He took part in the very, very risky assault of the Battle of San Juan Hill which made
him a national hero.
When he came back to America and after the publication of the book, in very quick succession
he was made governor of New York, then he became vice president, then President McKinley
was shot and he became president in 1901.
Another way in which Roosevelt was clearly a conservative is the way in which he honored
tradition and the old virtues, particularly the virtues of fidelity, self-reliance, bravery
and hard work.
Here's a passage from the introduction to his autobiography in which Roosevelt states,
there is need to develop all the virtues that have the state for their sphere of action.
But these virtues are as dust in a windy street unless back of them lie the strong and tender
virtues of a family life based on the love of one man for one woman and on their joyous
and fearless acceptance of their common obligation to the children that are theirs.
There must be the keenest sense of duty and with it must go the job of living.
There must be shame at the thought of shirking the hard work of the world and at the same
time delight in the many-sided beauty of life.
With soul of flame and temper of steel we must act as our coolest judgment bids us.
We must exercise the largest charity toward the wrongdoer that is compatible with relentless
war against wrongdoing.
That's a little taste of his beautiful although sometimes purple rhetoric.
Other Anglo-Saxon conservatives in America shared many of Roosevelt's opinions and
enthusiasm.
One of them was Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, a Massachusetts politician who earlier had
studied under Henry Adams, Henry Adams the neo-medievalist, the traditionalist who looked
back to the great French cathedrals.
Henry Cabot Lodge had studied under Henry Adams.
He also was intensely afraid that the great Anglo-Saxon race was going to decline in the
face of mass immigration and he became one of the leaders of the anti-immigration movement.
Lodge wrote, more precious than the forms of government are the mental and moral qualities
which make what we call our race.
While those stand unimpaired, all is safe.
When those decline, all is imperiled.
They are exposed to but a single danger, that is by changing the quality of our race and
citizenship through the wholesale infusion of races, whose traditions and inheritances,
whose thoughts and beliefs are wholly alien to ours and with whom we have never been assimilated
or even been associated with in the past.
Another of this group, also a friend of Roosevelt, as was Lodge, was Alfred Thea Mehan, the
naval historian.
He agreed with Roosevelt that war is a permanent part of the human condition and that the ability
to win naval battles is the key to world domination.
He was a lifelong navy officer, he'd been a junior officer in the Union Navy during
the Civil War.
His book, The Influence of Sea Power Upon History, published in 1890, became immensely
influential on both sides of the Atlantic.
He'd been given the job of teaching at the Naval War College in Newport, Rhode Island
and the book was based upon his lectures explaining why the British had gradually built up a
world-dominating empire and he showed that the key to the British Empire was the capacity
to win naval battles and keep the sea lanes open between Britain's colonies.
Now eventually the navy ordered him back to sea on the USS Chicago.
Some of the admirals were a bit dubious about the value of his work as a writer, one admiral
actually said, it's not the business of a navy officer to write books.
When Mahan got to the United Kingdom to Britain, his voice suddenly became a kind of triumphal
procession.
He was given an honorary doctorate by Oxford University and won by Cambridge in the same
week the first person ever so honoured.
Because British politicians and strategists understood the importance of his book, he'd
explained to Britain in a systematic way really for the first time the essential cause of
their own world dominance.
It's not that the British hadn't understood the importance of their navy but it had never
been codified quite so convincingly and coherently before as it was now in Mahan's book.
Perhaps even more significant is that two nations whose strategists took notice were
Germany and Japan, both of which reacted to Mahan by building big navies of their own
with immense consequences for the 20th century, culminating obviously in the Second World
War.
Already in 1905, the Japanese astonished the rest of the world by winning a great navy
victory against the Russian navy at the battle of Tsushima and every one of the Japanese
battleships had a Japanese translation of Mahan's book there on the bridge.
At a disarmament conference in the Hague shortly before the First World War, Mahan was one
of the American negotiators and he favoured voting against emotion for the international
outlawing of poison gas shells of the kind which were actually going to be used to horrifying
effect in the trenches of the First World War.
Now why was Mahan against outlawing them?
Here was his reasoning.
He said all sorts of previous weapons including crossbows had been outlawed but then later
they were used anyway in warfare.
Mahan's view was it's much better to create these weapons and not be taken by surprise
than it is to rely on the slender reed of an international conference resolution.
Sooner or later weapons which are invented are going to be used.
The best way to prevent war is to have so many of these weapons that the enemy will
be deterred from attacking you.
One of his fellow American delegates was the president of Cornell University, Andrew Dixon
White and at first White was a bit dismayed by Mahan's warlike tone but later on he wrote
His views have been an excellent tonic.
They have effectively prevented any lapse into sentimentality.
When he speaks the millennium fades and this stern, severe, actual world appears.
Let me give you the example of one last conservative from the Roosevelt generation, again a great
believer in the Anglo-Saxon supremacy and the conservative virtues.
He was a U.S. senator but he resigned his seat after the passage of the 17th Amendment.
This amendment took place in 1913 and it was the constitutional amendment which led to
the direct election of senators until then the state governments, the state assemblies
had nominated men to become senators and the whole point in the constitution of having
an unelected Senate was to restrain the democratic principle which was embodied in the House
of Representatives.
But as the idea of democracy became more and more popular among most Americans, the amendment
passed through Congress that now senators and congressmen should be elected.
Elohu Root was so horrified that he resigned his seat because he couldn't bring himself
to campaign among the Hoy Palloy.
Again it's very much the same impulse shown by Coriolanus in Shakespeare's play.
How dreadful to get down among the ordinary people.
Now the New Republic, a liberal magazine of the time, in an editorial said, no man can
lead a people who has his back to the future.
That was their farewell to Elohu Root.
But I think actually this is exactly what a conservative would say he does have to do.
Let me read you the quotation again.
No man can lead a people who has his back to the future.
A conservative will say, surely, if he's leading him his back to the future it means
he's looking towards the people he's leading and if he looks at them and looks beyond them
to the rich heritage of history then he's got a lot to draw on, he's got a rich fund
of experience whereas if he's looking at the future it's empty and doesn't contain anything
and it's far too easy for him to fantasize about what it's really going to be like.
So although the New Republic clearly intended to be insulting, in an odd way they were giving
him an encomium on exactly what a conservative ought to be.
