Today, we like to believe that in all essentials men and women are similar, equally gifted
intellectually and equally capable of all work except the most physically strenuous.
Only in the 20th century, by contrast, nearly all articulate Britons and Americans were
more struck by the differences between men and women.
Suffrage advocates in both countries argued that women's moral superiority and their
natural affinity for charity, compromise and nurture would improve the quality of politics
if they were allowed to participate.
Women's suffrage retorted that on the contrary, women's intervention in politics would do
nothing to improve politics, but would destroy women's special virtues and qualities, making
them manish, bossy and vulgar.
Respectable medical opinion on both sides of the Atlantic agreed that women were oriented
around their reproductive systems and prone to hysteria if overstimulated.
Helen Kendrick Johnson, one of the most articulate American opponents of women's suffrage, regarded
it as an attack on marriage, on childbearing and on the family, as central institutions
of society and she foresaw that it would introduce strife into the heart of family life.
One male reviewer of her book noted that she, quote, possesses a wonderfully unfeminine
capability for indulging in calm, logical discussion.
In Britain, meanwhile, conservative opponents of women's suffrage pointed to the fact that
radical suffragettes like Christabel Pankhurst seem to be on the brink of insanity with their
window-smashing campaigns and hunger strikes.
In the event, women's work and service during World War I strengthened the case for their
enfranchisement.
Once women had the vote, conservative politicians in both countries scrambled to recruit them
and found the reality of their participation far less odious than their anticipation of
it.
The first woman to sit in the British Parliament, Nancy Astor, was herself an American by birth
and a conservative.
Well, ideas about the essential difference between men and women could be used to justify
the pro-suffrage position and the anti-suffrage position.
Middle-class Victorians on both sides of the Atlantic, men and women, developed a theory
of separate spheres.
The idea was that women's role in life was to nurture children and to form their consciences
and to instill religious and moral values.
And women, particularly middle-class women, were described in a language that simultaneously
exalted and confined them.
Ancient language described them as the angels of the household, saying that they were made
for nurture and that they were organized around reproduction.
But that, on the other hand, the assertion was women are less capable of sustained education,
less able to undertake sustained mental effort, and vulnerable to hysteria.
Here's a little bit of characteristic rhetoric.
This is from the Catholic cardinal of Baltimore, Cardinal Gibbons, in the 1870s.
He says, woman is queen indeed, but her empire is the domestic kingdom.
The greatest political triumphs she would achieve in public life fade into insignificance
compared with the serene glory which radiates from the domestic shrine and which she illumines
and warms by her conjugal and motherly virtues.
Now you can see in this remark the typical conservative view that the family is the basic
institution of society, not the individual, and that a society is healthy in proportion
as its families are intact with mother at the very center.
Now admittedly Cardinal Gibbons was an American Catholic, but this wasn't a point of view
that was confined to the Catholics, and neither is it a view which was confined to the men.
Let me give you a parallel quotation from Catherine Beecher.
She was the sister of Harriet Beecher Stowe who wrote Uncle Tom's Cabin, one of the most
famous American novels of the 19th century.
And Catherine Beecher wrote lots of advice books to young women, and she also believed
that women's special place was in the home and that the sacred role of women given to
them by God himself was to nurture the new generations of men.
Catherine Beecher writes, though she may not teach from the portico, nor thunder from the
forum, in her secret retirement she may form and send forth the sages that shall govern
and renovate the world.
Though she may not gird herself for bloody conflict, nor sound the trumpet of war, she
may unwrap herself in the panoply of heaven and send the thrill of benevolence through
a thousand youthful hearts.
The claim here of course is that the women are really doing a more important job than
the men because it's in the home that they're creating the character of each new generation.
But in practice women lacked legal rights.
Their property became their husbands at the time of marriage.
They weren't allowed to take independent legal action.
In the very, very unlikely case of a divorce or a separation, women were likely to lose
in custody battles.
Women could be committed for insanity on the specifications of the husbands who could call
in a doctor and have their wives committed.
They couldn't serve on juries.
And all these kinds of disadvantages were situate conditions against which the early
suffrage advocates protested.
But it's important to emphasize, I think, because it's easy for us to forget this, that
advocates of votes for women didn't say that women were really much more similar to men.
They also agreed with this conception that women and men are totally different and that
it's because of the differences that women ought to be allowed to vote.
People like Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Antony said, women's superior moral qualities
would elevate the tone of politics from its degraded condition in the late 19th century.
I described in some previous lectures the degradation of urban politics against which
people like Theodore Roosevelt felt so strongly and the mugwumps.
And upper and middle class women in both countries are saying we can elevate the standard of politics.
The emphasis in the works of Stanton and Antony in America and of Millicent Fawcett, their
counterpart in England, was on difference.
They didn't say give us the vote because we're just like men.
They said give us the vote because we're different from and better than men.
Well, anti-suffragists used the same idea but with a slightly different spin.
In their view, to enter a world of argument and force and coarseness, the arena of public
political debate, would be to brutalize women and to rob them of the special qualities which
added such a luster to civilization. Anti-suffragists said it would be awful if women had to serve on
juries. It means that they'd have to spend their time mingling with criminals and that
they'd have to hand their children over to nannies and paid servants.
If politics was coarse and corrupt, that must mean that as mothers, women had been falling
short in their role as nurturers. For them to get into politics would further weaken their
proper role. In other words, if politics is already deficient, it's because the mothers
haven't really been raising the children well enough. So the job is for the women to retreat
further into the home. Now, a frequently quoted idea, again on both sides of the Atlantic, was
that men are naturally barbarians but that women have the role of taming and domesticating them.
In the lecture on Theodore Roosevelt, I mentioned Elohu Root and we saw him in a previous lecture
opposing the direct election of senators. He was equally opposed to the idea that women should
be given the vote. In this also, he was dismayed by the constitutional amendment which eventually
was passed and Root said, suffrage, if it means anything, means entering upon the field of political
life and politics is modified war. In politics, there is strife, contention, bitterness, heart
burning, excitement, agitation, everything which is adverse to the true nature of women.
Woman rules today by the sweet and noble influences of her character. Put woman into the arena of
conflict and she abandons these great weapons which control the world and she takes into her
hands feeble and nervous for strife, weapons with which she is unfamiliar and which she is unable
to wield. Woman in strife becomes hard, harsh, unlovable, repulsive. Many conservative women in
both countries echoed this idea that politics is war by other means and that therefore it's
anathema to women. Well anti-suffragists saw their worst fears confirmed in the conduct of
the radical women's social and political union in Britain. This was the astonishing organization
in Britain led by Emmeline Pankhurst, the wife of a North country manufacturer and her two daughters
Christabel and Sylvia. It was founded in 1903 and the women of this family were impatient at the
lack of progress which was being made towards the enfranchisement of women. The very first parliamentary
bill for women's votes had been introduced into Parliament in 1867 and sponsored by John Stuart
Mill. But although 1867 was the year of the Second Reform Act it didn't include the principle of
votes for women and neither did the the Third Reform Act of 1884. At the same time incidentally
back in the 1860s it had been a source of special disappointment to the American suffragists, people
like Antony and Stanton. Although the recently freed slaves had been given the vote even though
many of them were illiterate, highly educated women such as themselves were still being denied.
Well now the Pankhursts after 1903 specialized in escalating tactics on behalf of women's votes.
They said we've got to take direct action and we've got to be as conspicuous as possible in
doing it. They certainly overcame the long tradition that women ought not to make themselves conspicuous
in public life. First they chained themselves to the railings in Downing Street outside the
Prime Minister's house making it very difficult for them to be taken away. Then one of them chained
herself to a statue in the House of Commons lobby. Next they and their supporters began
smashing department store windows in Oxford Street and Regent Street assaulting policemen.
When they were taken to jail they went on hunger strikes dropping explosives into mailboxes
in every way trying to disrupt everyday life and this is in Edwardian Britain where women
seemingly decorous and well-dressed and demure suddenly would take hammers and smash the windows
or little explosives out of their bags. Sylvia Pankhurst describes more of their methods she says
destructive militancy on a hitherto unparalleled scale. Petty injuries and annoyances continuing
side by side with large-scale damage. Street lamps were broken chairs flung into the serpentine.
This is the the lake in St. James's Park next to Buckingham Palace. Cushions of railway carriages
slashed. Flower beds damaged. Golf greens all over the country scraped and burned with acid.
Empty houses and other unattended buildings were systematically sought out and set on fire.
Bombs were placed near the Bank of England. Lloyd George's new house in process of construction
at Walton on the Hill was injured beyond repair by a bomb explosion. An incredible succession of
actions taken by the suffragettes. The most dramatic action of all came in the year 1913.
Every year the most famous horse race in England is the Derby. It's the counterpart to the Kentucky
Derby here in the United States and a young suffragette called Emily Davidson at the Derby
ran under the rails and threw herself under the horse which was owned by the king and was racing
in the Derby. She was killed and to the suffragette she became a martyr to the cause.
Well it was absolutely horrifying to conservative women to see well-dressed ladies acting in ways
like this. It was also very annoying to moderate suffragists in the National Union of Women's
Suffrage Societies led by Millicent Fawcett. In reform movements this is often the case
that you have a moderate organization which is tending to emphasize its reasonableness
and on the other hand a militant wing which commits outrages that draw a lot of attention
but tends to make the cause itself suffer and seem like the work of cranks.
Radicalism gave credibility to the Women's National Anti-Suffrage League that is the
organization of women which gathered to oppose the idea of votes for women. Its journal The Review
was full of horrified reactions to the radicals. Readers on both sides of the Atlantic kept in
touch with what was going on in the other country and certainly American pro and anti-suffrage
women knew about the Pankhursts and knew about Emily Davidson. Some of them were convinced that
Christian civilization itself was at stake and it might very well be jeopardized if women entered
political life. Again in the course I've several times mentioned people who predict the fall of
western civilization. It's a recurrent conservative fear and certainly came it arose to an acute
to a crescendo in the debate over women's votes. Listen to an American writer called Joseph Pyle
writing in 1913 the same year as the death of Emily Davidson. He writes,
With Christianity there came into the world a new example and a new thought. To women's whole
nature appealed that life of self-sacrifice of love and of willing service that has created a new
heaven and a new earth. From the foot of the cross there arose and went out into the world
a womanhood that did not demand or claim or threaten or arrogate.
Woman has become to man not only a companion but an inspiration. Out of the crucible of the
centuries has come what we not only love but adore before which in certain hours we bow with a
reverence that links us unconsciously with the divine. It is Christian civilization that is in the
balance. Well as you've probably noticed from these these eulogies these incomiums to the beauty
and divine quality of women. This is a debate which is going on mainly in the upper and upper
middle classes among women who don't have to work. It was already the case that hundreds of
thousands of women in both countries were working in factories and on farms and as domestic
servants but they're not the kind of women who are being idealized in the superheated rhetoric of
this kind. Now interestingly there were women who were involved in political life who said it
was an advantage to them to lack the vote. So long as women lacked the vote they could influence
all citizens without the suspicion that they were interested parties. A very interesting argument
was made by Emily Bissell. This was an American woman active in the politics of the state of
Delaware. She played a significant role in drafting and working and gathering information
to support child labor laws. She was a consumer advocate and she was an activist in the Red Cross
and she insisted that it was better better for this political work that women didn't have the vote.
She said the voteless woman can go to any man Republican or Democrat. She can ask for laws
that create offices without the suspicion that she wants to hold them. She cannot trade or deal.
She is known to be disinterested and it doesn't have to be proved. A woman working for any measure
in a legislature has an immense advantage over a man. And that's an interesting point of view
isn't it? One that it would be hard to reconstruct if we didn't know about it. That someone who was
politically active herself didn't want to have the vote and didn't want the didn't want the right
to be able to hold such offices. Well opposition to the suffrage was in effect the natural conservative
position. The great difficulty for the suffragists was always to get themselves taken seriously at
all because it would have meant such a big change in the way politics had always been done.
The British historian Brian Harrison who studied it very closely in the British context says
opposition to a reforming movement often springs less from distaste for the cause itself
than from a temperamental dislike of reforms in general. Anti-suffragism was particularly prevalent
among those who were conservative by temperament especially in matters of day to day social life.
The suffragists mainly women of higher classes found it very difficult indeed to enlist working
class supporters. There's an enormous fatalism among working class people in Britain which was
much stronger then than it is today. This idea that things are the way they are because they've
simply been destined in that way and that the ordinary person's just not got to make a fuss
about it. Working class people had always been very reluctant indeed to join visionary crusades
and it's important to remember that the Labour Party the great rising force in British politics
in the early part of the 20th century was itself very socially conservative. Working class hecklers
sometimes broke up votes for women demonstrations by brandishing signs that read blokes for women
in other words making what we'd call a sexist joke imputing sexual frustration to suffragists
actions. Here's the historian Harrison again he writes the working man had all the more reason
to resist feminist ideas because he normally had no domestic servants to protect him from its full
implications for his domestic routine. Perhaps in compensation for their subordination elsewhere
working men were often authoritarian in the home so the suffrage movement suffered from not being
able to recruit ready supporters from the working class. Now the Labour Party and the trade unions
which had given birth to the Labour Party themselves tended to be hostile to feminism
because they were afraid that with a great change a potential great change in gender relations
women might enter the workforce in much larger numbers and of course the more if more women
were coming into the workforce that would tend to create a downward pressure on wages if women
were admitted and the unions were struggling to prevent wages from being decreased and trying
to work to get them increased so the labour movement and the unions and the Labour Party
have all got a built-in incentive not to be enthusiastic about women's suffrage or what we
call feminist rights. Higher up the social scale many conservatives were skeptical of democracy
in the first place as we've seen throughout the course especially in Britain and they viewed
the extension of the votes to women most of whom would not be well educated as worsening an already
severe problem. But some elite women did make the argument that their education gave them a
better entitlement to vote than ignorant working men. Here's Lady Louisa Knightley speaking in 1885
she said she was waiting outside the polling station on election day while her husband voted
quote and felt for the first time personally the utter anomaly of my not having the vote
while Joe Bull has Joe Bull's an imaginary uh it's a reference to the ordinary working man
she suddenly starts to realise how strange it is that I despite all my uh education
am being excluded while men who in fact can't read and write are given the right to vote.
She was the founder of the conservative and unionist women's franchise association in 1908 this was
a group of pro-suffrage conservative women and its members sometimes joined in the big suffrage
demonstrations. Here's her description from the year 1910 of a suffrage march and she adds in what
I think of as a very ladylike tone of voice. Our banners made a brilliant display and many of our
branches were well represented. Warwickshire, Hull and Croydon branches all contributed beautiful
banners. All our members wore the colours of the association carrying penance and bouquets of flowers.
In other words they've got the accoutrements of their lady likeness and these are conservative
ladies. They're trying to deradicalise the suffrage movement by showing that distinguished ladies
such as themselves can join in. Here's another example of a of a pro-suffrage conservative
the Baroness Henry de Verne's writing in 1887. She wrote this is not an age when men must work
and women must weep. Women need not neglect their homes because they share the aims and
aspirations of their husbands or fathers or brothers. The more women interest themselves in
subjects of universal importance the happier are their homes likely to become. So counteracting
arguments like Elohu Root who says women are going to become brutalised by politics she says no
home life will be stronger if man and woman together can take a common interest in political life.
Well the debate over suffrage was affected by other political and intellectual trends
of the late 19th and early 20th centuries especially by the rise of socialism. Many
conservatives saw a continuum between socialism free love and women's participation in politics.
They had the idea that all these things were dangerous and that they went together. They
certainly believed that socialism was somehow synonymous with the destruction of marriage
in favour of a kind of erotic selfishness and self-indulgence and the term used at the time was
free love. Caroline Corbyn of Connecticut writing in 1888 argued that socialism meant
degrading women to the promiscuous level of men. In other words rather than raising everyone up
it would be pushing the women down. But at the very at the far end of the political spectrum
the threat of German military power appeared in the debate. Strange as it may seem. For example
Lord Cromer who was another of the great British imperial pro consoles a man very much in the
same stripe as Lord Milner or Lord Curson whom I've mentioned in connection with the empire
said this in a speech of 1910. The German man is manly and the German woman is womanly. Can we
hope to compete with such a nation as this if we war against nature and endeavor to invert the natural
roles of the sexes? We cannot do so. In other words women ought not to get to the vote because
were they to get it would be less likely to be able to defeat Germany in a war. It seems like a
very very strange line of argumentation but clearly was convincing to Cromer. The debate also was
sometimes cast in the language of evolution. I've mentioned at various points in the course how
after the publication of Darwin's book on the origin of species back in 1859 other groups had
picked up evolutionary language and applied it to areas of economics and politics as well
and it was applied not surprisingly to the suffrage vote to the suffrage debate as well.
Evolution shows us how organisms adapt to special niches and so the differentiation of
spheres between men and women could be seen as this kind of specialization. If so then reducing
the difference by enfranchising women was going to be evolutionarily retrogressive.
An American writer called Mrs. A. J. George writing in 1916 said the vote would be a backward step
toward conditions where the work of man and woman were the same because neither sex had evolved
enough to see the wisdom of being specialists in their own line. All right so the idea here is
the more we evolve the more different men and women are going to become.
In a previous lecture we also so we also encountered the idea of Anglo-Saxon race
suicide. This is the kind of thing that people like Madison Grant were very preoccupied by.
The idea was this if women go into politics instead of being mothers then the Anglo-Saxon
birth rate is going to fall further and the Anglo-Saxons are going to be swamped by the
less advantaged races. Neglected sons will become weak and so America would become quote
a race of masculine women and effeminate men and the mating of these would result in the
in the procreation of a race of degenerates. Well in the event the decisive change in the
situation came from the First World War when millions of men were drafted into the military
services. Women's services in both economies became indispensable. Women went to do all
sorts of jobs particularly in industry which they'd never done previously. It greatly strengthened
the suffrage position to show look at the way in which women are capable of doing all these jobs
which previously were confined to the men and that in turn led to constitutional changes
in both nations. A constitutional amendment passed through congress and then through three quarters
of the states in 1920. In time for women to participate in the 1920 presidential election
and the president they chose was Warren G. Harding a much much more conservative man
than his immediate predecessor Woodrow Wilson. In 1918 parliament in Britain passed a vote
which specified that women over the age of 30 could vote if they were the owners of five
pounds worth of real estate. So women's suffrage is more restricted at first but it was then extended
to full equality by a second act of parliament in 1928 just 10 years later. It was bitterly
disappointing to feminists because they discovered that most women voted in the same way as their
fathers if they weren't married and the same way as their husbands if they were married. In other
words there wasn't the same kind of transformation of political life as some feminist leaders had
anticipated. Meanwhile former opponents of women's suffrage were quick to note that women tended
if anything to be politically more conservative than men. The first woman to sit in parliament was
Nancy Astor born in America. She'd never been a suffragist but she'd become popular because
of her charity work with wounded British soldiers during the first world war. She was the wife of
an aristocrat and when her husband's father died and he inherited the noble title it meant that he
had to go to the seat in the House of Lords and so she decided to stand for parliament to get his
seat and she won it in 1919. She was a very good speaker and great at dealing with hecklers. In the
1920s and 1930s she had a long feud with Winston Churchill partly because she was an advocate
of appeasement of Hitler in the 1930s. There's a famous anecdote about one of their exchanges
in which Nancy Astor says, Winston if you were my husband I'd put poison in your coffee to which
Churchill answered, Nancy if you were my wife I'd drink it. Another distinguished member of parliament
was the Duchess of Athle who'd been a leading anti-suffragist. She opposed what votes for women
but once women got the vote and got the right to sit in parliament she became a conservative member
of parliament from 1923 to 1938. Eventually she resigned in protest over the conservative
government's appeasement of Hitler in the late 1930s. She was a supporter of the Spanish Republic
and an outspoken anti-communist much closer to the positions espoused by Winston Churchill.
While the history of the anti-suffragists has been all all but forgotten the price of defeat in
political disputes is often oblivion. I think it's it's worth hanging on to this thought.
Before women got the vote the people who were arguing for it were vulnerable to ridicule.
Once they had the vote those who'd argued against it in turn were ridiculed and then they were forgotten.
