The 1920s was a period of prosperity throughout the United States, in which vast numbers of
citizens acquired their first motor cars, refrigerators, radios and gramophones. A trio
of conservative Republicans occupied the White House, Warren G. Harding, Calvin Coolidge and Herbert
Hoover, all content to preside over a society in which it began to seem possible that everybody
could get rich. Isolated groups in the universities deplored what they saw as a general yielding
to materialism. One was the New Humanists, a group of conservative intellectuals led by Irving
and Paul Elmer Moore, who insisted that mankind has a higher spiritual destiny than mere consumerism.
Another was the Southern Agrarians, centered in Nashville, Tennessee, who regarded the rural
South as a repository of virtues that the rest of the nation was beginning to forget.
The South alone has suffered defeat and failure, they wrote, and it must teach the rest of the
nation that human aspirations are sure to be chastened. More upbeat than either of these groups,
but also conservative in his own way, was H. L. Menken, the most popular American journalist
of the 1920s, who poured scornful cold water over progressive and perfectionist notions
on the one hand, while mocking old time religion and rural life on the other.
Well, after the First World War, conservative Republicans rejected the League of Nations
and shunned the Russian Revolution, then led the country on a retreat from international politics.
The First World War convulsed Europe from 1914 to 1918. The Americans participated only
from April 1917 till the November of the following year. Woodrow Wilson was president throughout
the war, and he believed that it was the war to make the world safe for democracy,
and the war to end all wars. These were exactly the kind of slogans that conservatives would never
use, and they embodied exactly the kind of things that conservatives would never believe.
Why? Because it's utopian, it's asking for a dramatic change in human nature. What could be
less likely after a history which, as far as we can trace it, has always been characterized by
warfare to believe that suddenly now it's going to stop?
During the war, there was a high degree of temporary government regulation of the economy
for the sake of maximum efficiency in prosecuting the war. As the war came to an end, and as the
peace treaty was summoned to Versailles just south of Paris, President Wilson decided that he'd go
in person to participate in the negotiations, but he made a great party political mistake.
He took no senior Republicans with him to Versailles. All his entourage were Democrats,
and not surprisingly, the Republicans resented their exclusion from the treaty.
In the closing years of the Wilson administration, Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, and we've already
met on several occasions, led the conservative resistance to the Treaty of Versailles as negotiated,
and particularly to American participation in the League of Nations. Wilson put particular hope
in the League of Nations, an organization which would ideally resolve all future disputes,
making the resort to arms unnecessary. But this was something that Senator Lodge and his
fellow conservative Republicans refused to agree to. They said, it's wrong for us to agree
to the international resolution of future disputes affecting America's national interests,
because by doing so, we'll be surrendering part of our national sovereignty. America ought not
to put itself in the position where committees made up of Italians and Norwegians might be
resolving issues of vital concern to the United States. Lodge said, in reality, the nation wouldn't
permit that to happen when it came to the point, so it's dishonest to sign to act as though we're
going to let it happen. He wrote that he deplored, quote, the natural view of good people, who think
that if you shout peace loud enough, you will have peace, and who do not see the dangers involved
in agreeing to a treaty which makes promises we know we shall not carry out.
In the 1920s, while Italy and the Soviet Union created a new form of total politics,
the United States government shrank, giving maximum scope to free enterprise.
The Russian Revolution, which took place in 1917, had terrified American conservatives,
who feared a comparable upheaval at home, just as the French Revolution had scared the British
governing classes for the next few decades. So the Russian Revolution scared the Americans,
who feared that their own working class might conceivably become Soviet revolutionaries too.
And this began the long period of American anti-communism, which is central to the story
of 20th century American conservatism, and culminated in the Cold War and in McCarthyism,
but began back in 1918 with what's remembered as the Red Scare. American radicals were rounded up
by the Attorney General, Mitchell Palmer, who was himself the victim of an anarchist bombing.
Many of the many foreign-born radicals were deported without due process. The leader of the
IWW, the Industrial Workers of the World, one of the most radical unions in America,
Big Bill Hayward, went to the New Soviet Union. The anarchist Emma Goldman was expelled.
The leader of America's small socialist party, Eugene Debs, had been in jail for having spoken
out against the war and stayed in jail after the war had finished. In fact, he ran for president
from his jail cell, and in a beautiful recent book by Ernest Freeberg called Democracy's Prisoner,
he describes the strange paradox that one of the principal presidential candidates who got nearly
a million votes was running for president from his prison cell. Since 1776, America had been an
inspiration to revolutionaries everywhere. But after 1917, it became the world's counter-revolutionary
leader. That itself was to have very, very profound effects on American politics,
and particularly on American conservatism. And the United States in the 1920s and 1930s
became a great anomaly. The United States had the power to become a dominant force in world politics,
but it decided not to use that power. This is previously an unknown phenomenon, always before
in world politics. The strongest nation flexed its muscles to the maximum and exerted its power.
Here's the United States with far more ability to influence world events than it decided to exercise.
The first two Republican presidents of the 1920s, Warren Harding and Calvin Coolidge,
embodied the two sides of American small government conservative tradition. Harding campaigned on the
slogan of a return to normalcy, even though the word normalcy itself ironically was a neologism,
a word invented by Harding himself or his campaign managers. He declined to run a conventional
campaign in 1920, even after he'd won the Republican nomination. Instead, he stayed at home in Ohio
and welcomed reporters who wanted to come to his house, and he'd chat with them from his seat on
the front porch. After he'd won the election, he drank whiskey in the White House, even though by
now prohibition had come into effect. He played cards with his cronies from Ohio. He had a long-term
girlfriend named Nan Britton, and according to one set of stories, they had sex in a closet
in the White House. When Harding died in office in 1923, there were rumors circulating in Washington
that his wife had poisoned him because of his promiscuity. Scandals proliferated in his administration.
The secretary of the interior was sent to jail as part of the fallout of the teapot dome scandal.
Some other officials committed suicide to avoid arraignment. This, of course, was totally different
from the strenuous moral uplift of the Woodrow Wilson years. And as I mentioned in the previous
lecture, ironically, it was Harding who was the first president to be brought in by women's votes.
His presidency certainly didn't live up to the hopes of women who'd said politics will be a more
moralized environment once we're voting. There were no group government crusades of the Wilsonian
type, no progressive rhetoric. Wilson himself recognized the exhaustion of reform energy which
had characterized his administration, and Wilson wrote, it is only once in a generation that a
people can be lifted above material things. That is why conservative government is in the saddle
two-thirds of the time. That was a prescient statement on his part. Warren Harding had the
opportunity to appoint four conservatives to the Supreme Court, and in the 1930s they'd prove a
burdensome vexation to President Franklin Roosevelt. Harding's best appointees, Andrew Mellon at the
Treasury and Herbert Hoover at the Commerce Department, favored economy and efficiency.
They presided over tax reductions from the high rates imposed during World War One.
And they gave tax breaks to the wealthiest to create what would later be called the trickle
down effect. They claimed that the whole economy benefits from low taxes being imposed in the
upper reaches. But the government was shrinking so dramatically, the federal government, that they
still managed to balance the federal budget. They actually reduced the national debt. They reduced
the number of federal employees. Now this is in very, very striking contrast to what was happening
at the same time in Italy and Russia. Mussolini in Italy and Lenin then Stalin in Russia at the
same time were creating total governments, which aspired to survey and to participate in every
single part of the life of the nation. Well, Harding's been much scorned by the historians,
although in recent years a few revisionist views have restored some credit to Harding's administration
for its return to a small, effective and fairly efficient peacetime government.
After Harding's death in office, Coolidge embodied the old Puritan tradition in his personal life.
He also was a small government man, although in personal temperament very different. He
embodied the flinty integrity of New England. He was a vermonter. In fact, he was in Vermont
visiting his father when news of Harding's death arrived. And his father administered the oath of
office by the light of a kerosene lamp in August of 1923. He practiced a very, very simple lifestyle,
was unpretentious and slept for 12 hours every night. His nickname was Silent Cal. He was famous
for meeting requests for government aid with stony silence. Sometimes people came to see him and he'd
say nothing and they'd explain what they wanted from the federal government and he'd say absolutely
nothing at all. His silence apparently was intimidating and terrifying. There's a story,
probably apocryphal, about a bubbly young woman who told her friend that she was going to be with
President Coolidge at dinner and when the dinner started she said to him,
my friend told me that you wouldn't say three words to me all night and so we had a little
bet on it. I'm sure I'm going to win. To which Coolidge replied, you lose and said not another
word all night. Coolidge said at one point, four-fifths of our troubles would disappear
if we would sit down and keep still. Earlier in the course I mentioned Randolph of Roanoke,
the southern conservative of the early 19th century, who said the best kind of legislature
is one that sleeps and it makes absolutely no changes. Coolidge favoured business interests
openly over and above labor and agriculture and a Wall Street Journal editorial wrote,
never before here or anywhere else has a government been so completely fused with business.
A prolonged economic boom in the 1920s benefited most elements of American society.
This was the decade when ordinary Americans began to own cars of their own, refrigerators,
radios, washing machines. It was the decade in which advertising developed very quickly
and also consumer credit and the possibilities of installment buying. It was also the period
which began an erosion of the idea of individual financial conservatism, of never living beyond
one's means. From the 1920s really right up to the present, nearly every American has had the
opportunity to live beyond their means, to buy goods which they don't yet have the money to pay for.
Now, isolated groups of conservative intellectuals protested against what they saw as the gross
materialism of the 1920s. One of them was the new humanists. They sought to impose a sense of
restraint on human appetites and to appeal to a more exalted conception of life. The leading
figure among the new humanists is Irving Babbit. He protested against the rise of utilitarianism
in education, against the scientific method and against mass democracy, which you might well
look at as three of the characteristics of America in the 1920s. He was a professor of
romance languages at Harvard and had studied there under the mugwumps Charles Eliot Norton
and James Russell Lowell in the later decades of the 19th century. While he was an undergraduate
at Harvard, Charles Eliot had been the president of the university and it was Eliot who introduced
the elective system, giving the students the opportunity to choose among different courses
depending on what their chief interests were. And Irving Babbit was strongly opposed to this
reform. In his view, it compromised the essentially moral purpose of education. It taught the students
masses of facts, but it detached them from an overall view of life and its moral foundations.
Babbit also deployed modern science because it treated life as essentially material and
mechanistic. Science had no room for moral issues, which from Babbit's point of view ought to stand
front and center of any education. Babbit was a philosophical dualist. He had the view that
mankind, that every man has a lower physical side and a higher moral side. And he spoke regularly
of the inner check that the conscience imposes to make the moral side of man dominant over against
the lower animal side of man. The inner check or conscience must dominate and be nurtured by
moral education. He wrote that ever since the Enlightenment, philosophers had exaggerated
human goodness. Rousseau, for example, had the idea that man was essentially good,
but that human institutions made him vicious. Man is born free but is everywhere in chains.
Babbit said no to that. Man is not naturally good. There's a constant battle going on within
every one of us for self-mastery. Now the new era, the 1920s in America, seemed to him scary.
It was too materialistic. There were no calls being made for sacrifice. And this was a democracy
that catered to the very lowest common denominator, he said. In a book from 1924 called Leadership
and Democracy, Babbit wrote this. Genuine leaders, good or bad, there will always be.
And democracy becomes a menace to civilization when it seeks to evade this truth. The notion
in particular that a substitute for leadership may be found in numerical majorities that are
supposed to reflect the general will is only a pernicious conceit. In the long run, democracy
will be judged no less than other forms of government by the quality of its leaders,
a quality that will depend in turn on the quality of their vision. Where there is no vision,
we are told, the people perish. But where there is sham vision, they perish even faster.
Babbit's great colleague was Paul Elmer Moore, a professor at Princeton. He judged cultures by
or steer absolute moral standards. And he wrote principally about literature and could find absolutely
nothing to praise in the contemporary literature, the modernist work of his own era. Paul Elmer
Moore was a harsh or steer figure. He was even critical of seemingly harmless figures like Mark
Twain's Tom Sawyer. Here's his description. This victorious liar, this lucky vagabond and
cunning rebel to authority, was immoral. Books like Twain's, said Moore, were not only enfeebling
in their effect on the mind, but actually perverting in their effect on character.
Norman Forster was a professor who was a great admirer of Babbit and Moore. He saw them as
luminous figures in a new humanism. And he treated their rebukes to the worldliness of America in
the 20s as prophetic. Talking about humanism, he compares them to the great Renaissance humanists.
And he says, in the Renaissance, it's great foe was medieval other worldliness. Today, it's great
foe is this worldliness, obsession with physical things and the instincts that bind us to the
animal order. In a word, the many forms of natureism that have all but destroyed humane insight,
discipline and elevation. Well, liberal critics dismissed the new humanists for their lack of
creativity. And for what they what the critics described as their faculty club on worldliness.
The critics pointed out if this really was a new form of humanism to be compared with that of the
Renaissance, it would be generating great creative work of its own. But in fact, there was none.
A scholar called Hartley Gratton collected an anthology of the new humanists critics
and wrote that the new humanism was, quote, the exclusive property of a small sect of school
masters so fatuous that they do not hesitate to assign school masters A's, B's and C's in humanism
to Homer, Plato, Aristotle, Confucius, Buddha and Jesus.
He wrote that they were so preoccupied with the inner check and the cultivation of individual
restraint that they scanted the conditions of the world around them, falsely implying that one's
environment is not vitally significant in development. Of course, there's always this debate going on,
the nurture nature debate, which matters most. The new humanists thought that nature mattered most
and that every individual had to struggle inwardly with his or her own demons. Whereas Gratton and
the critics tended to take the view the environment is vitally important and this is something with
which the new humanists have not come to terms at all. A second group of critics of the 1920s
were the Southern Agrarians. They eulogized the neglected wisdom of rural life and used an idealized
vision of the South as a scourge against the rising urban world. Their anthology, I'll Take My Stand,
The South and the Agrarian Tradition, was published in 1930. It attributed all virtue to the rural
South and all vice and wickedness to the urban North. Well, the Southern Agrarians praised farm
life, but they were poets and academics, not farmers. Among them were many figures who have a
distinguished place in 20th century American modernist literature, particularly Alan Tate,
John Crow Ransom and Robert Penn Warren, all of whom went on to lead very, very distinguished
literary careers. Alan Tate even tried to back up his enthusiasm for farming by acquiring a farm,
but he was only able to do so with the help of a rich brother who was a banker and could give him
the money and he found that he couldn't make it pay. He had to arrange for a tenant family to do all
the actual farm work. Of course, it's one thing to make sentimental claims about farm life, but it's
all turned altogether another to do the actual backbreaking work of farming, as Tate soon discovered.
Another of the Southern Agrarians, Andrew Little, made a lyrical tribute to farming life
and he wrote, a farm is not a place to grow wealthy, it is a place to grow corn. Well,
that also was completely false to the historical record. American agricultural history is actually
all about getting into the market and getting away from subsistence farming.
And the Southern Agrarians also had a radically false view of Southern race relations.
They maintained the old cliches of the lost cause, the idea that the slaves on the plantations
before the American Civil War had been contented and protected. Now, at the time when presidents
Harding and Coolidge regarded conservatism as support for American industry and a laissez-faire
approach from the government, the Agrarians condemned industrialization altogether and said
it was the antithesis of conservatism because capitalism changes everything. They said it's
almost as mendacious as communism because both of them, capitalism and communism,
are materialist systems, philosophically materialist systems. Here's a little passage from the
introduction to I'll Take My Stand. We look upon the communist menace as a menace indeed,
but not as a red one because it is simply according to the blind drift of our industrial
development to expect in America at last much the same economic system as that imposed upon
Russia in 1917. The Southern Agrarians are interesting to read because they challenged
all the verities of their era. They said, for example, hard work is bad, not good. So is
transforming and shaping the world. Leisure is natural, but only Southerners know how to be
truly leisurely. They even took on one of the great figures of American history, the pioneer.
They said the pioneer is not the ideal American character. Settlement and permanence are much
more important than restless movement to new frontiers. So there's a lot to be, there's much
to be interested by in the writing of the Southern Agrarians, but they weren't really
very reliable guides to what the world was actually like. They always had academic champions
who admire their longing for permanence and their dissatisfaction with the makeshift and the temporary
and the shifting things of life. But like the new humanists, they were essentially just
an academic coterie and certainly had no practical political significance.
The satirist H. L. Menken, an unashamed elitist, poured scorn on the conventions and follies
of his era in the 1920s and became one of the most popular writers of the decade. Menken was a
journalist from Baltimore. He was also the first American interpreter of the German philosopher
Nietzsche, and he exhibited something of a ruthless Nietzschean streak of his own. Most
ordinary people, in his view, are contemptibly weak. Only the minority are worth our attention,
and only the chosen few can lead or even contribute to civilization. Here's a characteristic passage
from Menken. The existence of most human beings is of absolutely no significance to history or to
human progress. They live and die as anonymously and as nearly uselessly as so many bullfrogs or
houseflies. They are at best undifferentiated slaves upon an endless assembly line,
and at worst they are robots who leave their mark upon time only by occasionally falling
into the machinery and so incommodating their betters. Well, Menken stands squarely in the
libertarian tradition descended from John Stuart Mill and William Graham Sumner, rather than in the
tradition of Hamilton, the strong government tradition, or the Edmund Burke tradition,
which reverences tradition and old things. But Menken was harsher than William Graham Sumner,
who spoke up for the forgotten man. Menken was ostentatiously indifferent to the common man.
He had no illusions at all about democracy and was in fact actively opposed to it. He wrote,
giving every man a vote has no more made men wise and free than Christianity has made them good.
Menken was famous in his day for scorning and hating the puritanical values for
dislike evangelical Christianity and for his contempt for rural life. He said of Puritans,
that Puritans were people who were terrified that someone somewhere is having some fun.
Now his platform, the place where he advanced these views, was a journal called The American
Mercury, of which he was the founder and the editor from 1924 to 1933. The American Mercury
was a great commercial success. It encouraged middle-class American readers, particularly city
dwellers, to see things as he saw them and to flatter themselves that they were free from many
of the idiotic conventions which he was so eager to explode. It was one of the urbane new magazines
of the prosperous 1920s, along with the New Yorker, which was founded at about the same time.
And in an early editorial, Menken wrote, there must be room in the middle for an educated
tourism, the true disraelian brand. It exists everywhere, but in the United States it has no
voice. So a reference back there to disraeli, the old English Prime Minister of the 1870s.
Menken hated Wilsonian progressivism, the characteristic politics of the 19 teens,
and he always tried to deflate its strenuous and aspiring character. This was partly because
during the First World War, he'd been pro-German, at least until the time when the Americans entered
the war, and he was suspected of being an enemy agent. This intensified his hatred of Wilson.
He hated prohibition as well as a blend of puritanism plus Wilsonian perfection. It was
everything he didn't stand for. And he wrote, between Wilson and his brigades of informers,
spies, volunteer detectives, perjurers and complacent judges, and the prohibitionists
and their messianic delusion. The liberty of the citizen has pretty well vanished in America.
In two or three years, if the thing goes on, every third American will be a spy upon his fellow
citizens. Menken's most famous moment probably came in 1925 at the Scopes Monkey Trial. Now what
happened here? This is in the town of Dayton, Tennessee. The legislature of Tennessee, Pastor
Law, making it illegal to teach the evolutionary theory. A young school teacher named John Scopes
believed that Darwin was right and made a point of teaching Darwinian theory. He was prosecuted
and put on trial. Clarence Darrow, a famous Chicago attorney, volunteered to defend Scopes,
and William Jennings Bryan, the old Democratic presidential candidate and a leading
creationist, a fundamentalist, volunteered to help the prosecution. So all sorts of people
gathered in Dayton, Tennessee, for the trial, which became something of a circus or a show.
And Menken himself went down there. He was friends with Darrow and wrote ruthlessly
scornful editorials about the Scopes Monkey Trial and took great glee in the fact that Darrow
was able to make a fool of William Jennings Bryan by showing how very, very little Bryan actually
knew about the vast complexities of the formation of the earth and the origins of life. Well,
there's something very unlikable about Menken, particularly his attitudes when you take them
away from the writing. But on the other hand, he's very likable because he's saved by an
extraordinary wit and a love of paradox. I mentioned earlier that the new humanists were
intensely preoccupied by questions of conscience. Here's what Menken has to say about it.
Conscience is a mother-in-law whose visit never ends. Isn't that beautiful? Well, the new humanists,
the agrarians, and Menken were all different types of conservatives reacting to the prosperous
America of the 1920s. The onset of the Great Depression after the Wall Street crash of 1929
would bring new elements of conservatism to the fore.
