The onset of the Great Depression transformed American conservatism. Following a decade
of minimal government and widespread prosperity, President Hoover and the Republican Party
found themselves forced onto the defensive in the fallout from the Wall Street crash.
After losing the election of 1932, they looked with horror on the New Deal, fearing that
Franklin Roosevelt would centralize federal power in a way comparable to the rising European
tyrant Mussolini, Stalin and Hitler.
Widespread unemployment and a pervasive sympathy for the suffering of vulnerable citizens
meanwhile cost H. L. Menken much of his old popularity. His jibes and jests now seemed
more heartless than amusing. A handful of isolated elitists such as Albert J. Nock
and Ralph Adams Cram nevertheless continued to argue against democracy.
While Hitler's power increased and the Second World War began, American conservatives argued
whether the United States should stand behind Britain in the defense of European civilization
or whether it should remain aloof from a conflict in which America had no vital interest.
After losing the presidency in the election of 1932, Herbert Hoover wrote and spoke extensively
against the encroachment of federal power. In his earlier career, Hoover had been a progressive
Republican rather than a member of the Old Guard. He'd never been closely associated
with people like Henry Cabot Lodge or Elahoe Root. He was the most widely traveled of
all the presidents up to that time and had spent many of the formative years of his
career working abroad as a mining engineer and then a very, very talented businessman.
And he'd given to the United States extremely distinguished service during the First World
War. He was in London when the war began in 1914 and he helped to repatriate Americans
court in France, particularly France and Belgium, by the outbreak of the war. He was then involved
in Belgian famine relief between 1914 and 1917, helping Belgians on whose land the
war was taking place to be fed. Then he ran the food administration in Washington, D.C.
under President Wilson. And he was very efficient indeed at running a big government department,
ironically. He thought it was OK during wartime because emergency conditions made government
intervention in the economy appropriate in the way it would not be at other times. He
then undertook a massive expedition for famine relief to Central and Eastern Europe during
the post-war era. He was secretary of commerce for presidents Harding and Coolidge. But although
he got a progressive reputation, still he was a great believer in the American tradition
of rugged individualism, that in the end he said, what makes America great is the self-reliance
of its citizens. In a speech called Rugged Individualism, which he gave many times in
election campaigns and then around the country in the 1930s, he emphasized the need for self-government,
decentralization and self-reliance. The war government, he said, had been only a temporary
expedient. Over 150 years, we have build it up a form of self-government and we have build
it up a social system which is peculiarly our own. It differs fundamentally from all
others in the world. It is the American system. It is just as definite and positive a political
and social system as has ever been developed on earth. It is founded upon the conception
that self-government can be preserved only by decentralization of government in the state
and by fixing local responsibility. But further than this, it is founded upon the social conception
that only through ordered liberty, freedom and equal opportunity to the individual will
his initiative and enterprise drive the march of progress. During the war, by which he means
the First War, during the war we necessarily turned to the government to solve every difficult
economic problem. The government having absorbed every energy of our people to war, there was
no other solution. For the preservation of the state, the government became a centralized
despotism which undertook responsibilities, assumed powers, exercised rights and took
over the business of citizens. To large degree, we regimented our whole people temporarily
into a socialistic state. However justified it was in time of war, if continued in peacetime
it would destroy not only our system, but progress and freedom in our own country and
throughout the world. Well as president, as the depression worsened between 1929 and
1932, Hoover took cautious steps to remedy depression conditions. But he refused on principled
grounds to pay direct relief from the federal government to the unemployed. The Reconstruction
Finance Corporation, the RFC, led Franklin Roosevelt to campaign against Hoover for overspending
in the campaign of 1932, which is itself evidence that the New Deal, the far higher
spending regime which was to follow, was not preplanned. As the New Deal came in after Hoover's
defeat, Hoover was horrified by it. He deployed these power shifts and the New Deal was indeed
innovative in at least five ways. First of all, the federal government began to offer relief
and work programs directly to individual citizens living in the states. Second, federal supervision
of business became much closer than ever before. The Securities and Exchange Commission was founded
as a way of trying to prevent the kind of chaotic activities on the stock market which had contributed
to the bubble and then the Wall Street crash. The anti-monopoly laws were suspended by the
National Recovery Administration, which tried to organize all the different industries to accept
codes to prevent cutthroat competition which might drive more businesses out of operation.
The federal government went into business directly, particularly with the Tennessee
Valley Authority, the great hydroelectric dam building and electricity generating schemes,
which for the first time saw the government competing with the private sector to provide
electricity. For the first time, great subsidies were offered to farmers, subsidies which were
particularly controversial because they were subsidies paid to farmers to not plant certain
crops, the idea being to induce shortages and therefore to raise prices. Trade unions got
enhanced legal protection under the terms of the Wagner Act of 1935 to give them a stronger
bargaining position when they were face-to-face against their employers. Now historians from the
New Deal right up to the present have disputed whether the New Deal was actually very ad hoc or
whether it had been highly planned and they disagree about whether it saved capitalism,
in which case even that could be seen of as a kind of conservative gesture, or whether the New
Deal was a severe challenge against capitalism. Hoover himself protested against the New Deal
in the name of liberalism and it's important at this point to pause for a second to think about
the changed meaning of the word liberal. In the early 19th century liberalism favored maximizing
individual liberty, particularly economic liberty. But by the early 20th century and particularly
by the time of the New Deal it was starting to come to mean using the state to promote equality
and welfare and high employment and health and education. Exactly the kinds of things
which Hoover protested against in the speech rugged individualism. So it's in the 1930s that the
word liberal itself starts to take on a new meaning and it's a meaning, the new meaning is one which
has been retained up to the present, so that since the 1930s liberals have tended to be more
sympathetic to big government projects. Hoover was afraid that Roosevelt might become a potential
European style dictator. In Central Europe the march of socialist and fascist dictatorships
and their destruction of liberty did not set out with guns and armies, he wrote.
Dictators began their ascents to the seats of power through the elections provided by liberal
institutions. They offered the mirage of utopia to those in distress, they flung the poison of class
hatred. That was itself, that last remark was a rebuke to FDR for his language of class antagonism.
Roosevelt was a very accomplished orator and knew how to insinuate that the rich were living at the
expense of the poor in the depression days. Well Hoover was again alarmed by Franklin
Roosevelt's attempt to tamper with the Supreme Court.
Roosevelt was indignant when the Supreme Court found that the National Recovery Administration
and many other parts of the New Deal laws which had been brought into force in 1933 and 34
were challenged and were found by the Supreme Court to be unconstitutional. As I mentioned before
four of the Supreme Court justices sitting in the early days of the New Deal had been appointed
by President Harding back in the early 1920s and they also tended to be
conservatives who were unsympathetic to the direction the New Deal was taking.
So Roosevelt proposed to increase the number of justices sitting in the Supreme Court
up to a maximum of 15 for a very long time there had been nine but the Constitution had never
specified exactly how many there ought to be. Now Hoover saw this as a barefaced attempt to
politicize the court and so it was. In a speech in San Diego against the idea which became a
conservative classic Hoover traced the whole history of American rights and liberties all
the way back to the Magna Carta and then through the American Revolution.
These rights were no sudden discovery no overnight inspiration they were established by
centuries of struggle in which men died fighting bitterly for their recognition.
Their beginnings lie in the Magna Carta of Runnymede 570 years before the Constitution was written
down. Through the centuries the habeas corpus the petition of rights the declaration of rights
the growth of the fundamental maxims of the common law marked their expansion and security.
Our forefathers migrated to America that they might attain them more fully.
When they wrote the Declaration of Independence they boldly extended these rights. Before the
Constitution could be ratified patriotic men who feared a return to tyranny whose chains had been
thrown off only after years of toil and bloody war insisted that these hard won rights should be
incorporated in the black and white within the Constitution and so came the American Bill of
Rights. Many conservative Democrats were also horrified by Roosevelt's court packing plan they
saw it as a direct affront to the Constitution itself and so Roosevelt was forced to back away
from this idea even though he just won a big re-election victory in the election of 1936.
Robert Taft unblemished by defeat became the leader of the Senate conservatives in the later days
of the New Deal. Taft was an Ohio Republican son of the president who'd succeeded Theodore Roosevelt.
William Howard Taft had become president in the election of 1908 immediately after Theodore Roosevelt
and his son Robert was now the was becoming the Senate leader of the Republicans. He was
immensely hardworking sober humorless but the master of the issues. He won a seat in the Senate
in 1938 and became a new conservative leader in Washington. He agreed with Hoover that a centralized
economy was antithetical to American traditions and here's a passage from one of Taft's speeches.
He said it would be absolutely contrary to the whole American theory on which this country was
founded and which has actually made it the most prosperous country in the world. It is inconsistent
with democratic government. Communism, fascism and Hitlerism have destroyed a system like ours in
many European countries and substituted a form of despotic socialism. As far as we can judge
socialism will not work. There is no man and no group of men intelligent enough to coordinate and
control the infinitely numerous and complex problems involved in the production, consumption
and daily lives of 120 million individualistic and educated people. In other words the sheer
complexity of our society makes planning either impossible or with its restrictions tyrannical.
Now at the end of that speech he expressed a point that would become central to post-world
war II conservatives. Socialism is not only oppressive, it's also bound to be economically
hopeless, very very inefficient because no centralized bureaucracy can possibly know enough,
quickly enough, to organize an entire nation's economy. The invisible hand of the market does
it far better and in a far far less repressive way.
Well the critique of democracy in mass society, voiced by American conservatives ever since the
era of the Federalists, could still be heard even in the 1930s from Albert J. Nock and from Ralph
Adams Cram. Not people who are politically important, but people whose ideas can still
resonate, at least for some people. No greater book called Our Enemy the State. An impassioned
decentralized government and it's become a libertarian classic. His autobiography The Memoirs
of a Superfluous Man, published in 1943, also became a kind of cult classic among libertarians,
very influential to the next generation of conservatives. The young William F. Buckley
Jr., about whom I'll say much more in subsequent lectures, said that it was his favorite book as
a teenager. That itself is a demonstration that he must have been a very unusual teenager.
Well Nock argued that he'd become superfluous. There was no room for him in the democratic world
because he said he was too good for the world. He dismissed most people as being really unworthy
even of the name of human beings. He wrote, they are merely the subhuman raw material out of which
the occasional human being is produced. This was the same kind of sneering and yet wickedly
amusing tone that H. L. Menken had used and in fact the two men were mutual admirers.
Nock sometimes wrote for Menken's American Mercury in the 1920s. He said once he realized
that most people couldn't really be described as human beings at all this had made him more
tolerant of other people's horribleness. In one famous passage he writes, after all one has a
great affection for one's dogs even when one sees them reveling in tastes and smells that are
unspeakably odious. In other words you can't hold it against so many people that they're really
not human beings they're just living up to the nature they've got even though it's not really
a human nature. He was a deliberately provoking writer in in many ways. His biography has shown
that the book though ostensibly about his own life memoirs of a superfluous man misses out
massive areas of his experience such as that at first earlier in life he'd been a minister
and that he was married and that he had children. None of these things appears in the pages of the
book. Nock was very good at inverting the age's conventional wisdom. For example he felt that
universal literacy was a terrible mistake because he said it enabled unscrupulous leaders to deceive
pathetic ordinary people. Quote, it enables scoundrels to beset, dishevel and debauch such
intelligence as is in the power of the vast majority of mankind to exercise. Permitting
mediocrity and sub mediocrity to run rampant to the detriment of both intelligence and taste.
He was thinking particularly there of advertising and the way it it's systematically deceptive
in its intentions and of course as literacy had risen so had the advertising business.
Ralph Adams Cramm shared Nock's belief that most people have no capacity for self-government
or sustained thought and that society ought to be organized to prevent them from doing harm.
We met Cramm earlier in the course. He was one of the anti-modernists of the late 19th and early
20th centuries and he looked back nostalgically to the Middle Ages to the great Gothic architecture
which in his view was the greatest building style ever achieved and he was also a practicing
and excellent Gothic architect. In Cramm's view America had had its golden age at the beginning
of the republic in the 1790s. He praised what he called the old selective aristocratic republic
controlled and directed by men of tradition, education, inherited culture and exalted ideals
which had produced such noble instruments of government as the constitution of the United
States and for a certain length of time it fulfilled the high anticipations of its creators.
But he said this great edifice had been debased by the arrival of mass democracy
personified in Andrew Jackson. The vast riches acquired by industrial barons after the civil war
had degraded and coarsened American life and that coarsening, that degradation could be seen
in modern architecture. Now another place where Cramm is very interesting is in his writings about
modern art. As I mentioned earlier he's unusual because he was not only a practicing art artist
and architect but also someone who wrote a lot about them and theorized about their significance.
Cramm saw modern art as self-indulgent and he thought of the cult of the artist,
the artistic genius as completely mistaken. You probably know that late 19th and 20th century
artists loved the idea of themselves as brave rebels who were pioneers of the avant-garde
in reaction against society and drawing on the reserves of their own great genius
to challenge a complacent bourgeois society. Artists themselves had a cult of their own
individualism or Cramm was dismayed by all this. He thought of art and architecture not as the
expression of the alienated soul but rather in a healthy society particularly as the healthy
expression of a community's self-awareness. He wrote, art is an expression not of the personal
reactions of highly specialized individuals but of something that is almost communal even racial
in its nature. This is true if it were not I should reject it as my subject for I have
scamped sympathy with that entirely modern view of art which makes the artist a rebel against
constituted society an abnormal phenomenon feeding upon his inner self cut off from the life of his
fellows and issuing his aesthetic manifestos in flaming defiance. Not so did the art of Greece,
of Byzantium, of the Middle Ages come into being and relate itself to life.
Like Henry James he thought of skyscrapers the distinctive buildings of the American cities
in the early 20th century as soulless commercial tributes to America at its worst utterly inhuman
in scale objects that bullied rather than adorned their surroundings.
Another influential figure to conservatives in the 1930s was the Spanish philosopher
Jose Ortega y Gasset. His book The Revolt of the Masses was published in Spain in 1930 and an
influential English translation came out in 1932 as its title suggests The Revolt of the Masses.
It sounded a cautionary note about the rising power of the masses of the population.
Ortega was a philosophy professor in Madrid and he was a member of the Spanish parliament of the
early 1930s in the frail Spanish republic that was soon swept away by the Spanish Civil War of 1936
to 1939. This book became a classic to conservatives particularly after the Second World War because
it warned that while the masses of people had gained rights and had gained wealth and had gained
access to the amenities of civilization they were not developing a commensurate sense of
responsibility. Ortega says the masses are running a world that they do not really understand.
In the 1930s conservatives divided on the question of how best to respond to fascism
and how to respond particularly to the rise of Hitler with significant numbers taking the
isolationist point of view. There was a lot of uncertainty about the meaning of the word fascism
and at first the whole the the idea had a limited appeal among conservatives in the early 1930s.
What did fascism mean? Did it mean simply fervent nationalism or fervent anti-communism?
If so strong government conservatives might very well like it.
The old joke was that Mussolini for the first time in Italian history made the trains run on time
and an American conservative historian named Ross Hoffman went to Rome in 1935 and found
that it was true. He disliked the theatrical aspect of Mussolini's leadership but he admitted
that there was a new purposefulness to Italian life which he hadn't noticed before and he speculated
that a depression-stricken America might need quote a constructive revolution in behalf of
authority order and justice. That wasn't an endorsement of fascism but it was certainly an
approximation to seeing potentially the point of it. Similarly the new humanist Irving Babbit
noted that America might need a Mussolini of its own to prevent the rise of an American Lenin
and it's possible that he was thinking about Roosevelt as a potential American Lenin the
all-powerful central figure. Well if there was some doubt about the significance of fascism
there was much less doubt about Soviet communism which American conservatives had hated right from
the start. Herbert Hoover opposed Roosevelt's decision to give diplomatic recognition to the
Soviet Union in 1933. The Russian Revolution had begun in 1917 but both President Wilson and then
his three Republican successors Harding Coolidge and Hoover had all declined to normalize diplomatic
relations with the Soviet Union. They regarded it as a rogue state in effect. Hoover had been there,
he'd been in the early Soviet Union as the revolution was just beginning and had been horrified
by the brutality of Stalin as he secured his power. Hoover wrongly anticipated the rapid decline of
communism in the 1930s. He said Marxian socialism is a dying faith. The gigantic experiment in
socialism in Russia is now devouring its own children and shedding rivers of blood. Well it
was true that the revolution was devouring its own children as the old Bolsheviks were put on trial
one by one and it was true that tens of thousands possibly millions of people were dying in Russia,
the extermination of the Kulaks and the terrible famines of the early five-year plans. But the
Soviet communism was going to have more vitality than Hoover had bargained which is why it took
till the end of the 1980s for it finally to perish. American opinion split over the Spanish
civil war which was one of the great geopolitical events of the late 1930s. American Catholics
strongly favored Franco, Francisco Franco the army general who launched a coup against the Republic.
Why? Well because Franco posed as the savior of the Catholic Church. There were many incidents
of priests and nuns being massacred by radicals on the Republican side. American Catholics called
Franco the George Washington of Spain. Most Americans on the left on the other hand were
fervently enthusiastic about the the Republic. The Abraham Lincoln Brigade was a group of American
volunteers many other American communists who went to fight on the side of the Republic against
Franco. It's interesting isn't it that both sides the right and the left try to bring to bear the
reputation of legendary figures in American history George Washington and Abraham Lincoln
in their thinking about what was going on in Spain and in fact of course the American analogies
were very poor in both cases. The best way to get the feeling of the outlook of the left is by
reading Ernest Hemingway's great novel For Whom the Bell Tolls which is about an American volunteer
in the service of the Republic. Charles Lindbergh's leadership gave popular credibility to the
isolationist cause once the Second World War began at least until the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.
The Second World War began in September 1939 and it intensified the debate going on inside the
United States about what the appropriate American response should be towards fascism. The claim was
commonly made in the 1930s that the First World War, the Great War, had been fought not to make
the world safe for democracy as Wilson said but to benefit the munitions makers. There's a great
wave of cynicism in the early 1930s and even congressional investigations which purported
to show that a conspiracy of the munitioners had dragged America into the war and so the mood
among isolationist was we've got to make sure that we don't again get hoodwinked into going to war
especially because it's a war which involves the old European powers tearing themselves to pieces
and there can't really be vital American interests at stake.
Let's go back said the isolationists to the philosophy embedded in Washington's farewell
address. That gives us the best guidance, no entangling alliances. In the late 1930s the
America First Committee which was America's leading isolationist organization won some
sympathetic attention from conservative republicans like Herbert Hoover and Robert Taft.
Taft pointed out that the First World War had not made the world safe for democracy and had not
ended all wars and he was particularly afraid that Franklin Roosevelt would consolidate absolute
power if America joined the war to win the United States would have to succumb to what Taft called
an absolute arbitrary government in Washington in which the federal government would take over
business and regulate every detail of private and commercial life. That was the great dread.
Roosevelt's power was bad enough even in peacetime during the Depression and during
the New Deal. He'd shown his unscrupulousness at the time of trying to pack the Supreme Court
and now he was going to use the pretext of war to consolidate his grip on American life.
The historian Justin Raimondo who's himself a libertarian has this comment to make about the
unusual character of the of the isolationists. He writes the isolationist old right represented
a distinctly American phenomenon which owed nothing to the old world and was in all essential ways
the exact opposite of its European counterpart. It was a nationalism of an unprecedented kind
based not on blood and soil and the need to expand but on a tendency towards introversion
and impulse to draw back from the world and its endless quarrels.
Well in the event that's a very shrewd comment but in the event isolationism was nullified by
Pearl Harbor after the Japanese surprise attack in December of 1941 there was no doubt that America
would go to war although even then there was the residual question should America go to war just
against Japan which alone had attacked America or should America go to war against Japan and its
ally Germany. In the end Hitler solved that problem for the Americans by himself declaring war
against America. Had he not done so the debate inside the United States would have been far more
intense and the outcome of the war itself might very well have been different so it was one of
Hitler's several very momentous mistakes.
