While McCarthyism made headlines, a quieter form of American conservatism was taking shape.
For the first time, a self-identified conservative movement was becoming intellectually influential
in America.
One part of it was traditionalist.
Students like Ross Hoffman rediscovered the wisdom of Edmund Burke and argued that it
was as timely to America facing the threat of communism as it had been to England facing
the threat of the French Revolution 200 years before.
Richard Weaver, a literature scholar at the University of Chicago, looked even further
back for inspiration and in his book, ideas have consequences, lamented what he thought
of as the decline of civilization since the Christian Middle Ages.
The most widely noticed traditionalist of the early 1950s was Russell Kirk, whose book
The Conservative Mind traced an Anglo-American conservative lineage from Burke down to such
giants of his own era as T.S. Eliot.
Weaver, Kirk and Hoffman all believed in the natural law, the idea that positive laws
ought to follow the structure of being that could be discovered in nature itself.
This principle, strong in Catholic tradition, caught on widely in the 1950s, even among
non-Catholic writers like Walter Lippmann and Peter Virek, contributing a new respectability
to conservative ideas.
While America after World War II enjoyed a massive rise in living standards and idolized
innovation and up-to-date-ness, a group of conservative intellectuals was making the
case for remembering and venerating tradition.
Richard Weaver argued that Western civilization should look back to its classical and medieval
heritage.
His book, Ideas Have Consequences, was published in 1948 and in it he traced the modern fallacies
all the way back to the work of William of Occam, one of the scholastic theologians who
died in the year 1349.
Weaver himself was a professor of literature at the University of Chicago, a southerner
but a man who never really fitted in in the windy city.
He'd studied with the southern agrarians in Nashville, that agrarian group from the South
before the Second World War, and he'd done his PhD at LSU, Louisiana State University.
He lamented the defeat of the South in the Civil War because with its defeat, America
had lost an example of a society dedicated to benign hierarchy, gentility and tradition.
It seemed clear enough to Weaver that the world was getting worse, not better, especially
in light of the Second World War and its incredible destructiveness, and he wanted it to call
his book The Fearful Descent.
He was a philosophical idealist who sought the causes of decline in ideas, and he found
it in an unlikely place, the work of William of Occam, his fateful advocacy of scholastic
nominalism instead of scholastic realism.
Let me just briefly explain those two ideas.
In scholastic theology, the realists had this idea that there are certain objects like chairs,
for example, and every chair you've got is an approximation to the ideal chair, and that
the ideal is more real than the particular manifestations of that object.
Chairs is an easy example because it's a concrete object.
Those are the people who are called the realists.
By contrast, the nominalists of whom Occam was won are people who say, we've got various
objects upon all of which we can sit, and as a term of linguistic convenience, we use
the word chair, but that doesn't mean that there's some kind of essence of chairness.
The only thing that we've really got is the particular objects themselves.
That's nominalism.
Now Richard Weaver's point was that the sciences that we have today are the descendants of
nominalism.
They say that the only things which we can regard as susceptible to accurate information
are the things which impinge upon our senses, which we can look at and hold and touch and
smell and taste and see.
And Weaver says, the issue ultimately involved is whether there is a source of truth higher
than an independent of man, and the answer to the question is decisive for one's view
of the nature and destiny of humankind.
The practical result of nominalist philosophy is to banish the reality which is perceived
by the intellect, and to posit as reality that which is perceived by the senses.
With this change in the affirmation of what is real, the whole orientation of culture takes
a turn and we are on the road to modern empiricism.
He deplored the rise of scientific specialization, which is one of the characteristics of the
19th and 20th centuries, and he said, the long term effect of Occam's nominalism is
to think that nothing transcending experience can be regarded as real, whereas in his view
all the most real things were non-empirical.
We get science, but science is only a truncated form of knowledge.
Weaver was contentious of scientific over specialization.
In an age when it appeared to be bringing great technological progress, but certainly
not of the kind that he could approve, this was a period of course when many people were
having misgivings in view of the destructiveness to which science had been lent in the terrible
wars of the first half of the century.
At one interesting moment in Ideas Have Consequences, Richard Weaver cites Philip of Macedon telling
his son, the man who was later to become Alexander the Great, about his flute playing that he
ought to be ashamed of playing it so well.
As a surprising remark, we think that to play musical instrument well is good, but Philip
of Macedon's point, which Weaver echoes is, you ought not to be specializing in this way,
especially you who've got a leadership role to fulfill.
Weaver favored the idea of fraternity over that of equality.
And characteristically for Weaver, he takes two of the phrases from the French Revolution,
equality, fraternity and liberty, and puts two of them as antagonists.
Fraternity in his view is the opposite of equality, and he says fraternity is the virtue
we ought to emphasize because it's embedded in families themselves, families, the basic
units of society.
Here's how he thinks about it.
The committee of people in groups, large or small, rests not upon the chimerical notion
of equality, but upon fraternity, a concept which long anti-dates it in history because
it goes immeasurably deeper in human sentiment.
The ancient feeling of brotherhood carries obligations of which equality knows nothing.
It calls for respect and protection, for brotherhood is status in family, and family
is by nature hierarchical.
It demands patience with little brother, and it may sternly exact duty of big brother.
It places people in a network of sentiment, not of rights.
Fraternity directs attention to others, equality to self, and the passion for equality is simultaneous
with the growth of egotism.
So in other words, as America becomes a more equal society, it becomes more egotistical.
Society is most dedicated to equality in Weaver's view, like contemporary America,
with therefore the most selfish, envious, and resentful.
Another very interesting person from the same period is the Jesuit theologian John Courtney
Murray, who also argued for a renewed adherence to the natural law.
He claimed that it was embodied in American ideals and institutions.
Murray was a Jesuit.
He's famous as a liberal Catholic in some respects, particularly because he favored
religious toleration as the official Catholic policy.
Now up until the 1960s, the Catholic Church was kind of officially intolerant.
It certainly enjoyed the benefits of religious toleration in America so long as it was a minority
faith, but it aspired to an ideal condition of superiority when it would impose intolerance
on everybody else.
With the reasoning that, error has no rights.
Now Murray strongly deplored that view.
He thought that everybody should have religious freedom and that they should come to the
religious truth completely voluntarily.
He was censured by his superiors in the 1950s and even silenced for a while, prevented from
publishing some of his work.
But then he was vindicated at the Second Vatican Council, which took place in Rome between
1962 and 1965, where he was recognized and honored by being asked to author its declaration
on religious liberty.
From the time of the Vatican Council onwards, religious liberty did become the official
Catholic position.
But although Murray was a religious liberal, he was a political conservative, a cold warrior
of a very conservative kind, who argued that the heritage of the medieval theologians,
the scholastics, had been best preserved not in Europe, which had forgotten it in the
age of royal absolutism, but in the Constitution and the Federalist Papers, which ironically
these American documents had ironically conveyed into modern times the Catholic tradition of
limited rule.
In ingenious works Murray traces these ideas of limited government back to their scholastic
predecessors.
Murray did for Catholic intellectuals.
What McCarthyism did for the Catholic masses, that is to show the perfect congruence of
Catholicism with America, even better than the condition of the Protestants.
Other traditionalists in the 1940s and 50s argued that, in the face of communist threats,
the wisdom of Edmund Burke was as relevant as it had been in the face of the French Revolution.
The Burke revival in scholarship was begun by Ross Hoffman and Paul LeVac in the 1940s.
Ross Hoffman was another Catholic, a convert, who had given up a good job as a professor
at New York University for a much worse job at Fordham University, the Jesuit school,
because of his faith he wanted to work in a Catholic environment.
During the Second World War, Ross Hoffman argued passionately in favor of intervention
in the war, as opposed to the Irish-American Catholics who were anti-British and therefore
tended to favor the isolationist position.
In Hoffman's view, Britain had now become the bearer of Christendom, the accumulated
heritage of Christian tradition, over against the barbarism of the Nazis and therefore
must be supported.
He began publishing on Edmund Burke after the war, emphasizing that Nazism and Communism
were to us what the Jacobins of the French Revolution had been to Burke.
And in a daring rhetorical move, he said, Nazism was not a right-wing movement, it's
a left-wing movement.
The Nazis were national socialists, and the socialism in that phrase has to be emphasized.
Like the Stalinists, they favored concentrations of power in the great central government
and the sweeping away of all forms of tradition in favor of this new and terrifying thing.
Hoffman also emphasized that Edmund Burke stood squarely in the tradition of the natural
law and was not a pragmatist.
One of Hoffman's most influential books was The Spirit of Politics and the Future of
Freedom, published in 1950.
In it, Hoffman, like Murray, saw Catholics as leading a conservative revival, fortified
by the work of Edmund Burke.
I mentioned earlier in talking about Burke that there's been some speculation that he
might have been a Catholic.
Of course, people writers like Hoffman had an obvious incentive for wanting him to be
so.
Now the world, and in this book, Hoffman argues as follows, the world since 1914 has been
facing permanent revolution, quote, an evil so great that it sums up almost all the evils
abounding in the nightmare of horror which has tortured the world during the past few
decades.
Lenin, Trotsky, Stalin, Hitler and Goebbels have been its outstanding practitioners.
It is the black art of sending the human race upon an endless adventure into a promised
land that is never reached.
The perpetual sacrifice of today for a future that never becomes a present.
Ross Hoffman was encouraged to witness a revival of interest in the idea of human rights, with
for example the founding of the United Nations at the end of the Second World War.
And he said, it seems unlikely that men can long continue talking about human rights without
asking themselves why humans have rights, and so raising again the great questions concerning
human nature that an evolution-minded generation ignored.
In other words, we've got here the makings of an intellectually informed religious revival.
If you think of mankind as simply a biological product of evolution, it's very, very difficult
to have the idea of rights, but if you think of a man as a divine being who's part of
a structured order of existence itself, then rights begin to make more sense.
Russell Kirk became America's leading exponent of traditionalist conservatism, with his surprise
bestseller The Conservative Mind, published in 1953.
Kirk encouraged the idea that America was experiencing a new conservative renaissance.
Kirk was the son of a Michigan train driver, with mildly socialist views.
He was drafted into the army in the Second World War, and presided as a sergeant over
the paperwork at a chemical weapons testing base in the southwestern desert, a bizarre
setting, especially for someone of his temperament, but one which gave him plenty of leisure, the
time to read extensively and to begin to rethink his political commitments.
After the Second World War, he went as a graduate student to St Andrews University in Scotland,
and he wrote his dissertation there on the history of conservatism.
Scotland in the late 1940s was still, in some respects, a very backward place.
Post-war rationing was still an effect.
It was still very otherworldly by American standards, still very hierarchical, with kindly
squires and Scottish barons, very few motorcars, and a feeling of ancient simplicity which
resonated with Kirk.
It certainly appealed to his instinctive love of antiquity and eccentricity.
Back in America, he got a job as an instructor at Michigan State University, and he hated
it.
He called it behemoth university, and was ruthlessly scornful of all the vocational
training that was taking place there.
He'd already been influenced by Irving Babbitt, one of the new humanists who also detested
vocational education.
And it was while he was working at Michigan State that he met and befriended Richard Weaver,
the author of Ideas Have Consequences.
He was absolutely astonished by his own success with the conservative mind.
It was nearly as much of a sensation as Whitaker Chambers' book, Witness.
And this was further evidence, incidentally, that there was nothing dull about intellectual
life in the 1950s, although that's an assertion which has often subsequently been made.
Both these books were bursting with ideas and with polemic and with emotional intensity.
Russell Kirk, in The Conservative Mind, placed Burke also front and center in his pantheon,
and he judged all other conservatives in light of what he argued were Burke's central
principles.
He said, quote, the essence of social conservatism is preservation of the ancient moral traditions
of humanity.
And Kirk then went on in the early chapter of the book to summarize the six universal
principles or canons of the conservative outlook.
And the very first one was religious, one, belief that a divine intent rules society
as well as conscience, forging an eternal chain of right and duty, which links great
and obscure, living and dead.
Political problems at bottom are religious problems.
Burke's second principle was that it's better to love the mystery and diversity of life
than to try to standardize the world and its people.
Uniformity of all kinds, said Kirk, is false and it's likely to be tyrannical as well.
Third, society should not only be diverse, there should also be class stratified.
Hierarchy is natural.
Leadership is natural and everybody craves it.
And an equal society finds it difficult to repose its full faith in adequate leaders.
Fourth, said Kirk, property is the economic foundation of liberty.
If individuals or families can't own property, they can't really be free.
They don't have a place on which to stand to oppose the forces that threaten them.
And property certainly can't be equalized without the tyrannical intervention of intrusive
government.
Fifth, emotion is more powerful than reason and we have to be very careful to discipline
our emotions and not to let our ideas run away with us.
Tradition is a benevolent force, not least because it's a check on our intellectual pride.
It constantly reminds us that we can't think through every problem and every principle
right from original premises.
We've got to rely on tradition and we've got to rely on the emotions which our actual
circumstances generate.
Sixth, said Kirk, conservatives don't oppose change.
Change is inevitable.
But they favor caution and respect for the past in adapting to new circumstances.
Well, along with these six general principles which he then illustrates in operation in
the years since the life of Berg, right up to his own time, he identified the five greatest
threats to conservatism and here's what he said about them.
They were the rationalism of the philosophes, that is the French philosophers of the eighteenth
century who believed that purely rational planning was possible, the romantic emancipation
of Rousseau and his allies, the utilitarianism of the benthomites, the positivism of Comte's
school and the collectivistic materialism of Marx and other socialists.
In Kirk's view, these movements were threatening because they violated the natural law foundations
of reality.
They despised tradition.
They believed in the perfectibility of man and they advocated in one way or another political
and economic levelling.
Russell Kirk was a passionate anti-communist but he warned his contemporaries that American
capitalism, like communism, was a materialist system that neglected spiritual values.
Here he was making a comparable point to that made by the southern agrarians.
They had said in 1930, the problem with capitalism that is much too similar to communism is a
philosophically materialist system and this was a point with which Kirk agreed.
Of his own world he wrote that America was now a world smudged by industrialism, standardised
by the masses, consolidated by government, a world crippled by war, trembling between
the colossi of east and west and peering over a smashed barricade into the gulf of dissolution.
This our era is the society Burke foretold and as you can tell from that description,
he like we the thought it was a dreadful world, that industrialisation had made it worse,
not better.
Well it's possible to regard Russell Kirk as the creator rather than merely the recorder
of the Anglo-American conservative tradition.
He certainly was highly selective and in who he was willing to put into the conservative
tradition.
He excluded all the libertarians and he drew a veil over such issues as American slavery
and the American Civil War.
As you read the book you could be forgiven for not noticing that slavery had ever existed
and for somehow eliding the American Civil War altogether.
Nevertheless, the conservative mind is a great book, very very interesting, despite such
obvious faults.
It's still today one of the two or three books that everyone coming to the conservative movement
for the first time should read whether they're going to become a conservative or whether they're
simply interested in it as an intellectual phenomenon.
In it the author's voice often merges with the voices of the people he's writing about.
Now it's surprising that this was in a way, it's surprising that it was accepted as his
doctoral dissertation because normally dissertation advisors, including me, are very very emphatic
that the student's voice has got to be separated from the voices of the people he or she is
talking about.
But what Kirk repeatedly does is he begins by talking about Burke or about one of the
other conservatives and gradually his voice merges with Kirk's voice so that you can't
really tell who's saying what.
It was a work of advocacy and a polemic on behalf of conservatism as well as a study
of it.
But as these quotations suggest, Kirk hated industrialization and loved hierarchy and
was looking to restore a reverence for tradition which he felt was so severely missing.
He seemed to have believed that in a strongly hierarchical society of the kind he wanted,
the lowly, the people in the lowest social positions would be satisfied with their lowliness.
Now certainly British history gives some evidence in support of that idea but American history
really doesn't.
The ideology of democracy and equality had been so strong for so long that it was very
very difficult to believe that traditionalism in America could ever mean making the lower
classes content with the idea of their lower classness.
It's a book which makes exacting demands on the reader and when you read the conservative
mind you really need to be surrounded by dictionaries and encyclopedias and reference books of various
kinds because he's constantly throwing out ideas with their full explanations of them.
And the book ends with an expression of hope.
In both great English speaking nations conservatism has manifested a political and intellectual
continuity for nearly 165 years while the radical parties that detested tradition have
dissolved in succession, adhering as a movement to no common principle except hostility to
whatever is established.
Conservatives have retreated a long way since the French Revolution began.
Now and then they have fled headlong but they have not disbared when they were beaten.
And today when the ranks of radicalism are decimated, timorous and afflicted by internecine
ferocity, conservatism has such an opportunity for regaining ground as it has not seen since
that day when modern radicalism issued its challenge to traditional society by decorating
the Hotel de Ville with human heads on pikes.
In other words, not since the French Revolution began with an outbreak of brutality as conservatism
had such an opportunity as it now has.
Kirk himself cultivated his own image as a rustic sage.
He lived in the remote Michigan village of Macosta.
He couldn't drive a car.
He used a very, very old mechanical typewriter.
He was fiercely not up to date and right into the last days of his life in the 1990s refused
to use a computer.
He wrote poetry and he wrote ghost stories.
Somebody compared him to the elves who lived at Rivendell in The Lord of the Rings and
he was delighted by this kind of comparison.
He loved the idea of having his little rural outpost to which conservative pilgrims would
come to sit at his feet.
And he did in fact become the grand old man of traditionalist conservatism working at
night writing to a huge array of correspondence and sleeping during the days.
A brilliant writer and a wonderful eccentric.
Natural law ideas, central to the work of Weaver and Kirk, also influenced the journalist
Walter Lippmann and the historian Peter Wierig.
Lippmann's essays in the public philosophy published in 1955, another of the fascinating
political books of the fifties, endorsed the idea that natural law offered our civilization
a firm moral foundation.
By the fifties Lippmann was one of the two or three best respected and most influential
journalists in America, a columnist whose work was read throughout the entire nation.
Now as a young man Lippmann had been an idealistic socialist back in the days of the First World
War.
And he'd become progressively disenchanted by advertising, propaganda and by the ease
with which the public could be misled or manipulated.
He was horrified by communism and Nazism, these systems which uprooted all tradition.
And now after the Second World War he began to seek the security of the natural law whose
principles were immutable.
Lippmann said, a large plural society cannot be governed without recognizing that, transcending
its plural interests, there's a rational order with a superior common law.
This common law is natural in the sense that it can be discovered by any rational mind,
that it is not the willful and arbitrary positive command of the sovereign power.
This is the necessary assumption without which it is impossible for different peoples with
their competing interests to live together in peace and freedom within one community.
Well Lippmann was another non-Catholic, like Richard Weaver and Russell Kirk, exploring
resources in the Catholic tradition, not so much for their religious value as for the
way they created a sure foundation for preserving society and civilization itself.
The 1950s was a period of intense ferment inside the American Catholic community and
as many of its ideas became more respectable, so were the Catholic people themselves, now
second, third or fourth generation immigrants, and very soon to give rise in John F. Kennedy
to the first Catholic presidential candidate after whose presidency the anti-Catholicism
which had been so strong for so long began to evaporate.
Peter Virek became the favoured new conservative for many liberal intellectuals.
In 1949 Virek won the Pulitzer Prize for poetry.
He was a professor of history at Mount Holyoke College and he was a conservative of a kind
but one who hated McCarthyism.
He saw McCarthy as vulgar and affront to decent people.
Virek sympathized with the New Deal and he scoffed at libertarians as the opposite of
real conservatives.
His view was that Franklin Roosevelt had saved capitalism and in that sense had done a conservative
job, not a popular point among many conservatives at that time, but nevertheless a defensible
one.
And he made the same kind of argument in favour of the natural law that Littman had made and
a very strong argument for Christianity as the foundation of American society because
over two millennia Christianity had synthesized the best of all the systems of ideas that
it had encountered.
Its certainty of man's sinfulness made it appreciate the need to restrain the passions
and here's a characteristic passage from Peter Virek explaining the value of Christianity.
Christianity is the needed time capsule conserving and fusing the four ancestries of Western
man, the stern moral commandments and social justice of Judaism, the love for beauty and
for untrammeled intellectual speculation of the free Hellenic mind, the Roman Empire's
universalism and its exaltation of law and the Aristotelianism, Thomism and anti-nominalism
included in the Middle Ages.
Society is ever fusing them in new proportions to meet the ever-shifting emphasis on morality,
beauty, intellect, legalism or universality.
To some degree all must be present.
The razor's edge tension of the delicate and vulnerable balance between them is perhaps
what goes Western man to greatness and gives him his creativity, his Elan.
In other words Christianity has gathered together all its best in these multiple heritages and
created this vulnerable but beautiful and creative civilization.
Well Peter Virek's an important figure because he did much to give the new conservatism as
it gathered force after World War II a respectable reputation and his work forced at least some
liberal intellectuals to consider its claims more seriously than they otherwise would have
done.
