A third strand of the new American conservatism of the 1950s, along with anti-communism and
traditionalism, was libertarianism. Libertarians, heirs of Adam Smith, John Stuart Mill and
William Graham Sumner, had virtually unlimited faith in the powers of the free market and
deplored state intervention in the economy. While traditionalists looked on the family
as the basic unit of society, libertarians exalted the individual and regarded personal
liberty as the highest possible good. While traditionalists sought the wisdom of the ancients,
the scholastics and Edmund Burke, the libertarians found little of value in the work of anyone
earlier than Smith. Two Austrian economists, Friedrich von Hayek and Ludwig von Mises,
both exiles to America from Nazi Germany, wrote persuasive academic works on behalf
of economic liberty. But their influence was overshadowed by that of the emigre Russian
novelist Ein Rand. Rand's two blockbusters, The Fountainhead, published in 1943, and Atlas
Shrugged from 1957, sold in the millions and made economic individualism sound immensely
attractive, manly and dynamic. Rand's villains were New Deal bureaucrats and half-hearted
socialists who believed in a planned society. Her heroes were visionary entrepreneurs.
President Eisenhower's Republican Party had accepted much of the heritage of the New
Deal, much to the dismay of such libertarian spokesmen as Henry Hazlett and Murray Rothbard.
In 1960 and again in 1964, they encouraged the presidential aspirations of Arizona Senator
Barry Goldwater. The growth of the New Deal in America and the rise of state socialism
in Britain prompted libertarian polemics in favour of free enterprise, liberty and the
minimal state. The Vienna school economists Friedrich von Hayek and Ludwig von Mises wrote
influential statements justifying the free market. Both of them were forced to flee from
Germany because of their hostility to the Nazis. Hayek went first to the London School
of Economics, where he was an antagonist of John Maynard Keynes, probably the most influential
economist of the interwar years in Britain. But later on he went across the Atlantic and
took up a job at the University of Chicago. Von Mises, meanwhile, migrated to New York
and worked there at the NYU Business School. Now Hayek's famous book was The Road to Serfdom
from 1944. The Road to Serfdom warned that concentrated state economic power robs men
of their freedom and is hopelessly inefficient. Hayek said economic freedom is the foundation
of all other freedoms. It's appropriate to have government and it's appropriate for
the government to be a fair umpire, but the government itself should not make economic
plans. He'd been alarmed by the rise of government controls during World War II in Britain and
in the United States. And anticipating critics, he said, but isn't it vexing to submit to
the invisible hand of the market? His answer was yes, but the alternative is much worse
because the alternative is to submit to the will of particular men, even if they say they're
acting selflessly. Von Mises, in his book Human Action from 1949, argued that the infinite
complexity of human behavior makes economic planning impossible or tyrannical. It's a
massive book and it's written in a tone of inflexible logic. It's got a kind of pulverizing
intensity. Von Mises insisted that a free society was impossible unless it was based
on the free market and private property. These alone made possible personal and religious
freedom, democracy, free speech, freedom of the press and international peace. In other
words, all the good qualities that we cherish in our world are incompatible with any system
other than the free market. A long passage in Human Action is an admiring analysis of
prices. And he asks, what is a price? Well, it's a source of information about what is
plentiful and what is scarce, based on the experience of thousands of people, on their
production, on their knowledge of where things are and whether they can be moved, and on
their desire or the intensity of their desire. So prices are a wonderful information mechanism
that they can only exist in a free market. He said, by contrast, socialized economies
don't really know what's plentiful and what's scarce. Instead, they have to guess. And this
was, in fact, a point beautifully illustrated by the fortunes of the Soviet economy throughout
the 20th century, where there were nearly always shortages of everything, partly because
they were so inefficient and because incentives were so low. But now and again, there'd be
a sudden abundance of things not really needed, because the centralized planners for once
had overestimated the amount of need for something. In other words, a centralized economy can't
possibly be as adaptable as individual entrepreneurs' response to perceived needs. And their perception
will only be good if there's a plenty of free exchange of information making the price mechanism
more nearly perfect, more informed. And one thing that Von Mises emphasized particularly
strongly, as had Hayek, was this, that market economies are dynamic. Tastes and needs are
constantly changing. And the entrepreneurs who stand right at the center of this system
are people who can adapt quickly to meet new demands and changes in taste and changes
in needs.
Like Hayek, and in fact, like Ross Hoffman, who we looked at last time, Von Mises argued
that Nazism was not a right-wing movement. No, it was a left-wing movement because it
brought business under state control, just like the other forms of socialism. He also
drew attention to the fact that Nazism is a name for the national socialists. And he
noted that in the case of the Italian fascist leader Mussolini, he'd made a switch from
socialism to fascism because they were both forms of left-wing movement. Similarly, the
leader of the British fascist party, never a significant political group, Oswald Mosley,
had been first a socialist and then a fascist, two forms of left-wing movement.
What these Austrian economists had in common was the belief that centralized planning destroys
personal liberty. Here's Von Mises again.
The main issue is whether or not man should give away freedom, private initiative and
individual responsibility, and surrender to the guardianship of a gigantic apparatus of
compulsion and coercion, the socialist state. They, the socialists, call themselves Democrats,
but they yearn for dictatorship. They call themselves revolutionaries, but they want
to make government omnipotent. They promise the blessings of the Garden of Eden, but they
plan to transform the world into a gigantic post office. Every man but one is subordinate
clerk in a bureau. What an alluring utopia. What a noble cause to fight for.
Well, a group of American economists and journalists also made the case for libertarianism. One
of them was Henry Hazlett, who wrote an entertaining little book in 1946 called Economics in One
Lesson. This was a book which made the case against the developing Keynesian orthodoxy,
which had become deeply influential on both sides of the Atlantic in the era of the Great
Depression and the New Deal. And Hazlett said, the whole of economics can be reduced to a
single lesson, and that lesson can be reduced to a single sentence. The art of economics
consists in looking not merely at the immediate, but at the longer effects of any act or policy.
It consists in tracing the consequences of that policy, not merely for one group, but
for all groups. That's what economics is, as Hazlett tells us.
Now, John Maynard Keynes, in arguing for deficit spending, his idea was that during times of
depression the government should spend far more than it's taking in, in the hope that
later it will be able to balance its budget by taking in more than it's spent in boom
times. Keynes had once been asked whether in the long run his plan wouldn't create
impossible difficulties because of the reluctance of people later on to pay the debt, and Keynes
had answered, in the long run, we're all dead. In other words, let's think about our own
generation and leave later people to take care of themselves.
Now, this response seemed to Henry Hazlett outrageously irresponsible. He wrote, there
are men regarded today as brilliant economists who deprecate saving and recommend squandering
on a national scale as the way of economic salvation. And when anyone points to what
the consequences of these policies will be in the long run, they reply flippantly, as
might the prodigal son of a warning father, in the long run we're all dead. And such shallow
wise cracks pass as devastating epigrams and the ripest wisdom.
Well, Hazlett's book is full of homely examples as he tries to explain moving from the micro
to the macro level how an overall economy works and how it works best if the market
is free. In one passage he imagines what would happen if a vandal broke the window at a baker's
store. He says, what would happen when the vandal breaks the window and some onlookers
gather around? And he says, now some of them will probably say to themselves, hmm, this
broken window will create work for the glacier, enabling him to earn more money, which he
can therefore spend and put into the economy. So it looks as though the smashing of this
window has an economic benefit. But as Hazlett, those onlookers forget that the baker will
have to pay for the window and therefore he can't buy a suit for which it saved $250.
And the passage goes on like this. The glaciers gain of business, in short, is merely the
tailor's loss of business. No new employment has been added. The people in the crowd were
thinking only of two parties to the transaction, the baker and the glacier. They had forgotten
the potential third party involved, the tailor. They forgot him precisely because he will
not now enter the scene. They will see the new window in the next day or two. They will
never see the extra suit precisely because it will never be made. They see only what
is immediately visible to the eye. Well, this was a little parable on the part of Hazlett,
warning people not to look only at what's immediately apparent to the senses in thinking
about economics. No, good economics means realizing what opportunities have been lost
in the long term, as well as what short-term goals have been met. The fallacy seemed to
him increasingly widespread, even among economists, above all, who ought to know better. And so
that story was a little parable about the way in which short-term fixes are actually
fixes only in the sense that the work of the vandal could be said to be of use to the economy.
Hazlett was one of a group of libertarians who refounded Albert J. Knox's journal The
Freeman in 1950. And I spoke about Albert J. Knox a few lectures ago. He was the man
who wrote the two books Our Enemy, The State, taking the view that the state is always our
enemy, and the memoirs of a superfluous man in which he said the vast majority of people
scarcely qualify as being human beings at all. Well, Henry Hazlett, along with Suzanne
Lafollette, who'd worked on the old Freeman, and John Chamberlain, all of them highly
connected in the New York media world, and all very enthusiastic about free market economics,
got together and began to and refounded this journal. They wanted to offer a positive program
in support of free enterprise, in addition to the negative policy of anti-communism.
The problem with anti-communism, of course, is that it defines itself in terms of its
antagonist, whereas the enthusiasm for the free market is something positive. But still,
they were struck by the dilemma that the Cold War was so intense, and the potential threat
offered by the Soviet Union with its nuclear weapons was so massive, that perhaps even
they as libertarians were going to have to accept the role of the American, the big American
government in defense policy. Perhaps only the government is strong enough to oppose
Stalin. Their view was the free market can't give us something adequate to preserve the
civilization within which the free market should operate. But that thought split them
with some of their other fellow editors, because some of them, particularly Frank Chodorov,
said, no, no, you're wrong about that. Chodorov was one. In other words, John Flynn and Garrett
Garrett, people who'd previously been isolationists, who'd wanted the Americans not to get involved
in the Second World War, because they'd anticipated that that was going to make the centralized
government even stronger. Now, Chodorov and Flynn and Garrett continued to say, we mustn't
have a massive American military presence around the world, because having it is itself
going to be a threat to our liberties. When the National Review was founded in 1955, which
is going to be the subject of my next lecture, the Freeman became more of an intellectual
and educational journal dedicated to libertarian economics.
Now, one of the most significant libertarian economists of the 20th century was Milton
Friedman, who lived from 1912 to 2006. He was both the most intellectually astute advocate
of libertarianism and one of its greatest popular advocates. His most approachable book
is Capitalism and Freedom, which was published in 1962, and it popularized Friedman's views
against government regulation. Implicitly, it was an answer to John Kenneth Galbraith's
book, The Affluent Society, which had been published in 1957. Galbraith, in a beautifully
written book, argued for a greater role for the government in running the economy. Friedman
argued for a smaller role for the government. And the two men, both of them brilliant speakers,
debated often in the 1960s and 1970s. It was always a great pleasure to see the two of them
going at it together, as I once had the chance to do when I was a graduate student in Berkeley.
As you listen to each one in turn, you are absolutely convinced that he was right and
that he was making unanswerable arguments. But then you'd hear the other one, you think,
oh yes, that's right as well. They were both virtuosos and both brilliant performers.
Now, said Milton Friedman, the great virtue of Capitalism is that it decentralizes power
and it minimizes coercion. Second, Capitalism has proved that one nation's gain does not mean
another nation's loss. All of them can grow richer under Capitalism. And third, Capitalism doesn't
discriminate. The price system tells you how much something costs, but not who made it and not
who cannot or cannot buy it. It's open to everybody. And in fact, the system works best when there
is no discrimination. And so in some artful passages, Friedman shows the decline of discrimination
is coterminous with the spread of the market economy. The book's full of good ideas. In
Capitalism and Freedom, Friedman advocates educational vouchers, the idea which has persisted
ever since, that instead of having a community taxed and then setting up a public school
paid for by tax money to which all the kids in the locality go, every parent should be
given a voucher and then should choose, worth a certain amount of education money and then
should choose which school their kids should go to. And it won't be long before the kids
are going to the good schools, which therefore will grow bigger and thrive. And it won't
be long before the bad schools are going out of business because they don't offer high
quality education. So the voucher system is Friedman's way of saying, the free market
will work well even in the environment of education. And the government by giving vouchers
will assure that every kid can still get an education paid for by the state, but now the
schools are going to be much better. Higher quality education is certain in a market environment.
He also advocated the negative income tax. The negative income tax says, all citizens
incomes above a certain threshold should pay a percentage in tax. But below that threshold,
the government should actually give money to people who are not earning enough. It's
much better to do that just to simply give them money than it is to have a wide array
of anti-poverty programs of the kind which we're beginning to develop in the great society
under President Johnson. Because anti-poverty programs often aim at one result, but have
unexpected negative byproducts. This is a point we're also going to pursue when we begin
to investigate the work of the neoconservatives.
Milton Friedman's book A Monetary History of the United States, published in 1963, was
important partly because it cast doubt on the standard explanation of the Great Depression.
And it blamed the government policy of withdrawing money from circulation for the intensity and
duration of the depression. He said, the depression wasn't a demonstration of the need for more
government intervention as advocates of the New Deal claim. It was rather an illustration
of the harm that powerful government agencies can do to bring on financial instability.
In the words, had this tampering with the economy not taken place to begin with, the
depression would have been much less bad. So he was offering an alternative general theory
for the causes and duration of the Great Depression.
Friedman worked at the University of Chicago. One of his colleagues there was George Stigler,
and in the end both of them won Nobel Prizes for Economics, both very, very important figures.
Stigler was interested in government regulation, and he noticed after careful experiments that
government regulators were never able to bring down the prices charged by the industries
which were being regulated. He asked, why not? And he discovered that there was a revolving
door between the industry and the regulatory agency. In other words, somebody would work
in the auto industry, for example. Then, because they knew a lot about that industry, they'd
go to work in the regulating agency for a while, and then they'd come back to the industry
itself. The same people were actually running it, and they all had the same essential outlook,
even though the regulators were supposed to be standing as a police force over against
the business. And in fact, Stigler also found that the businesses actually want regulators,
because they have the effect of conferring legitimacy on monopolies or near monopolies,
oligopolies. It's a form of political insurance that the industry welcomes as a way of claiming
that it's not irresponsible. Stigler and Friedman both believed that regulation was nearly
always costly and counterproductive. It would be much better to let markets run unregulated.
They said, even businesses in a near monopoly position must act as though they had competitors,
because if they don't, they very soon will have competitors. Again, later in the 20th
century, there were some lovely examples of that. Massive companies like IBM and General
Motors began to perform very poorly once they had a near monopoly position, with the result
that hundreds of startups or foreign competitors came into the American market to begin to
erode their market share, and to force them to produce either better quality goods or
to drive them out of business. But despite the many important people whose names I've
mentioned, probably no one did more to popularize libertarian views than the eccentric Russian
emigrant novelist, Ein Rand. In her first great novel, The Fountainhead, published
in 1943, she celebrated the achievements of a great architect and his determination to
fulfill his own vision and not to compromise with the conformist drones or the lackeys
of the state. The hero of The Fountainhead is a great architect called Howard Rourke.
He builds a beautiful building, the bureaucrats and the regulators intervene to try to modify
it, and rather than let them do so, he dynamites it in a dramatic scene, saying, it's got to
be the way I saw it or I won't let it exist at all. When he goes on trial for this act
of sabotage, he makes a very, very, a great dramatic speech, one of Rand's great set pieces,
in which he makes the claim that mankind hates geniuses even while using their discoveries.
And here's what Howard Rourke says when he's on trial.
Thousands of years ago, the first man discovered how to make fire. He was probably burned at
the stake he had taught his brothers to light. He was considered an evil doer who had dealt
with a demon mankind dreaded. But thereafter, men had fire to keep them warm, to cook their
food, to light their caves. He had left them a gift they had not conceived and he had lifted
darkness off the earth. Centuries later, the first man invented the wheel. He was probably
torn on the rack he had taught his brothers to build. He was considered a transgressor
who ventured into forbidden territory. But thereafter, men could travel past any horizon.
He had left them a gift they had not conceived and he had opened the roads of the world.
Throughout the centuries, there were men who took first steps down new roads armed with
nothing but their own vision. Their goals differed, but they all have this in common, that the
step was first, the road new, the vision unborrowed and the response they received, hatred. The
great creators, the thinkers, the artists, the scientists, the inventors stood alone
against the men of their time. Every great new thought was opposed. Every great new invention
was denounced. The first motor was considered foolish. The airplane was considered impossible.
The power loom was considered vicious. Anesthesia was considered sinful. But the men of unborrowed
vision went ahead. They fought, they suffered and they paid. But they won. No creator was
prompted by a desire to serve his brothers. For his brothers rejected the gift he offered
and that gift destroyed the slothful routine of their lives. His truth was his only motive,
his own truth and his own work to achieve it in his own way. Well, it's very doubtful
that this was completely true, that all the inventors and scientists had been hated, but
it certainly makes for very, very stirring rhetoric.
Rand founded Objectivism. It was a kind of cross between a libertarian intellectual cult
and an intellectual club and a semi-religious cult. Its members were expected to share in
Rand's odd interests. She loved jewelry in the shape of dollar signs. She loved dancing
the tango. And above all, she loved smoking, which she thought was life-giving.
Her chief disciple named himself Nathaniel Brandon. This wasn't his real name, but the
idea of Brandon is, it's Ben Rand, with the word Rand inside the bed, Brandon. In other
words, he's claiming that he's the son or is the metaphorical son of Rand herself.
There were all sorts of strange tales coming out of the Objectivist world about sexual
mix-ups there that Brandon and Rand themselves were cohabiting and that their mates were
expected to put up with it because these two were the great geniuses.
While many of the Objectivists were teenage boys who loved the stirring stories, but among
the more distinguished members of the Objectivist circle was Alan Greenspan, who later became
the head of the Federal Reserve.
Rand's second great blockbuster was Ackler Shrugged, published in 1957. It was an immense
bestseller. And the plot imagines a worldwide catastrophe that would ensue if the world's
great capitalists all went on strike.
The story follows a railroad manager named Dagny Taggart. You've only got to hear her
name to know how purposeful she is. It's an anagram of dagger and those hard consonants
in her name that tell you straight away what a dynamic figure she is, Dagny Taggart.
But bit by bit she's noticing the mysterious disappearance of the great entrepreneurs
from her world. The entrepreneurs and the great thinkers, one by one, are disappearing.
And people murmur to one another the mysterious question, who is John Galt?
At last she learns that Galt is the leader of the great men of mind, the geniuses and
the leaders, who refuse to live in a world of socialism and altruism and collectivism.
Oh, incidentally she hated altruism. She wrote essays with titles like The Virtue of Selfishness.
Anyway, John Galt's return and his 100 page speech are the climax of the book. What's
happened is that he's gone on strike. He's been living in a mountain fastness in Colorado.
And one by one he's been encouraging the other great men to come and live with him because
he says to them all, if we the great ones go on strike society will suddenly be helpless
and it will suddenly realize that it can't possibly do without us.
Here's his great speech or a bit of it because the speech as a whole is 100 pages long and
it really outlines the whole of Rand's theory. He says, we're on strike against your creed
of unearned rewards and unrewarded duties. If you want to know how I made them quit,
I told them exactly what I'm telling you tonight. I taught them the morality of reason, that
it was right to pursue one's own happiness as one's principal goal in life. I don't
consider the pleasure of others my goal in life, nor do I consider my pleasure the goal
of anyone else's life. I am a trader. I earn what I get in trade for what I produce. I
ask for nothing more or nothing less than what I earn. That is justice. I don't force anyone
to trade with me. I only trade for mutual benefit.
Force is the great evil that has no place in a rational world. One may never force another
human to act against his or her judgment. If you deny a man's right to reason, you must
also deny your right to your own judgment. Yet you have allowed your world to be run
by means of force, by men who claim that fear and joy are equal incentives, but that fear
and force are more practical.
Well I need to emphasize that Ein Rand was very widely admired and she drew thousands
of new recruits to the conservative movement as it developed in the 1950s and 60s, many
of whom after a stay in her world defected, as she saw it, to other parts of the movement,
particularly moving on to traditionalism. But equally, although she was widely admired,
Rand was always widely mocked and parodied by critics, including other people in the
conservative movement like Whitaker Chambers, who argued that the world of atomized supermen
that she imagined in her fiction was the antithesis of real conservatism. Listen to the hard words
in Whitaker Chambers' review.
Out of a lifetime of reading, I can recall no other book in which a tone of overriding
arrogance was so implacably sustained. Its shrillness is without reprieve, its dogmatism
is without appeal. It consistently mistakes raw force for strength. It supposes itself
to be the bringer of a final revelation, therefore resistance to the message cannot be tolerated.
From almost any page of Atlas Shrugged, a voice can be heard, from painful necessity
commanding to a guest chamber, go.
More recently, it's been beautifully parodied in Tobias Wolf's novel, Old School, published
in 2004. And the novel is set in a prep school in New England, whose literary club invites
famous writers to come to talk to the students. And it's about how Rand herself, with a crowd
of objectivists, comes to speak to the boys, makes an enormous impression on the young
boy narrator who begins, who reads the books and begins to think of himself as a Randian
superman. When he goes home for the vacation, he despises his family members because he
thinks of them as being like the drones. But then, he catches flu and feels terrible.
And he's extremely glad that his parents and his relatives are there to nurse him through
it and to show him little acts of selflessness and kindness. Anyway, the book's brilliantly
effectively bunking because it shows that nobody can possibly spend an entire lifetime
living up to the rigorous ideals that Rand set.
Another important figure in the development of libertarianism was Murray Rothbard, who
lived from 1926 to 1995. Briefly, he was an enthusiast for Rand, but he soon became
independently important as a leading libertarian intellectual. He'd studied under Ludwig von
Mises at New York University. And after reading Atlas Shrugged, sent an admiring letter to
Rand, but she rebuffed him when she discovered that he didn't smoke and that he'd married
a religious woman. She was implacably opposed to religion because she thought that was
mere superstition. And she hated the Christian message of charity and love for one's fellow
men.
Murray Rothbard's distinctive because he denied, like some of the members of the Free
Man, that the Soviet Union posed a massive threat to the United States. He resisted the
steady growth of the military-industrial complex and the increased power of the centralized
state. Like Nock, his view was, the state's always our enemy.
I'll say more about Murray Rothbard in a later lecture. He became the central figure in the
development of American libertarianism in the 1960s and 70s.
