The
conservative movement gained adherence during the crises of the 1960s despite
Goldwater's defeat. Conservative writers insisted, first, that America's limited
mission in Vietnam was doomed to failure. Having committed troops there, they
should aim for victory, destroying North Vietnamese power rather than merely trying
to prevent its spread to the South. Second, after fighting a rearguard on
behalf of racial segregation, many of them accepted the Civil Rights and Voting
Rights Acts of 1964 to 5, but opposed the rapid development of affirmative action
programs, which they saw as a violation of the tradition of individual rights.
Third, they deplored the rising youth culture on college campuses and the
demonstrations and activism that often accompanied it. Equally bad in their view
was the reluctance of liberal college administrators to repress it. Worst of
all was the mass demonstrations of 1968, when, as they saw it, society was
beginning to unravel. When civil order is threatened, they wrote,
Stern measures for the restoration of the law are the necessary first step, and in
these conditions, repression can be a civilizing force. Under pressure of these
events, National Review writer Frank Meyer re-emphasized the theory of fusionism,
pointing out that the radical individualists, the traditionalists, and
the anti-communists in the movement needed each other. They shared a common
faith in civilization and a common objection to everything that American
liberalism stood for. Never enthusiasts for Richard Nixon, they supported him in
the presidential election of 1968, but would have preferred the new governor of
California, Ronald Reagan. Most of the new conservatives supported military
action in Vietnam, but deplored what they saw as the half-heartedness of
President Johnson's containment policy. Now, ever since the late 1940s,
containment had been the standard Cold War approach. George Kennan, an
influential policymaker, had proposed this policy. America should no longer
draw back as it had done after the First World War. Instead, it should remain
committed all around the world to preventing the further expansion of
communism. Now that nuclear weapons made war catastrophically dangerous,
America's policy must be to keep pressure on all the frontiers of the
communist world in the hope and the expectation that eventually communism
would unravel from its own internal contradictions, enabling the long
crisis to pass. But from the conservatives point of view, that wasn't always
good enough. William Buckley and James Burnham argued that the armed forces,
once committed, should fight to win using all the weapons at their disposal.
They continued to believe that America was involved in an all-out war with
communism, that Ho Chi Minh was not merely a Vietnamese nationalist, and that
a Viet Cong victory would be a Soviet victory as well. So, in their view, it
was perfectly reasonable to take measures like bombing Hanoi, the principal
city of North Vietnam, mining Hai Phong Harbor, the principal harbor of the
North, to prevent Soviet supply ships from coming in. And to take offensive
actions into North Vietnam, rather than merely trying to prevent the spread of
North Vietnamese army power into the South, and fight inconclusively against
Viet Cong guerrillas in the South. In their view, the Americans had given
themselves a mission which couldn't possibly prevail. Even as the war
became more and more unpopular at the end of the 1960s, Buckley reminded
readers that American credibility was at stake, and that if the United States
backed away, it would be unable to assert its will in any other part of the
world. Until the Tet offensive of the early winter of 1968, a majority of
Americans still supported the war. But after Tet, when it suddenly seemed that
no Americans in Vietnam were safe, even in the cities, with the communist
uprisings in Saigon and Hue, then suddenly American popular opinion began
to turn more and more decisively against the war. But Buckley's point was,
how can our allies in NATO and CETO, the Asian Treaty, how can they trust us if
we demonstrate that we can't make our will prevail? The National Review
Conservatives overcame their preference for small government and for
volunteerism and liberty to argue in favor of the draft, although this also
remained a controversial point. Frank Mayer wrote, the principle of universal
military obligation is derived from the constitution of civil society without
which no human freedom could exist. But a free state has the right to enforce it
only when such enforcement is the sole way to defend the structure of freedom
itself, circumstances of paramount necessity. Well, of course, reasonable
people could disagree about whether the American mission was circumstances of
paramount necessity. So even in this defense of the draft, you can see Mayer
having second thoughts and wondering about the reasonableness of so much
energy for a place which might actually be peripheral to the main struggle. Two
splinter groups, Murray Rothbard's libertarians and Elbrent Bezel's
militant Catholics, disagreed with the war policy and particularly with the
draft. Rothbard, who we met earlier, steadfastly denied that the Soviet Union
and its communist allies posed an imminent threat to the United States or
that the Vietnam mission was justifiable. In fact, Rothbard and like-minded
libertarians found themselves sympathizing with parts of the American left in
the 1960s. One of the most colorful figures in this period was Carl Hess, who'd
previously been a principal speechwriter for Barry Goldwater, a great
lover of liberty in the election of 1964. Rothbard and Hess together began to
publish a journal called Left and Right because they were struck by the paradox
that the people who now agreed with them were the new left against the war. Here's
what Carl Hess said, conservatives like me had spent our lives arguing against
federal power, with one exception. We trusted Washington with enormous powers
to fight global communism. We were wrong. As Taft foresaw when he opposed NATO,
Vietnam should remind all conservatives that whenever you put your faith in big
government for any reason, sooner or later you end up as an apologist for mass
murder. Hess and Rothbard and some of their friends for a while described
themselves as anarcho-capitalists and they had a kind of uneasy alliance with
the anarcho-syndicalists on the extreme left. There's an extremely brilliant book
about this by a man called Jerome Tuccioli. Its title is, It Usually Begins
with Ein Rand and he describes the way in which a generation of young libertarians
sometimes found themselves in strange alliances with the radical left at the
time of the 1960s. That was one group of critics. Another group were the Triumph
group, Elbrent Bezel, who I've mentioned several times already, the man who'd
written Goldwater's book, The Conscience of a Conservative, founded Triumph
magazine in 1966 and its intended audience was Orthodox Catholic
conservatives. He was a convert to Catholicism. He'd married William
Buckley's sister, Patricia, and converted and was very serious indeed about
his faith. In fact, he was dismayed by the Second Vatican Council of the early
1960s which entailed many changes for Catholics, the end of the mass being
said in Latin and the declaration of religious liberty. I mentioned in an
earlier lecture John Curtney Murray, the Jesuit who wrote Dignitatis Humane as
the name of the Vatican document because in Bezel's view it was still better not
to favour a policy of religious tolerance. He wanted to convert the
heretics but even so he believed most of all in obedience to the teaching
magisterium of the church and he was determined to follow church teaching
even when he had misgivings about it. For a while, Bezel had lived in Spain
when Franco was still the dictator there. Support for Franco's Spain had been
a great right-wing Catholic cause in the 1930s during the Civil War which
brought Franco to power. Bezel and some of his friends held summer schools at
the Escorial Palace, King Philip II's vast mausoleum built in the late 1500s.
Among his most enthusiastic supporters was Frederick Wilhelmsen, a professor
of philosophy at the University of Dallas and in Wilhelmsen's view Spain
was the spiritual centre of Christendom. Wilhelmsen wrote, there is only one
nation in history that has bested at arms both Islam and Marxism and that
nation is Spain, the Crescent and the Hammer and Sickle. Ultimately they have
but one common enemy, the Cross of Christ and the civilisation that took root
and flourished from the wood of Golgotha. Well that's a romantic flourish
from Frederick Wilhelmsen claiming that only Spain first defeated Islam in the
Reconquista in the 1490s and then defeated communism in the Spanish Civil War.
But anyway, Triumph magazine was dedicated to the full Magisterium
following Catholic teaching wherever it might take them. Brent Bezel began to
argue against the American role in Vietnam and to denounce American tactics
because they didn't live up to Catholic teaching on just war theory.
First of all, he didn't think the Tonkin Gulf resolution was adequate in terms of
committing the nation to war according to the theory. He was horrified by the
assassination of General Diem, the South Vietnamese leader who was assassinated
shortly before President Kennedy and apparently with the acquiescence of
President Kennedy himself. And by the late 1960s there were widespread
rumours that the American forces were using chemical warfare such as
defoliants against the Ho Chi Minh Trail. And Bezel wrote, there can be no
equivocation. The use of chemical and biological warfare is absolutely forbidden
a nation that wants to consider itself limited to morally just means of warfare.
Christians today can and should fight for the good but only with weapons and
battle plans that seem pleasing to God. So he wasn't taking a pacifist position
but he was taking one which was consonant with Catholic just war teaching.
Libertarians and Triumph, these Orthodox Catholics, were both a source of intense
annoyance to fusionist conservatives like Buckley and Mayer and Burnham.
Another big issue in the 1960s was the rise of black militancy after the peaceful
phase of the civil rights movement. Conservatives fear the rise of black
militancy in the wake of King's period of leadership in the movement.
National Review conservatives condemned the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the
Voting Rights Act of 1965. These are conventionally regarded as great landmarks
in the history of the civil rights movement. But as National Review looks
at them, they both had the effect of augmenting federal power and taking it away from the states.
While the legislation was being prepared before it passed through Congress,
Frank Mayer said this, almost every section of the 1964 civil rights bill is directed
towards destroying the constitutional balance of power and centering control over the lives of
citizens in the hands of the chosen instruments of liberalism, the executive and the subservient
Supreme Court. National Review then went on to express an acute dislike of affirmative action
programs which began to develop in the 1960s because they substituted group rights for individual
rights. The logic of affirmative action was that a citizen was going to be regarded in
consideration for admissions to schools and admission to employment, not on the virtues of
his or her particular qualities and abilities, but rather according to which racial group they
happened to belong to. These conservatives also reacted to the rise of black militancy,
particularly the Black Panthers, and met them with calls for repression. The summers of the 1960s
were punctuated by violent riots in many of the inner cities. Detroit and Newark and Washington,
D.C. itself suffered very, very severe property damage right in the heart of old cities.
National Review explained these riots as attributable to the new militancy of black
leaders like Stokely Carmichael and H. Rapp Brown, some of the Black Panthers and other militants too.
They also said this rioting had been prompted by the frustration of unrealistic hopes that
liberal promises had raised, that many liberal activists had rashly promised that the many
disadvantages which the African American population struggled with were simply now going to evaporate
and when they found that this wasn't the case, that getting the vote certainly wasn't a cure all,
they rioted in frustration against it. But of course in retrospect, by 1968 or 69,
it was already possible even for conservatives to look back nostalgically to the days of Martin
Luther King with his message of nonviolent Christian love and his appeal to the heritage of Gandhi.
A connected theme was that the new conservatives regretted the rapid European decolonization of
Africa, many of whose countries they said were ill-prepared for self-government.
They regarded imperialism as having done far more good than harm in Africa, introducing Western
technology, Christianity, medicine, education and good roads. In their view, it was easy to
balance the goods and bads of imperialism and find that on balance it was a good thing.
They anticipated that the new African democracies were hopelessly frail and would soon succumb to
military coups and tribal dictatorships, a prediction that soon proved true in almost every case.
They also saw it as a place, Africa, as a place where Western influence was destined to shrink as
communist influence grew, which again proved true in many former colonies, particularly the formerly
Portuguese colonies of Mozambique and Angola. This was the period of the Cold War when the
Soviet Union and the American government were both casting about to get as many sympathetic
allies as they could, and new post-colonial nations were sometimes able to play the Americans and
the Russians off against each other, getting aid and mutual assistance.
Well, because of National Review's general approval of imperialism and general deploring
of the abandonment of Africa to its fate, there were much less censorious than most American
opinion about Rhodesia and South Africa, which were the two remaining white supremacist regimes
inside Africa. On the other hand, they were genuinely horrified by the brutality of South
African apartheid and the escalating repression with which it was maintained, the periodic massacres
carried out by the white police force, and similarly by white French terrorism in the
Algerian War of Independence. Now normally, National Review had an extremely confident tone
of voice, but facing this problem, they had a very uncharacteristic tone of genuine bafflement
and horror. Here's a 1962 editorial in which National Review wrote,
We confess with deep and troubled humility, our failure to comprehend this dreadful problem of
terror that has become a pervasive quality of our epoch. Before the problem of terror,
the mind plunges into a metaphysical despair, as before those other dark dilemmas that have
so long weighed on man's spirit. I think that's a demonstration that they were in fact taking
these questions very, very seriously and were agonized over how adequately to resolve them.
Now another source of discontent to the conservatives during the 1960s was the
activism of the Supreme Court under the leadership of Chief Justice Earl Warren.
This appeared to be further up to the conservatives, this appeared to be
further upsetting national stability, especially with its decisions relating to religion and the
First Amendment. In two important decisions in 1962 and 1963, praying in public schools was prohibited
and so was Bible reading and so was the recitation of the Ten Commandments.
Conservatives lamented these decisions because they had a secularizing effect, and for many of these
conservatives the Cold War had a big religious dimension, that it was actually the war of
Christendom against atheism. So they said this is the worst possible time in which to strip away
the religious protections and the public religious affirmations of American history.
And they said getting rid of prayer and Bible reading and the Ten Commandments in schools
violates a long tradition of prayer and Bible reading. Even a very carefully worded prayer,
the Regent's Prayer in the state of New York, was prohibited. Even though the Regents had been
very careful to word it in such a way that no particular religious grouping was offended,
even so the prayer was found to be unconstitutional according to the way in which the Warren
Court interpreted the First Amendment. Now once again, one of the most important figures in
this controversy was Brent Bozell. He wrote a book, published a book in 1966 called The Warren
Revolution, and it was the first of many late 20th century conservative broadsides against
judicial activism. Bozell argued that the Supreme Court judges were making the law in religion,
in civil rights, particularly the Brown case, in the rights of alleged subversives, in cases arising
out of McCarthyism, in election redistricting, and that sometimes in making the law they were
completely ignoring long traditions of precedent, which was supposedly the very thing the Supreme
Court must never do. Bozell wrote, during the past 12 years, the Supreme Court, with the encouragement
of the country's intellectual establishment, has instituted a new kind of constitution making,
which is revolutionary, both in its method and in its consequences. It sought to transfer the
solution of some of the most momentous problems of contemporary public policy by judicial decree,
a more explicit repudiation of the underlying assumptions of the constitutional government
can hardly be imagined. Another source of anxiety to the conservatives was the youth culture of the
1960s, and particularly the unrest in American universities. Now in the 1950s and 60s, American
University campuses have grown very, very rapidly, first in response to the GI Bill after World War
II, and then in a more affluent society, in response to the fact that more and more members
of each generation could afford to send their children to college, and that credentialing became
necessary for good work. The Vietnam War intensified that effect because young men soon discovered
that they could get a draft deferment if they were going to college. You'd be called up to the army
as soon as you left high school, unless you were going into college, and suddenly all kinds of young
men who hadn't previously been particularly studious suddenly found in themselves a great
thirst for higher education. On the campuses themselves, there was an uprising of student
activism. It began with the Berkeley Free Speech Movement in the fall of 1964, when the students
protested against not being allowed to express their political views and to campaign for their
candidates freely on campus. Then followed demonstrations at Columbia in New York, at
Cornell, at Harvard, and many other, particularly of the elite universities. Sometimes with the
students occupying the libraries or the administration buildings and trying to bring the ordinary work
of education to a standstill until their demands were met. They demanded a more relevant curriculum,
one addressing the problems of their world. The abolition of parietal rules, according to which
they had curfews, boys and girls weren't allowed in each other's dormitories, and the university
was standing in in the position of a parent over them. They wanted more contact with the
surrounding communities, and very often they wanted the universities to detach themselves from the
Vietnam War by abolishing ROTC and refusing to let university researchers take on military
research projects. Well, very often the university administrators reacted to these kinds of demands
very, very cautiously, treating the students with kid gloves, conciliating the radical leaders
rather than confronting them. William Buckley, who was a fixture on the college debate circuit,
was dismayed by the occupations and by the disruption of unpopular speakers on campus,
and particularly by the weak administrators' responses. As you might expect, he was one of
these speakers who got a rough handling from several student audiences. And in his regular
column in National Review, he once described how he'd been forced to abandon a speech after
heckling from Students for a Democratic Society, SDS people, was so loud and continuous and deafening
that it was literally impossible for him to be heard. So he left the stage and the apologetic
student leader who'd invited him in the first place told Buckley that the administration of
the college would not act against the radicals. Buckley wrote this, there's nothing at all wrong
with the overwhelming majority of the students whose intimidation is less the result of the
raucous minority than the result of the intellectual and moral abdication of their faculty and deans.
As in the inner cities, so on the campuses, sometimes law and order must come first. Buckley
wrote, policemen are, in certain circumstances, precisely the agents of civilization and humanity.
Their availability is something that the forces of reason and enlightenment should celebrate
rather than deplore. One of the most famous incidents of public demonstration in the 1960s
was the riotous scenes surrounding the hotels where the Democratic National Convention took place
in Chicago in 1968. And they were widely regarded at the time by journalists and commentators as
as premonitions of anarchy and social breakdown. The sociologist Robert Nisbert was increasingly
sympathetic to the conservative position and he believed that sure enough society was becoming
completely ungovernable. He wrote early in the 1970s about the 60s. I think it would be difficult to
find a single decade in the history of Western culture when so much barbarism, so much calculated
onslaught against culture and convention in any form and so much sheer degradation of both culture
and the individual passed into print, into music, into art, and onto the American stage. The revolt
against authority, the consecration of disorder, waste and anarchy in traditional society, these
are indeed icons of all left intellectuals at the present time. Well the early political career
of Ronald Reagan demonstrated that conservatives were going to be the long-term beneficiaries
of the 60s. But before talking about the early days of Reagan's career let me just say about a
word about Buckley himself as a candidate. He ran a political campaign for mayor of New York
in 1965 which he lost but which brought him further publicity and respect. When he began to
campaign Buckley decided he wasn't going to act like a normal candidate. He had the liberty to
do this because he knew he was going to lose the election. He wouldn't join a Polish parade,
he wouldn't eat blintzes when he went to a Jewish district. Both his running mates were Irish Catholics,
he wasn't going to attempt to have an ethnic balance on his slate. In fact he argued that block
politics insulted people into stereotypes of themselves and that to satisfy an ethnic block
did not help the actual members of the block. His two rivals the Republican John Lindsay and the
Democrat Abraham Beam were both very very serious men and Buckley consistently ridiculed them with
witticisms in debate when they were grimly serious. When it came to the point Lindsay the moderate
Republican won with 1.3 million votes whereas Buckley got 340,000. A respectable showing but
nevertheless an obvious loss. He then wrote a lovely book about the campaign called The Unmaking of a
Mare published in 1966 and it's one of the most entertaining political books of the entire decade
of the 60s. One incident in the campaign which he recalls fondly is this. A journalist says now
what are you going to do if you're declared the winner and Buckley said I'm going to demand a
recount. Now there was nothing to be less likely than that he was going to win. The book and the
campaign made him a major national celebrity and prompted the creation of Firing Line his political
chat show which ran for the next 30 years and also contributed to the main streaming of conservatism.
Now let's move on to Ronald Reagan. Reagan was a movie star in the 1930s and 40s and he'd
cooperated with Hollywood McCarthyism because he'd been the head of the Screen Actors Guild
at the time when the House Committee on Un-American Activities went to Hollywood
in search of of Hollywood communists. He helped to purge the communists by active cooperation
with Huac the House Committee. He didn't he believed that communists were agents of a foreign
power and that they ought not to work in the industry. Reagan had then moved into TV in the
early 1950s getting on board a new technology quite early just as he'd moved from radio to Hollywood
in the 1930s. He made a speech on behalf of Barry Goldwater during the primaries and during
the last days of the campaign of 1964 and it drew widespread notice in the Republican Party
because Reagan a very very practiced public figure who'd been in the limelight for 30 years
was very good at making convincing speeches. In the speech Reagan said he'd switched from his
family's democratic New Deal loyalty with which he'd grown up because of fears of over mighty
government and the sinister movement towards total government which had seemed possible.
He hit all the major Goldwater themes and made many of them sound rather sinister but at the
same time he backed them with his easy folksy style. Reagan was very good at presenting conservatism
with a sense of relaxation. He said we are at war with the most dangerous enemy that has ever
faced mankind in his long climb from the swamp to the stars. There is only an up or down up to
man's age old dream the ultimate in individual freedom consistent with law and order or down
to the ant-heap totalitarianism and regardless of their sincerity their humanitarian motives
those who would trade our freedom for security have embarked on this downward course.
Well the speech played so well that it led the the the king makers of the Republican Party
to offer Reagan the chance to run for the governorship of California in 1966. He campaigned
against the radical students at Berkeley and found it to be a very resonant issue with many of the
voters the taxpayers who resented as they saw it paying for this unrest and he won an upset
against Edmund Brown Sr. the Democratic incumbent who'd underestimated Reagan and who thought of
him as a political lightweight. Reagan discovered that Berkeley was a vivid vote-getting issue
and as the governor he sent in the National Guard in May 1969 during the intense and violent
controversy over the future of People's Park. Another California educator had the same experience
S.I. Hyakawa a professor of semantics whom Reagan appointed as president of San Francisco State
College in 1968. He became a hero to conservatives during a student strike. SDS the Black Panthers
and the Third World Liberation Front led a student strike demanding an end to racism,
an end to Vietnam Vietnam war and a new black studies department and they tried to close the
campus down. Hyakawa was determined to keep it open, refused to be intimidated, called in the
police and on one occasion jumped onto a sound truck and pulled out the wires to prevent sound
amplification of the students speeches. This also played very well politically and led to his
being rewarded with a successful run for the U.S. Senate in 1976. All these signs that standing
up to the radicals made good electoral sense was a message not to be lost on the Republican Party
strategists in the 1970s and in the politics of the 70s these new activist conservatives became a
more and more important part of the party's work.
