In the 1970s, Saigon fell to North Vietnamese troops, the Soviet Union built a world-spanning
navy, and revolutions broke out in Iran and Nicaragua.
The world seemed less susceptible to American control than at any time since the defeat
of Germany and Japan at the end of World War II.
The neo-conservatives, just as they came to share conservatives' views on domestic issues,
started to see them as essentially right also on the big questions of foreign policy, especially
the idea that there is always going to be war, and that it's best to prepare for it
and expect the worst.
Rejecting President Carter's claim that considerations of human rights should eclipse
realpolitik, they argued that it was sometimes necessary to make alliances with authoritarian
regimes for the sake of resisting totalitarians.
Several former Vietnam-era peaceniks, including Michael Novak and Norman Pod Horitz, publicly
apologized for having underestimated the mendacity of communism and swore not to let themselves
be deceived again.
In an analysis of Soviet intentions, a neo-conservative group, Team B, interpreted the Soviets as
more aggressive and more willing to use nuclear weapons than the Central Intelligence Agency's
own Team A.
Led by Paul Knitzer and the Committee on the Present Danger, they therefore lobbied Congress
not to ratify the recently negotiated Second Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty, SALT II.
Another period of the early 1970s was a period of disillusionment, the sour residue of the
Vietnam conflict, even once most Americans had left.
The Americans had almost completely evacuated by 1972, and Saigon fell in 75.
But the year 73 and 74 were also embittered by the Watergate scandal.
It preoccupied the nation for nearly two years.
Then there were years of slow economic growth and inflation, known at the time as stagflation.
A gasoline crisis in 73 and again in 79, and a feeling of national malaise.
Then there was the intensified sense of helplessness, brought about by the hostage crisis when American
diplomats were held at the American Embassy in Tehran by revolutionary Iranian students.
These circumstances and these events were a stimulus to second thoughts on many issues.
Most conservatives, virtually all of whom had been Cold War Democrats, began to realize
after George McGovern's candidacy in 1972 that they might have to shift to the Republican
Party, though it was a shift which happened slowly.
They kept hoping that another Harry Truman would appear on the horizon, that is to say
a hard anti-communist Democrat.
But in practice they never found one.
The outcome of the Vietnam War prompted many neoconservatives to reconsider their ideas
about communism.
As liberal intellectuals in the 1960s, many of them had become disenchanted with the war,
especially after the Tet Offensive of 1968.
They'd wondered whether they weren't oversimplifying when they divided the world between the simple
black and white of American good and communist evil.
They'd become willing for a while to think of Ho Chi Minh as more of a nationalist than
a communist and to doubt the validity of domino theory.
Domino theory was the idea, which was orthodoxy in the Pentagon in the 1950s and 60s, that
if one country goes communist it's that much more likely that it will knock over successive
countries like a row of dominoes falling and that therefore you've got to fight the enemy
when he's far away and weak, otherwise you're going to have to fight him later when he's
much stronger and closer to you.
This is itself the application of the lessons of the events leading up to World War II.
Anyway, many of the Democrats had come to share the New Left's idea that America was
doing more harm than good to the actual people of Vietnam.
But the fall of Saigon in 1975 and its sequels led to massive imprisonment or liquidation
for Vietnamese people who had cooperated with the United States or with the Republic of
Vietnam, that is the South Vietnamese regime before the end of the war.
The plight of the boat people seemed to affirm the mendacity of the new communist regime.
Hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese people were so desperate to get away from communist
Vietnam that they risked their lives in leaky boats to get out into the South China Sea
in the hope that they could find their way to the Philippines or that friendly ships
would pick them up, and a great stream of refugees known collectively as the boat people
began to pour into the United States.
If that wasn't bad enough, Pol Pot's genocide in Cambodia, another communist regime, gave
further horrifying evidence of the dangers of ideological fanaticism.
Pol Pot literally exterminated a large percentage of the country's entire population, including
virtually everybody who was educated.
Under these conditions, several near-conservatives recanted their old views and reasserted a
militant anti-communism.
Norman Pot Horitz, in his book Why We Were in Vietnam, apologized for his earlier attitude
and rebuked liberals who refused to reconsider.
Another man who had second thoughts and admitted them openly was Peter Berger, who we met in
the previous lecture writing about mediating institutions.
He wrote, I was wrong, and so were all those who thought as I did, contrary to what most
members, including myself, of the anti-war movement expected.
The peoples of Indochina have since 1975 been subjected to suffering far worse than anything
that was inflicted upon them by the United States.
As President Ford's ambassador to the United Nations in 1975 to 1976, Daniel Patrick Moynihan
made boisterous assertions of American patriotism.
It's in his ambassadorship that we can see the beginnings of a revival of near-conservative
national pride.
Moynihan, after the controversy on the report of the Black Family and the scandal which followed,
had become a Republican and had gone to work for the Nixon government.
Moynihan served as American ambassador to India in the Nixon administration.
He was dismayed at widespread anti-Americanism which he found in the diplomatic community
and the seeming inability of the Americans to rebut it.
He told one, he told a diplomat friend that when other countries diplomats criticized America
unjustly at the United Nations, quote, something specifically bad should happen to each one
of them, and when it has happened, they should be told that Americans take the honor of their
democracy most seriously.
For example, he said, perhaps the United States government should cut its aid to governments
whose representatives made insultingly anti-American remarks in the United Nations, even though
the UN met in New York, there was a routine rhetoric of anti-Americanism in its everyday
conduct.
Moynihan was determined to challenge this rhetoric that was alleged that America was
a capitalist imperialist oppressor and that Israel, one of America's very closest allies,
was based on Zionist racism.
Perhaps Moynihan's most dramatic moment came with his denunciation of E.D. Armin.
E.D. Armin was the dictator of Uganda who undertook terrible purges, including the expulsion
of the entire Indian population or the Indian descended population of Uganda, which had
the effect of wrecking the economy of Uganda and plunging it into desperate poverty.
Moynihan denounced E.D. Armin as a racist murderer.
This was in a speech on the floor of the United Nations, a speech which Norman Pod Horitz
had helped him to write.
National review, who had hopes for Moynihan, were delighted by this and declared him their
man of the year.
Well, Moynihan's success at the United Nations led to his election as a United States senator
from New York in 1976.
And although he'd been working for two Republican administrations, first Nixon and then Ford,
he ran for Senate as a Democrat.
Ironically, he defeated William Buckley's brother, James Buckley, who'd won this New
York Senate seat as an independent conservative in 1970.
Because the National Review conservatives had disliked Nixon, their conservative party
had tried to go its own way, and James Buckley was their most conspicuous success story.
But he now lost his seat to Moynihan.
By then, ironically, the National Review conservatives and Moynihan were converging
politically.
Moynihan for a time seemed like a possible future presidential candidate, except that
the Democratic Party was moving further away from many of Moynihan's views.
His and the other neoconservatives favored presidential candidate in 1976 was Scoop Jackson
and not Jimmy Carter.
At this point, the mid-70s, Irving Crystal was almost alone in having already become
a Republican and having already voted for President Nixon in 1972.
Moynihan was the first of the prominent neoconservatives to win a major elective office.
He was a Harvard professor who'd gone to work in the government and now had become a senior
elected official.
And he used his new prominence in public life to continue the work he'd begun at the
United Nations.
Much of it was highly congenial to the neoconservative outlook.
He made an outspoken defense of America against its critics from the Soviet Union and against
critics in the Third World Block, and he voiced a consistent, militant anti-communism.
To many neoconservatives, the situation of Israel demonstrated the need for national
strength, resolve and a full appreciation of external threats.
Israel's very existence had been in jeopardy from the moment it came into existence in
1948, and repeatedly Israel had had to fight for its life.
And the American neoconservatives, many of whom were Jewish and were particularly interested
in Israel, said, by analogy, the Americans have got to be ready to do the same kind of
thing that Israel has to do, be ready to fight, be ready for surprise attacks, and to fight
back decisively if the moment comes.
It was an enormous amount of pride at Israel's achievement in the Six-Day War when it hammered
its opponents into the ground in the space of less than a week.
But on the other hand, this pride was compounded by anxiety over Israel's momentary exposure
when it was taken by surprise at the beginning of the Yom Kippur War of 1973.
Commentary magazine under the editorship of Norman Pod Horitz devoted part of every issue
to Israeli affairs, and often again pointed to the American analogies to keep the two
countries' comparable situations in some ways at the front of attention.
And commentary angrily denounced other American Jews who criticized Israel or Israeli policies.
People such as Noam Chomsky, the linguistics expert, and I.F. Stone, the old radical journalist.
They also exhibited a steady alienation of the American Jewish community from the African
American community.
Historically, the two had been very, very closely linked.
But increasingly, the militant black leaders had been scapegoating Jews, particularly denouncing
them as ghetto storekeepers, despite their historic alliance.
And commentary under Pod Horitz said, it may be that this ancient alliance has now got
to break, because one of the places in which we see the most flagrant form of anti-Semitism
is from the radical African American groups.
The 1973 oil crisis demonstrated American vulnerability to fluctuations in Middle Eastern
politics.
Robert Tucker, who was one of the most prolific of the neo-conservative foreign policy writers,
lamented the development of what was becoming known as the Vietnam syndrome.
The idea is, the lesson to be drawn from the Vietnam War is that the United States must
not allow itself to get drawn into protracted conflicts in remote parts of the world.
That instead, America ought to start thinking about a revival of the old isolationism.
This was horrifying to Robert Tucker.
He said, no, the United States must always consider the possibility of intervening forcibly
in circumstances such as we might encounter in the Middle East.
To disavow force would at once make the nation powerless.
This is quoting Tucker directly.
This apparent absence of the possibility of using force as an element in the crisis seems
astonishing.
At least it must seem astonishing to those who assume some continuity with the past.
This is clearly the absence of the credible threat of force, which renders plausible the
expectation that the interests placed in jeopardy by present oil prices will not be preserved
in the future.
In other words, if the Americans won't even contemplate the possibility of using force,
then they're not a powerful nation at all, and they're going to be completely at the
mercy of the oil exporters.
Tucker was afraid that after Vietnam, American foreign policy makers had completely lost
their nerve and the will to intervene militarily anywhere.
If that were true, international chaos would ensue.
He reminded readers that dictators were held in check everywhere by the knowledge that
United States power might thwart them.
And this must remain true after Vietnam, despite America's failure there.
That's what deterrence policy was all about, and deterrence was a cornerstone of American
containment.
Don't let the enemy be anxious about your intentions, and therefore let the potential
enemy be deterred from acting against you.
Neo-Conservatives disliked President Carter's attempt to make human rights the paramount
concern of his foreign policy.
Carter was a surprising election winner, and he benefited from the disillusionment with
Washington politics generated by Watergate.
Under other circumstances, he probably wouldn't have won, and he was emphatic about his detachment
from the conventions of Washington life, and emphatic about the idea that he was going
to make foreign policy far more dependent on human rights questions than it had been
up to this time.
When he withdrew his support from abusive rulers in Iran, the Shah, and in Nicaragua,
the result was revolutions, which showed in both cases that these regimes had prospered
because they got American support.
But Carter was dismayed to discover that both these revolutions created regimes that were
much worse than the ones they'd got rid of.
They were more oppressive rather than less.
Now Gene Kirkpatrick, a foreign policy expert, proposed a distinction between authoritarian
regimes, which she said might sometimes enjoy American support, and totalitarian regimes,
which were beyond the pale.
This is writing during the Carter administration, and she also was expressing an interest in
what relationship there ought to be between morality and foreign policy.
We can't have a simple calculus of supporting only the good and deploring the bad, but neither
can we be totally cynical and give support to anyone who happens to have a temporary
alliance of interests with us.
So this distinction between authoritarians and totalitarians was perhaps one way of drawing
the relevant line.
Kirkpatrick was a professor of political science at Georgetown.
She said, there's no instance of a revolutionary socialist or communist society being democratized.
But right wing autocracies do sometimes evolve into democracies, given time, propitious economic,
social and political circumstances, talented leaders, and a strong indigenous demand for
representative government.
In other words, authoritarian governments are potentially susceptible to maturing into
democracies.
And the 1970s presented two very good examples.
When Franco, the Spanish dictator, finally died, Spain did in fact become a democracy.
The monarchy was restored, and it once again became a functioning democracy.
Portugal, after the death of Salazar, went through the same process.
So Europe presented two relevant examples of autocracies which developed into democracies.
But Kirkpatrick also reminded her readers that you can't create a democracy overnight,
and that attempts to impose them on societies without democratic experience, or in places
where the nation was fighting for its life against rebellions, was certain to be counterproductive.
In other words, it's wrong to assert that democracy is right always and everywhere.
That itself is in fact a fallacy.
She said, the United States should encourage liberalization and democratization, provided
that the effort is not made at a time when the incumbent government is fighting for its
life against violent adversaries, and that proposed reforms are aimed at producing gradual
change rather than perfect democracy overnight.
Well, this was in fact a profoundly conservative insight that local traditions and experiences
have to be taken into consideration rather than a democratic blueprint automatically
imposed from outside or from above.
Kirkpatrick also criticized Carter's approach to Latin America, arguing that his human rights
aspirations ignored the realities of culture, economics, geography and history in the neighborhood,
and ignored the constant Soviet search for incremental advantages all around the world.
President Carter said that America had suffered for too long from inordinate fear of communism.
The neoconservatives totally disagreed, adding that communism was becoming more dangerous,
not less, and that the Soviet Union was as much of a threat in 1976 as it had been in
1946.
One of the many elements of the Carter government which they deplored was Carter's decision
to appoint Andrew Young as the U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations.
They certainly didn't regard him as an adequate successor to Moynihan.
Here's the neoconservative writer, Carl Gershman, who wrote, it is Young's apparent lack of
commitment to political freedom and his ability to turn a blind eye to oppression if it is
carried out by African and other Third World regimes in the name of a progressive ideology
that is the most troubling aspect of his thought and of his performance.
He is an advocate of U.S. acquiescence in a new system of tyranny.
Now, of course, you can imagine that in these disputes, the neoconservatives needed to walk
a fine line.
On the one hand, they were eager to criticize appeasement, particularly appeasement of the
Soviets, but on the other hand, they had to watch that they didn't merely acquiesce in
apparent abuses by regimes that happened to be friendly.
If they were going to follow this distinction between totalitarian and authoritarian, there
was the danger that they'd simply say to any regime which they favored at the moment,
it's really just authoritarian.
And to say if any regime they happened to disfavor, it's essentially totalitarian and
is beyond the possibility of redemption.
The distinction was sometimes applied loosely and in a self-interested way, and of course
it was vulnerable to criticism as such.
Nevertheless, Kirk Patrick was going to be an important person and she would be picked
up as a foreign policymaker when President Reagan came into office after the election
of 1980.
Meanwhile, the continuing growth of Soviet military power led neoconservatives to argue
for a more skeptical attitude towards détente and more resolve in building up the American
arsenal.
They observed with alarm the growing reach of the Soviet Union's navy and its continuing
search for third world clients.
The neoconservatives were afraid of Soviet discipline and patience.
In many articles they wrote, the Russians have never been in a hurry to conquer the world,
but their patience and their doggedness and their willing to take the long view makes
them all the more dangerous.
Here's the neoconservative political scientist Edward Lutvak writing in the mid-70s.
He says, while the loudest American voices ceaselessly argue that mere numbers are meaningless,
if not that military power itself is passe, the Russians are building missiles, bombers
and warships to acquire a worldwide strategic reach.
It is hard to deny that this growing strength signifies an expansionist intent.
Well the neoconservatives doubted the wisdom of the strategic arms limitation treaties,
the so-called salt treaties of the 1970s, because they thought that the Soviets would
interpret them as signs of American weakness rather than as genuine avenues to peace.
The idea of anti-communists was always this.
The communists want to conquer the world and sooner or later they're going to try to find
ways to do it.
And that means that if they favour a policy, it must be because they think that they'll
profit from that policy.
But their idea of profiting is moving towards world conquest and therefore if they favour
a policy, we must not favour it.
We don't have any kind of harmony of interests with them.
If therefore it, we should be against it.
Well the first salt treaty, salt one, had been ratified in 1972 in response to an awareness
of the fact that there were now far more nuclear weapons in the arsenals of the Soviet Union
and the Americans than would have been needed to kill everybody in the world many times over.
They actually had the phrase overkill to describe the surplus killing capacity of the nuclear
arsenals.
And the negotiators of salt one, including President Nixon who endorsed it, was the idea
that there was a common interest, that both sides had an interest in ratcheting down the
danger.
But in 1975 Norman Pod Horace wrote an article called Making the World Safe for Communism.
Obviously there he's picking up on Woodrow Wilson's old phrase making the world safe
for democracy and saying now what we're doing is inadvertently making the world safe for
communism.
He deplored Dayton as the pathway to surrender.
He argued in favor of reviving the fighting spirit of Franklin Roosevelt and Harry Truman
and John F. Kennedy, the kind of liberal Democrats who believed who were the hardest anti-communists
and willing to fight to the uttermost against it.
Pod Horace said it was right to use American power to make the world safe for democracy.
In other words there he does invoke directly the liberal Democrat warrior Woodrow Wilson.
This was a less cautious formulation than Gene Kirkpatrick's.
Pod Horace totally rejected the McGovernite withdrawal into a new form of isolationism
which had been advocated by the Democratic candidate in 1972.
And he rejected the liberal tendency to feel guilty about the projection of American power.
This was very much the kind of analysis offered by National Review over the preceding 20 years
although National Review itself would never have used Wilsonian rhetoric.
Pod Horace described the widespread datant attitude as Finlandization.
That is to say putting America in the position of Finland that squeezed right next to the
Soviet Union had constantly to mollify the Soviet Union.
And Pod Horace accused Carter and Carter's appointees of appeasement.
Now of course that was the word which summoned to mind the memory of Neville Chamberlain,
the British Prime Minister of the 1930s who totally underestimated the danger presented
by Hitler.
And of course that's very handy from Pod Horace's point of view since it permitted him to take
on the role of Winston Churchill, the great critic of appeasement.
In a strategic study of the Soviet Union undertaken in the later 1970s, Team B, a group of analysts
dominated by neoconservative experts, Team B offered a more pessimistic view of Russian
intentions than the CIA's own Team A. In those days the head of the CIA was George
H.W. Bush, the man who was later to be the first of the two George Bush presidents.
Team A was appointed by Bush from within the CIA and Team B was an independent external
group of analysts and he wanted two reports to evaluate the intentions of the Soviets
from two different sources.
Team B included Richard Pearl, Richard Pipes, Paul Wolfowitz and Paul Knitzer, four analysts
all of whom were going to play prominent roles in the politics and the foreign politics of
the next 25 years.
Their report said that Soviet policy was still dedicated to world conquest and to creating
usable nuclear weapons as part of a massive arms buildup.
They noted that the Soviets did not subscribe to the idea of mad mutual assured destruction
but instead were looking for ways to prevail, including ways to prevail which used nuclear
weapons.
Paul Knitzer was a professor at Johns Hopkins, a professor of international studies and formerly
deputy secretary of defense.
He'd been one of the negotiators of the SALT 1 Treaty and he was one of the founders of
a new group called the Committee on the Present Danger founded in 1976.
It was a lobby for neoconservative foreign policy ideas and the committee began to place
regular op-ed articles in the New York Times and the Wall Street Journal where the neoconservatives
were becoming well connected.
The committee urged the United States not to sign the SALT 2 Treaty, in the words, urged
the Senate and President Carter not to go ahead with the treaty in the late 70s because
they said its actual effect will be to facilitate Soviet superiority.
Paul Knitzer spoke with special authority because of his very extensive work as the
SALT 1 negotiator between 1969 and 1973 in the Nixon administration.
The United States, said Richard Pipes, another member of Team B, the United States has to
force the Soviets into retreat.
He added, the ultimate purpose of Western counter strategy should be to compel the Soviet Union
to turn inward from conquest to reform.
Only by blunting its external drive can the Soviet regime be made to confront its citizenry
and to give it an account of its policies.
In other words, we have to maintain the pressure which containment was supposed to create,
to deny all possibility of expansion to the Soviet Union in the hope that eventually its
own citizens, its own people, will rise up against the Soviet regime.
Well, two crises at the end of the 1970s, the Iran hostage crisis and the Soviet invasion
of Afghanistan confirmed the neoconservatives' worst fears and led many of them to
decide on a change of party allegiance to actually switch and become republicans.
President Carter's inability to rescue the hostages, the American diplomats, stuck inside
the American Embassy of Tehran and the diplomatic outrage that they should have been captured
in the first place, obviously a grotesque violation of diplomatic protocol.
That crisis projected a dangerous image of American weakness or powerlessness.
Carter was of course unlucky in that the rescue mission he sent to try to get the hostages
back, several of the aircraft crashed and the mission had to be abandoned.
The Soviet incursion into Afghanistan confirmed the neoconservatives' worst fears about communist
aggression.
In the long run, the incursion would prove to be disastrous, but it certainly seemed
menacing when it began in 1979.
We can now look back on it as one of the precipitating causes for the eventual fall of the Soviet
Union, but that of course was still more than ten years in the future when it began
in 79.
In January of 1980, President Carter met a delegation of neoconservatives, including
Norman Pod Horitz, Gene Kirkpatrick, Elliot Abrams and others, to discuss foreign policy
issues in the hope that they could come to an agreement of minds about the important
questions, but in fact they instantly clashed and came to virtually no agreement at all.
Many of the neoconservatives hoped that Daniel Patrick Moynihan would challenge Carter in
the 1980 Democratic primaries, but because Moynihan was a Democratic Party senator from
a quite liberal state, New York, he was no longer as free as the intellectuals were to
express his views openly, or he'd be sure to lose his reelection bid in 1982.
What actually happened in the primaries of 1980, the Democratic primaries, was that Edward
Kennedy challenged Carter, and though a fracturicidal struggle took place within the Democratic
Party, which made their candidate all the weaker.
The neoconservatives felt that Kennedy was equally unsatisfactory on the issues they cared
about, and it was that which led them finally to conclude, or many of them to conclude,
that they must switch their support and vote for Reagan.
