Between 1960 and 1980, Britain left behind its imperial past, joined the European Economic
Community and accepted a shrunken role in world affairs. Economic continuity was prevented
by a fundamental disagreement between the two major parties, with Labour favouring state
socialism and the Conservatives favouring capitalism.
Overmighty trade unions, bitter industrial relations and a long succession of disastrous
strikes in the 1970s made Britain a byword for economic dysfunction and decline.
Margaret Thatcher, a shopkeeper's daughter from Grantham, was an unlikely figure to
rise to the leadership of the Conservative Party, coming as she did socially and geographically
from humble origins and being in every way outside the magic circle of Tory privilege.
She was, however, a brilliant organiser, a first class speaker, inexhaustibly hard
working on every political question, and when necessary could terrify allies and adversaries
into submission. She won the general election of 1979, declared her resolve not to permit
the decline to continue, and then succeeded where her male predecessors in the Conservative
leadership had failed. She denationalised the major industries, won her face off with the
most powerful unions, stimulated an era of economic recovery, and even won a war against
Argentina over the future of the Falkland Islands.
Bitterly hated by the British left, and personally unpopular on her own side of the House of
Commons, she was nevertheless the decisive personality of her era, and left an impression
on the country as vivid as that left 40 years before by Winston Churchill.
British Conservatism after World War II was very different from its American counterpart
because it confronted a completely different situation. As I mentioned at the beginning
of this course, Conservatism is usually reactive, and the great issue for British Conservatives
was the fact that the Labour government of 1945-50 under Clement Attlee had nationalised
the major industries. Now, was it the Conservative wisdom to learn to live with them, or was
it to try to undo Attlee's work and restore a private enterprise capitalist system?
A generation of male Conservative party leaders had accepted the nationalised industries while
trying to protect Britain's shrunken private sector. Winston Churchill in the early fifties,
then Anthony Eden and Harold Macmillan in the later fifties, and Alec Douglas Hume in
the sixties, and then Edward Heath in the seventies. All of them had to some extent
learn to live with the nationalised economy. They recognised that some parts of the nationalised
state sector, particularly health and education, the National Health Service, were popular
and were providing citizens with opportunities never previously enjoyed. The general increase
of health of the British population since 1945 is an astonishing story of progress.
The British trade unions found themselves in a more powerful situation than ever before.
Because industries no longer had to make a profit, but could instead be subsidised from
state funds. You can imagine the situation is different when a trade union is confronting
a nationalised industry than when it's confronting a private employer. Traditionally, the owner
of an industry could tell the union members, if I meet your demands, we'll all be out
of work. If I pay you as much as you want, or if I permit you to work as inefficiently
as you want, we're going to be defeated by our competitors. But once the industry has
been nationalised, the union members can answer, we don't have to be profitable. The government
can subsidise us, because it has the power of taxation and subsidy. This is one of the
reasons why nationalisation tends to conduce to inefficiency. Now the Labour Party had been
founded by the trade unions, the TUC, back in 1900, and it was still beholden to them.
But of course, each union took a particularistic view of its situation, whereas the government's
job was to consider the economy as a whole, and so very often Labour governments themselves
came into conflict with particular unions because of disagreements about points of emphasis.
The 1960s, when Labour was mainly in power, and the early 70s when the Conservatives were
in power, witnessed a succession of bitter strikes in the major industries, as workers
demanded better pay and conditions. Labour governments were often embarrassed by unsanctioned
or wildcat strikes. Governments of both parties permitted inefficient industries to continue
operating as a way of preventing widespread unemployment.
This in turn meant that the tax burden on the productive, which is to say mainly the
private part of the economy and on individuals became steadily more burdensome. By the 1960s,
income tax rates rose as high as 90% on big incomes. And that meant that entrepreneurs
had a high incentive to leave the country or resort to tax shelters or other dodges. Famous
British people like the Beatles, the great rock sensation of the 1960s, no longer lived
in Britain. It was simply too expensive to do so because virtually all their income would
have been taken away in taxation. Anyone who prospered had an incentive to leave or to
give nearly all his income to the state.
The centralised administration of major industries soon became bureaucratically top-heavy, and
without the incentive of competition, they became less and less efficient. British industries
were increasingly unable to stay abreast of European, American and Japanese competitors,
many of whom still had all sorts of incentives to improve the quality of their goods, to diminish
the cost and so on. So the British economy is steadily losing whatever competitive position
it still enjoyed in the 1940s.
Another characteristic of Britain in the 1950s, 60s and 70s was that each general election
signalled a profound change of direction in economic affairs. When the Conservatives won,
they dedicated themselves to free enterprise. When Labour won, they dedicated themselves
to annihilating free enterprise. But the overall decline in the British economy, compared to
its rivals, seemed to be inexorable.
Each party had a group of committed supporters, while the crucial middle of the electorate
switched back and forth depending on circumstances.
These were the circumstances in which Margaret Thatcher gained the leadership of the Conservative
Party in 1975, just after the defeat of her immediate predecessor, Edward Heath. She then
won the general election of 1979, becoming Britain's first female Prime Minister.
Her father was a grocer, and she came from the little town of Grantham in Lincolnshire,
as an undergraduate she'd gone to Oxford during the Second World War. But even by comparison
with many of her predecessors, she was an outsider to the traditional circle of Conservative
leaders.
She was an undergraduate chemistry major and was one of very, very few science graduates
in the House of Commons. Overwhelmingly, members of Parliament in college had studied history
or classics or politics or law. She was one of a tiny minority of science graduates. But
even she hadn't been a practising scientist, she'd led a career in business law and then
in politics, greatly aided by the fact that she'd married a prosperous businessman, Dennis
Thatcher, who was in an anomalous position in Britain for the first time, rather than
the Prime Minister having a wife, the Prime Minister had got a husband, and Dennis Thatcher's
position was the source of much comedy in the 1970s and 80s.
Thatcher won the election in 1979 because of stagflation, the odious mixture of stagnation
and inflation in the late 70s. And because of Britain's continuing economic deterioration,
it was becoming more and more apparent to ordinary British people that their way of life was
more impoverished than that of their European neighbours, most galling of all that now Britain
was distinctly poorer than Germany, the enemy it had defeated in the Second World War. In
the preceding winter of discontent, that is the winter from 1978 to 79, the Labour Prime
Minister James Callaghan had shown a complete inability to handle the trade unions. He also
suffered from all the woes which were reflecting Jimmy Carter at the same time in the American
economy.
Well, Margaret Thatcher, without debts to the British establishment or to the Old Boys
Club, was more willing than her predecessors to be confrontational and ideologically assertive.
Temperamentally, she was more of a fighter than most Conservatives. The Conservative temperament
is perhaps her conciliatory one by nature, but Thatcher certainly wasn't like that at
all. She loved to fight. In an early speech in 1979, she said this, the Old Testament
prophets didn't merely say, brothers, I want a consensus. They said, this is my faith and
vision. This is what I passionately believe. If you believe it too, then come with me.
Tonight, I say to you just that, away with the recent bleak and dismal past. Well, you
can see from that that she's a very, very assertive speaker. Here's the historian John
Charmley commenting, I think, very perceptively on one of the contradictions of her character.
He says, the personal nature of Thatcherism helps explain some of its contradictions. She
passionately believed in getting the state off people's backs, just as she disdained
statist solutions to political problems. She loathed the nanny state. Yet she was one of
nature's nannies, passionately believing that she knew how to save the country she loved.
Not surprisingly, this created tension between instinct and action. Early cabinet meetings
in her administration were very stormy. She liked to pound her opponents into submission.
It wasn't very long after she became Prime Minister that resignations began from ministers
who weren't willing to put up with her high-handed style and also dismissals as she fired ministers
who she found insufficiently cooperative. Gradually, cabinet meetings became mainly
short gatherings to announce fitter, complete things she's decided to do, rather than to
discuss as a predecessor, Harold Wilson had liked to do in the 60s and early 1970s. Harold
Wilson had been a politics professor at Oxford University, and his idea of a cabinet meeting
was like a seminar in which sometimes ideas would be discussed for hours and hours. By
contrast, that's just cabinet meetings tended to be very, very short and hierarchical in
which she said, this is what we believe and this is what we're going to do. When she
read political memorandums from ministers, very often in the margins she would write
either wet or dry. Now for her, wet was an insult. It meant feeble or conciliatory, whereas
dry meant strong and decisive. And gradually, these terms entered everyday political language
so that by the later 1980s, if you were one of the conservative wets, what that meant
was that you were a conservative, but that you were unsympathetic to Thatcher and that
she was unsympathetic to you. She was determined to move Britain back towards free market economics,
away from socialism and away from Keynesian principles. She was a great admirer of the
libertarian economists Friedrich von Hayek and Milton Friedman. And she was a supporter
of the Conservatives Institute of Economic Affairs, which was an English parallel in
the 1970s and 80s to the American neoconservative think tanks. After winning the election of
1979, she demonstrated a superb ability in meeting her rivals at Prime Minister's question
time. This is an important element of British political life. If you're the American president,
you don't have to face regular cross questioning from congressmen. In fact, you can insulate
yourself almost entirely from Congress, but the Prime Minister has to go twice a week
to the House of Commons and face questions from members of the opposition who try to
embarrass her. Thatcher was excellent in Prime Minister's question time. She didn't sleep
very much and she was famous for being up at half past four in the morning listening
to radio broadcasts about agricultural policy. She read fine detail reports about every aspect
of the administration. And the result was that sometimes in Prime Minister's question
time, the shadow minister, that is the minister out of office, believing that he or she was
going to be able to embarrass the Prime Minister, would discover to their horror that she knew
more about the issue than they did and that she'd be able to deliver harangues full of
accurate statistics about the issue at question and pulverize them into surrender. And this
was known as a handbagging. In other words, the idea was Mrs Thatcher's beating it with
her handbag and it was something that the Labour Ministers came to dread and that if
they were going to risk a question in question time, they'd better be able to do a really
good job of it. I think this is partly why British Prime Ministers have to be so eloquent
and have to be quick on their feet and able to debate very quickly and skillfully. She
was determined to restore the British economy to private ownership and to free enterprise.
And under her guidance, Parliament undertook the privatization of the railroads, of telecommunications,
of power production, of the airlines and of manufacturing. All of the things which the
aptly government had called the commanding heights of the economy, which had been nationalized,
she then presided over their denationalization. Now, re-adapting to private ownership caused
some difficulties, but all these industries staged great recovery, greater streamlining,
greater efficiency and a renewed capacity by the year 2000 to compete with foreign rivals
so that the chronic decline of the British economy really did come to an end and it began
to recover and to be able to compete once more. Her willingness to accept rising levels
of unemployment made her bitterly unpopular in the early 1980s. There'd been a very, very
strong belief throughout Britain ever since the Great Depression that unemployment was
intolerable and that it must be prevented by government action. That she was more willing
to accept it in the short term for the sake of closing inefficient government-owned industries
and that contributed greatly to her unpopularity, especially during her first administration.
But her view was, in line with the libertarian theory, although you might get short-term unemployment,
which is very, very painful in the short run, if you're freeing up the circumstances of
economic competitiveness, in the long run, the unemployed will be reabsorbed into new
economies and the economy will run more efficiently and will have less unemployment. But you've
got to be willing to go through the painful medicine before you come out at the far end.
One of the unexpected benefits of high unemployment from her point of view was that it discouraged
other workers from going on strike from fear that they too would lose their jobs. Once
they recognized that she was serious about closing down inefficient industries or privatizing
them, union members would think a lot more carefully before going on strike for fear
that their jobs would disappear while the strike was going on and they'd never come back. That
she was certainly willing to face up to and face off against the most powerful trade unions
and to defeat them. Most of all, she refused to make concessions to the powerful coal miners'
union in a strike that lasted for more than a year in 1984 to 1985. Most of the coal miners
themselves started to doubt the wisdom of their own union. They finally became convinced
that continued resistance was futile and so returned to work. That had closed all the
remaining inefficient coal mines and the remaining fifteen profitable mines were privatized
in 1994. This was a massive change in what had been one of the United Kingdom's principal
industries. It had been a vast part of the British economy in the nineteenth century
and it shrank greatly in the late twentieth, but once more became economically competitive.
Another very shrewd piece of politics on Mrs. Thatcher's part was her recognition that
selling council houses to their owners would create a potential new pool of conservative
voters. Now, council houses are a very distinctive part of the British urban landscape. They'd
been built by local government authorities in large numbers ever since the 1920s or steer
bleak, grey and joyless. Council houses were a feature of every industrial city and usually
the poorest neighbourhoods had hundreds of them, joyless, dismal places. But Thatcher
understood, if you sell them to their owners, especially if you give them fairly generous
terms by which they can buy them, now the people who previously were just renters are
going to have pride of ownership and they're no longer going to be constrained by a whole
array of rules and regulations which the council used to impose on them. The result was that
the newly bought council houses started to be painted and changed at their owners' discretion
and extended. The eighties and nineties were a period of intense enthusiasm for domestic
extensions. Renters became owners and now they had a new incentive to favour the conservatives
because now they were small scale property owners. Every neighbourhood in Britain, particularly
council house neighbourhoods, look much better because of that decision. In foreign policy,
Margaret Thatcher shared the views of President Reagan. She agreed with Reagan that the Soviet
Union was a menace and she was able to revive the jeopardised Anglo-American special relationship
which in the nineteen sixties and seventies had to some extent been in abeyance. Here's
the historian Robert Blake speaking about her foreign policy views. Her hostility to
the Kremlin and all its works was clear and emphatic. The victory of Ronald Reagan in
nineteen eighty was a boon. She found herself in accord with the president of the most powerful
country in the world. Unlike his predecessor, he was anything but wet. She believed that
Britain's interests, by and large, coincided with those of the United States of America.
Over the years of compromise and conciliation in the world of the United Nations and UNESCO,
etc. a fresh wind seemed to be blowing. The conservative party under her leadership reverted
to an older outlook on the international scene. She was prime minister throughout his two
terms of office. She was already prime minister when he was elected in November of nineteen
eighty and she was still in office when he left in January of nineteen eighty nine. And
the two of them frequently expressed mutual admiration. It was one of the high points
of this special relationship. She cooperated closely with the American defense establishment
in updating American nuclear missiles which were cited on British territory as part of
the NATO agreements. She also faced down the resurgent CND, the campaign for nuclear disarmament.
The CND had had a huge surge in the early nineteen sixties, the first generation of
protest against nuclear weapons. And once again in the late seventies and eighties it was
a powerful popular movement. The most dramatic example of that was the Greenham Common Demonstrators
where for months a camp made up entirely of female demonstrators camped outside the American
air base at Greenham Common to protest against the bringing in of a new generation of nuclear
weapons. Well it certainly was a source of political discomfort to her to have a huge
continuous demonstration going on. But Thatcher was willing to be unpopular personally,
particularly. And she was absolutely confident that the nuclear based deterrence policy was
the right one. She also benefited from the Labour Party's decision in favour of unilateral
nuclear disarmament. At this time the Labour Party took the decision that it was supposed
to nuclear weapons altogether. That it couldn't in justice hold onto nuclear weapons and claim
to be a defender of civilisation. Because the weapons are so horrible and so indiscriminate
that all they can do is the work of annihilation. Well in practice the Labour Party's decision
for unilateral nuclear disarmament, whatever its moral quality, was never popular among
the voters because of their fear of the Soviet Union. Thatcher herself was nicknamed the
Iron Lady by the Russians, but she accepted it as a badge of honour. It's one of many cases
in history where someone who's given what's meant to be an insulting nickname takes up
that name and uses it proudly. When in early 1982 an Argentinian dictator,
Galtieri, seized the Falkland Islands in the South Atlantic, Margaret Thatcher had no
hesitation in dispatching a military task force to regain them. United States forces
gave support to the British Navy and Army in the form of refuelling services in the middle
of the Atlantic and reliable intelligence from the American communications and espionage
satellites. It was completely different from the Suez fiasco of 1956 when Anthony Eden
had launched the campaign against Suez without even notifying President Eisenhower or letting
him know that it was being planned. This time there was close cooperation between the two
Allies. The Falkland Islands themselves in the South Atlantic were of little value, but
the principle, the symbolism of the thing, was great and the restoration of national pride
when the British Army successfully recaptured them was also acute. The invasion went well
and very soon the Argentinians were forced to surrender after which the Argentinian
dictatorship was dismantled. The Conservative Member of Parliament, Enoch Powell, punning
on her reputation as the iron lady, said before the war began, in the next week or two this
house, the nation and the right honourable lady herself will learn of what metal she
has made. After the victory in the war he said that the tests on the metal had come back
and that it was, quote, ferrous matter of the highest quality and exceptional tensile strength
is highly resistant to wear and tear and to stress and may be used to advantage to all
national purposes. Well that's a lovely speech by Enoch Powell which is outwardly entirely
complementary and yet has just a hint of denigration, the idea that she really is metallic and
resistant to the normal range of human responses. Margaret Thatcher won re-election in 1983
on a wave of public patriotism. The Labour Party leader Michael Foote was almost comically
inept and I can't help noticing here that he was in fact a professional historian. The
Labour Party manifesto for that election was described by one Tory MP as, quote, the longest
suicide note in history. It was the biggest landslide since World War II in British politics
and gave Margaret Thatcher the time and the confidence to carry on with her policies. She
won far more emphatically than Winston Churchill ever had done. Well there's a gradual shift
in the 1980s concentrating Conservative voters more and more in the south and east of England
which is also the economically most powerful part of Britain. While Labour's strongholds
increasingly came to be in what was called the Celtic fringes that is Wales and Scotland
and the extreme south west, the west country. Margaret Thatcher was a Eurosceptic. Britain
was now part of the European Union but she insisted on renegotiating the terms of British
participation in the EEU because she thought that as it stood Britain was paying too much
and that British sovereignty was compromised by being subject to the decisions of foreign
politicians. Through extremely hard and effective bargaining she was able to win back for Britain
some of the high charges of participation in the EEU, something that even her Foreign
Office ministers hadn't believed that she was going to be able to do. She was an extremely
talented negotiator as well. In an important speech made in Belgium at Bruges in 1988 she
criticised the bureaucratic centralisation of the European Union while welcoming the peace
and co-operation that European unification was bringing. But she said that she wanted to
make sure that it would remain decentralised and democratic. Here's part of her speech which
again is very, very politically artful. She said, this year we celebrate the 300th anniversary
of the glorious revolution in which the British crown passed to Prince William of Orange and
Queen Mary. Visit the great churches and cathedrals of Britain, read our literature and listen
to our language, all bear witness to the cultural riches which we have drawn from Europe. We
in Britain are rightly proud of the way in which, since Magna Carta in 1215, we have pioneered
and developed representative institutions to stand as bastions of freedom. And proud too
of the way in which for centuries Britain was a home for people from the rest of Europe
who sought sanctuary from tyranny. We British have in a special way contributed to Europe.
Over the centuries we have fought to prevent Europe from falling under the dominance of
a single power. We have fought and we have died for her freedom. It's a beautiful speech
on itself and it summons up the memory of the way in which Britain played a crucial role
in the defeat of Napoleon and the defeat of Hitler. But then of course she goes on to
imply that yet another sinister concentration of force now threatens Europe, this central
European bureaucracy. And of course she implicitly implies, signifies, that she's coming to the
rescue yet again. So she's lining herself with the great British rescuers of Europe.
She added, to try to suppress nationhood and concentrate power at the centre of a European
glomerate, would be highly damaging and would jeopardise the objective we seek to achieve.
Europe will be stronger precisely because it has France as France, Spain as Spain, Britain
as Britain, each with its own customs, traditions and identity. It would be folly to try to fit
them into some sort of identity kit European personality.
In 1989, on the 200th anniversary of the outbreak of the French Revolution in Paris, most world
leaders sent in platitudes and congratulations. But Thatcher tartly said that Britain had been
struggling against the legacy of the French Revolution for the last two centuries. And
according to legends she supposedly said that, quote, all the French Revolution created was
a pile of headless bodies with a dictator standing on top. This is almost an update of
Edmund Burke and again a demonstration of her defiant reluctance to simply go through the
normal conventions of diplomatic nicety. The popular press loved her for this remark. They
called it handbagging the frogs. The frogs is an insulting nickname for the French and of course
handbagging is what Mrs. Thatcher does to all the people she doesn't like. Handbagging the
frogs. That's been popular in British history for eight or nine centuries by now at least.
In October 1984, Margaret Thatcher also survived an assassination attempt when an IRA bomb, a
bomb planted by the Irish Republican Army, blew up the hotel in Brighton on the south
coast of England where she was staying for the Conservative Party conference. The blast
took place at about four o'clock in the morning. It killed five and injured a senior cabinet
minister Norman Tebbitt very seriously. And yet within minutes of the blast, Margaret Thatcher
herself emerged from the hotel unhurt with her hair perfectly styled, well-dressed and as
cool as ever to denounce the treachery of the bombers and to swear that this act too would
not lead her to change course. It was one of those fortuitous events which had an enormous
impact on further contributing to the respect which the voters felt for her. Well like all
the most successful politicians, Margaret Thatcher was lucky. She enjoyed the economic
recovery of the 1980s after the period of stagflation in the 1970s and she enjoyed the
new revenue which was coming into Britain from North Sea oil and gas as very useful new
resources. But also like all good politicians, she made the very, very best of the hand which
history handed to her.
