Margaret Thatcher was finally ousted from the Conservative leadership in 1990. Her
successor, John Major, gave further evidence that the party was no longer the preserve
of the aristocrats. He came from a modest background, his father had worked in music
halls and for a time ran a business selling decorative garden gnomes. Major himself did
not attend college but made an effective career in banking and then politics. Prime Minister
for more than seven years and winner of the 1992 general election in his own right, he
was able to consolidate the Thatcher counter-revolution. By the time he left office his party had been
in power without interruption for 18 years. The end of the Cold War during his premiership
weakened the prestige of socialism everywhere and his labour rivals finally prepared themselves
to repudiate what had become to them a burden and even for some an embarrassment. Meanwhile
the most emotional event of the 1990s for many Britons, the sudden death of Princess
Diana in 1997, demonstrated the continuing emotional appeal of royalty. Ever since the
glorious revolution three centuries before, the monarchy too had been adapting itself
to changing times and circumstances while remaining one of the foundations of British
political stability. John Major inherited Margaret Thatcher's mantle
of leadership in 1990 when she was ousted in the party's crisis of 1990. The accumulated
grievances of a decade were combined with Thatcher's rash insistence on introducing
an unpopular new revenue device called the poll tax. Every government in a democracy
tends to get more unpopular the longer it continues. It takes the blame for everything
that's gone wrong just as it takes credit for everything that's gone right.
Thatcher tended to fire ministers who differed with her and by 1990 she'd been through nearly
all the senior conservatives and was surrounded mainly by junior ministers who weren't willing
to stand up to her and that of course made it a little bit more difficult for her to
get accurate bad news because her entourage were reluctant to tell her about it.
Unfortunately the old conservative ministers stood up to her over the ruinous unpopularity
of the poll tax which was causing mass street protests and over bitter divisions about Britain's
role in the European Union. So the parliamentary conservative party had a vote of no confidence
in her and that provokes a leadership election. She narrowly failed to win outright on the
first ballot gaining 204 votes out of the necessary 208 but rather than go to another
ballot in the words accepting that she had in fact suffered severely in her leadership
credibility she withdrew and signalled her preference for John Major. Here's what Margaret
Thatcher said in her farewell speech as prime minister. 11 years ago we rescued Britain from
the parlous state to which socialism had brought it. Once again Britain stands tall in the
councils of Europe and of the world. Over the last decade we have given power back to
the people on an unprecedented scale. We have given back control to people over their own
lives and over their livelihoods over the decisions that matter most to them and their
families. We have done it by curbing the monopoly power of the trade unions to control even
to victimize the individual worker. Well John Major's early history and his career
progress were further testimony to the conservatives willingness to adapt and change. He was as
much an outsider in the 20th century as Disraeli born Jewish had been in the 19th. Of course
I realize I've said this repeatedly through the course with each new conservative leader
I say what a surprising choice this person was but Major perhaps more than any of the
others was indeed a surprise. His grandparents were factory workers in the Midlands. His
father briefly was a trapeze artist and a music hall performer before becoming a small
time manufacturer of garden gnomes. And in the lower middle classes of England garden
gnomes are a kind of joke item of bad taste. A crisis in the company's business had forced
his the major family to move to a cramped two room apartment without its own bathroom when
John was 12. He certainly didn't have an upbringing which in any way could be described
as as privileged. He did very badly in school and left at the age of 16 never to return
to formal education. For a while he was a company clerk for an electric company then
briefly a laborer at his father's old works. He really began to get a foot on the right
kind of ladder when he got a lowly job in banking and began to work his way up in the
company. For a while he became a junior bank manager in Nigeria. Back in London after suffering
in a rather severe car crash in Africa he joined the young conservatives and this proved
to be a decisive step on the road to his eventual success. It was much tougher to rise with
a background like his than it would have been for a wealthy young man going to Oxford or
Cambridge from Eaton school which had been the traditional way for conservative leaders.
But it was possible. Britain more than ever before in the years of the 1970s 80s and 90s
was becoming a true meritocracy in which the in which by the benefit of hard work you could
prosper. Major himself was an extremely hard worker. He was tactful. He was loyal to Thatcher
and she began to see him as a possible successor. But it was a difficult in effect major had
to walk on a tightrope at the time of the conservative party election leadership election
because on the one hand he had to accept and in fact declare his loyalty to Thatcher. But
on the other hand he had to make clear that he was something different from her. He said
at one point I am not son of Thatcher but still are the ones available. He was the closest
to her views. Here's the historian Arthur Marwick at making what seems to me a very
accurate remark about him. Major perhaps reflecting the natural prejudices of his family background
shared Thatcher's faith in market economics, low taxation and control of both inflation
and bureaucracy. But unlike her he had a genuine sympathy for the underdog. He was only ceasing
to be one himself and he did not have her instinctive xenophobic anti-Europeanism.
He was only 47 at the time he became conservative party leader and at once prime minister. That
made him the youngest prime minister of the 20th century. Many of the people we've studied
throughout this course only became leaders in fairly advanced old age. Winston Churchill
became prime minister in his late 60s. Disraeli in when he was 70 in 1874. Major himself was
astonished dazed at the pace of his own rise. He'd only come into parliament in 1979. In
other words the only prime minister with whom he'd been an MP was Margaret Thatcher whom
he was now replacing. Even his wife Norma Major said this doesn't happen to people like
us. But it had. His premiership ended the strenuous ideological struggles of the Thatcher decade
and revived the sense of political moderation that had been so characteristic of the conservative
leaders of the past people like Stanley Baldwin in the years between the two world wars.
And then Major's victory in the election of 1992 consolidated many of the Thatcher reforms.
There might have been temporary if Labour had come back in 1992 but the fact that Labour
lost again really cemented the the permanence of the Thatcher revolution. Most of the loyal
Thatcherites deplored his lack of fighting spirit and his lack of sharp elbows. The political
left continued to hate everything about the conservatives and Major as the legatee of
Thatcher. But the election of 1992 did in Britain what the election of 1948 had done
in America. You may remember that in 1948 all the pollsters and nearly all the politicians
themselves were absolutely convinced that Dewey the Republican candidate was going
to win. But he didn't. Harry Truman won again and stayed in office. The pollsters were wrong.
Everybody was astonished. The same thing happened in 1992 in Britain. The pollsters all predicted
a Labour victory and they were mistaken. The pollsters were wrong. They were upset and
they were amazed. And just as the Democrats ever since the New Deal had stayed in power
and now won yet again in 1948 so the conservatives had been continuously in power stayed in power
yet longer. Neither party in British politics had ever before won four consecutive elections.
The New Council House owners whom I mentioned last time and the buyers of shares in the
denationalized companies all had obvious motives to vote conservative because now they felt
that they were playing their own little role in a property owning capitalist democracy.
Only after that only after the to them the shocking defeat of 1992 did the Labour Party
finally begin to shed its burden of an unpopular attachment to socialism emerging in the late
90s under Tony Blair as new Labour. Now throughout this period much of the British
public followed the activities of the royal family who simultaneously transcended politics
and defined many of the attributes of conservatism are always a tense mixture. The journalist
Jeremy Paxman writes this any system which puts an unelected person at the head of the
country affronts the suffrage legitimizes the idea that advancement is by breeding rather
than effort and ensures that the country marches into the future looking backwards into its
past. So why was the monarchy so popular? Where did it come from and why did it survive
into the 20th and then into the 21st century? All these are complicated questions. Well
the kings are descendants of warrior chieftains who seized land by force and held it by force
against rival warriors and there are moments in British history where you can see that
very clearly. In Britain William the Conqueror, William the Duke of Normandy became king
of England because he defeated and killed his predecessor King Harold in 1066 at the
battle of Hastings. Similarly the Tudors became the kings and queens of England because
Henry VII defeated and killed Richard III at the battle of Bosworth Field. In Shakespeare's
version that's where Richard cries out my kingdom for a horse but he can't find one
and he's felled by his rivals and Henry takes over and becomes King Henry VII through brute
military force. Now after taking the throne in battle monarchs then tried very hard to
legitimize themselves and to pass on their charisma to their successors so that they
wouldn't have to rely on brute force but instead could depend upon the loyalty and devotion
and tradition that accumulates gradually with the passage of time. In other words each warrior
king wants it to be forgotten that his throne depended ultimately on blood. And it's important
for us to remember that in 1500 there was nothing traditionalist at all about favoring
the Tudor monarchy because it had only been in power for 15 or 16 years. And similarly
there was nothing traditionalist about favoring the Stuart monarchy in the year 1610 because
the Stuart's had only come into power in 1603 with the death of Elizabeth I. There was nothing
traditional about supporting the Hanoverians in 1720. This was another new dynasty in power
maybe five years by then. But the longer they stayed on the throne the more legitimate their
right to be there came to appear. The kings had once thought of themselves as God's direct
appointees. King Charles I was a passionate believer in the divine right of kings. He was
the king who was executed by Oliver Cromwell at the end of the English Civil Wars. But
he went to the scaffold and lost his head denying that Parliament had had any right to put him
on trial that he was answerable only to God. It was a curious thing to believe because even
the accursory glance at history would have shown how regularly monarchies had been displaced by
war. But I suppose that you could rationalize it by saying that God had intended certain outcomes
so that particular people would in fact end up on the throne. The restoration of 1660 which
brought Charles I's son back to the throne, Charles II, suggested that there was no adequate
alternative in terms of legitimacy. That in the 17th century the country needed the king just as
much as the king needed the country. Well the glorious revolution with which this course really
began established the principle that Parliament set the terms for the monarchy. And after the
glorious revolution it was quite clear the king must be a Protestant, must cooperate with Parliament.
But still even then the monarchs retained a glamour that even skeptics found it very,
very hard to ignore. And it's noteworthy that even as the actual political power of the monarchy
declined steadily still the glamour remained and perhaps even became stronger. Listen to Nigel
Nicholson speaking in 1962 himself a man with high aristocratic connections. He says,
a fabulous respect for royalty survives in its glamour and a certain sanctity. It is considered
irreverent and almost blasphemous to make jokes in public about the royal family. And we are all
conscious when in the presence of the sovereign of a certain tension which is akin to war.
The death of Princess Diana in a 1997 road accident in Paris prompted an unprecedented
outpouring of grief. And I think it was politically significant that the feeling surrounding that
event should be so intense. Her funeral was a major national event. Hundreds of thousands of
mourners lined the route and poured into London. The Prime Minister at the service described her
as the people's princess. And that phrase from Tony Blair captured the paradox of Princess Diana's
life. On the one hand she gave the impression of accessibility with her extensive charitable work
and the life she'd lived as a late 20th century celebrity. When she was in America she danced
with John Travolta. But in fact of course she was herself a member of an ancient noble family,
the Spencers and was impossible to approach for an ordinary citizen. British people simply could
not go up to Princess Diana and talk with her. The exclusivity was at least as important as the
most important element in her attractiveness. Now the fact that Americans were almost as
involved in the great upheavals over Diana's death as the Brits were demonstrates that the
Americans themselves were still far from immune to the radiance of the monarchy even though they'd
fought a revolutionary war back in the 1770s and 80s to get away from it. British commentators
sometimes observed that so many Americans came to Britain to see the Queen and to see the changing
of the guard and to visit the royal houses Windsor Castle in Buckingham Palace and Sandringham,
that the Queen had become an extremely useful generator of revenue she brought dollars into
the country. She was even referred to sometimes as an invisible export. Observers noted with
surprise that the mystique of the monarchy survived even its increasing subjection to media
scrutiny. Now throughout the centuries the monarchs and the members of the royal family had been
insulated from popular inquisitiveness. But by the 1970s practically everything they did was
discussed especially in the British tabloid press, the so-called gutter press, newspapers like The
Sun and The Daily Mirror. Royalty were pursued everywhere by photographers with very, very long
range lenses and could reasonably had to fear that they were never actually private, that every
moment of their lives was going to be invaded by intrusive photographers. There were repeated
embarrassments in the failure of Prince Charles's marriage to Diana and then the failure of Prince
Andrew's marriage to Sarah Ferguson. But somehow the monarchy itself survived all these misfortunes.
Most ordinary British people never met a member of the royal family or if they did it was a lifelong
cherished memory that itself suggests the power of enthusiastic self-abasement which is so
characteristic of the lives of people living in monarchies. And of course it's the absolute
antithesis of the democratic assertion of equality. Now the role of the monarchs in Britain's
unwritten constitution had shifted gradually ever since the glorious revolution of the late 17th
century. Just as the Conservative Party showed a talent for adaptation and change, so did the
monarchy. In the late in the 18th century, the 1700s, the court was still the nation's centre of
patronage. Those who were in favour with the king, the so-called the inns, got all the privileges
and all the sinecures, the pensions and the money, the good stuff that flows from the throne.
18th century prime minister's first concern was to be sure of the king's support and I mentioned
this in talking about Robert Walpole near the beginning of the century and William Pitt at
the end of the century. They knew that they'd got to have the king's support because without it
they'd be too politically vulnerable. And it's in those circumstances that the opposition
literature developed about the corrupting tendency of power. The way in which being close to power
was likely to corrupt you. This was a rhetoric which the American revolutionaries had picked up in
the 1760s and 70s and which became a vital part of the justification of the American revolution.
And of course it was the rhetoric which became part of the basis for small government American
conservatism. No monarch after George III attempted to interfere directly in legislation or to veto
it once it had passed through parliament and that also marked a decline in their formal power.
The very last time it happened was in the year 1800 when George III flatly refused to sign
legislation for Catholic emancipation and warned Pitt away from forcing the issue because the king
said I'm the defender of the Church of England, defender of the faith and to give political
rights to the Catholics will be a straight violation of my oath of office. After that it never happened
again and as we saw earlier in the course eventually Catholic emancipation did pass through
parliament. But even in the 19th century informally the monarch remained very important and prime
ministers or shrewd prime ministers continued to continue to understand the need to cultivate the
monarch. We could see this very clearly in the case of Benjamin Disraeli. He was much better than
his rival Gladstone in Wrapping Queen Victoria around his little finger. He was flirtatious and
exactly the right way with Victoria and she loved him for it. He made her the Empress of India
and as I said before he was the one prime minister who was permitted to sit in the queen's presence.
The monarch remained a vital figure in the constitutional crises of 1832 and 1910 to 11.
The first occasion was when the House of Lords refused to pass the First Reform Act
and the prime minister instructed the king William IV, you will now have to give titles of
nobility to enough men to create a pro-reform majority in the House of Lords. Those were the
circumstances under which the House of Lords finally backed down and very reluctantly did in
fact pass the Great Reform Act. The same thing or something very similar happened again in George
V in 1911, the first year of his reign. When he was required to or was told by the prime minister
Askwith, if necessary I'm going to ask you to make enough new men into Lords so that the parliament
bill can pass restricting the power of the House of Lords to two years and again that was the moment
in which Parliament finally or the House of Lords finally backed down and agreed to the
principle very reluctantly. In 1922 King George V was obliged to choose a prime minister from
among the various conservative contenders. What happened in this instance was that the
conservative prime minister Bono Law was terminally ill and resigned. He advised the king about whether
to choose Lord Cousin or Stanley Baldwin but in the end it was the king who actually made the choice
in favour of Baldwin. Now every session of parliament begins with the king's speech or at
the moment the queen's speech that's the state opening of parliament. The speech itself is
written by the incumbent prime minister and the monarch is enjoined prohibited from openly expressing
partisan sentiments. So what this means is that and sometimes it leads to slightly ironic situations
for example King George VI read out Clement Attlee's plans for socialising the commanding
heights of the economy in 1945 even though it's fairly certain that he didn't in fact believe it
was a good idea. Similarly Queen Elizabeth II summarised the objectives of her Labour prime
ministers Harold Wilson, James Callaghan and Tony Blair. By the 1970s it was an open secret that
there's a great landowner and as a horse racing enthusiast and as one of the richest people in
the world the queen had strongly conservative sympathies but she was very very careful indeed
never to express them in some kind of open forum. Now another moment where the the condition of the
royal family was was laid bare was the abdication crisis of 1936. This was a moment which demonstrated
the limits of acceptable royal conduct. Prince Edward was the oldest son of King George V.
He was the prince of Wales that is the heir apparent to the throne and he was very popular,
well liked, approachable, he visited remote parts of Britain. He once protested at the awful conditions
under which coal miners lived in south Wales but his declaration then was interesting something
must be done. He was very careful not to say what for fear of becoming involved in a political
controversy. He enjoyed a rapturous welcome during several visits to the United States where he was
regarded as a fascinating celebrity but just before the death of his father at which point he
was going to succeed to the throne he became involved with Wallace Simpson. Wallace Simpson was a
twice divorced American woman and when his father then died when George V died making him the new
king King Edward VIII the prime minister Stanley Baldwin told him that he couldn't marry Wallace
Simpson because as king he was the head of the Church of England which was officially in those
days was officially opposed to divorce. In other words he couldn't scandalize the Church of England
of which he was the the head by doing exactly what the Church of which he was the head said him
that nobody must do. He was compelled to choose he could either choose to be king in which case he
was going to have to give up Mrs Simpson or he could choose to abdicate and astonishingly that's
what he decided to do. He gave up the throne and married and married Wallace Simpson with the result
that his younger brother the Duke of York then became the king instead became King George VI.
Now in those days there was much more media censorship surrounding the activities of the
monarchy and ordinary British citizens didn't get to hear about what was going on so although they
knew that that the king had died and that Edward was now the king the new king that most ordinary
Brits didn't know anything at all about Wallace Simpson. So when the king went on the radio to
announce that he was in love with a woman and he was determined to marry her even though it meant
that he was going to be excluded from the throne. It was met as an absolute astonishing surprise
by most of the British electorate. Americans knew about it because the American press already
had access to stories like this but people inside Britain didn't. Well he and his wife Mrs
Mrs Simpson then married and they spent the whole of the rest of their lives in exile. He got the job
of or he got the title of the Duke of Windsor but spent the rest of his life living outside Britain
and his brother George VI and particularly his brother's wife Elizabeth were very very keen to
keep them at a distance. From a constitutional point of view it's probably a good thing that they
never had any children because if they had had those children would have been pretenders to the
throne that is potential rivals to the children of King George VI. As it happened George VI only
had two daughters if the Duke of Windsor and his wife had had a son that son would have had a very
very strong claim to be the king but in the end that was a contingency that didn't arise.
Well Britain found in the 20th century that continuity in its heads of state coupled to
changes in its head of government is a very workable system and in fact that it adds another
element of stability to the system overall. In America by contrast the president also has
to be symbolic head of state that's one of the things which makes the job of president so
exacting that he's got to do the job which in Britain is shared between the monarch
and the prime minister. George VI who hadn't prepared hadn't grown up expecting ever to be king
and suddenly had to take on the role became a symbol of British resolution and imperturbability
during World War II but it hadn't started out looking that way in fact at first he seemed like
an inadequate figure. He had a very very severe stammer was an extremely nervous man and fortified
himself for public appearances by chain smoking a very very heavy chain smoker. In the late 1930s
he shared the views of Neville Chamberlain that Hitler should be appeased and as I mentioned when
Chamberlain came back from his meeting with Hitler in 1938 believing wrongly that Hitler had now
agreed to a peaceful future. The king took Chamberlain onto the balcony at Buckingham Palace as a
way of saying look how fully I endorse the work that this prime minister has done. George VI
was reluctant to accept Winston Churchill who replaced Neville Chamberlain in May of 1940 because
he shared the commentary view that Churchill wasn't really adequate to be prime minister
but as the war persisted the king came around and he likes virtually everybody else was very
impressed by the resolution of Churchill's war leadership and the magnificence of his wartime
speeches. He and his wife Elizabeth used to make visits to areas of London which had been bombed
by the German Air Force during the Blitz the 1940 and 41 during which night air raids were an almost
constant occurrence and the Royal Family had an odd bit of good fortune which is that Buckingham
Palace their London residence was damaged by German bombs but not too heavily damaged that
meant that they could plausibly claim that they too had faced the hazard of enemy bombardment
just like the rest of the the people of Britain. The king's wife Queen Elizabeth said now they
could look east enders in the face and there was the people of the east end of London which had
been very very heavily bombed by the Luftwaffe. Queen Elizabeth II has been the ideal figure
ahead. She had a very very highly developed sense of duty and in fact has spent her lifetime on
official visits. She enjoyed a surge of initial popularity on becoming the Queen at the age of
25 after her father's sudden death from lung cancer. Periodically since then she's had phases of
unpopularity if you've seen the movie The Queen you know all about this that she was regarded as
not having acted very appropriately in 97 at the time of of Princess Diana's death.
But it's true throughout the history of the monarchy that there have been moments of unpopularity
certainly in the 1860s and early 1870s Queen Victoria had also been very unpopular because
of her refusal to appear in public life during her long phase of mourning after the death of
Prince Albert but even so there's still no significant political suggestion of removing the
monarchy. Just very occasionally a member of parliament speaks up in favour of the idea of
turning Britain into a republic and abolishing the monarchy. One of them is called Dennis Skinner
his nickname is the beast of Bolsova. Bolsova is his constituency. He's been an embarrassment to
new labour because of his outspoken anti-monarchist and pro-socialist views. The monarchy is probably
as strong now as ever it was and everybody who loved Princess Diana now looks forward to the
eventual coronation of Prince William sooner or later as King William V of England. Now Jeremy
Paxman whom I mentioned earlier a journalist describes his early belief in his belief in his
own early life that Britain ought to be a republic but then he goes on to investigate the history
of the royal family and to explain its durability and he says if we were devising a system of
government for the 21st century we should not come up with what we have now. The arrangements are
antique, undemocratic and illogical but monarchies do not function by logic. If they work they do so
by appealing to other instincts of history, emotion, imagination and mythology and we have to acknowledge
that many of the most stable societies in Europe are monarchies while some of the most unstable
and corrupt have presidents. Well these are very Burke-ian sentiments the kind of thing
Edmund Burke would have said we've got to benefit from the inherited tradition however illogical
it might seem in purely rational terms and that reason is shallow compared to emotion,
tradition and the sense of reverence.
