As we saw last time, not all American conservatives were happy with a foreign policy based on
trying to democratize the world.
Paleo-conservative is the name given to advocates of the older conservative tradition, that
of Russell Kirk and Richard Weaver, who looked back to the classical and medieval sources
of our civilization, and were skeptical of Woodrow Wilson-esque plans to make the world
safe for democracy.
Southern descendants of the agrarians, such as Mel Bradford and Clyde Wilson, were particularly
well represented in this group, for so were keepers of the flame of small town, decentralized
life, and opponents of federal centralization, like Sam Francis.
Their journal was Chronicles of Culture.
Libertarians too, who'd always regarded anti-communism as a distorting force, saw the 1990s as an
opportunity to dismantle the monstrous military-industrial complex.
A third distinct group in the 1990s was the group of ecumenical religious writers, organized
by Richard John Newhouse, around the journal First Things.
They deplored the secularization of American life and tried to restore the idea, familiar
throughout much of American history, that this was a Judeo-Christian society.
In a controversial symposium from 1996, they came close to arguing that religious Americans
might have to declare war against their own government if it continued to sanction the
mass killing of unborn children, a phenomenon they compared to the Nazi Holocaust of the
1940s.
Well, the Paleo-Conservatives deplored the new prominence of neo-conservative ideas in
the 1980s and 90s, and they rallied around Pat Buchanan in the elections first of 1992,
as we saw last time, and then again in 1996 and 2000.
One group among these Paleo-Conservatives traced its lineage to the Old South and were
particularly closely linked with the southern agrarians of the 1930s who'd been one of
the groups to speak out against what they saw as the excessive materialism of the 1920s.
Their journal was The Southern Partisan, founded in 1981.
It was very critical of what it called the Yankee-Conservatism of national review, and
its founders noted that there was, quote, there was no popular voice for the qualities
and the values embodied in southern history, the importance of family life, small communities,
local government, honor and manners, the sacred value of the land, the need to nurture the
religious roots of the republic, and to keep the old stories alive as a basis for renewal.
The Southern Partisan was always vulnerable to the accusation of racial insensitivity
and of sentimentalizing the Old Slave South, and they were never particularly eager to
allay those allegations.
One of their principal figures was Mel Bradford.
He hoped to become their standard bearer inside the federal government, and for a while looked
like a possible candidate to become director of the National Endowment for the Humanities.
Mel Bradford was a professor at the University of Dallas, formerly a student of one of the
Agrarians, Donald Davidson, and a scholar of Abraham Lincoln.
He was nominated for the NEH, for the National Endowment for the Humanities, in the Reagan
Years.
But neo-conservatives spoke out against him.
One of them was Irving Crystal, and other of them was George Will, about whom I've so
far said very little.
George Will was one of the new and significant conservative voices in journalism of the 1970s
and 80s.
He began as National Reviews Washington correspondent, sending back regular reports during the Watergate
Crisis, and then went on to win the Pulitzer Prize for Journalism, which of course made
him a major figure in American journalism, from then right up to the present.
He also was opposed to the idea of having Mel Bradford head the National Endowment of
the Humanities.
After all he said, Bradford used to work for George Wallace, the racist candidate in 1968.
And Bradford describes Abraham Lincoln not as a hero, but as a tyrant.
And this was true.
Bradford saw Lincoln as the first in a long line of odious centralizers, and as a president
who had usurped the power of the states.
His description of Lincoln made Lincoln seem hardly better than a dictatorial war criminal,
luring immigrants from abroad, then sending them into the meat grinder of the Union Army,
suppressing habeas corpus and basic civil rights, a violator of the South's right to
secede, and an economic centralizer.
Well, as you can see from this description, Bradford still took very, very much the position
of the secessionists and thought that they'd been entirely justified, and that Lincoln
had usurped power and enforced his opinions on them unjustifiably by sheer military might.
Bradford hated corporate capitalism, he hated the mobility of modern life, and he hated
the rhetoric of equality.
Looking further back in American history, he regarded the revolution of the 1770s and
80s as a backward-looking event, undertaken to restore traditional English liberties and
not a forward-looking event inaugurating American democracy.
Bradford wrote,
Nothing could be more natural than that once we lost one constitution and Bill of Rights
through revolution, an act based on elaborate constitutional arguments.
We established another constitution and another Bill of Rights, or rather several of both,
as soon as possible.
There is no way of understanding the origins of our fundamental law apart from 18th century
English constitutionalism, than which there is no doctrine more conservative.
In his view, a deliberate or possibly an accidental misreading of this tradition had distorted
it in favor of democracy and in favor of equality.
This far-reaching change, he said, based on a misunderstanding of our heritage from the
Declaration of Independence and from the Christian promise that grace is available to all, threatens
to swallow up our reverence for law, responsible character, moral principle, and inherited
prescription.
Well, that was that was Mel Bradford.
His friend Clyde Wilson was a professor at the University of South Carolina and was
the editor of the papers of John C. Calhoun.
Calhoun, of course, had been the outspoken champion of states' rights, one of the great
intellectual defenders of slavery in the days before the Civil War.
So it was highly appropriate that this group who are clinging so hard to the Southern case
should be working with Calhoun.
And he agreed in all the essentials with Bradford, small government and decentralization were
vital to America, restoring the legacy of Thomas Jefferson.
He agreed that citizens had exchanged virtue, central for a republic, for luxury.
And he wrote, the people must not only put limits on government.
They must break their own dependence upon the corrupt system.
Give up the expectation that things will be done for them and demand the return of our
resources to ourselves to dispose of in our own way.
I think part of the irony of their position is that these Southern Paleo-Conservatives
were arguing for a profoundly conservative vision of society by invoking Jefferson, many
of whose contemporaries had feared him for what they saw as his excessive radicalism.
This is a lovely example of the way in which the symbolic meaning of an individual can
change drastically with the passage of time.
It's very hard to imagine conservatives in Jefferson's own day seeing him as the conservative
champion, but it's certainly possible by the 20th century for him to be interpreted
in that light.
In any case, the neo-conservative critics hated all this.
They did believe in equality and democracy.
They proposed that the job at the National Endowment for the Humanities should go to
William Bennett instead, and he got the job, causing a lasting legacy of bitterness between
the two groups.
A second collection of Paleo-Conservatives organized around a journal called Chronicles.
These were Midwesterners as opposed to the Southerners, but they also favored small-town
decentralized political life.
Chronicles of culture, their journal, was founded in 1977 by the Rockford Institute
in Illinois, and the principal figures there were Sam Francis and Thomas Fleming.
Francis, in an article from 1986, wrote a rousing defense of Joe McCarthy, the anti-communist
Wisconsin senator of the early 1950s, saying that McCarthy had been a militant anti-liberal,
and that conservatives and right-wingers should still support him today because he was right
on all the big issues.
Fleming was outspokenly anti-immigrant and almost comparable to Theodore Roosevelt in
his admiration for the Anglo-Saxons and for their special virtues.
Paul Gottfried, one of their collaborators, agreed, even though he was himself Jewish,
and he saw it as the historically justified view to exclude immigrants, especially immigrants
from places which didn't have the Anglo-Saxon traditions in politics.
Gottfried wrote, Hamilton, Jefferson, Madison, Jay and Franklin all spoke out against liberal
immigration and warned against admitting into the New Republic those who had come from cultures
markedly different from the one they were entering.
Like Pat Buchanan, they wanted a much tougher policy along the Mexican border.
Milton Williamson, another member of this group, noted the paradox that by about 1990,
quote, it is considered humanitarian to fret about population growth and its effects on
the environment at the global level, but racist, xenophobic, uncompassionate and un-American
to worry about the population crisis as it immediately affects the United States, the
only place in the world where we are in a position to do anything about it.
So in other words, in Williamson's view, if we're serious about the dangers of overpopulation,
we can stop it right here and now by not letting anybody else into the United States.
Well, rebukes like this are rebukes both to liberals and to neo-conservatives because
they generally favored an open immigration policy.
They were very confident of the assimilative powers of America, and very often from their
own family histories they could see that their ancestors one or two or three generations
back, mainly Jewish and Catholic immigrants from Europe, had in fact assimilated and given
them, the children and grandchildren, the opportunity to thrive in America.
So they also tended to take the view that more population is a greater source of wealth
and therefore should be welcomed.
These kind of disputes came to a head at a 1986 meeting of the Philadelphia Society,
and many smoldering resentments between the neo and the paleo-conservatives came briefly
out into the open.
A paleo-conservative speaker named Stephen Tonsaw, he was a professor of history at
the University of Michigan, made a great outburst against the former leftists who are now neo-conservatives.
And here's what he said, it is splendid when the town hall gets religion and joins the church.
Now and then she makes a good choir director, but when she begins to tell the minister what
he ought to say in his Sunday sermons, matters have been carried too far.
So the old town whore is the neo-conservatives, as he saw it.
Tonsaw accused the neo-conservatives of being far too complacent about the growth of the
welfare state, and of being, quote, global Democrats and secularists whose democratic
universalism was reminiscent of Trotskyist utopianism, and of course he knew perfectly
well that many of them in the 1930s during their own youth had in fact been Trotskyists.
He also thought that religion was central to conservatism, and that the neo-conservatives,
whatever their religious origins, were now too secular, too much beholden to radical
modernism to be convincing as conservatives.
Tonsaw carried on in this way.
Halfway from modernity is not far enough.
Politics has always been inseparable from culture, and both derive ultimately from religion.
It is absurd to believe that one can remain a modernist in culture and reject the implications
of modernism in politics.
Unbelief is incompatible with conservatism.
Conserve what?
And to what end?
Well, that's an unusual point of view, the claim that you really can't be conservative
if you're not religious.
Not many others in any part of the movement were willing to go to that position with Stephen
Tonsaw.
Libertarians, another conservative grouping, saw the end of the Cold War as an opportunity
to revive their fortunes and to begin dismantling the great warfare state, the military-industrial
complex.
Murray Rothbard had been discouraged by the libertarian party's inability to attract voters,
and he hoped that now it was going to be possible to improve its image by making an alliance
with other conservative groups.
The problem for the libertarians was that during the 1960s they periodically had alliances
with parts of the New Left.
I mentioned this previously that for a while the anarcho-capitalists had had a meeting
of minds with the anarcho-syndicalists, and it was the extreme left and the extreme right,
because they both agreed over the tyranny of the American government in the Vietnam War
and in compelling people to join the army in the draft.
The libertarians had never entirely been able to shake the hippie associations that
some libertarians had certainly had in the 1960s.
It was a constant struggle for them to be respectable.
At a meeting in 1989 at Rockford, libertarians and paleoconservatives together founded another
new grouping, the John Randolph Club, that is naming themselves after the defender of
southern tradition, John Randolph of Roanoke, whose work we investigated much earlier in
this course.
The well in Rockwell of the Ludwig von Mises Center at the University of Auburn University,
I should say, combined libertarian economic ideas with cultural conservatism and sympathized
with Rothbard's general outlook.
So although on the face of it, traditionalists and libertarians still had differences, they
can understand the benefits of uniting, particularly because they all understood that the two-party
electoral system in the United States strongly disfavors third parties and that if you want
to be serious about ever mounting a campaign, you've got to build up alliances rather than
have the constant fragmentation, which is always the temptation among people who are
looking for ideological purity.
Libertarians remained very active in politics in the 1990s and into the new century and occasionally
they influenced Republican policy questions, but their profound hostility to the modern
state made them marginal from centers of power and influence.
Even somebody like President Reagan, despite his intention of beginning to break down the
great state, had actually proved unable to do it.
Once bureaucracies exist, they fight very tenaciously indeed to retain their existence
and politicians will hardly ever risk exhausting themselves and making themselves unpopular
in the act of trying to get rid of them, so they tend to stay once they're there.
And libertarians more and more had to struggle against the imputation that they were simply
utopian in their idea that the government could shrink.
Another group different again was the Theoconservatives.
These were religious intellectuals with a more cerebral approach to politics than that
of the new Christian right.
And they became more influential in the 1990s because really of the work of one man, Richard
John Newhouse.
As I mentioned previously, after the evangelical scandals of the late 80s, the events surrounding
Jimmy Swaggart and Jim and Tammy Baker, the moral majority had shut down in 1989, but
Ralph Reed's Christian Coalition took over, working hard to build grassroots constituencies
and to run their candidates very hard at the level of school boards and local city and
county governments.
The problem was that it was intellectually a bit thin.
They were interested in the work of Francis Schaefer.
Many of them were enthusiastic about C.S. Lewis, and they were great readers of Bibles.
But it seemed as though many of their members were more interested in banning sexy books
from libraries than they were in reading good ones.
Now, in order to understand the next anecdote, I must remind you that Al Gore's wife, Tipper
Gore, was herself involved in a movement towards library censorship or labeling materials
which might be troublesome to children.
The paleoconservative Thomas Fleming made this remark.
He said, if the library refused 100 requests for Goethe or Bishop Berkeley, then it would
be time to accuse the library of censorship.
After decades of efforts to ban nasty books, rape movies, and put warning labels on records,
the Tipper Gores of America have contributed nothing, literally nothing positive to our
culture.
This was an important point that particularly in the New Christian Right, there wasn't a
very rich intellectual tradition.
It tended to be a defiant assertion of simple populist answers and a ready reliance on
the Bible, having none of the richness that other parts of the conservative movement certainly
showed.
So I want to indicate now the theoconservatives in this respect were something new.
Now, Catholics had always played a prominent role in the conservative movement since World
War II, and I've given many examples of that.
People like William Buckley Jr. himself, whose Catholic faith was very, very serious to him.
His brother-in-law, Brent Basel, Michael Novak, who wrote The Rise of the Unmeltable Ethnics
and the Spirit of Democratic Capitalism, Russell Kirk and Jeffrey Hart, both of whom were converts,
and many others.
There's a prominent Catholic role in the movement, and now they were about to acquire a powerful
new ally.
Richard Newhouse was a former radical in the 1960s.
He'd been an outspoken opponent of the Vietnam War.
He was a Lutheran minister.
But in the 1980s, he published two influential books on religion and politics, showing that
his thinking was changing.
The first one was called The Naked Public Square from 1984, and the second one was called
The Catholic Moment from 1987.
The first of these books was a lament at the excessive secularization of the United States.
Newhouse said the First Amendment was never meant to exclude religion from public life.
It was written only to prevent any one church from becoming dominant over all the other
Christians.
But, he said, recent Supreme Court decisions have now forced Christianity out of public
life while authorizing hedonism and permissive sexuality.
Liberal democracy is in danger if there are no fundamental points of agreement, and if
religion, which asks questions of ultimate concern, is no longer allowed to participate.
Here's a passage from his book The Naked Public Square.
The case can be made that the great social and political devastations of our century
have been perpetrated by regimes of militant secularism, notably those of Hitler, Stalin,
and Mao.
That is true, and it suggests that the Naked Public Square is a dangerous place when religious
transcendence is excluded, when the public square has been swept clean of divisive sectarianisms,
the space is opened to seven demons aspiring to transcendent authority.
Our question can certainly not be the old one of whether religion and politics should
be mixed.
They inescapably do mix, like it or not.
The question is whether we can devise forms for that interaction, which can revive rather
than destroy the liberal democracy that is required by a society that would be pluralistic
and free.
In the Catholic moment, the second of these books, he argued that the Catholic Church,
his rich intellectual heritage, was ideally equipped to address all these questions, especially
in the age of Pope John Paul II, the Polish figure around whom anti-communist Christians
had rallied, and particularly after the Second Vatican Council of the 1960s, which had purged
the Catholic Church of much of its old intolerance.
Newhouse said, Catholicism better than any other Church has a beautiful balance of reason
and revelation.
It has a long tradition of natural law teaching, which certainly appeals most deeply to people
of faith, but is also explicable to people whatever their metaphysical views.
It has a complicated and very well worked out theory relating to just war.
And the paper in cyclical letters, the letters of advice written extensively over the last
century on the crucial issues of our time, have built up a fund of wisdom which can be
used to good effect by all conservatives.
Well, it might seem unusual that a Lutheran minister should write so enthusiastically
about Catholicism, but perhaps he resolved the paradox by himself converting to Catholicism
and almost at once training and taking the vows and becoming a Catholic priest.
Newhouse had long been a celibate, even as a Lutheran, so this transition was relatively
straightforward.
It would have been more complicated had he been married, as Luther and clergy are entitled
to be.
After separating from the Rockford Institute, he founded First Things in 1990.
In the 80s, his Center on Religion and Society set in New York had been funded by the Rockford
Institute, which also ran chronicles.
But Newhouse himself didn't like chronicles, particularly he didn't like its xenophobic
attitude to foreigners, to immigrants, and he didn't like its vulnerability to charges
of anti-Semitism.
He was himself outspoken in favor of ecumenism, bringing members of the different religions
together.
And so he criticized what he called the magazine's indulgence in nativism and its increasingly
shrill and mean-spirited war on conservatives who did not pass its ideological tests.
A crisis came in 1989 when the Rockford executives ejected Newhouse from his New York offices.
He literally came to work one morning and found that he'd been locked out and that essentially
all the stuff from his office had been put out on the street, that the dispute between
them had become too acute.
The mainstream media followed this spat among right-wing groups with great interest.
Major funding came from the Bradley Foundation, and now that Rockford and Newhouse were splitting,
the Bradley Foundation decided that it was going to stay with Newhouse.
Of the two, it preferred Newhouse's outlook, and a spokesman for the Foundation said,
Rockford, particularly its magazine Chronicles, is somewhat critical of free markets and
spreading democracy.
It looks back to agrarian society, small towns, religious values.
It sees modern times as too secular, too democratic.
There's a distrust of cities and of cultural pluralism, which they find partly responsible
for social decay in American life.
So the Bradley Foundation came down against Rockford and in favor of Newhouse.
First Things, his new journal, gave prominence to such evangelical activists as the former
Watergate conspirator Charles Coulson, who had been through a profound conversion experience
while he was in prison, and had begun an evangelical prison ministry and was a major figure in
the evangelical world of the 1980s and 90s.
But also to Jewish writers like Rabbi David Novak.
It was central to Newhouse's position that all the members of the Judeo-Christian churches
could collaborate and that the things they held together in common easily outweighed
the things that kept them apart.
He agreed with the Christian Coalition that the defeat of communism was only half the battle
and that they also had to overcome decadence and immorality inside America itself.
He deplored abortion, hated the normalization of homosexuality, and disliked the American
refusal to condemn people whose misconduct had led them to contracting AIDS.
Obviously AIDS was another of the great issues of the 1980s and 90s, and Newhouse's view
was this, we must hate the sin and love the sinner.
But that doesn't mean we've got to abdicate our moral responsibility.
The people who contract AIDS, he said, have done things which they ought not to have done
and we ought to be much more willing to condemn them for it.
He was horrified, as I mentioned, at the normalization of homosexuality.
Newhouse himself with Charles Coulson collaborated on the 1994 statement, evangelicals and Catholics
together, emphasizing their shared heritage and shared concerns.
This was one of many signs of rapprochement on the right.
Before 1960, the idea of Protestants and Catholics collaborating had been almost impossible
to imagine.
In those days, especially before the election of President Kennedy, anti-Catholicism was
a very active force in American life.
But by the 1980s and 90s, a shared belief that America faced a moral crisis had brought
them together.
This had been very, very plain in Operation Rescue, the anti-abortion movement during
the late 1980s.
Theo conservatives raised the possibility that the government's complicity with abortion
might force them to abandon America.
The symposium called The End of Democracy, the Judicial User-Patient of Politics in 1996.
It argued very much along the lines earlier worked out by Brent Basel and Robert Bork
that the Supreme Court had usurped the legislative function on behalf of a radical agenda promoting
immorality.
The symposium began like this, law, as it is presently made by the judiciary, has declared
its independence from morality.
Indeed, morality, especially traditional morality, and most especially morality associated with
religion, has been declared legally suspect and a threat to public order.
Soon, said the contributors to this symposium, citizens were going to have to choose not
God and country, but God or country, an incredible position to be put in.
One of the contributors to the symposium was Robert George, a professor of politics at
Princeton University.
And here's his response to the Supreme Court's position on abortion.
He wrote,
It is not merely that the claim of these justices to have found a pro-abortion mandate in the
Constitution is manifestly ludicrous.
The value of constitutional democracy lies ultimately in its capacity to serve and secure
the common good, which demands above all the protection of fundamental human rights.
If the Constitution really did abandon the vulnerable to private acts of lethal violence,
and indeed positively disempowered citizens from working through the democratic process
to correct these injustices, then it would utterly lack the capacity to bind the consciences
of citizens, taking the view, in other words, that it might be immoral to regard oneself
as bound by the declarations of the Supreme Court.
Well, that in turn brought forth irritated rejoinders from more secular conservatives,
including William Bennett, who pointed out that America did have a political system that
was responsive to citizens' initiatives and concerns, and that working within the system
could still change the situation.
The position of the symposium also infuriated Gertrude Himmelfarber, historian and other
prominent neo-conservative, who said that slavery, bad as it was, had not delegitimated
the Constitution itself, and neither should abortion.
Well, the theo-conservatives and the paleo-conservatives, plus the unassimilated libertarians, showed
that there was plenty of internal conflict in the American conservative movement in the
1980s and 90s, and this underlined the possibility that the end of the Cold War had removed the
one vital rallying point of anti-communism.
