Alan Bloom, a University of Chicago philosophy professor, published The Closing of the American
Mind in 1987 and to his astonishment it became a national bestseller. A prolonged howl of
anguish against the decline of civilization. It was particularly harsh in its condemnation
of youth culture, rock music, hedonism and overindulgent parenting. Bloom sought the wisdom
of the ancients and appealed against trendy and relevant approaches to education. At the
same time, E.D. Hirsch published cultural literacy, deploring the decline of a nationally
shared fund of knowledge. On behalf of rigor in the arts and scholarship, Hilton Kramer
founded New Criterion in 1982. He, too, hated the substitution of political relevance for
aesthetic excellence in literature and painting. These cultural protests from conservatives
who took on the role of their generation's guardians of civilization came to a head in
a controversy over the writing of national standards for the study of history.
Lynn Chaney, head of the National Endowment for the Humanities, led the charge against
what she saw as the biased hate America curriculum produced by Gary Nash and his team at the
University of California, Los Angeles. It gave more attention to Harriet Tubman than
to George Washington. Frequently referred to the Ku Klux Klan and the Trail of Tears.
They were passing over Edison and Carnegie in silence, and it put Rockefeller on trial
for economic crimes. Roger Kinball suggested in Tenured Radicals that the new left, defeated
on the streets in the 1960s, had now taken over the academy and were subverting the minds
of impressionable youth with leftist propaganda. Collectively, these culture warriors argued
that conservatives had won the battle for national politics that lost the battle for
the souls of young Americans. Well, American conservatives in the 80s and 90s became increasingly
afraid that, despite their political successes, it was all going to turn to ashes if they
weren't able to hold on to the high ground of American culture and civilization, and
particularly education. This was the importance to them of Alan Bloom's book, The Closing
of the American Mind. And Bloom described the United States as a wilderness of rock
music, pornography, ignorance, self-indulgence, and hedonism. Here's one of the most famous
passages from the book on the degradation of young people today. He wrote,
Picture a 13-year-old boy sitting in the living room of his family home doing his math assignment
while wearing his Walkman headphones or watching MTV. He enjoys the liberties hard-won over
the centuries by the alliance of philosophic genius and political heroism, consecrated
by the blood of martyrs. He is provided with comfort and leisure by the most productive
economy ever known to mankind. Science has penetrated the secrets of nature in order
to provide him with the marvellous, lifelike electronic sound and imagery production he
is enjoying. And in what does progress culminate? A pubescent child whose body throbs with
orgasmic rhythms, whose feelings are made articulate in hymns to the joy of onanism
or the killing of parents, whose ambition is to win fame and wealth imitating the drag
queen who makes the music. In short, life is made into a non-stop, commercially pre-packaged
masturbational fantasy. People of future civilizations will wonder at this and find it as incomprehensible
as we do the caste system, witch-burning, harems, cannibalism, and gladiatorial
combats. Well, Alan Bloom's recommendations about how to rescue America from this situation
included a return to classical wisdom and a much more rigorous, much more rigorous, elitist
education. He'd been a student of Leo Strauss, whose influence on the American conservative
movement has been much debated. Strauss and Bloom, the student, were both great believers
in the power of the very best literature to teach every generation. They had a small
list of timeless classics, Plato, the authors of the Bible, Shakespeare, and Hegel were
among them. And their view was that you shouldn't read these works in historical context, but
rather you should read them as a source of absolutely dependable truth. They were very
much against the idea of cultural relativism, which was becoming more and more persuasive
in most parts of the American Academy. To Alan Bloom's surprise, the book became a
bestseller, and in fact it occasioned a great soul searching throughout the nation, which
ironically disproved the theme of the book. If the American mind was closed, books like
that, full of dense philosophical passages, wouldn't get read at all. The very fact that
so many people took the message so seriously and began to worry and to wonder and to hold
concerned discussions about it could be taken as reassuring evidence that the American
mind was very much alive and that the relationship between intellectual and moral things was
an issue of active concern among important people. Academic reviewers rejected Bloom's
assertions while accusing him of sexism, racism, elitism, and opposition to multiculturalism
and pluralism, which were some of the leading intellectual trends of the time. And he certainly
was an elitist. He was quite open about that. When he was invited to give the graduation
speech at Harvard University a year or two later, his speech began like this, my fellow
elitists. And his faith in absolute truth did make him ready to oppose multiculturalism.
Cultural relativism itself has an interesting history. It had developed first of all in
anthropology as anthropologists had realized that rather than regarding their own society
as right and that those they were going to study as more or less wrong, what they needed
to do was to suspend their own values completely and try to understand the values of the societies
into which they went on their own terms to see how they functioned, how they made sense
in terms of the cosmology of these different peoples. And gradually the idea that academic
study ought to be undertaken this way with a cultural modesty became more and more widespread.
But conservative writers like Bloom said that liberals had taken it much too far and
that it prevented them from necessary discernment of what was good and what was bad. William
Buckley had made this, that joke earlier, a liberal is someone who doubts his principles
even while he's acting upon them. And although that was an intentional overstatement, it did
embody a little kernel of truth that confidence about one's values was becoming a little bit
more, it was much more hesitant by the late 20th century than it had been previously.
More democratic in outlook was equally dismayed by trends in American education was E.D.
Hirsch with his program of cultural literacy put forward in a book of the same name, Cultural
Literacy in 1987. Hirsch was a professor of English at the University of Virginia. And
the theme of his book was this, educated Americans once shared a common body of knowledge that
enabled them all to communicate accurately and efficiently.
But trendy new curriculums, plus sheer neglect, had robbed many people of that common heritage,
especially the poor and members of minority groups, so that they didn't know a wide range
of cultural references without which they worked at a terrible disadvantage in trying
to get good jobs. They should learn this heritage anew in order to thrive in the wider world.
The book, Cultural Literacy, ended with a 65-page list of basic ideas and concepts which
everyone should know. And when you read the list, it all seems terribly disembodied and
disjointed. Look under F in the list, for example, and you find this. Fiscal policy, fish or
cut bait, fishing, nuclear, fits and starts, Fitzgerald, Ella, Fitzgerald, F. Scott, Fjord,
Flapper and so on. Later on, Hirsch followed up by writing the Dictionary of Cultural Literacy,
in which he gave much more space to saying, this is what everybody needs to know.
Now like Alan Bloom, Hirsch was sharply criticized for privileging certain themes and ideas and
for seeing merit in learning by rote from lists, for neglecting a variety of learning
styles and for discriminating against minorities. He indignantly denied it and said he represented
a real liberalism as opposed to one that had been seduced by relativism. I think it's justifiable
to see him as a conservative, even though he wasn't sure it was a label he wanted, because
of his central idea, which was that there's a common fund of ideas and a wisdom inherited
from the past that everybody should know and build on as they preserve their civilization.
Conservative literary and art critics feared that the quest for political correctness and
contemporary relevance had trumped time-honored artistic criteria. That was the motive of
Hilton Kramer for the founding of another journal, The New Criterion, in 1982. He made
an extremely sophisticated case for high standards and for a transcendence of politics
in the arts. Hilton Kramer was the longtime chief art critic of the New York Times, but
he believed that there are absolute standards in the arts and that they should be protected
from criteria of political relevance. During the 1970s, 60s and 70s and into the 80s, the
art world more and more was enthusiastic about art by women, art by minorities, art by refugees,
art which either explicitly or with thin veiling made a political point rather than
solely an aesthetic one. In Kramer's view, work like that may be good, but it ought not
to be praised and it ought not to be given museum space unless it's good as art, in
other words, unless it can fulfill the criteria of aesthetics as well as politics. Kramer was
an enthusiast for abstract expressionism, the work of artists like Mark Rothko and Jackson
Pollock. Earlier conservatives had hated work like that. In the early days of the Newt
National Review, you could sometimes find peppery critics saying that abstract art was
itself part of the communist conspiracy. Well, that wasn't at all Hilton Kramer's way, but
he did favor the idea of agreeing upon and maintaining high artistic considerations.
Here's the first editorial from his journal in 1982 and he said that he was harkening
back to the day when criticism was more strictly concerned to distinguish achievement from
failure, to identify and uphold a standard of quality and to speak plainly and vigorously
about the problems that beset the life of the arts and the life of the mind in our society.
He added that the prevailing aesthetic and artistic ideas of the 1960s had been an insidious
assault on the mind, substituting sentimental radicalism for intelligent and critical thought.
What was even worse in his view was that the art world had turned against capitalism, even
though in his opinion, capitalism, for all its many flaws, has proved to be the greatest
safeguard of democratic institutions and artistic freedom that the world has given us.
In his view, it was insanity for artists not to favor capitalism because without it they
couldn't prosper. Well, he tried hard to make sure that the pages of the new criterion were
non-partisan, but in fact contributors to the journal as the 80s went on were increasingly
recognizable conservatives and they included names which will have become familiar to anyone
who's listened to these lectures, people like Norman Pod Horitz, the editor of commentary,
Gertrude Himmelfarb, Roger Scruton, the English conservative philosopher and others like them.
Conservative intellectuals also deplored the use of federal funds to underwrite art shows that
many citizens regarded as blasphemous or pornographic. A flash point in this respect comes with the
Corker and Galleries decision in 1989 to mount a display of photographs by Robert Mapplethorpe.
Mapplethorpe himself, one of the famous photographers of the 80s, had recently died from AIDS and
the photos themselves expressed a very explicit homoeroticism, plus sadomasochistic themes.
Jesse Helms and some other conservative politicians protested against the idea that federal funding
should underwrite a show of this kind when the work itself clearly outraged the sensibilities of
many viewers. Under this kind of political pressure, the gallery withdrew its sponsorship of the show.
That led Liberal intellectuals to cry censorship, but Hilton Kramer writing in the new criterion
said no this isn't censorship, censorship would be preventing showing the work altogether whereas
in fact other Galleries were going to pick it up. Here the issue is simply not using tax
payers money but permitting the show to go on elsewhere. Kramer also criticised the idea
which seemed to him to becoming more and more widespread that somehow the more shocking
a piece of art was, somehow the better that made it or the more relevant that made it.
In his view that was a fallacy. National Review wrote an editorial about this dispute and
agreed that the photographer had chosen shocking subjects deliberately to affront the viewers
sense of decency. The editorialist went on. He, Mapplethorpe, exploited the dual reaction
to create tension in the viewer. What is indecent and immoral becomes stunningly beautiful. There
was no question he said that these were in fact phenomenally beautiful objects. But he
added that it was disingenuous of Liberals to imply that somehow they weren't shocking
or that somehow the dirty mindedness of Jesse Helms was the real issue at stake. It wasn't.
One of Helms and Kramer's friends was Roger Kimball. Roger Kimball deployed the politicisation
not so much of art as of academic life and wrote a book length study of this phenomenon in a book
called Tenured Radicals in 1990 and followed it up with another one called The Long March in the
year 2000. He theorised that the new left radicals of the 1960s having lost the battle in the streets
in their revolutionary hopes of the Vietnam years had now taken it to the college classroom instead,
in other words that they'd worked their way into academic institutions, they'd become faculty
members, they'd got tenure and now they were teaching sinister alien leftist values to
credulous generations of students. In a way Tenured Radicals, this book by Kimball was an update of
William Buckley's book God and Man at Yale written in the early 1950s although he wasn't
particularly interested in the religious side of the question. Kimball's point was this,
parents when they pay their their children's college tuition are paying to have their their own
values reinforced but the professors undermine those values with subversive notions. The curriculum
now he said includes gay studies, afrocentrism, deconstructionism, all of which are assaults
on the principles on the central principles of western civilisation and when they're challenged
on this point he added they shelter behind the idea of academic freedom and deny that anybody
got the right to to specify what they must or must not teach but actually said Kimball they're
denying true academic freedom to professors and students who are conservatives with a mixture
of censorship and ridicule so in other words not only are they infecting young minds they're also
intolerant. His second book The Long March was a lament about the long shadow cast by the counter
culture heroes of the 1960s and in Kimball's view these were a dreadful group the Beatles,
Abby Hoffman, Alan Ginsberg. He said between them these culture heroes of the 60s had challenged
the fundamentals of American sexual morality they had degraded intellectual standards and they'd
promoted the cult of youth. He was alarmed to notice the way that even the defenders of civilisation
had picked up certain elements of their ideas particularly the glorification of youth and
the idea that excessive permissiveness should be encouraged rather than prevented.
Well it was common by the 1980s and 90s for liberal historians to denigrate the 1950s as the era
of the man in the grey flannel suit and by contrast to glorify the 60s as a period of great cultural
and artistic outpouring. Roger Kimball did exactly the opposite he was full of praise for the 50s
for its creativity along with its stability and the constructive aspects of the 1950s intellectual
life much of which was a great achievement that was then lost he said in the 60s. Reading Kimball
side by side with some of the leftist historians is to get a kind of mirror image effect praising
either the 50s or the 60s depending on which values you preferred. Kimball was a friend of Kramer's
and he also wrote regularly for the new criterion here's a characteristic article by him. He said
much of what presents itself as art today can scarcely be distinguished from political
sermonising on the one hand or the pathetic recapitulation of Dadaist pathologies on the other.
He said that the new criterion stood for the revival of basic artistic technique basic
excellence which was itself increasingly being neglected and that it was dedicated to ignoring
shallow provocation and moreover it was eager to recover the reputation of artists who'd
wrongly been neglected because of the unfashionable themes of their work. He ended like this. The
new criterion has specialized in resuscitating important figures whose voices have been drowned out
by the demotic inanities of pop culture or embalmed by the dead hand of the academy.
A lovely kick at the academics there and the one had he saying that they're very sinister
on the other hand that they kill everything they touch. Well numerous conservative imitators
also deplored the degradation of academic standards the politicization of higher education
and what they saw as academics greed and empire building tendencies. As you can tell from many of
the people I'm discussing today American academia was held very much under suspicion and endowed
by many American conservatives. Charles Sykes wrote a pair of books in the late 80s once called
Prof Scam from 1988 and others called The Hollow Men from 1990 and he argued that professors
now use the tenure system not to advance daring new ideas which was the justification for the
system in the first place but rather to shelter the fact that they were really very idle and that
they were more interested in an incestuous form of academic inbreeding. Peter Shaw in his book
The War Against the Intellect from 1989 deplored the rise of victim groups as objects of study. He
said there's been a steady decline of rigorous intellectual standards and they've been replaced
by emotion and wish fulfillment especially in new disciplines like women's studies and the studies
of third world peoples which in his view competed with one another to find people
who could be described as victims and then sympathized with and given special consideration
while assaulting the dead white males who allegedly had persecuted them.
This was a major theme of conservative writing throughout the 1980s and 90s and to some extent
into the new century. Now at the same time that a wide array of conservative adults were writing
in this way conservative students were also becoming involved in writing critical work of
their own. Conservative student journals such as The Dartmouth Review which was founded in 1980
also began to complain against political correctness and fashionable ideologies on campus.
The first of these student journals had been The Alternative founded at the University of Indiana
back in the late 1960s by Emmett Tyrrell and Tyrrell had made the exceptional jump from starting
out as the editor of a student paper and then managing to grow up with his paper and launch it
on the nationwide scale as The American Spectator which is one of the most successful conservative
journals of the 70s and 80s. One of the founders of The Dartmouth Review was Benjamin Hart the son
of Jeffrey Hart who was a senior editor at National Review and a close friend of William Buckley.
In other words, Ben Hart in starting his journal has a lot of expert opinion to draw on very,
very close to home indeed. With his father's help he managed to raise funds from conservative
foundations, pointing out to them that these battles for ideas start on campuses and if the
campuses are in fact in the hands of the radicals and the liberals we students need to fight back.
We need to offer an alternative vision of the truth to students who otherwise aren't going
to hear conservative points at all. Many of the conservative foundations found that idea persuasive
and began to give money to conservative student papers. The Dartmouth Review from the outset was
very hostile to affirmative action both in student selection and in faculty appointments.
They ridiculed radical professors, particularly those who favored ideas of political correctness
and they were particularly harsh against a music professor, an African American who sometimes
delivered abusive racial harangues in class, finally forcing him into retirement. One college
official was so vexed by the Dartmouth Review and its provocation that in a confrontation with Benjamin
Hart he actually bit the young editor. Ben Hart wrote a memoir about all this called
Poison Ivy, obviously punning on the idea on the one hand of poison ivy and the other
idea of the ivy league schools. One of his fellow editors was Dinesh D'Souza who like
Emmett Tyrrell went on from student journalism to becoming a significant figure in the conservative
movement later on in his life and D'Souza thinking about the the work of the Dartmouth Review
described later the paradoxical situation in which they'd found themselves as young student
journalists. D'Souza wrote this, the dilemma can be stated this way. Typically the conservative
attempts to conserve, to hold on to the values of the existing society. But what if the existing
society is inherently hostile to conservative beliefs? It is foolish for a conservative to attempt
to conserve that culture. Rather he must seek to undermine it, to thwart it, to destroy it at
the root level. This means that the conservative must be philosophically conservative but
temperamentally radical. That is what we at the Dartmouth Review quickly understood and certainly
that was true of D'Souza himself who remained a lightning rod for controversy into his adult life.
Another of their editors in the early years who went on to an adult career in conservative
journalism was Laura Ingraham. The Dartmouth Review wasn't the only one. Similar journals also
with foundation funding began to spring up on other campuses. The Cornell Review was one
and Ann Colter began her career as a polemical conservative writer there. The alumni of all
these journals emphasized the importance of them as a place where they could meet other young
conservatives and share ideas in an academic environment that was otherwise perceived to be
hostile. A controversy over whether the United States should have national standards for the
study of history and what they should consist of exposed the gulf between conservative and liberal
ideas about the American past. Lynn Chaney who was the head of the National Endowment for the
Humanities in the first Bush administration, she was the wife of the man who later became
the second Bush's vice president commissioned the standards and Gary Nash a professor at the
University of California Los Angeles headed the team that wrote them. Now by the time the draft
was the draft of the National History Standards was finished Chaney was already out of office it was
1994 by then but once she read the draft of what they'd come up with she thought of it as little
better than anti-American propaganda and Congress rejected them out of hand compelling the team
to modify them. Chaney said they were unpatriotic politically correct and hardly better than
propaganda against the nation. She noted in an op-ed piece that they included six favorable
references to Harriet Tubman 19 negative references to McCarthyism no reference to the
constitutional convention or to the Wright brothers or to Einstein or to Thomas Alva Edison the great
inventor. Rockefeller was depicted as a robber baron the standards even proposed that he should
be put on trial for his unethical business practices which of course implied his guilt even before the
trial began and many conservative journalists reading them agreed with Lynn Chaney's estimate
Charles Krauthammer who was an influential writer in those decades agreed quote the whole document
strains to promote the achievements and highlight the victimization of the country's preferred
minorities while straining equally to degrade the achievements and highlight the flaws of the
white males who ran the country for its first two centuries. A second draft was produced two years
later in 1996 more nuanced less confrontationally politically correct but it still refused to
give conservatives the kind of celebratory curriculum they had anticipated and hoped for.
Lynn Chaney still didn't like these new standards and she realized that she might have made a mistake
she perhaps she'd made the situation worse by creating a nationwide curriculum that would
now be bad for everyone at least if it was left at the state level many children would be spared
the national travesty. Lynn Chaney wrote a book about the whole controversy called telling the
truth and it depicts her as the guardian of threatened truth and common sense. Incidentally
paleo conservatives would have said to her right up front of course she shouldn't have
national standards if you keep if you let every community decide for itself you'll have a healthy
diversity of opinions rather than one tyrannical centralized version which is bad enough anyway
on principle and even worse if it's all political correctness. Meanwhile on the other side of the
controversy Gary Nash himself wrote a memoir of the whole experience a book called history on trial
published in the year 2000 in a tone of wounded innocence he justified the standards and said
it was necessary to include the voices of previously silenced or neglected Americans. In Nash's view
surely a democracy should take the view that all its people were worthy of having their stories told
not just the elites in his view the conservatives had a very very narrow view of what history was.
Well whether history is supposed to teach moral lessons and if so which ones remained open to
question and I think that's a good transition point for me to begin tying up this whole lecture
series where I'll also ask the question of does history teach us moral lessons.
