We need to pause for a moment to consider the background of this remarkable revolutionary Lenin and the machine for revolution which he built up, the Vanguard Party, as it was called, of the Bolsheviks.
Lenin was not Lenin's real name. It was rather an assumed revolutionary name.
He was born Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov in 1870. He was born of middle-class origins. His father was a school inspector, giving him the status of approximately the lower nobility and the structure of the Russian Empire.
Lenin's youth, however, was shaped by one traumatic experience above all. His admired older brother, in 1887, was executed because of his political activities. It was charged that he was a terrorist.
Lenin was seared by this experience. He rejected traditional religion. One anecdote suggests that at that moment of loss of faith, Lenin literally tossed a cross into the garbage, expressing his complete break with earlier beliefs.
He denounced liberalism, believing it to be a weak and irresolute, hopeful ideology, and instead turned towards radical revolutionary politics of the sort that his admired brother had also pursued with a remarkable single-mindedness.
Contemporaries and friends of Lenin's used to say about Lenin that they had rarely met a man so focused upon his desires.
Lenin lived the future revolution. He tended not to speak much about himself, but seemed consumed, seemed to have given over his entire being to the aim of the revolution that was to come.
Some suggested that Lenin had turned himself into a perfect weapon or machine for revolution. He would start the day with a reading and underlining of many newspapers and would pass on to frenetic and organized, efficient revolutionary activity.
Living as a revolutionary now, living for the revolution, he took the revolutionary name of Lenin. He was soon arrested in 1896 for his political activities and was exiled to Siberia.
Exiled to Siberia under the Tsarist regime was not the harsh sentence that it often would become in the times of the Soviet Union. Exiles could often hope to spend their time in settlements studying or writing or thinking.
The way in which Siberian exile had become a literal death sentence was yet to come.
From 1900 to 1917, Lenin lived and worked outside Russia in exile and never lost hope in the coming of the revolution that he heralded.
He set about organizing a secret society of professional underground revolutionaries who would be joined in an iron commitment to a set of common ideals.
Committed to Marxist socialism, this vanguard party, as he called it, because it would be in advance of the masses, leading the masses, showing them the way,
was to be marked by a distinctive structure that would allow it to organize underground, a structure of so-called underground cells.
These cells, smaller parts of a larger revolutionary organism, would give it coherence,
but would also mean that it would be harder to break up because its organization would be secret and centralized in such cells rather than in one essential center that could be knocked out.
Such a professional revolutionary party would also have to be marked by an enormous internal discipline.
To this end, Lenin and his colleagues coined a somewhat odd phrase called democratic centralism to express the dynamics of their own party on the inside.
Democratic centralism was the idea that within this professional party, discussion about tactics should be free, should be open, should be, in a sense, democratic.
But, however, once the leadership of this party, after taking into consideration the voices and the ideas of the professional revolutionaries that made it up,
once the leadership had decided upon the course of action, the time for discussion was over.
At that point, centralism would kick in.
And this elite professional party of revolutionaries would then act with one will, with one commitment, and with enormous professionalism towards its revolutionary goal.
In the name of such a party, such a vanguard party that would be in advance of the masses, in advance of other political parties, Lenin actively forced a split within the Marxist movement in Russia.
