These lectures are titled, Utopia and Terror in the 20th Century, Part 2.
Lecture 13, Nazism.
In our previous lecture, we examined the darkening storm clouds over Europe, over much of the
world in the course of the troubled decade of the 1930s.
In today's lecture, we'll examine one very prominent feature of that trajectory, the
rise of the disturbing movement of Nazism in Germany.
In this lecture, we'll be examining the origins, the ideological beliefs, and the rise to power
of the Nazi movement in Germany.
As we'll see, many of the origins for these phenomena lay even further back than the 1930s
troubled as they were in the legacy of the First World War.
We will discuss in particular the Nazi worldview and its promises for a fundamental reordering
of German society along racial lines after coming to power in 1933, their fusing of terror
with modernizing programs for superhighways, superweapons, and supermen, and the promise
of a German utopia.
We turn, first of all, to the question of the origins of Nazism.
And one particular point that we want to underline is just how much these origins owed to the
effects of that First Great War, World War I.
Time and again, we see that the features of the Nazi movement, its ideology, tie back
to roots in the First World War.
The impact of that war on culture, on politics, on society truly laid the groundwork for the
emergence of the Nazi movement in Germany and crucially informed its ideology.
Some historians have traced back the energies, the mobilization of the masses that the Nazis
sought to those days at the start of the First World War, the so-called August Madness, in
which in a moment of ecstasy, which was supposed to overcome the earlier divisions in society,
Germans had allegedly felt lifted up into a sense of national unity and national purpose.
That analyst, whom we have discussed already in earlier lectures of the dynamics of crowds
and of masses, Elias Canetti, had already written in his book, Crowds of Power, that
in some sense the National Socialist movement began not nearly in 1919 with a formal founding
of the party that became the Nazi party, but began in fact in those August days of 1914.
He argued that Hitler and the Nazis would seek to ever afterwards reclaim or recreate
by artifice that emotion that Germans had supposedly felt in 1914.
It was following upon such a sense of national mobilization that defeat had hit Germany particularly
hard in 1918.
Many ordinary Germans were left embittered, unable to accept the fact of failure, and historians
of Germany are emphasizing ever more today that it was not the harshness of the postwar
settlement that was crucial in setting Germany upon its troubled path in the years after 1918,
but rather the fundamental inability of ordinary Germans to accept defeat.
This had crucial consequences.
Faith in the Democratic Weimar Republic, as it was called after the town of Weimar in
which the constitution of this new democracy was written, was crucially undermined by
those things that it was associated with in the minds of Germans.
Association with German defeat, what Germans denounced as the Versailles Treaty, universally
condemned in German society and a legacy of economic hardship carrying over from the
dislocations of the First World War.
In spite of a period of stability from 1924 to 1929, German democracy still remained fragile.
German nationalists had an explanation for what they saw as the humiliation of their
nation.
They propagated what came to be called the stab in the back legend, which claimed that
German armies had in fact not been defeated on the battlefield, but that Germany's war
effort had been betrayed by forces on the home front by, in a sort of scapegoating of
minorities in German society, it was claimed, German Democrats, German socialists, and in
particular, a religious minority, German Jews.
