The Khmer Rouge announced that they were bringing something entirely new and unprecedented
to Cambodia, but paradoxically also returning the country to the sort of rural idyllic conditions
it might have known in some bygone age.
And as we've mentioned before, many ordinary Cambodians, in fact, were receptive at first
to the message that at long last stability, peace, and harmony could be at hand.
It would take a while before the full scope of the ambitions of the Black-clad Khmer Rouge
would become known, because they were obsessively secretive in their actions.
Many of their recruits were young.
Young boys and girls recruited at the age of 12 or younger and quite deliberately cut
off, as Pol Pot himself had cut himself off from their families and from the society and
the sort of context they had known before.
In the tragedy that would unfold in Cambodia, there would be a marked generational dimension.
The young would be turned into killers of the society which they now had been turned against.
The ruling body that was to oversee the transformation of Cambodian society was a shadowy entity.
Very little was known about it.
It denied aspects of its own existence in its propaganda.
This entity was known as the Angkar, meaning the organization.
As little was known about it, one thing was stressed in its propaganda, and that was that
this organization was all-powerful and would provide the Cambodian people.
In one phrase that was used in propaganda, the Angkar organization was called the mother-father
of the people.
More than any parent, this government would steer the development of Cambodians.
The aim of the policies that would unfold in communist Cambodia would be not only an
imitation of aspects of Mao's great leap forward, the attempted mobilization of the countryside
and a great leap into the future of industrialization and productive agriculture, but much more
than that, an attempt to surpass Mao's model as well.
This would be accompanied by ferocious revolutionary violence.
The Khmer Rouge mounted immediately a campaign of what they called ruralization, cities they
viewed as tainted, full of impurities, full of deviations, full of elapses in those virtues
that were associated with a peasantry.
We see here, in other words, a great deviation that wouldn't have been recognized at the
time by these activists from classical Marxism.
We'll recall that Marx had emphasized that the workers, especially in the cities, were
the vanguard of the future, while the peasants were often denounced as being in a state of
rural idiocy or retardation.
Instead, the Khmer Rouge were taking Marx's ideas and changing them to fit their realities
and their vision of the utopian future.
The cities thus were slated for annihilation.
They were ordered to be emptied out in 24 hours.
And with tremendous dislocation involving even the evacuation of hospital patients in
their beds, the cities were indeed turned out, their populations expelled.
60% of the entire population of the country was exiled from its earlier place of residence.
And Phnom Penh, the capital city, a great cosmopolitan city of 2 million people, was
in short order deserted, silent, and vacated.
The social transformation of Cambodia had begun.
What happened to those people who were now exiled to the countryside?
Even this transformation in their circumstances didn't mean that they could escape their former
identity.
Former city dwellers, now thrust into a new context that many of them had not known before,
were labeled, even in their rural exile, the new people.
And as such, they were segregated from the peasantry who were judged more healthy, more
virtuous.
These new people would be uprooted again and again, and deported from one part of the countryside
to another.
In the process of these repeated deportations, many of them were decimated.
They had few supports or people to draw upon in unfamiliar regions as a way of securing
survival.
