The problems of food in agriculture being eaten by birds of the fields, sparrows, were to be eliminated by a campaign against birds, against sparrows, in order to wipe them out.
This turned into an ecological disaster because as these predators on insects were eliminated, the insects proliferated at a horrific rate.
Common dining halls were to replace individual households.
The fraudulent agricultural ideas of Trofium lisenko from the Soviet Union, which we'd mentioned in an earlier lecture, were copied and indeed intensified.
Deep plowing, which had been hailed as the revolutionary transformation of agriculture, now saw plowing not just a foot into the soil, but ten feet into the soil.
And predictably enough, the result was agricultural disaster.
But propaganda announced successes.
It was announced that pumpkins of a vast new size were being grown, weighing 132 pounds.
It was announced that pigs had been crossbred with cows in order to yield a new dynamic breed.
Now, this was the propaganda.
The reality was that harvests failed.
The Great Famine followed.
This has been called the greatest, largest famine in human history.
And in some sense, it was perfectly predictable because it matched the pattern of events unfolding in the terror famine of Ukraine in 1932 and 1933 in the Soviet Union.
By 1960, famine was raging in the provinces and cases of cannibalism were recorded.
Dining halls and the communes broke out into food riots.
The famine left up to 40 million people dead as a result.
The event was denied by the Chinese government.
But those who had a chance to travel through the provinces had one particular haunting impression, the silence, the silence in the Chinese countryside, the people, animals, all gone.
By 1960, the project of the Great Leap Forward was abandoned, but the commune structure would remain in place.
The next wave of revolutionary transformation, as it were to redeem these failures, was called the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution from 1966 to 1976.
Mao, who was already growing old, feared that the revolutionary fervor and determination of China was fading, was slowing.
And thus he sought to regain the initiative by encouraging a young generation, those who had been born after the revolution, to move against those whom he saw as the established authorities, party officials, teachers, and elders.
These were, in fact, some of his own allies from the route to power.
These were now announced to be enemies of the people.
In many ways, this is reminiscent of other cases we've seen in this course of dictators moving against their own former allies.
They were now suspected of betraying China's revolution, of trying to move the country over to a capitalist road, and away from that close future of communism.
A smaller group of revolutionary elites around Mao, including his wife, Zhang Xin, supported this campaign, as Mao pledged that it was necessary to set on fire China once again.
Young people who were vested with this task were known as the Red Guards.
They were organized into Red Guard units, several which were millions strong.
They were actually several millions strong in extent, organized on military lines.
These Red Guards were charged with the duty of purging the party and society.
Those who were accused of revisionism, as it was called, or capitalist betrayal, were killed in the millions, or sent to Lao-Gai camps for re-education to redeem their potential.
Ordinary people were forced to participate in public rituals of self-criticism.
These were often called struggle sessions to show the proper revolutionary consciousness and that they were not deviating.
Party General Secretary Dennis Xiaoping and other rivals of Mao were purged.
Campaigns associated with this great proletarian cultural revolution also aimed to eliminate corrupt traces of the past, western influences,
especially in education and in the teaching staff in books and in old art.
Propaganda denounced the four old, old thought, old culture, old customs, old habits.
These were to be obliterated.
Mao Zedong's thought was now made obligatory and was emphasized in even more frenetic propaganda that had been the case before.
The collection of Mao's sayings, the little red book first published in 1964, was now hailed as a replacement for traditional laborious education.
Everything one needed to know about the keys to the future were there in this book of Mao's sayings.
Standardized Mao suits, drab uniforms of plain tailoring became approved and indeed necessary guards.
