Claiming security needs and omitting to mention that the invasion of the Nazis
had been an invasion of his own allies, Stalin demanded an outer empire of
Eastern European so-called People's Republics, ruled by communists after a
period of shared government in coalition. Within the inner empire of the Soviet
Union itself, Stalin now clamped down again. You'll recall that at the start of
the battle between the Nazis and the Soviets, Stalin had implicitly seemed to
offer the promise of liberalization if only ordinary Soviet citizens would
rally to the cause of the defense of the motherland. These promises were now
betrayed. Stalin returned to his rhetoric of addressing the People's of the Soviet
Union no longer as fellow Russians or fellow members of a homeland, but rather
as comrades. And a very vivid example of this was the fate of Soviet prisoners of
war. You'll recall that those Soviet prisoners of war who had fallen into
Nazi hands were often allowed to die of neglect in the millions. Stalin now
needed out to them a cruel fate to those who survived. Ipsofacto, Stalin
considered soldiers who had allowed themselves to be taken prisoner, traitors.
So as they were loaded onto trains and brought back to home, to Moscow, to other
Russian cities, their trains didn't stop to unload them there. Instead, these trains
with prisoners of war now liberated in quotation marks, sped on through to
Siberia. They were shipped there by cattle car to labor camps to pay for the
crime of having been captured. The novel of Alexander Solzhenitsyn entitled One
Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich portrayed this man's own experiences in
the Gulag of this period. He had been an artillery officer in the Red Army. He
had been a committed fighter in the Russian cause, but he'd been arrested in
1945 for making critical remarks about Stalin and was subjected to eight years
in prison. He depicted in this novel the brutal realities of the Gulag camp and
later would be awarded the Nobel Prize in 1970 for this depiction. This account
of the brutal existence of ordinary prisoners one day in the life bore a
punchline that was ironic and that punchline was essentially that this on
balance had been a good day for a prisoner since he had survived. Other
peoples were to be punished wholesale for their real or suspected
disloyalty. They were deported or decimated. Before the wars end in 1944
Chechens, English and Crimean Tartars, non-Russian peoples living in the Soviet
Union were all deported from the Caucasus and the Crimea to Central Asia
because of Stalin's suspicions. Half a million Chechens and English were
deported, 189,000 Tatars with great losses to their populations and the
conflict that still rages in Chechnya in the Russian Federation today cannot be
understood without this long-term background. Mass deportations also
resumed in the Baltics following on earlier deportations of 1941. Hundreds of
thousands were deported to Siberia. Scarcely any families were left untouched
and it's estimated that 15% of the Baltic populations were gone by 1950. In a
sense, World War II also continued in Eastern Europe even after 1945. The so
called Baltic Forest War saw guerrillas fighting Soviet forces well into the
1950s. The Cold War would also grow in intensity in the following years. Stalin
stated that a territory's occupier determined and had a right to determine
its social system. He worked with communist allies in Eastern European
countries to consolidate their rule. In 1947, non-communist parties were dropped
from government in Eastern European countries one after the other, Hungary,
Romania, Poland. In 1948, a communist coup in Czechoslovakia also created sole
rule on the part of the communists. In October 1947, the common turn, which had
been shut down to continue good relations with the Western democracies, was now
revived under the new name of the common form. Communist parties in Italy and
France also enjoyed considerable popularity and prestige due to an
anti-Nazi resistance, and it seemed to many hopeful internationalists that
communism was progressing on all fronts. But Stalin then died in 1953. It's been
suggested that he was perhaps on the eve of another wave of purges. Authorities
had announced in months previous the discovery of an alleged doctor's plot.
Government doctors, mostly Jewish in origin, were accused of preparing a wide
conspiracy to poison Soviet leaders. Stalin's regime seemed to be taking a
radical anti-Semitic turn before his death, and it's suggested that the Jews of
the Soviet Union might have been the next target of his paranoia.
