Films about the Nazi reign of terror and its genocide were later found at the home of President Javier Imana.
In an echo of the long gone days of the reign of terror of the French Revolution,
the local killing units even called themselves public safety committees.
They were drawing on a wide range of references.
And they also, as has been the case with other movements we've seen, perverted the language to their purposes.
That insightful analyst of the Nazi perversion of German language, Victor Klemper,
who had analyzed Nazi vocabulary, would not have been surprised at any of this.
A phraseology was invented to cloak in ideological terms, to veil them in euphemism, preparations for massacre.
The massacre itself was called work.
The genocide was called umuganda, public work.
A project in social engineering, in other words.
The weapons for this destruction were referred to as tools of work.
And the overall killing plan was called, in an obvious imitation of the Nazis, the final solution.
The message of hatred still needed to be propagated and spread to the wide masses
to implicate ordinary Rwandans who to dissent in this project.
And the government for this purpose used modern media, newspapers and radio,
television was less evident, to spread its message.
The government indeed provided free radios in the countryside to expand the reach of its message.
And a special radio station, government controlled, which came to be nicknamed Radio Hate,
songs were played, songs of hatred against the Tutsis.
These same radio stations would later relay precise orders for coordinated killing throughout the country.
Well before the genocide itself, weekly propaganda meetings in the countryside featured arts performances, plays,
all communicating the messages of hate against the Tutsi minority.
Images of President Javier Imana, about whom there was a cult of personality,
were posted ubiquitously around the country and were even worn as buttons by the activists themselves.
In their propaganda, the government also drew upon earlier phenomena.
The propaganda argued not only that the Tutsi were evil, that they were subhuman,
but they also argued that the Tutsi were about to unleash genocide upon the Hutus.
They in fact referred to the RPF, the Tutsi guerrillas, as the Black Khmer Rouge,
who were about to wreak the sort of violence upon the Hutu group that had been seen in Cambodia.
This was a case of a phenomenon we've seen in many cases before,
a projection onto one's intended victims of one's own intentions, as was clearly the case in Rwanda.
But some flashpoint was still needed and that flashpoint came as a surprise.
On April 6, 1994, the Hutu President Javier Imana, who with his allies had been promoting this program, was assassinated.
Under mysterious circumstances, many analysts believe that his own allies assassinated him in order to provide the spark for this event.
The moderate Prime Minister and the Belgian UN peacekeepers who were protecting her were murdered immediately thereafter.
The expectation of the plotters had been, as we now know,
that a strike against Western peacekeeping forces would soon provide the impetus for a withdrawal of those forces, fearing greater casualties.
And in this respect, they were right.
The United Nations withdrew its troops and observers on April 21, 1994 in spite of the pleas of the UN peacekeeping commander on the ground,
a French Canadian, who argued that thousands of lives could be saved from what was impending if only more troops were sent.
Now the genocide unfolded.
The campaign raged, with most killings taking place in a concentrated period in April of 1994.
During the peak of the killing, one murder, it's estimated, was taking place every two seconds around the country.
In total, the massacres would claim 800,000 lives over the course of 100 days.
These massacres were conducted not spontaneously at first, though they certainly took on a momentum of their own later,
but from careful lists that had been compiled by the government.
While the government organized, the killers included a remarkably broad section of Rwandan society, from a variety of motives.
Some were eager, some were enticed into the killing in the interest of gain.
Others were coerced and forced to share the complicity by being ordered to kill.
Neighbors turned on neighbors.
