Nonetheless, later, the Bolsheviks would later mythologize what they called the Great October Revolution,
making it appear a mass event in art and in film.
A joke used to circulate that the documentaries that were made afterwards,
restagings or recreations of the storming of the Winter Palace,
actually had more people who got hurt in the filming of these re-demonstrations rather than in the actual event itself.
The Bolsheviks announced that they were taking power in the name of the Soviets, not for themselves.
But on taking power, they started to consolidate their authority.
A council of people's commissars, known by the dauntingly long acronym Sovnarkom, was established.
It was made up of members of the Bolshevik Party, including Lenin, Trotsky,
and a shadowy figure by the name of Stalin, who had become very prominent in years afterwards,
and they were supported by other revolutionaries of a more anarchist stripe, the left socialist revolutionaries.
The Bolsheviks soon moved to eliminate other parties, shut down other newspapers,
and dismissed the newly democratically elected constituent assembly.
They were sent packing by Bolshevik sailors who told them the Bolsheviks were in control and their services were not needed.
By summer of 1918, the only legal party in Russia was the Communist Party,
as the Bolsheviks renamed themselves in March of 1918.
They sought to consolidate control over the economy as well.
The market was shut down, replaced with state control of internal trade, factories, and land.
Lenin tremendously admired Germany's war socialism.
He felt the Germans had really hit upon something which he aimed to introduce in Russia as well.
A secret police was established on December 17, 1917.
Soon after the seizure of power, it was known as the Checa,
which stood for the acronym for the Extraordinary Commission for Combating Counter-Revolution and Espionage.
These checkists were charged with red terror against counter-revolutionaries and class enemies,
drawing on the example of the French Revolution.
The beginnings of a concentration camp system were established as well.
So-called revolutionary tribunals replaced regular courts.
Using the railroad system and armored trains, which they felt were modern and forceful tools,
Bolshevik units fanned out across the country to seize control of the vast land.
These measures were in line with Lenin's ideas of what had to follow upon a seizure of power, dictatorship,
which he defined ringingly and harshly as authority untrammeled by any laws,
absolutely unrestricted by any rules whatever and based directly on force.
A total dictatorship to follow upon a total revolution.
One can't begin to understand what the Bolsheviks thought they were doing
without considering their ideological expectations for the future, their hopes,
their expectations for the spread of worldwide revolution.
The Bolsheviks always expected that their action in Russia was but the beginning.
The action which would unleash a worldwide cascade of proletarian revolutions,
especially in the developed economies of Germany, Great Britain and the United States.
To win time for this absolutely essential internationalization or globalization of the revolution,
Lenin delivered to ordinary Russians on the promises of peace and land.
The Bolsheviks began peace negotiations with Germany.
Lenin encouraged peasants to take over estates, which was very nice because that's what they were already doing on their own anyhow,
but he simultaneously passed a law nationalizing all land under the control of the government, a sign of the future.
At the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, the Bolsheviks accepted defeat in order to save the revolution.
After a truce in December of 1917, the Bolsheviks and the German military had met to negotiate a peace treaty,
but they had opposed aims. The Germans wanted territory for an empire in Eastern Europe.
The Bolsheviks aimed to use negotiations as a global propaganda event announcing their message worldwide.
To sway world public opinion and to embarrass the imperialist powers, the Bolsheviks had revealed
the diplomatic secret treaties they'd found in the safes of the Russian foreign ministry.
When negotiations stalled with the Germans, Trotsky took a gamble.
He announced a new tactic.
His new tactic as he walked out of the negotiations was to claim that the Bolsheviks now recognized neither peace nor war.
Nobody was really sure what that meant.
Trotsky himself probably didn't know what it meant.
It probably sounded better in the early hours of the morning when it occurred to him that it didn't practice
because the Germans, after being befuddled for a moment, simply resumed their advance.
They sped forward by train to occupy ever larger parts of Russia.
To save the revolution, Lenin convinced his Bolshevik associates to return to the negotiations.
