When Marx was criticized for the vagueness of these prescriptions, he answered sternly.
He was not in the business of writing utopian socialist cookbooks, as the earlier utopian
socialists might have been.
He was interested in showing the path in a rigorous scientific way to what the future
would hold.
And it's remarkable to observe that the vague outlines of Marx's prescriptions for the future
did not detract from the appeal of his program precisely because it promised a rigorous plan
for achieving that future, whatever its detailed outlines might be.
We need next to consider the movement, the political mobilization that grew out of this
to many people, inspiring vision of what the future would hold.
Marx threw himself into political activism, often supported by his associate Friedrich
Engels.
He needs to be stressed that Marx himself was politically active.
You still hear it now and again bandied about that Marx was merely a philosopher who had
proposed some abstract ideas for us to toy with and that he would have been horrified
to see them actually perhaps put into action.
This couldn't be more incorrect.
Marx had explained that earlier philosophers had described the world, now it was the task
of people like himself to change the world and he set about doing that energetically.
As part and parcel of this political engagement, Marx had already written himself, in a sense,
into his political program.
With people like himself in mind, as he was writing the Communist Manifesto in 1848, he
had stated that certain exceptional individuals of tremendous philosophical insight might
be able to rise above their class origins, in the case of Marx, the middle class origins,
to survey and understand the historical process as a whole, transcending their origins, understanding
and influencing the historical process.
Karl Marx saw himself as one such philosopher who had changed the world.
The most advanced activists in those supporting Marx's ideas were called communists.
Marxists lived lives that were made electric, one might say, by the expectation of the approaching
final struggle.
This was an expectation which was summed up in the international anthem of the communist
movement.
Note, not the national anthem, but the international anthem.
Marx and his associates felt that nationalism was merely a fraud perpetrated by the middle
classes upon the working classes who instead should stand together in class solidarity.
This international anthem was appropriately enough called the Internationale.
The Internationale urged the toiling masses to hear the signal of the approaching final
fight.
There was almost a religious apocalyptic promise being made here.
A final fight in which slaves would cease to be slaves, would instead become armies of
workers who would throw off tyranny and usher in a new age.
No gods, no kings could do this for the masses.
The masses would have to do it for themselves, as the ringing words of the Internationale
announced.
It wasn't necessarily a very good sign for the future of the movement that no sooner
had this stirring international anthem been produced than its creators were embroiled in
a decades-long struggle over the copyright ownership of the Internationale.
This is something that didn't really mesh with the abolition of private property announced
in that anthem.
But we need to focus on this, the certainty on the part of followers of Marx of having
understood history's evolution and its ultimate goal gave immense confidence and a sense of
purpose to those who followed these prescriptions.
When Marx died in 1883, expecting the near advent of the realization of his predictions,
he was hailed as a Darwin of politics.
If Darwin had made clear to us the underlying laws of the natural world and its changes,
so Marx had given order and scientific basis to an understanding of human society.
But even at this period, as Marx's death in 1883, in spite of his prediction of imminent
revolution, there were already trends afoot that would have disturbed Marx, and which in
many ways conflicted with some of his predictions.
The socialist parties that were established in European countries drawing on Marx's thought
tended to be organized on a national basis with a French, and a German, and a British
socialist movement.
They rhetorically at least had announced their shared solidarity, but this wasn't necessarily
the case if they were organizing on a national basis, something that didn't mesh with the
internationalism of Marxist ideology.
