He carried the day by explaining to his fellow revolutionaries that this was not an admission
of defeat.
It was rather a case of taking one step backwards in order to take two steps forward.
And thus on March 3, 1918, the Bolsheviks signed the incredibly harsh treaty of Brest-Litovsk,
which stripped vast territories from the former Russian Empire.
But they felt, gave them time for their revolution.
In spite of these reverses, and in spite of a brewing civil war, as anti-Bolshevik forces
began to muster their energies within Russia, Lenin continued to expect that the International
Workers' Revolution was about to break out.
To demonstrate that there was no way back to the days of the old regime before the Bolshevik
Revolution, the Bolsheviks executed in cold blood the imprisoned Tsar, the Emperor of
Russia and his family, shooting them in a cellar in Yakutrinburg on July 16, 1918.
As with the French Revolution, in its increasingly radical stages, the Bolsheviks were determined
to show that their revolution was for good and was moving forward, progressing inexorably.
We need to consider, in some sense, the outcome of this revolution in terms of its influence
on world politics, both direct influence and indirect influence.
The Bolsheviks saw their red October, as we've stressed, as but the first part of a worldwide
process.
They now felt it was up to them to seek to export their revolution worldwide.
This was not to be simply an event confined to the backward Russian Empire, but rather
the unleashing of a much larger catalytic process.
They founded, in March of 1919, an organization which was devoted to this task of export.
This was an organization known as the Common Turn.
This was very characteristic of the Bolsheviks, this love for acronyms, which seemed to suggest
bureaucratic efficiency in organization.
The Common Turn stood for the words the Communist International.
It was also known by the name the Third International, because it was intended to supersede previous
the first and second world socialist organizations known as Internationals.
The Common Turn, founded in Moscow in March of 1919, really functioned as Revolution
Incorporated, an export company.
Trotsky was proud of this organization and referred to it as the General Staff of the
World Revolution.
The Bolsheviks, they felt, had simply shown the way, now was up to other radical socialists
worldwide to follow their lead.
The Common Turn set about organizing and encouraging Communist parties in other countries to follow
the Bolshevik example.
Such Communist parties established in other countries were often made up of those most
radical parts of the social democratic wing, the socialist movement, who were encouraged
to split off from their earlier socialist comrades and to take the more radical course
that the Bolsheviks followed.
The aim was to create soon, not in the far off future, but soon, a worldwide international
republic of Soviets spanning the globe and realizing the dream of worldwide global revolution.
The influence of this revolution would also be indirect.
We want to consider this as well, especially after the vast devastation of the First World
War when it finally comes to a close in 1918.
This Bolshevik revolution would gain admirers worldwide.
Many of these admirers, who felt that this was an example to emulate, saw the Bolshevik
Revolution in great red October as a beacon of hope and social change.
There were also, however, many who viewed the Bolshevik seizure of power as a danger,
and they were opponents who would be alarmed by what they saw as the revolutionary processes
taking place in communist Russia.
Truly the year 1917, in which the Bolsheviks come to power, was a great dividing line in
modern history.
Some historians of Europe have called 1917 the beginning of world history in a real political
sense.
And now on, something new had happened.
There now existed in the international system a state which was dedicated to the overthrow
of all other governments.
The Bolshevik seizure of power was a pivotal event of the century, not just for Russia,
but for the world.
The challenge of communism would shape the ideological discourse of the 20th century
as all political leaders and governments of the world would have to respond to it.
In our next lecture on the aftermath of World War I, we will see the furious dialectic
of attempts both to export this revolution and this ideology worldwide, as well as furious
reaction and counter-revolution against this ideology leading to more political change.
