Lecture 18, Mao
In our previous lecture, we discussed the growing ideological conflict of the Cold War.
We now turn to examine one of the players in the Cold War itself, the rising of communist
China.
One of the essential points which we've tried to underline again and again in these lectures
is that the sort of ideological regimes we've described and have been discussing needn't
and mustn't be viewed in isolation.
Rather in many cases, they have been in relation to one another, have sought to outdo one the
other, or have been in conflict.
When we discuss the case of communist China, we'll see how a Western ideology, Marxist
ideology was adopted to Chinese culture and changed in the process.
The Chinese Communist would come to power in 1949, would form a society informed by the
ideology of Mao thought, which adapted Marxist ideas.
We'll examine the forms of this society, its emphasis on a radical break with a rich
past.
We'll see how Chairman Mao commanded massive campaigns using human beings as material with
the goal of developing the country, most notoriously in the failed Great Leap Forward in the 1950s
and the inner turmoil of the great cultural revolution that followed.
We first begin by an examination of the communist long march to power.
In the course of the early 20th century, China had been in turmoil.
With the collapse of the Manchu dynasty, China had become a republic in 1911.
The country, however, dissolved into warlord rule, threatening to split apart into what
amounted to independent regions.
To deal with this situation, Sun Yat-sen founded a nationalist party known as the Guomintang,
or KMT, which sought as a revolutionary party to promote the goals of national independence,
unity, progress, and science.
In an alliance founded on certain shared ideas, this nationalist party, the Guomintang, was
at first supported by the Chinese Communist Party founded in 1921.
When classical Marxists thought, it was thought necessary for a country to move through the
stages of revolutionary development, including a stage of bourgeois dominance before moving
to full-fledged revolution, and thus this cooperation was seen as ideologically sensible.
But by 1927, these earlier allies had come into conflict.
The successor to Sun Yat-sen, General Chiang Kai-shek, attacked the communists, seeing
them as a threat to his dominance, destroyed them in Shanghai and in other urban areas where
they had their bases.
The communists now had to pull back to peasant areas where they sought to build a new base
of support.
And crucial in this context was an emerging leader of the young communist movement in
China, Mao Zedong.
He would come to be called the great helmsman of China, who was this man who would steer
his nation.
He was born in 1893 in Hunan province, son of a peasant landlord.
In his youth, he admired Napoleon, he admired especially Chinese emperors, and steeped himself
in reading in history.
But nonetheless, in spite of this fervent desire for education, he would remain for much of
his formative years an outsider due to his rural origins.
Never able quite to measure up to the educated elites to which he aspired.
His independent reading in times spent between schools filled him with an admiration for
the concept of a new culture, a modern transformative culture that was shaping the world and, as
he saw it, expressing itself in one particular country at the time, the Soviet Union, the
building of a new experiment that he would like to participate in.
Mao became a revolutionary activist already from 1911, active in both the nationalist
movement, which protested the Paris Peace Conference ending the First World War for
what were seen as unjust impositions upon China, and joined the Communist Party.
