We will look out over the frozen wastes of Stalin's Gulag camps at Magadan in the Far
East.
We'll consider the barbarity of the Nazi death camps in Hitler's final solution and
the genocide practice there.
We'll consider also the mass graves closer to our own times of Rwanda in Africa and Srebrenica
in the Balkans in Europe and we'll survey Cambodia's killing fields.
While our lectures will obviously not be able to cover all aspects of all of the many tragedies
of the 20th century, we will nonetheless attempt to focus in on those that speak to the very
largest issues.
One might pause for a moment to ask why one would dwell on such terrors, why one would
concentrate one's historical and scholarly attention on what seem to be unrelieved stories
of human barbarity, cruelty, and unrelieved tragedy.
And yet I think it's worthwhile to keep in mind that given the common nature of such
tragedies in the 20th century, this is a question of such existential importance to us all, that
it needs to be faced head on and that moreover, the cautionary tales, the stories that bid
us to be careful in our approach towards politics and human history as such in our own experience
are not all that these stories of tragedy present to us.
There are also stories of heroic resistance and perhaps models of how these trends might
be short circuited.
Let us consider the explanatory framework, the key elements that we'll try to keep in
mind as a way of seeking to understand and give coherence to the tragedies we'll be
examining.
A clear linkage exists between 20th century plans for utopias, on the one hand, and on
the other hand the use of terror to bring them about.
These key terms, utopia and terror, are the terms that we need to take a moment to define.
First, the word utopia defines and evokes the notion of an imagined ideal society.
The utopian tradition is perhaps as old as mankind itself.
It certainly is dated back by intellectual historians to classical times in western civilization.
Such scholars point in particular to Plato's Republic as an example of an imagined philosophically
coherent society.
But most older conceptions of ideal societies as such were religious in nature.
They proposed a golden future in the afterlife, an Eden, a paradise in which human problems
would be resolved, in which man would exist in harmony with the divine.
But in modern history, with growing modern secular and scientific thought, especially
in Europe and in western civilization as a whole, a new page was opened in the utopian
tradition, one that was decisively different from the earlier religious meaning of utopian
thought.
With growing secular thought, new thought experiments could be undertaken.
Tens that did not speak to the divine or supernatural powers, but rather utopias or
perfect societies that were intended not for the hereafter, but for the here and now, heaven
on earth, quite literally.
The first of these was Sir Thomas Moore's Utopia in 1516.
This was a work that indeed gave its very name to the utopian tradition.
It was a work that described a harmonious society based on reason and equality.
And all of the ways in which Thomas Moore defined this ideal society hammered home the
point of its harmony and its inner coherence.
This was a society that in many ways was intended as a criticism of the social realities which
Sir Thomas Moore saw around in his own day.
This was a society that by contrast with all other known societies, disdained riches,
looked on gold with scorn, which was based on shared property and shared prosperity, not
on private possessions.
It was in essence a welfare state.
People would work together, live together, and grow together.
Rather than families being divided, the society would meet in common dining halls to take
their meals together.
All would wear the same clothes to emphasize the commonality of this utopian island.
This was to be a society with no privacy, with a strict moral code, a civic religion
which was not Christian, but instead would be a philosophical common ground that all
could unite upon and was presented as a utopia.
Yet Thomas Moore's naming of this society was significant.
The name he gave to the island of utopia quite soberly turned the message on its head by
suggesting that this might be an impossible dream.
