Europe's Jews were concentrated in ghettos, in Poland and elsewhere, and then were shipped to the camps by train.
Gas chambers were disguised as showers and were used to kill millions in a rationalized machinery of death.
Unlike in earlier concentration camps set up in the first years of the Nazi regime where their existence was relatively open,
here secrecy was emphasized, to avoid news spreading that might affect neutral world opinion,
to avoid news spreading to the German home front which then would be confronted with the immediate reality of what was being done in Germany's name,
and to prevent provoking more desperate resistance among intended victims.
Yet one thing is clear. In spite of the sort of secrecy that was ordered, such a program couldn't be kept entirely secret,
millions of Germans and others were involved, directly or indirectly, and thus had some measure of knowledge about the program's details.
There was a further irony. When news of death camps did leak out of Germany and the occupied territories to the west,
those rumors were often initially not believed. This was another legacy of the First World War.
Propaganda in the First World War had announced news of atrocities, some without basis, some with basis.
And after the First World War, a great skepticism had grown up about such stories.
It was precisely this skepticism which in this case led to such true rumors, such first portents of the atrocities being committed by the Nazis in their full scale,
led to them at first being dismissed, and the toll of such policies was dreadful.
The Nazis killed an estimated 6 million Jews in their camps and elsewhere during the Holocaust,
and they were further responsible for the deaths of millions of others due to abuse, slave labor, and executions.
One Italian Jewish survivor of Auschwitz, Primo Levi, gave a searing account of his experiences in what amounts to a classic of this barbarous era.
His book, Survival in Auschwitz, which showed in detail from his own experiences how the camp universe, the parallel universe set up by the Nazis,
was designed specifically for the aim of destroying human identity itself, demonstrating to the prisoners that there were no limits in how they might be treated,
and to fulfill the ideological prophecies of the Nazis, who had announced that the world was broken down on racial lines,
that some races would be slated for extinction while others dominated.
The camps were where those prophecies were to be brought to pass, as Primo Levi suggested.
Primo Levi's survival in Auschwitz also had one haunting image.
Primo Levi recounted an experience he had of a meeting with an educated German doctor by the name of Panwitz,
who was looking for educated prisoners who knew something about chemistry in order to use their knowledge, at least for a while, to use them economically.
Panwitz interviewed Primo Levi, and Primo Levi explained that if he were able, as a survivor of the camp, to communicate to people who had not known that reality,
how that German doctor had looked at him, that look, that gaze, he could communicate the entire barbarity of Nazi Germany.
He explained that that look was not the sort of look that would pass between two human beings.
There was no flicker of fellow feeling, no recognition of common-shared humanity on the part of that German doctor as he looked at the prisoner in front of him.
Primo Levi explained that instead it was a sort of look that one might see at a zoo, between a creature of one race and another,
who was there to be exploited, to be used, and cast aside, not a fellow human being.
Primo Levi understood that his very humanity was under assault.
The Nazis had further future plans beyond even their barbaric perfection of the final solution.
