Lecture 21 From the Berlin Wall to the Balkans
In our last lectures, we've considered a whole series of regimes close to our own times whose
ideologies and whose atrocities in the name of their ideas have done much to shape the
violent course of the 20th century.
In today's lecture, however, we want to observe a remarkable transition, what many felt at
the time was a turning point.
As the 20th century neared its end, the spirit of the times seemed to be sending mixed signals.
On the one hand, a message of hope, on the other hand, the suggestion that perhaps a whole
new round of ideological conflict might yet emerge.
From 1989 to 1991, truly remarkable years in modern historical experience, a whole series
of communist regimes in Eastern Europe and then the Soviet Union itself fell apart with
astonishing unexpected speed.
And in this context, hopes for a transition to democracy abounded in these newly liberated
countries.
Yet it precisely the same juncture in the Balkans, Europe saw a reversion to crimes which many
had hoped would not occur again, crimes which resembled those of the Second World War.
As the formerly unified state of Yugoslavia began to come apart and crumble, new leaders
emerged who proclaimed new nationalist ideologies with the aim of ethnic cleansing to produce
states on the basis of national unification and identity.
Radio, TV, and even pop music would be deployed to incite ethnic hatreds.
In Bosnia and Kosovo, atrocities would be seen that reflected all too well experience
of bygone generations.
We want to consider in today's lecture, in other words, both the causes of these remarkable
phenomena as well as to consider the reasons for the belated intervention by the international
community as things went wrong in the Balkans.
We'll consider first the democratic wave centered around the year 1989.
Clearly 1989 marked the end of an epoch.
For most of the Cold War, it's estimated that about a third of the world's population
had lived under communist regimes.
In 1989 and the few years that followed, this state of affairs would be remarkably overturned.
The self-liberation of societies in Eastern Europe and Russia thus made the centuries
close a hopeful time.
But at the same time, there were certain events that suggested, even to contemporaries, that
millenarian expectations of a democratic utopia just over the horizon were premature.
Let's speak then first to the hopes of 1989.
There were certain remarkable figures who had been active before this year who now would
come into their own and be recognized as models for civic behavior.
These remarkable individuals, and indeed there were many more of them than can be described
in our lecture today, had in common the fact that they challenged authoritarian states,
held up the standard of human rights, and their demands tended to converge around 1989.
An event years previous had given many of these dissidents a foundation for argument.
The signing in 1975 of the Helsinki Accords on Human Rights.
These Helsinki acts, which were treated by the Soviet Union essentially as a formality
or a dead letter, would turn out to have remarkable significance because their rhetoric, their
promises of human rights would now be a commitment to which the dissidents would hold their governments.
At the same time, in previous decades, a rich literature of dissidents had circulated underground
in a word indeed from Russian that entered into the English language and other languages
Samizdat, meaning to publish yourself, which meant in essence the underground press.
Novels, political works were circulated in the underground, in the Samizdat form, including
the works of Solzhenitsyn.
There were other examples of such dissidents and writers in other Eastern European countries.
It's a prominent example of one whose trajectory was remarkable and significant for our purposes
was the Czechoslovakian playwright Václav Havel, who wrote absurdist surrealist plays.
Some have argued that only the form of surrealism could really be a realistic depiction of the
sort of society in which he and others were living.
