In the novel, Winston Smith resists the system, but ultimately he's tracked down and broken and betrays his love for Julia and his own humanity.
In this novel, Orwell's vision is dark and pessimistic.
The future is presented in the words of one of the interrogators of Winston Smith as he's being broken as a dark one full of hatred forever.
This interrogator tells his victim, if you want a picture of the future, imagine this, a boot stamping on a human face forever.
The interrogator promised that what would follow upon the triumph of the regime and suppressing last resistance would be a world of terror,
not a utopia of love or of peace, but a world of terror based on hatred and domination, which were equally parts of human nature.
It's remarkable to observe that in this story in which George Orwell emphasized the conviction that totalitarian regimes had of the malleability of human nature and their ability to manipulate,
that one could actually see many of the features of contemporary regimes or in some cases even anticipations of later authoritarian practice in the world at large.
But George Orwell's novel was not simply about the regimes that he observed in the present day.
His pessimistic message was a wider one.
It had to do with the human susceptibility, as he saw it, to the lure of tyranny, the promise of order and stability, even at the price of the extinguishing of human nature.
And indeed, even in these hopeful times of the first years of the post-war period, observers who looked around could certainly see portents that were far more troubling than the high hopes of this post-war period.
And these included massive forced population movements and ethnic cleansing in Europe itself.
World War II had left 11 million refugees on the European continent and many more million in other parts of the world.
These were now, as it were, a new kind of person, stateless, unmoored, homeless, and bureaucratically they were labeled displaced persons.
In Hannah Renz's reflections on the 20th century, she argued that the 20th century might have to be considered the century of the displaced person or of the refugee.
Among those who were displaced or actively expelled were ethnic Germans in Eastern Europe.
Some 15 million ethnic Germans fled or were expelled from Eastern European countries where they had lived as minorities in some cases for centuries previous,
especially from Poland and Czechoslovakia.
They were expelled in part in a cycle of revenge against Nazi crimes committed against Eastern European peoples.
And to note this human tragedy in no way minimizes the guilt of the Nazis, in no way exculpates their crimes, but rather underlines the vicious nature of cycles of revenge and violence in modern history.
At the Potsdam Conference, where Great Britain, the United States, and the Soviet Union gathered in July to August of 1945, the Allies approved what they called the humane and orderly transfer of such people.
They referred in particular to a precedent that we've already discussed in an earlier lecture.
The precedent of the 1923 Lausanne Treaty, which had established what were supposed to be, at least in theory, humane population transfers between Greece and Turkey in the aftermath of the First World War.
That process had been violent. This new, underwritten process of population transfer after World War II was also enormously violent, with an estimated 3 million dead.
The rhetoric of humanity and concern for humanitarian issues covered up a brutal reality.
And beyond this, over 2 million refugees from Eastern Europe were also forcibly deported or returned to Eastern Europe into Stalin's control, where they were killed or jailed.
A terrible fate had awaited them.
Within the areas of his control, Joseph Stalin now clamped down in recognition of the growing tensions of the Cold War.
One needs to distinguish between Stalin's policies in an outer empire, of the areas dominated by the conquering Red Army, and his policies of reconciliating his control in an inner empire of the Soviet Union itself.
Let's consider first the outer empire of Eastern Europe.
