It included a dramatic cast of characters, among them an entire Czech Legion, which rampaged
from one part of the Russian Empire to the other.
This Czech Legion was made up of 40,000 former prisoners of war who earlier had been fighting
for the Hapsburg monarchy, had been taken prisoner by the Russians, and then had been
organized as prisoners into a new army to service reinforcements for the Allies.
Trying to find a way to the West in order to join the continuing war against the Germans,
this Czech Legion soon found itself almost accidentally in control of the Trans-Siberian
Railroad.
They opposed the Bolsheviks because of what they conceived to be the traitorousness of
Lenin and taking the Bolshevik regime out of the war, and soon were at loggerheads with
a new regime.
In order to protect military supplies, which the Western Allies had sent to the Russian
Empire to aid the war effort of their Eastern Ally, and to muster at least some support
for the White Forces, the Western Allies also landed some forces on the Empire's edges.
These included the British, French, American Expeditionary Forces, as well as the Japanese
in the East.
While these Western Allied forces did not fight on the front lines against the Bolsheviks,
their presence on the soil of the former Russian Empire provided an opportunity for the Bolsheviks
to present themselves not only as revolutionaries who were remaking the world anew, but also
to muster nationalist outrage increasingly against such a venture of Allied intervention.
Here this Allied intervention would be used as a potent tool to propaganda effect in ways
which did not necessarily match the confused and ultimately ineffectual intervention by
the Allies.
Another war to top it all off also flared up on the borderlands of the Russian Empire
when the Poles who had reestablished national independence and sought to make that national
independence as expansive and as much in the borders of the earlier Polish Commonwealth
as possible had moved into Ukrainian territory in spring of 1920 into the borderlands between
the Russian heartland and Poland.
The Soviets had counterattacked under the leadership of a remarkably talented young officer, in
fact earlier an officer in the Imperial Army, General Mikhail Tukhachevsky, who aimed for
something more than simply staving off the Poles, but with the encouragement to the Bolsheviks
aimed not only to throw back the Polish attack, but in fact to go crashing right through Poland
in order to establish a link with the revolts breaking out in the industrial heartlands
of Germany.
The aim was to build, as it was put at the time, a red bridge to Europe.
This red bridge would allow for the Bolsheviks to finally make common cause with radical
socialists in Germany and elsewhere, and it was hoped to set the world ablaze.
In fact, this counterattack was halted right outside the gates of Warsaw, the capital of
Poland and what later was referred to as the miracle of the Vistula.
And at this spot, at this event, the Poles still commemorate this as yet another occasion
when the Poles have saved Europe from a danger.
Peace between Poland and the Bolshevik regime was signed in 1921, and it really marked a
decisive end to certain hopes for the linking up with radical revolution in the West.
By late 1920, the civil war in the areas of the Russian Empire had largely ended.
The Western Allies withdrew their small interventionist forces, and the Soviet regime had served
and survived.
As the Bolsheviks took stock of the reasons for their victory, there were several that
stood out and testified to their determination.
The first was, simply put, that the Bolsheviks had been better organized, more disciplined,
and had been more centralized than their scattered opponents.
This led to a second point, the increasingly centralized government that the Bolsheviks
had crafted in their determination to do whatever it took to survive had certainly been an asset.
This increasingly centralized and powerful government would also form the beginnings
of a total state with ambitions reaching far beyond those of liberal governments of previous
decades.
One particular policy which had been instituted in order to really consolidate this control
in economics had been important as well.
This was the economic policy of war communism, as it was called.
It was a radical departure from earlier models of economic organization in which the government
subjected the entire economy to relentless centralization and nationalization, that is
to say, government control of factories, banks, and land.
