Lecture 7, Wars Aftermath, The Hinge of Violence
Welcome to this lecture on the aftermath of World War I.
We'll seek to examine what follows after total war in societies bruised and battered by such a conflict.
I refer to the aftermath of the First World War as the hinge of violence,
because in some sense the war didn't end neatly with the declaration of a ceasefire in November of 1918,
rather in some sense in very many important ways the effects of the First World War would continue.
There were hopes vested in the end of the war for a more democratic order of European society in particular,
hopes that were shared in other parts of the world for democratic transformation and maybe an end to imperialism.
But such hopes would very soon, in the course of just a few years fall prey to a latent state of strife continuing in world society,
not only between nations but within them as well.
One would see vast flows of refugees, one would see disordered societies in which political violence had become common,
and intense hopes for democracy worldwide would evaporate all too soon.
The results of World War I thus would continue as aftershocks long after the war officially ended on November 11th.
On the 11th hour of the 11th day of the 11th month of 1918, with the declaration of the armistice,
the guns finally fell silent.
But this simply opened up a period of needing to take stock of what the war had cost.
The war had left some 10 million dead around the world and double that number wounded.
Many of them, those who survived, scarred for life, either physically or psychologically.
Thus common monuments to the unknown soldier, the tomb of the unknown soldier for instance,
fittingly symbolized the anonymous mass death that had become common in this total war.
Among the living, one spoke of a lost generation, those who were missing,
as well as those young people whose lives had been bruised and scarred by the experience of the war.
The war also had an intellectual and cultural impact, which was significant as well.
One might say that the war had in important ways brutalized European societies in particular,
producing militarized politics and an even more militarized outlook on life.
The literary historian Paul Fussell has suggested that the First World War
accelerated a tendency to speak in war-like language, even in the English language itself,
to think in terms of polar opposites, us versus them.
The wartime expansion of government power had also dealt a body blow
to cherish liberal ideals of limited states, individual rights, respect for human rights.
The First World War had demonstrated that in an emergency, centralized states would have to fill the vacuum.
The lost generation of scarred survivors as a result often dramatically and emphatically disavowed their faith in ideals.
They felt that those fine, cherished notions for which they had bled and their comrades had died
had been exposed as empty and shallow.
One work that summed up this ubiquitous disenchantment was the memoir of Robert Graves,
entitled in an evocative title, Goodbye to all that.
Goodbye to the certainties of the 19th century.
Goodbye to the hopes of an inevitable progress.
Goodbye to the confidence in an ordered society.
The question now arose, what principles would replace those that had been declared bankrupt and finished?
Some ex-soldiers in many different countries called for a new kind of politics,
one that would reflect their experience in the searing fighting in the trenches
with their encounter with the deadly powers of modernity.
Some ex-soldiers would call for what they labeled a new trenchocracy to steer politics.
Soldiers who had fought and bled, who had experienced this modern experience of total war firsthand,
should reshape societies and politics.
