It's at this point that another factor intervened, and it's one that Hannah Rent and her analysis
of the 20th century's course and totalitarianism had stressed as a crucial element in shaping
the fortunes of the century, imperialism.
The colonial legacy of Rwanda as Europeans intervened to seize the territory and to influence
it would set a new framework for these differences and divisions in Rwandan society.
Rwanda became a German colony in 1885, and then after World War I was transferred to
Belgian rule, Belgian administrators set about, as they felt, administering the country in
an enlightened way, and one of their cornerstone tactics in administration was to discern scientifically
they thought the dividing lines in Rwandan society.
What earlier had been a fluid division, what earlier had been a shifting set of identification
between Tutsi and Hutu was now indeed bureaucratically set in stone.
In fact, in an expression of the sort of racist science that was proposed by colonial administrations
in many places around the world, the Belgian administrators invented what was called a
nasal index to measure the noses of Tutsis and Hutus, feeling that this was a scientifically
irreproachable way to categorize and measure who belonged to which group.
And then these designations, arbitrary as they were in practice, were then imposed and
printed in identification documents, which now became compulsory.
The colonial administration had divided the population along lines which earlier had been
far more shifting, now an increasingly strict division of the groups which earlier had been
intermingled was achieved.
Part of a policy of divide and rule, of the colonial powers favoring one minority or another
group in order to consolidate and as it were outsource its control of the territory.
But in spite even of these bureaucratic divisions, the human reality of intermarriage, interdependence,
interrelationships nonetheless continued.
A new page opened in Rwandan history when in the process of decolonization that swept
the world in the course of the 1960s also brought independence to Rwanda in 1962.
Now the majority Hutu, who earlier had been ruled over by the Tutsi minority, dominated
the new republic.
The shoe was now on the other foot and discrimination against the Tutsis became a common occurrence.
There were also periodic waves of massacres of the Tutsi minority by the Hutu majority
and thus many thousands of Tutsis were compelled to flee Rwanda but yet hoped some day to return
to their homes.
Fighting continued in the 60s and the 70s and the 80s between rebel groups of the Tutsis.
In some cases some of these Tutsi fighters had never in fact visited their homeland that
they aimed to return to on the one hand and then the Hutu led Rwandan government which
enjoyed support from former colonial powers France and Belgium in Europe.
A new stage in these political and military confrontations however occurred in 1993 when
the Arusha peace accords were worked up through the mediation of the Tanzanian government.
This peace accords of 1993 called for a setting down of arms and a new beginning of a new
cooperative government which would include power sharing with the Tutsi rebel groups
outside of the country including the RPF the Rwandan patriotic front led by Tutsi leaders.
United Nations peacekeepers coordinated by Kofi Annan who later became UN secretary general
were sent in with a specific mission to observe and at the pleasure of the Rwandan government
to provide a sense of stability.
In reality however the Hutu dominated government of Rwanda had other plans.
It was determined not to share its power.
It feared that returning Tutsi minority members might now exact vengeance or justice for the
acts that had been committed in previous periodic massacres.
We thus need to observe the underground plotting of the government as it laid its careful
plans for the reality of genocide.
