Legitimacy was also sought in other ways.
It was sought in part through showing quite literally that the new man and the new woman had been built in this revolutionary regime in the sports programs of the East German state.
Vast resources were spent on the Olympic program and on Leipzig's sport university.
Vast sums were pumped into the sports programs and as is now clear, vast amounts of drugs were pumped into the veins of athletes competing for the honor of the East German states in the Olympics as well.
A reality that in many cases was hidden from the athletes themselves.
This doping, this drugging of athletes in order to achieve superhuman performance was common and often led to tragic results.
One reads now in the press of cases of women athletes who had been given so many drugs that they in fact turned physically into men.
Their health has been damaged, perhaps destroyed, all in the interest of a state that was willing to sacrifice the money alters of Olympic success.
I recall how at the Olympic competitions one would see nearly superhuman figures of great muscular bulk, men as well as women standing in the competition for the East German state.
In the five year plan of 1986, the East German state further announced that it was surging ahead in technology.
This was to be German genius and efficiency deployed to show what socialism could achieve in a German context.
This five year plan promised investments in the very cutting edge technology, cybernetics, robots, and computer engineering, but the results in fact were intensely disappointing.
The rhetoric of viewing the future and moving towards it was there, but in fact the resources were already lagging.
The East German state was not delivering on its promises.
Nonetheless, we might pause for a moment to consider some of the visions of the future that were offered to the people of this state.
They included the promise that soon the standards of living in the West would be outstripped, would be overtaken, but clearly these results were lagging.
In a bizarre utopian vision that was not shared with a population at large, government planners envisioned making the wall between the Germanies, their anti-fascist protection wall as it was termed a perfect border, a perfect barrier.
In retrospect, this seems a very odd thing to have devoted so many resources towards and particularly ignoble utopian vision.
The hope was that by the year 2000, a year that the East German state didn't live to see, but that by the year 2000, this border would have been perfectly mechanized,
perfectly technologically coordinated with automatic guns that didn't even need border guards, with surveillance devices which would make it impermeable, a perfect border.
In fact, another technology was steadily undermining the East German state and its claims to holding a plausible vision of the future.
That other technology was television.
The location of the East German state, cheek by jowl with West Germany, the Federal Republic of Germany, meant that Western television with its popular entertainment, with its news broadcasts,
including also in its programming those advertisements for all sorts of consumer goods that you just had to have were also being beamed into East German territory and being picked up on the television screens of East Germans.
This was, in fact, as it turns out, a feature of the East German life that was tolerated, at least by the East German state, because it was seen as a perhaps harmless outlet for the curiosity of citizens.
But nonetheless, the subversive message that life was otherwise in the rest of the world was making headway in the East German state in ways that are difficult to quantify.
East Germans used to joke about those members of their own East German territory who were out of the range of West German TV.
They were considered to be living in the valley of the clueless, those people who didn't have a clue about what was going on outside.
We return to a theme that we've seen again and again in this course that means of communication and technology could be a double-edged sword.
They could propagate, as in the radio of the Nazi regime, a message effectively beaming it to the masses.
On the other hand, as in this case, technology could also subvert the government message.
