Mao stated in conclusion that political power grows out of the barrel of a gun, and one had to not merely wait for revolutionary transformations, but to unleash them if necessary through violence.
Mao's peasant identity and his identification with the peasant masses and the revolutionary potential he saw in their nature set him apart from other men who were playing a very important role in the Communist Party at the time.
Unlike men like Zhou Enlai, who became a Communist in France, where he'd been studying in 1921, or men like Deng Xiaoping, who would become Communist as a result of study in France again, or in the Soviet Union, Mao's experience was limited.
Mao's experience was limited to China.
In many cases, one can trace throughout his political career a certain tension between himself, identifying himself with the Chinese rural roots, and those with foreign education, foreign experience in the ranks of the Chinese Communists, as well as the advisors of the Comintern, the Communist International, who'd been sent to China.
Mao felt that it was necessary to draw on his experience in order to move China in a revolutionary direction.
From 1935 on, Mao clearly headed the leadership of the Party, and a cult of Mao, and what was called Mao Thought, based on his ideas about the peasantry and their revolutionary potential, grew up, especially from 1943 on.
Mao was hailed, as we've mentioned, as the great Helmsman, steering China.
It was said that Mao was the man who managed to unite Marxist-Leninist theory with Chinese revolutionary practice.
The Communists now moved towards victory.
In the course of the Japanese occupation and then of World War II, the Communists gained control over northern areas, and there gained support of many peasants by enacting land reforms immediately.
Once World War II ended, a civil war continued in China between the Kuomintang and the Communists.
After their defeat, largely due to their own incompetence, the Kuomintang withdrew to the island of Taiwan in 1949.
The Communists now on the mainland reigned.
On October 1st, 1949, Mao declared the existence of the People's Republic of China from an important symbolic spot, Beijing's central Tiananmen Square.
Now, one saw a red dawn in China, the founding of a new state.
The founding of this new state, however, would be marked by enormous violence.
Mao later said to have admitted that somewhere in the order of 800,000 people were liquidated in the first five years of consolidating control.
After an initial new democracy policy of stabilization, which was modeled largely on Lenin's new economic policy that we've discussed in an earlier lecture, Mao announced that time had arrived for full steam ahead towards communism.
He commanded collectivization of agriculture, following and perhaps seeking to surpass Stalin's campaigns against the Kulaks in the Soviet Union.
Farmers were reorganized into so-called communes in the countryside, though they were still often allowed small private plots in which they could farm for themselves, as was the case in the Soviet Union, at least an intermediate compromise.
But activists within the Communist Party were not satisfied and continued to agitate for even more radical social change.
Within China, they affected remarkable transformations.
They worked to eliminate the endemic illiteracy in the countryside, to eliminate vestiges of traditions like footbinding of women, which were already in decline, to eliminate traditional medicine, which they saw as superstitious and illegitimate,
and to replace these features of traditional society with modern social organization.
In the process, such activists also launched attacks on the Chinese past and on traditional life, banning popular songs or opera, replacing them with approved politicized forms of song and theater,
destroying temples, plowing over ancestral graves, policies that would later be intensified in the Cultural Revolution.
One aim of the regime was to move forward with great force towards industrialization, and in this they imitated the Soviet Union, the model of the forging ahead into a socialist society.
The first five-year plan was launched in 1953, and the Soviet Union was always held up as the model for development.
Even films of the Soviet Union were shown to peasants and ordinary Chinese to show them what to aspire to.
A common slogan in the 1950s summed it up, the Soviet Union's today is our tomorrow.
At the same time, however, one can detect within Mao's policies and his statements the growing determination not merely to follow the Soviet Union, but in fact to outdo it by leaping ahead of it.
