Lecture 10 Soviet Civilization
Welcome to this lecture in which we'll be discussing Soviet civilization.
In our previous lecture we had considered Stalin as a leader,
the cult of personality that grew up around him and the Stalinization of Soviet society.
Today we want to look a little bit closer at the new society built up in the Soviet Union,
which was self-consciously revolutionary and modern,
which claimed to be aiming for the construction of a new Soviet man and a new Soviet woman.
This lecture focuses on significant and in many ways surprising artifacts
of what was said to be this new civilization.
We'll examine the art forms, the official art forms,
which were produced to create a utopian image of a society coming into being.
We'll consider how social life was to be radically restructured.
We'll consider some vivid monuments that were to display the achievements of this civilization.
We'll close by considering the view from outside as well as one dissenting view from the inside,
which objected to the utopian under construction.
Stalin once famously told the writer Maxim Gorky that Soviet artists had a special mission.
They were to become engineers of human souls.
Art was, in other words, to become a form of Taylorism,
literally reforming human beings, not merely reforming,
but reforming human beings to produce a new man and a new woman in a society
organized now on radically new grounds.
Art would have to change as well in its principles.
It would no longer be the expression of individual genius,
the inspiration of a remarkable individual,
but rather would have emphasis placed on collectivity and collective experience,
the class basis and class consciousness.
One movement which sought to enshrine this in official art was known as proletkult.
We see here the predilection that the Bolsheviks shared with other movements of the day
for acronyms which shoved together words to create a new kind of language of political action.
Proletkult stood for obviously proletarian culture,
and it urged new forms of art which would be produced collectively by groups of workers
or artists drawing upon a communal proletarian experience
to be totally distinct from earlier bourgeois art forms
with their emphasis on a look inwards and on personal experience.
Those of us who have worked on reports together in committees
or on other collective projects can well imagine what a novel might look like produced by committee.
I think there are probably good reasons why we don't read such proletkult masterpieces
as enduring landmarks of art today.
There was moreover a officially approbated form of art
which was endorsed officially and made mandatory in 1932
the doctrine of what was oddly named socialist realism
and focusing on it for a moment on this official orthodoxy in art
can give us a good sense of the way in which ideology would in many ways fundamentally transform
the entire mission of art.
According to this formula of socialist realism, art should be realistic
in the sense not of depicting society as it currently was
but realistic in the sense of depicting evolution in process.
Socialist realist art was to depict society as it was in the process of becoming under socialism
not the present day but the future which seemed nearly within reach.
Art thus would have political purposes in motivating masses.
Certain implications flowed from this new mission.
Art had to be simple.
It had to be easily accessible and popular
so that the entire population could draw the message from it.
It had to be full of unproblematic and unambiguous praise
for the party, the state, and the infallible leader, Stalin.
In part due to Stalin's own often quite conservative tastes in artistic forms
art now turned away from the experimental forms, the avant-garde playing with form
that earlier had marked some Bolshevik propaganda
and now turned towards more traditional forms.
And the result was quite clearly an art of a nearly astonishing banality.
Little collected today except as examples of the sort of kitsch
achieved under political pressure, it falsified the present
in the name of depicting a utopia that was soon to arrive.
