The revolutionaries feeling threatened moved now to a more radical phase. In 1792, they declared a French Republic,
abolishing the monarchy and now instead instituting popular sovereignty.
According to many historians, this was the advent of a new, modern kind of politics with appeals not just to elites,
not just to notions of divine right as legitimacy, but rather modern appeals to the masses
and the legitimacy that only the people gathered together supposedly could give.
The revolutionary slogans were in many cases informed by the ideals of the Enlightenment.
They were the ringing slogans of liberty, equality and fraternity, universal ideals for all mankind.
This emphasis on freedom and individual human rights grew into the ideology of classical liberalism.
We see here the beginning of the age of ideologies in the modern period.
At the same time, another ideology was born as well, the appeals to the people
and the attempt to muster the French people out of loyalty to not the king, but to the French fatherland
showed the new power of nationalism, especially in events such as the universal mobilization of the nation,
the mass drafting of the population at large in 1793, all of which showed the new power of this new allied ideology of nationalism.
Both liberalism and nationalism would play crucial and at first linked roles in 19th century history.
There was also another element that we need to explore a little bit further in the events of the French Revolution
and this was a certain utopianism which was present in the increasingly radical dynamic of the French Revolution,
especially in its most radical, and this is a feature of the French Revolution
that some historians believe sets it apart from the American experience.
The ardent radical revolutionaries sought at their most radical to de-Christianize France,
replacing religion with a cult of reason and Enlightenment ideas,
so that the Cathedral of Notre Dame, for instance, would be emptied of its traditional Christian paraphernalia
and instead would become a temple to reason.
In a very vivid symbol of the new arrival of a new age, the revolutionaries also instituted a new revolutionary calendar
which expressed an apocal break that the revolutionaries were seeking in human existence,
which reformed months and weeks into a more rational and Enlightenment-minded chronological framework
doing away with a massive traditional accretion of religious holidays and saint's days that earlier had been the case.
As the French Revolution moved into a more radical phase, however, its promises started to exact a price in blood
in what has come to be known as the reign of terror.
Fearing for the survival of the revolution, surrounded as it was by enemies on the outside
and revolutionaries feared enemies within as well, in 1793 they executed the king
and established a new governing body that would lead the revolution on to a final victory
known as the Committee of Public Safety.
The Committee of Public Safety ushered in a policy that was known as the Terror lasting from 1793 to 1794 at its height.
The Committee of Public Safety and the Terror were both dominated by an intriguing figure, in many ways a frightening figure,
the lawyer Maximilian Robespierre.
Maximilian Robespierre has been considered one of the prime and original examples of the intellectual in politics.
His nickname among contemporaries was the incorruptible one.
He was frightening to contemporaries because he wasn't in it for personal power or for personal gain, so it seemed,
but rather out of a commitment to abstract ideals which he sought to realize.
Maximilian Robespierre deliberately advocated revolutionary terror.
Revolutionary terror was defined as prompt and total justice, unsparing and unrelenting.
The prize of this policy of revolutionary terror was the production of what was called a Republic of Virtue.
Someday after a period of terror it was judged it would no longer be necessary to use compulsion
because people of their own, of their innate virtue that had been brought to the fore
would do the right thing without being compelled to do so.
Robespierre ringingly announced that terror without virtue was merely evil.
Virtue without terror at this stage of history would be pathetic and weak.
Terror, he felt, was necessary.
It is attributed to Robespierre this saying that one cannot make an omelet without breaking eggs.
The ends, glorious as they were, would seem to justify the means for Robespierre.
Terror would be necessary to bring about the Republic of Virtue.
