In the post-war turmoil in Germany, a small new party that called itself the German Workers' Party, its acronym was the DAP, was established in turmoil-filled Munich in the south in January of 1919 by nationalists who had earlier been active in the German war effort,
had earlier been active in the Fatherland Party, established to bolster German morale in the last stages of the World War, and this small group was but one among hundreds such radical small groups in German society.
But it was destined for a fate different than those of these small parties that tended to fade with time, and this in part was due to chance.
In September of 1919, one meeting of this German Workers' Party was visited by a then unknown soldier by the name of Adolf Hitler.
He had been charged by the German Army as part of its intelligence gathering operations to collect information on such small political gatherings.
Hitler, who had attended this meeting, soon became a member, I'm pretty sure that the observers were not supposed to do this, and soon had a meteoric rise within the party.
By 1921, he was the party's chairman, and at his urging, the party renamed itself, taking on the name National Socialist German Workers' Party.
It was known by its full acronym as the NSDAP, or by short, as the Nazi Party. That very name was significant.
The words national and German tended to appeal to nationalist conservatives, while the words socialist and worker tended to appeal to those on the left side of the spectrum.
What this very name announced was a crucial attribute of this young radical movement, the attempt to reach out to a broad constituency in German society promising something for everyone.
Hitler was in the process of remaking this party in his own image. The very figure of Hitler would be crucial in this context.
Hitler presented himself and was presented in the propaganda of the young Nazi Party as the unknown soldier who had emerged from the trenches of the Great War, transformed by that experience carrying a message of renewed greatness to a humiliated nation.
The obscure man, Hitler, presented himself as the embodiment of all those million unknown trench soldiers who had experienced the fighting on the Western Front.
Hitler's own conception of his role changed over time. He had at first seen himself as, he put it, a drummer, summoning a new political coalition of a group of forces opposed with democracy in Germany to do away with the democratic experiment.
But over time, he would come to see himself not simply as a summoner of energies, but as the prime leader himself.
Due to his skills in oratory as well as organization and the hard work of propaganda, Hitler himself became ever more crucial to the fortunes of the Nazi movement and indeed very often among ordinary Germans as it gained prominence, it was often called the Hitler movement.
Hitler's followers began to call him by a nearly messianic title, calling him the Fuhrer, the leader, the man of destiny.
In urban legend, Hitler's oratorical skills were ascribed to his experiences in the First World War. Supposedly, having been gassed in the trenches of that conflict, had done something to his vocal cords, had changed the nature of his voice, had given it a hypnotic quality.
Well, this was urban legend, this was speculation, this was the sort of supernatural myth that would surround the figure of Hitler and expectations vested in him.
What was indisputable and was true was that Hitler clearly knew his audience. He was able to speak to their deepest fears and deepest desires.
He himself would explain that he saw himself as channeling his audience's innermost feelings, innermost convictions. He was careful to take the pulse of a crowd and to tell that crowd what it wanted.
This was the reality of his oratorical skills.
Another crucial element in the Nazis' rise to power was also the calculated use of terror. And in particular, Nazi stormtroopers called the SA were the enforcers of this terror on the streets of German towns and cities.
Nazi organization and ritual within the party were permeated with the influences of that great experience of the First World War, and this was most clearly the case when we examine the stormtroopers, the Sturmabteilung, or the SA as it was called.
They were organized in 1921 as the political arm of the party. They saw themselves as political soldiers. They were essentially, however, thugs who were dressed in brown-shirted uniforms.
They drew their inspiration from Mussolini's Italian fascist black shirt movement, and indeed it was clear that they imitated this effective model.
