Lecture 23, Saddam Hussein's Iraq
In our previous lectures, we've examined cases of ideological regimes and their actions
that the international community tried to look away from.
In today's lecture, we'll examine the case of a regime which pressed itself upon the
world's attention at the very close of the 20th century and beyond.
And that was Saddam Hussein's Iraq.
In the lands of ancient Mesopotamia, a movement came to power announcing a new secular ideology
of Arab unity called Bothism.
The Both Party came to power in a coup in 1968, and then by 1979, Saddam Hussein had
become president.
In this lecture, we'll trace his rise to personal dictatorship, the way in which he modeled
himself on long-ago death spots as well as more recent ideological movements, we'll
examine the wars that he unleashed, and we'll examine his atrocities against the people
of Iraq as well.
We first need to examine the set of ideas which Saddam Hussein would champion.
At the same time, identifying his own personal power with his ideology, Bothism was in essence
a combination of nationalism and socialism.
Its origins lay in what we've described as a dark decade of the 1930s.
The Both Arab Socialist Rebirth Party, to give it its full name, grew out of the pan-Arabism
of the 1930s.
The argument that Arab peoples should not be divided along the lines of artificial national
boundaries of states that have been carved out in the post-war settlement after World
War I, but that they rather should be unified, that this was added a Marxist socialism fused
with the Arab nationalism of the pan-Arabists.
Some historians have considered this blending of nationalism and socialism arising in the
1930s and 40s to bear resemblances to the Nazi National Socialism.
The first organizers of the Both movement in 1940 were educated abroad in the west at
the Sarbonne in Paris.
They were Michel Aflach and Salah al-Din Bitar.
Their origins reflected the ideology's secular nature, its turn away from traditional religion.
As they were of mixed origins, Aflach was Greek Orthodox, al-Din Bitar, Sunni Muslim.
Religious differences were to be bridged by a commitment now to a mystical nationalist
ideology.
One which aimed to revive one Arab nation with an eternal mission across time, shedding
old traditions, shedding traditional religion, and uniting Arabs into one modern civilization.
Want to look backwards by the promise of a modern civilization for Arabs united under
the slogan of unity, freedom, and socialism.
Observers locating Bothism in its time and place in the ideological currents of the day
have seen affinities to Nazism as well as Stalinism in this movement that arose in roughly
the same time.
The ideology would come to power.
The Both party split between two branches.
One would come to power in Syria in 1963 and the other later in Iraq in 1968.
In spite of their pledges to Arab unity, however, the ideological consistency of unifying, which
didn't take place, took second place to the establishment of personal dictatorships in
those countries.
Iraq was in many senses an artificial creation.
It was certainly the site of the ancient Mesopotamian civilization, but it had gained
its borders and its establishment after World War I as a British mandate, as a colonial
territory.
As the British would discover, its diversity of populations and faiths, the Kurds, the
Sunni, the Shia, often made it unstable.
Saddam Hussein would step forward as the man to master this diversity.
Saddam Hussein would be proclaimed as the great son of the Arabs, bringing the Bothist
ideology to realization.
As we've seen in the case of other would-be dictators such as Hitler or Stalin or Mao,
his beginnings were not auspicious.
His origins were lowly.
Saddam Hussein was said to have been born in 1937.
There's some doubt about this date itself.
Some historians have suggested that while his official biography records 1937 as the
date of his birth, that in fact he was born later, but assumed an earlier date in sort
of an act of self-fashioning to make himself appear older and thus more worthy of respect
in his society.
