Let's keep in mind that while there certainly had been tyrannies and cruel dictatorships
before the 20th century, indeed human history is full of them, these movements, which we'll
be discussing in our lectures, were nonetheless set apart.
They were distinctively new and modern, principally because they could draw on new technologies
of control and persuasion, and ideologies that claimed to be scientific, new, progressive
and modern in their very essence.
While we'll be discussing a whole succession of ideologies, we also want to be clear that
this does not mean that the mass movements we will be discussing, such as for instance
communism or Nazism, were all identical in nature.
Very often they were ideological mortal enemies.
Rather, it's especially because of their different ideological goals that will be struck
again and again by the congruences in their actions and structures, the resemblances that
will occur between movements that were nonetheless fighting one another, as we'll see again and
again these were movements that would struggle, combat one another, interact, and on occasion
learn from or imitate one another.
I want finally to consider just two psychological factors and reactions that we'll be returning
to repeatedly in our lectures.
The questions of confidence on the one hand and resistance on the other.
Confidence as well as fear of these regimes are important factors in politics, though
they're difficult, perhaps impossible to measure precisely.
Mass movements would be able to exploit fears, especially by presenting themselves, even
to their foes as being inevitable in their triumph, and would be able to mobilize confidence
on a scale that enabled crimes of a magnitude never witnessed before.
It's a chilling thought to take aboard, that such crimes could be committed out of aspiration
and hope for a future vision rather than from desperation alone.
And yet, even in spite of such confidence projected by the regimes, people would still
resist.
Not often an easy task, especially when the claim to triumph seemed so plausible on the
part of these mass movements.
Such regimes are, thankfully, not the only story of the 20th century.
Resistance to such regimes, in many cases ultimately leading to their overthrow, is
also a crucial and inspiring story of the 20th century.
And resistance could come in many forms.
It could include active opposition.
It could include as well something as ordinary as jokes directed against the repressive
regime, which still testified, even in their bitter humor, to a certain inner reserve of
resistance within that had not been quelled by the regime.
And then, also significant for our purposes, the sort of quieter witness of people who
thought, reflected on, and wrote about the atrocities of their age and its violent trajectory.
One witness of the age, among others who we'll be considering in our lectures, was
among the first to try this difficult and ambitious intellectual task of trying to discern
the century's broader outlines.
She was a controversial political philosopher by the name of Hannah Arendt, a German Jewish
scholar and refugee from Nazi Germany who came to the United States, who drew on her
personal observations and experiences to dissect traits of what she called the century's
totalitarian movements, regimes that would aim at least for total control.
Her work is, I think, of decisive impact and significance to understanding the 20th century.
Further, there will be witnesses in fictional form, those such as Yevgeny Zamiatin, Aldous
Huxley or George Orwell, who wrote in the form of fiction their own anxieties, their
own premonitions of what the human future might appear like given the violent trajectories
of their days.
We reach thus our point of departure, and we'll need to keep in mind certain features
of the story that we'll be examining in these lectures.
One very important caution is to keep in mind that the 20th century was not only about
violence, but it did see unprecedented levels of it.
We will seek to trace, to follow this blood-red thread running through the fabric of our times
to understand what deeper lessons it might yield for us.
And in the process, two opposed observations, intention with one another, need to be kept
in mind throughout.
The first is this.
The overthrow of many of the regimes, which we will discuss in our lectures, testifies
not only to the acknowledged heroism of resistors or the witnesses, whom we'll be discussing,
who oppose these regimes, but also tells us something else.
It signifies to us that there's a certain inner instability in the regimes themselves,
which start to believe their own propaganda, start to lose a sense of the limits of reality
and thus ultimately might fall prey to their own utopian wishes.
The second opposed observation is this.
And it's an insight which is perhaps not an optimistic one.
The repeated rise of such regimes, again and again, with humanity seemingly not learning
from what's come before, points to another disturbing phenomenon, the apparent recurring
susceptibility of modern societies and modern people to such impulses, even today, suggesting
some inner flaw in modern man.
Perhaps consciousness of this susceptibility might be one of the first steps towards remedying
it.
We've sought in this lecture to define our terms and establish major themes.
In our next lecture, we'll consider the legacy of revolutions in world history, especially
in the 19th century, that would launch the world on the course of the violent 20th century.
