Indeed, the Gulag camp itself represented an important symbol of the regime, as a dissident
Alexander Solzhenitsyn would later argue when he suggested that the Gulag was in some sense
a microcosm of the outside larger society.
It was a crucial part of the Soviet regime.
The existence of the camps was not kept secret.
It couldn't be.
They had huge staffs of warders, guards and officials, and the importance of their labor
to the economy was clear.
One particular spot in the Gulag system summed up some of the importance of this institution.
And this was the Gulag capital in the far east of Magadan, where over a million prisoners
were sent to mine gold and minerals across a huge territory of three million square miles
the size of Europe.
For us to think of a concentration camp the size of Europe boggles the imagination.
Their labor was managed in what was supposed to be a rational scientific way by the Far
Northern Construction Trust, or Dalstroy.
Certain artifacts of everyday life also offer us interesting perspectives in on the society
which was intended to be built in the Soviet Union.
These included the communal apartments, called Komunalkas, which crowded many families together
into single apartments with shared kitchens, shared toilets and baths, and almost no private
privacy.
In part, this was simply an expedient given the housing shortage in the Soviet Union,
but it was also given an ideological twist.
The notion was that living would now take place communally.
Under the slogan, palaces for the workers.
Residences which earlier had housed middle class or upper class families were expropriated.
They were subdivided and could have over 50 people living in one apartment.
In Leningrad in the 1930s, about 68% of the population lived in such Komunalka collective
apartments.
Another vivid symbol was that of what one might call a radio, but it was in fact a little
bit different.
This was the so-called punked set.
It was a kind of loudspeaker that was set up in dwellings, such apartments, in farms,
factories, and in public places.
There wasn't a radio in the sense that we're accustomed to because it carried a single
station.
It couldn't have the station altered or changed, and some of these sets couldn't even really
be switched off at all.
The sound simply could be turned down to the point where it was simply a small murmur,
and such punked radio sets continued into our own times in the Soviet Union as well.
What sort of views did people have from the outside of the building of what was supposed
to be a new civilization?
During and after the revolution, many sympathetic visitors, especially from the West, were caught
up in the excitement of these seemingly world historical events.
The American journalist John Reed, in a famous text Ten Days That Shook the World, offered
his own romantic first-person view of the revolution up close.
American journalist Lincoln Steffens in 1919 stated about the Soviet Union, I have seen
the future and it works.
It's been suggested by some historians that he came up with this ringing quote before
he had actually visited the Soviet Union, which casts it in a very different light.
International visitors were welcomed on carefully stage-managed tours, and this is part of what
we might call the Potemkin Syndrome.
Back in the days of Catherine the Great and the 18th century in Russia, a certain Prince
Potemkin had carefully stage-managed model estates filled with happy peasants and model
agriculture to present a façade.
The Soviet Union would now make this into an art form, and Lenin earlier had said somewhat
unkindly that there always would be such useful idiots who would make propaganda unintentionally
for the regime.
Some journalists from the West well understood the grimmer reality behind the façade, but
in order to retain their access to the Soviet Union, not to lose their privileges as journalists,
they engaged in self-censorship.
One journalist was told in a phrase that might stand as a statement for this era as a whole
that you can't say that about one particular detail that he had revealed because it's true,
not because it's false, but because it's true.
Socialist realist depictions of Stalin's Soviet Union seemed especially attractive to many
in the West at a time of economic crisis in the Great Depression.
After a visit in 1932, the British writer George Bernard Shaw, otherwise so very critical
of the reality that he saw in the West, called the Soviet Union a land of hope.
