Some reformers who were often called utopian socialists because of their expectation of a utopia
established real settlements and real communes to serve as models for the rest of mankind for a harmonious society.
And some of them were right here in the United States.
For instance, Robert Owen's new harmony settlement that drove, at least for a time, in Indiana in the 1820s.
There were other thinkers who also played a very important role in this genealogy of what were called utopian socialists.
One of the most important was the French socialist Henri de Saint-Simon, who foresaw a future society of harmony,
not necessarily of perfect equality, because this would be a cooperative society presided over by an elite,
an elite of intellectuals and technological experts who would steer that society in the desired direction.
There was, in fact, one particular symbol of the Saint-Simonian project which sought to show just how much human experience would be changed.
And one can, in fact, see how vivid it would have been as a symbolic representation.
It was a particular kind of jacket called the Saint-Simonian jacket, which could only be buttoned or buckled up from the back.
And that meant that one individual himself could not properly dress.
The Saint-Simonian jacket was, by definition, one that one would need assistance in putting on.
This was supposed to be a symbolically rich illustration and allegory of humanity's need for cooperation.
The utopian socialists could also go off in directions that were, to even contemporaries, far more fanciful.
The French socialist Charles Fourier advocated cooperative model settlements that he called by the name of phalanisteries.
These were supposed to be secular monasteries, almost.
He also held the most remarkable notions of what the world would be like, including the natural world, with the eventual arrival of the socialist millennium.
Not only would human beings learn to cooperate, he hoped, but in this blessed epoch so too would the natural world and animals.
Beasts of prey would learn how to lead vegetarian lives, he hoped.
The great animals, whales, and elephants, for instance, might join with human beings to cooperate in productive labor willingly without coercion.
Fourier also seems to have believed that the oceans would quite literally turn to lemonade.
I'm not really sure how this worked in his vision of socialism, but it seemed part and parcel of the great promise of the arrival of a socialist millennium.
But such fanciful notions were not without their critics among contemporaries and even among other socialists.
At roughly the same time, a newer, more potent, and in many ways even more confident and resolute version of this important idea of socialism appeared.
Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels would announce a break with what they denounced as an unrealistic, fanciful utopian socialism,
and would present their own program of socialism based more firmly on reality and science.
Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels would propose what they called a truly scientific socialism,
which they claimed was not merely desirable, but which was inevitable, which was of a peace with the logic of the world and human history itself,
and which was tantalizingly close to being realized.
The outlines of their scientific socialism, as well as disturbing portents, even against this background of the trust and the belief in progress
that we're current at the end of the 19th century and at the start of the 20th century will be explored further in our next lecture.
