This eugenics took on a remarkable reputation worldwide and had gained many adherents.
It seemed to present modern answers to social problems by regarding them as basically biological
or medical issues that could be solved or dealt with in a therapeutic scientific way.
It was argued that especially at times of crisis with scarce resources,
the genetic stock of a society needed to be improved by vigorous state intervention,
precisely the sort of state intervention that the First World War in times of total mobilization
had now been shown to be possible.
Eugenics achieved remarkable popularity worldwide and across the political spectrum,
from the left as well as the right, because of its promise of modern solutions, the current problems.
There were two countries in particular which leapt towards the ideas of eugenics in particularly market ways,
and they were Sweden and the United States.
Eugenic policies in these nations, which often function as models for those of other countries,
included laws for the involuntary or compulsory sterilization of the mentally ill in prisons,
in mental institutions, and in psychiatric hospitals.
In Sweden and in the United States, such phenomena became all too common.
By 1935, in the United States itself, over 21,000 had been involuntarily sterilized.
This is a fact of the historical record in the United States that is not as well known as it should be.
These were measures that were presented as science at its most cutting edge in dealing with social problems.
In Germany, soon after the Nazis came to power in 1933, they would pass eugenic laws
and enact increasingly ambitious eugenic programs.
And it's a bitter irony of the historical record that in many cases they would explain gratefully
that they had drawn their inspiration and their model from the case of the United States,
its eugenic movement, and in particular the racial segregation that obtained especially in America's South.
What we see here is the bitter reality that the sort of ideological mass movements
we were discussing in this course could draw their inspiration not only from one another,
but also on occasion, even from democratic regimes and movements within them.
There's one particular author, the British journalist, Aldous Huxley,
who described these trends in a vision of what the future might look like.
In 1932, he published a book, a classic of dystopian or anti-utopia, entitled Brave New World,
in which he foresaw a society based on trends that he already felt were current in the 1930s, this dark decade.
He explained afterwards that he was simply extrapolating trends already at work.
He saw the disorder and the uncertainty of his own time and felt that it was precisely that chaos
that might lead to a demand for the opposite, a society of too much order.
His novel was set around the 27th century.
It showed a society based on the ideas of a mythic founder who was perhaps Henry Ford, perhaps Sigmund Freud.
It wasn't entirely clear. It was an ambiguity he worked into his novel,
as people would speak of the founder as either our Ford, a play on our Lord, or our Freud.
His original ideas were summed up in the notion that stability was the central value of a society,
and even human individuality, even human nature itself, could be sacrificed to that value.
This was, with a vengeance, a vision of better living through chemistry.
Chemistry and what was called emotional engineering, the conditioning of human beings,
as well as cloning and eugenic manipulation, were said to have solved the problem of happiness,
most notoriously by providing happiness in chemical form in so-called soma pills,
which were said to explicitly have replaced religion.
These soma pills, which promised instant, chemically induced happiness,
were on occasion referred to as Christianity or alcohol without any of the disadvantages.
On another occasion, these pills were referred to as Christianity without the tears.
Religion sapped of its promises of deeper meaning now had been replaced by chemistry in Huxley's vision.
