What was this all in aid of?
The promise was that Khmer Rouge, in this brutal fashion, by endorsing revolutionary
violence would create a new society.
To make that new society, the regime would follow radical measures to purify the human
material of the people within.
While the world would be cut off from the country, the country would be isolated, would
form a universe of its own, and seeking autarky, perfect self-sufficiency, Khmer Rouge felt
that they had the chance of creating the world anew in Cambodia.
There were symbolic actions that immediately made clear their resolve.
Money, currency, was abolished in one week upon their coming to power to be replaced
by a new form of economic equality.
Well, collectivization of land was decreed.
Not the measures of the Soviet Union or in China, which had been extensive enough, but
it still allowed some private plots to the peasants.
No total collectivization was demanded.
In the communes, as had been the case in communist China, people ate in collective canteens.
In dining halls, where they were not separated into families, but rather worked in a collective.
And there they shared the same thin, rice soup that represented the starvation diet
of ordinary Cambodians.
All Cambodians, moreover, were ordered to wear black clothes on the model of the Khmer
Rouge themselves, to shed vestiges of individuality, to instead become uniform, to become one in
their appearance.
Religion, writing, education all disappeared.
In their place, the Khmer Rouge and Pol Pot, in many senses, echoing Mao's insistence
upon will and its capacity to achieve remarkable transformations, argued that revolutionary
fervor itself would be able to bring the benefits of higher civilization, medicine, industrialization,
even in the hands of young children.
And indeed, the Khmer Rouge sought to control even the most intimate parts of people's lives.
Only arranged marriages that were approved by Khmer Rouge officials were allowed, and
those who engaged in relationships outside of the bonds of such sanctioned relationships
would then be punished most harshly.
Individualism was seen as something that needed to be overcome.
And in chilling propaganda slogans, the Khmer Rouge didn't hide how they viewed human nature
or indeed the individuals under their own control, but instead emphasized their disregard
for the individual.
One potent slogan stated, losing you is not a loss.
Keeping you is not a gain.
The individual was relegated to a revolutionary mass that was to be formed and remade.
People were seen as human material for the revolution.
What were the results of this revolutionary fervor, this determination to create the world
anew in the Khmer Rouge?
Well as one might have predicted, construction and agricultural projects undertaken throughout
the country were marked by that same irrationality and pseudoscience and that reliance on will
triumphing over the constraints of matter that we've seen in other regimes steered by their
ideology rather than by pragmatism, rationality, or compromise.
The collapse of agriculture as a result of the disastrous policies of the Khmer Rouge
here as was also the case in China or in the terror famine in Ukraine and the Soviet Union
once again led to instances of famine, cases of horrifying cannibalism in these crisis
situations.
And the Khmer Rouge government reacted in ways that might have made sense in terms of
their ideology but which represented yet another ratcheting up of violence against the subject
population.
These catastrophes in agriculture and other projects led the Khmer Rouge and Pol Pot to
suspect sabotage.
The movement began to comb through the civilian population even more determinatively and led
them to start purging themselves of ever more alleged enemies within the ranks of the party.
