It was joked at the time that indeed Hitler had sought black shirts for his stormtroopers,
but that the stores had been out of them at that time, there had been a sale on brown shirts, hence the uniforms.
It was joked at the time that in one characteristic of the party after another, in its ritual and symbols,
one could very clearly see the tremendous debt that Hitler as a would-be dictator owed to Mussolini
and his Italian fascists from the Roman salute to the imitation of the shirts for the thuggish stormtroopers.
It was joked that Hitler could visit Italy in the future, and he would then have to hail his earlier patron,
or the man he'd modeled himself on, Mussolini with the words hail emperator, hail to the emperor.
The joke then continued that Mussolini would have to answer hail imitator, hail you imitator of Mussolini's own tactics.
The stormtroopers of the essay grew out of a wider thuggish milieu in the troubled German society.
More than a million men had belonged to the paramilitary organizations of the Freikorps that had risen in defeated Germany
in 1919 and 1920, and many such men were sluiced into the stormtroopers' ranks.
The stormtroopers' leadership prided itself on a gangster style, on their toughness, indeed on their brutal violence.
A man who excelled at this, a former Freikorps captain, Aaron Ström, was the leader of the essay.
Hitler now pursued what he thought was a clear and determined plan for power,
and it was to be an imitation of Mussolini's own tactics that had been successful in Italy.
He aimed to imitate Mussolini's march on Rome in an incident that has come to be called by the faintly ridiculous name of the Beer Hall Putsch.
Imitating Mussolini's determined march on Rome, Hitler aimed to start a march on Berlin on November 8, 1923.
Well, this was something out of a comic opera.
The stormtroopers didn't even make it out of downtown Munich on their march on Berlin, as the police fired on them and the marchers scattered.
This revolt ended in failure, but what followed was key in the rise of Hitler.
At the treason trial, Hitler, in part due to sympathetic judges, exploited this opportunity to win a media victory,
turning the tables on the German democracy that was putting him on trial.
His name now gained national resonance, and it was crucial in relaunching the party in 1925 when he was released from his ludicrously short term in prison.
We now turn to examine the Nazi ideology which the Nazis championed at its ideological core with the ideas of racism and antisemitism.
Hitler had a brutal social Darwinist worldview that looked out into the world and saw a reality of constant struggle,
and in fact, constant racial war, pitting peoples against people's races against races in a constant struggle for survival,
a struggle in part for Leibn's realm or living space in which a people could expand and grow.
The applications thus for the Nazis were obvious.
One needed to consciously seek racial strategies to embrace natural conflict that they understood as the key to history in order to win triumph for the German people.
The Nazis posited the existence of a superior race which they aimed to recreate.
This was the superior Aryan race.
The Aryans, of which the Germans were supposed to be the finest surviving exemplars, though by no means pure themselves,
were supposedly in the stereotypes of the Nazis champion, blond, tall, honest, good,
embodying all that was creative and healthy, and of necessity they were juxtaposed with a demonic stereotype of the exact opposite.
Those were the Jews, depicted by the Nazis as parasites incapable of creating culture on their own,
eternally contaminating influences upon other peoples, and by definition the eternal enemies of all that the Aryan race for the Nazis stood for.
The Germans were supposedly the purest remnants of the original Aryans and would now have to be recreated.
The Nazis promised the creation within Germany of a true racial unity.
The charge term that they used for this idea was the Volksgemeinschaft, the people's community.
This was to be a racial utopia of rough egalitarianism among those who belong to this racial unity.
