However, a newer generation of writers succeeding upon Voltaire pushed these ideas further and perhaps more radical directions.
They included writers like Jean-Jacques Rousseau, who in his masterpiece The Social Contract in 1762, argued that reason commanded a crucial political implication.
The legitimacy of popular sovereignty, not the rule of kings or queens, but rather the people, this abstraction or this reality, ruling themselves and the only legitimate form of true democratic and authorized government.
The Enlightenment's optimism for reform, for progress, and also for human perfectibility generated tremendous excitement and a sense of possibilities.
One needs to take in for a moment just how outrageous this belief could be.
Human perfectibility meant that if human life could be brought into line with reason, there was no limit to what might be achieved in terms of the perfection of mankind itself.
The revolutions thus in the Americas and in France at the end of the 18th century evoked enthusiastic reactions far beyond the borders of those countries.
The American Revolution was hailed as a chance to enact Enlightenment ideas.
Excited observers in Europe felt that something truly new was taking place, meriting the world's attention.
And in fact, one of the most enthusiastic supporters of the American War for Independence was the British political agitator and Enlightenment philosopher Thomas Paine, who celebrated the American events as, as he put it, a new start for the world,
a chance to begin creation again and to get it right this time by bringing human existence into line with reason.
Thomas Paine argued that there was no going back.
Once people had seen what popular sovereignty could mean and be, it wouldn't be possible to unthink what the American Revolution had demonstrated was a possibility for all mankind.
A universal message, he argued, was being announced.
Now we need to speak about a revolution taking place in old Europe, the French Revolution.
Though there were similarities and very clear intellectual links between the American and the French Revolution, they were also very different.
In part because the French Revolution soon took on a more violent and radical turn, which is very important in terms of its intellectual impact as well.
The French Revolution's events were unleashed starting in 1789 when the monarch of France, King Louis XVI, called together an Estates General, a parliamentary or representative body, a traditional body,
that he hoped would authorize new fiscal reforms to put France on a firm footing in terms of taxation.
He hoped that they would approve his plans for fiscal reforms, but instead he discovered that the Estates General rapidly developed a momentum of their own.
The representatives of not only the aristocracy or of the clerics, but also the representatives of the common orders of France who had been gathered together at the Estates General soon formed their own ideas about their mission.
They gained a new confidence, a new sense of identity politically, and started making new demands that went far beyond what the monarch had felt was legitimate.
These representatives declared themselves to be a national assembly representing the people, national, and resolved to write a constitution that would enact these reforms.
When the king in his irresolute way tried to halt them, a new force intervened.
The Paris mob stormed the Bastille royal fortress on July 14, 1789, and though this was not a strategically decisive event, nonetheless symbolically it was significant.
The crowds had gathered and had stormed a symbol of royal authority, and to a great extent had brought down the confidence of that royal authority along with a structure that they demolished freeing the prisoners found therein.
For Alias Canetti, the analyst of crowds we discussed in the first lecture, this would be a crucial, perhaps the initial entry of the modern mass or the modern crowd into politics.
The National Assembly now moved in a remarkable summer of 1789 to enact one after another ringing declaration of new rights.
In August 1789, the National Assembly issued what it called the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen, and here we see a certain consonance between the American Revolution as well as the French because these were ideas that had been affected by the American declarations.
The revolutionaries, however, venturing now on the route of radical reforms, faced opposition elsewhere in Europe and even on the borders of France as the crowned heads of Europe looked with great suspicion at the radicalism that seemed to be growing in the once great kingdom of France.
