This sort of exposure later of false rumors had very important implications.
Skepticism would grow towards such propaganda,
and in a bitter irony, decades later reports of Nazi genocide,
of mass murder, atrocities, and racial murder in World War II
would at first be discounted by contemporaries
due to the skepticism that they afterwards felt
about the rumors that had circulated in the First World War.
Propaganda also aimed to undermine the enemy's war effort.
Taking direct action, the German military dictators
sent the Russian Revolutionary Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
across Germany itself from his exile in Switzerland to Russia
in a train that was carefully guarded and sealed as it were
so that he could deliver the message of revolution
without infecting Germany along the way they hoped
in April of 1917 into the Russian Empire itself.
War, however, would bring with it as well
social strains and a search for culprits.
The enthusiasm many had felt in those crowds of 1914
we've discussed started to fade under the impact of war
and social divides opened up between classes
and different political orientations within society.
Within the socialist movement, the radical uncompromising wing
which had been associated with that radical Lenin
gained in credibility.
Some sought scapegoats for the suffering of the war
in their own societies and in the German case
this led to the singling out of German Jews in the army
in the notorious Jewish census of 1916
which had been urged by anti-Semites
who suggested that the German Jews
were not participating patriotically in the war effort.
When such a census took place,
the resulting German Jews within the German army
the results were what one might have predicted.
They participated in exactly their proportion
in the German population at large
but the results were suppressed
and German anti-Semites now continued their slander
against the German Jewish community.
Even before the war ended in the soon to be defeated Germany
the ingredients were thus present for a conspiracy theory
about why the war had been lost
and it was soon to be called the stab in the back legend
which blamed minorities within Germany itself
on the home front for allegedly sabotaging the armies
and the trenches.
War also brought a devastating new phenomenon
that of genocide in the Armenian massacres
that took place in Ottoman Turkey
an ally of Germany in the war.
In 1915, while the war was going on
between half a million and a million Armenians
were killed in the Turkish Ottoman Empire.
After that empire feared that this Christian minority
of the Armenians would collaborate with their Russian enemy
to achieve independence and thus ordered them
to be deported from sensitive front areas.
The ruling elite of the empire, the so-called young Turks
had grown out of a secret society
entitled the Committee for Union and Progress.
The young Turks encouraged these measures.
Many historians believe however
that no one single order was issued for the killings
that took place but rather that this was a phenomenon
that accelerated on its own.
What we see is that total war would all too often
make genocidal conditions possible
because mass violence would seem increasingly normal
at such times.
In April of 1915 then, Turkish authorities moved
against the leaders of Armenian communities
and several hundred were arrested and shot.
In the next two years they further deported
two to three million Armenians from eastern Anatolia
away from the front areas towards Syria and Mesopotamia.
By some estimates a third of those who were thus targeted
were massacred, a third perished on the way,
and about a third survived these harrowing death marches.
Half a million to one million died,
either immediately massacred or from exposure in the desert.
In part because of international inaction
in response to the news of these killings that filtered out
they would become a dreadful precedent
followed later by others.
At the time the American ambassador in Istanbul
and German missionaries pleaded for international intervention
when they witnessed these massacres
but their voices were drowned out by world events.
We speak in our own times of a certain compassion fatigue
that hinders an active international intervention.
This is unfortunately not a new phenomenon.
