The plant's emphasis on the power of will, as embodied by the leader and the party and committed workers,
to overcome physical obstacles in many ways diverged from classical Marxism,
which had emphasized the inexorable laws of economic progress and material factors.
But nonetheless, industry expanded at a phenomenal rate, even though it did so at an enormous human cost.
New plants, new mines, even new industrial cities such as Magneto Gorsk, shot up seemingly overnight.
Specific targets for production, quotas or norms were demand to show the dramatic increases that the plant called for.
One very special example of this was the propaganda that celebrated Ukrainian minor Alexei Stakhanov,
who dramatically over fulfilled quotas set for him in the mines.
He set new records for production.
This was actually a staged feat because fellow workers were helping him and clearing away what he had produced
in order to allow him to achieve these overproduction of norms.
Stakhanovite shock workers as they were called, industrial stormtroopers essentially,
imitated Stakhanov's feats and were often hated by other workers because they would cause the production norms to be raised.
There were, however, very serious internal contradictions, logical flaws in the whole notion of a planned economy,
which was based on the ideal of overproduction.
This hinted at the irrationality of what was supposedly a scientific project, just to give one example.
Suppose a factory received, according to the scientific plan, enough leather to produce 100 shoes in a week.
If that factory took the material for 100 shoes to be produced in one week,
and in that one week produced a thousand shoes over fulfilling its production norms dramatically,
one can very readily see that the quality of those shoes produced with a fraction of the materials necessary in the scientific plan would be shoddy.
This hints at the irrationality of this project, but shortcomings would be blamed on spies, sabotage, and a lack of ideological fervor.
The first five-year plan was completed in 1932, far ahead of schedule.
The second five-year plan from 1933 to 1937 was also completed early, and driving these transformations were terror.
In particular, the purges of the great terror.
From behind his desk, puffing his pipe, with a smile playing on his lips,
Stalin oversaw the elimination of suspected or even potential resistance in what became his own massive campaign of terror against the Soviets.
The secret police on the camp system, as we saw, had already been established under Lenin, but Stalin oversaw their massive expansion.
In 1934, the secret police was renamed the NKVD and sent into more energetic action.
Historians estimate that for the total Stalinist era from 1929 to 1953, the number of those who were killed is in the millions.
In the historical literature today, the figure of 20 million as a death toll is often cited, but a final result will have to await closer archival research.
Stalin is said to have once quipped that one death, that's a tragedy.
A million deaths, that is a statistic.
We see the outlines of the magnitude of Stalin's terror.
It's estimated that during the great purge of 1936 to 1938, some 600,000 were executed.
The purges began with a mysterious murder of Stalin's potential rival, probably not an accident, Sergei Kirov, in December of 1934.
And this death, which many historians believe Stalin himself ordered, was used as a pretext to launch the purges and find those responsible for this assassination.
Massive arrests followed, including especially arrests of party officials, old Bolsheviks, who had been with the party from the beginning, and ordinary citizens.
The Moscow show trials were a dramatic propaganda event.
In three successive public trials, in 1936, 1937, 1938, in wave after wave of terror, prominent communists were accused of plotting against Stalin.
And their reaction was one that observers like Hannah Rent, whom we've discussed earlier, found psychologically remarkable.
Many of the individuals arrested gave improbable confessions, in which they admitted, in some cases to being at places plotting against Stalin,
where they demonstrably could not have been, and after their confessions were convicted and executed.
Among those convicted and executed were even, for instance, Yagoda, the former secret police chief.
Wave after wave of purging and cleansing of the party was taking place.
Those who were arrested, convicted and executed, were often shot in the back of the head from behind,
in a strategy for killing that many felt was resemblant of the killing by guillotine of the French Revolution, but now in a more modern way.
