And again and again, the Nazis emphasized one symbol of their movement, coordinated marching of masses, of true believers, of stormtroopers.
They were intended to have an exhilarating effect.
The Nazi movement anthems stressed the stormtroopers were on the march.
Germany was on the march towards a Nazi future.
The Nazis were also aided in their rise to power through the remarkable polarization of German politics.
Within German politics, the Marxist parties of the left, the Social Democrats and the German Communist Party,
which might otherwise have cooperated to stop the rise of Nazism, were in fact bitter rivals.
The common turn, the Communist International Organization, following Stalin's orders,
had directed the German Communist Party to denounce the Social Democrats as nothing better than social fascists.
They argued that in the coming struggle, German Communists were confident of being able to pick up the pieces after the collapse of German democracy,
after the collapse of the Nazi movement, and after the collapse of the Social Democratic rivals.
The Communist slogan, which as we now know was self-deluding, was, after Hitler, us, the Communists hoped to come to power.
Thus, an opportunity was lost to forestall the Nazis' rise to prominence.
By contrast, in this remarkably fragmented, polarized German political scene,
the Nazis presented themselves in a remarkably self-serving way as the only party that reached out to the broad masses of German society,
the only party that was a natural alternative to Communism, now the democracy had failed.
Curiously indeed, while these parties were ideologically at loggerheads,
a strange reciprocal antagonistic relationship emerged between the Nazis and the Communists in this crisis.
They both hoped to benefit from the collapse of German democracy.
They both, in practice, cooperated to make the German parliament impossible.
The Nazis were, moreover, very proud of opportunities to win followers from the Communists,
feeling that this was a true symbol of their promise of owning the future by winning over such former true believers.
The Nazis now would come to power.
Ironically, in spite of Hitler's ambitions to come to power through the ballot box,
the Nazis, in fact, entered government in January of 1933 through backroom intrigues, not through a clear-cut election victory.
In the November 1932 elections, the Nazis were stunned and horrified to see their percentage of the vote dip,
suggesting that at long last their growing support had peaked and now was on the decline.
Nonetheless, in January 30, 1933, Hitler became chancellor in coalition and in cooperation with conservative nationalists
who had placed him in power but who planned to manipulate him.
He would end by manipulating them.
The Nazi worldview was now in power, and the Nazis would seek to notify German society through their policy called Gleichschaltung.
Once in power, Hitler outflanked his conservative nationalist allies by securing control of the police forces,
and then, after the mysterious Reichstag fire on February 27, the passage of the so-called Enabling Act in March 23, 1933,
sometimes called the Suicide Note of the German Parliament, which gave Hitler control of legal authority in Germany.
This impression of legality would be very important in the Nazis' consolidation of power.
In the following six months, the Nazis pursued their policy of Gleichschaltung,
which might be translated as coordination or consolidation of control, to Nazify Germany.
They purged the civil service, outlawed other political parties, shut down labor unions, and relentlessly terrorized political opponents.
At the same time, they promised the Volksgemeinschaft, the people's community, was supposedly coming into being.
A community of solidarity in which, it was said, the common good would come before the individual good, an appealing slogan to many Germans.
The striving of the Nazis for total power was presented as a transcendence of earlier divisions.
And in the August 1934 plebiscite, not an election, but a poll, as it were, of the German people,
85% of the voters approved the Nazi regime, not in a free election,
but nonetheless a measure so the Nazis felt of legitimacy given to their regime.
At the same time, the Nazis made open use of terror in quelling resistance or challenges.
In 1934, the SA, the stormtroopers, now consisted of four million men, a formidable force.
