We need to discuss in brief some of the Nazi visions for the future, in essence, the science fiction of the Nazi Utopia, which they projected for the future.
Hitler foresaw a Europe which would be dominated and organized by the Germans as a master race, spreading into the living spaces of Eastern Europe as colonial overlords.
The German people were to grow from 80 million at present to 250 million in one century, and they were to be racially re-engineered.
They were to be purified, the dross melted away, stripped away, and instead leaving the racially pure.
The Third Reich was to last a thousand years and to dominate world politics.
In some sense, we don't need merely to look at Nazi propaganda to understand their plans for the future.
We can actually view another document, which gives us a glimpse of the future.
This is the GPO, as it's known in its bureaucratic acronym, the General Plan for the East, General Plan Ost.
This was an actual blueprint of Nazi plans produced in the SS Planning Office for the future of Eastern Europe.
It was reviewed by Heinrich Himmler in June of 1942, and it was sent back to the Planning Office by Himmler with a comment that it was still too gentle, still too mild.
They should continue to work on it. What did this document say in that form?
Well, it projected what Eastern Europe would look like 25 years after the war had been successfully fought by the Nazis.
It was, in essence, a work of science fiction. It coolly calculated the removal and the annihilation of some 31 million non-Germans from Eastern Europe, the Slavic and non-German peoples living there now.
Those who would be allowed to remain would not be free, rather they would provide slave labor for a while, and their areas would be colonized by the German master race.
These projects were already, in part, underway with the movement of ethnic Germans from Eastern European countries to the new colonial empire.
Nazi architecture also gives us a vivid visual way of understanding some of the vastness of the regime's ambitions.
The Nazis declared that their architecture was ideology and stone. It was bombastic. It was neoclassical.
It expressed some of the compulsions of the Nazis for monumentality and the dwarfing of the individual.
Hitler, who himself was a frustrated architect, compulsively planned and replanned the rebuilding of Berlin as a new German capital to be renamed Germania
on a grand scale with vast party buildings, vast parade grounds, assembly halls, and marching fields where a million Germans could gather to parade in the marching that was so important to Nazi imagery.
These buildings were to be cultic centers replacing traditional religion, which was expected to wither away.
Hitler was especially pleased with the work of his personal architect, Albert Speer, who was charged with the mission of realizing some of Hitler's fantasies,
who would achieve the so-called Cathedral of Light, a massive projection of pillars of light in the Nuremberg party rallies to imitate a traditional cathedral.
The grandiosity of Nazi architectural plans has suggested to some historians larger aims, including world domination.
Nazi architecture was preplanned to leave tremendous dramatic ruins for the future, thousands of years hence some historians have argued that it's also a blueprint for world plans.
Hitler clearly had superpower visions. He envisioned a post-war order of large blocks of superpowers contending for supremacy, certainly Germany, maybe Great Britain, maybe the United States, maybe others.
There is evidence of global goals in Nazi planning for such seemingly improbable things like an invasion of India in order to strike at the British Empire through Afghanistan,
plans for super battleships and super bombers that would be capable of ranges to reach America in a coming war.
Hitler's view of the United States was a very interesting feature of his thinking about the future. His views of Americans had always been very ambivalent.
At certain times, they were largely negative, at certain times though, Hitler had thought that the preponderance of German ancestry among many Americans might represent a racial core that meant that America might still be revived.
At other times, he and the Nazis were scathing in considering America as they put it, a mongrel nation of racial mixture and of mixing, which doomed it in racial terms in coming confrontations.
