Scarcely a family was not affected by these deportations, as overnight civilians suspected of potential political disloyalty were rounded up, put into train cars or cattle cars, and sent on a long road to Siberian exile, and the death that awaited many of them there.
When the Soviet Union invaded Finland in the Winter War of 1939-1940, Finns reacted with a ferocious resistance and guerrilla warfare.
The Red Army's dismal performance against Finnish Irregulars revealed the cost that Stalin's purges had taken on the Red Army.
Hitler now was free to turn towards the West. In 1940, Hitler attacked in the West overrunning Denmark and Norway, and then defeating France in the course of six weeks by June.
Hitler celebrated what he saw as the overturning of the verdict of World War I, what the German armies hadn't achieved in four years of protracted trench warfare that he himself had participated in.
The German armies had achieved now in the course of several weeks. Though Britain remained undefeated, Hitler now turned to his next goal, the conquest of living space for his master race in Eastern Europe.
He now turned on his Soviet ally.
Hitler's attack on the Soviet ally began with so-called Operation Barbarossa, launched on June 22, 1941.
With three and a half million men, this was the largest invasion mounted in history until that time.
In spite of repeated warnings, Stalin had refused to believe that the attack was coming. His ideological assumptions had blinded him to the treacherous nature of his own ally.
Stalin reeled before the impact of this treachery, which essentially anyone but he could certainly have anticipated.
Some historians suggest that he might have suffered a nervous breakdown in those first days of the attack by his former ally.
But when he emerged afterwards and spoke to the Soviet population, he appealed to them to fight in a war against the foreign invader.
He appealed in particular to Russian nationalism. This was a remarkable reversal.
He announced a great patriotic war to expel the German enemy. Not a great communist war, not a great Bolshevik war, but instead a holy war for Holy Mother Russia to expel the foreign invader.
Many ordinary Russians took this to be an implicit promise that if only they mobilized for the sake of Russia, then after the war, after its successful end, liberalization would follow.
And indeed, mobilization was impressive.
Part and parcel of Stalin's new tactic was an increased rapprochement with the Orthodox Church, which now was instructed to preach the message of a nationalist uprising against the German invader, now enjoying better relations with the Soviet government that for decades previous had persecuted the church.
Hitler for his part declared that the war on the east would be a new kind of war, freed of the constraints of civilized warfare. This was to be a war of ideologies, racial enemies, a war to the death.
This fact was underlined, in fact, in orders that Hitler handed down to the German armies, such as the Commissar Order of June 6, 1941, which instructed German soldiers to kill, on capturing them, Soviet political officers, the propaganda chiefs who were appointed to units of the Red Army,
orders that were later extended to another group the Nazis would target, the Jews in the occupied territories, considered racial enemies.
Soviet prisoners of war, many of whom didn't feel any compunction in particular to die for Stalin, were captured in enormous numbers in the first battles of the invasion of the Soviet Union.
They were put in camps, and the Nazis allowed them to die of hunger and neglect, considering them to be Slavic subhumans.
When incidences of cannibalism broke out in these camps, the Nazi chiefs considered that funny.
By the end of 1941, two million Soviet prisoners of war had died as a result of the mistreatment in the Nazi camps.
Total war was now intensified.
World War II would see an intensification of those trends that were already evident in World War I, especially in the mobilization and the targeting of civilians.
The Nazis used slave labor and became a crucial component of their war economy.
In the occupied territories, especially in the harsh treatment of the Eastern European territories, the Nazis killed civilians in reprisal for partisan or guerrilla activity.
Bombing of civilian centers became common, beginning with Nazi attacks on Warsaw and Poland, Rotterdam in the Netherlands and Coventry in Great Britain,
but then air war came back to Germany, where Allied bombing killed between 350,000 and 650,000 civilians in a raid on Dresden near the war's end.
Up to 80,000, many of them refugees, were killed in this intensification of total war.
The Japanese, half the world away, in their surprise attack on Pearl Harbor in December of 1941, brought America into the war, making it even more total.
In August 1945, the United States dropped fearsome new weapons, atomic bombs on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, killing an estimated total of 110,000.
The Nazi regime, however, enthusiastically embracing total war, made the deliberate murder of civilians a special aim and project of its conduct of the war,
and made it a cornerstone of its legacy that we'll discuss in our following lecture on the final solution.
