This was, in other words, an example of the phenomenon which yet had not had a name,
a phenomenon of what we call genocide.
It was markedly different in ways from the Nazis later industrialized murder of the Jews,
but it was a step on the way towards the perfection of this phenomenon.
In the Armenian massacres of the Turkish Empire,
certain individuals, certain communities were not targeted
if they were further away from sensitive strategic areas.
In the case of Armenian women, if they were willing to convert to Islam, they might be spared.
This did not seem to be a total attempt to entirely exterminate a group of people,
and yet they were being targeted not because of what they had done,
but largely because of who they were,
a step in the direction of the perfection of genocide.
Later, during the Second World War, Hitler would return to this precedent of the Armenian genocides.
Hitler is said to have later declared that no one remembered the Armenians today,
and so too it would be for his plans for the annihilation of entire groups of people
in Eastern Europe and elsewhere in the Nazi areas of control.
To this very day, it's harrowing to observe that the Turkish government denies this tragedy,
or downplays it, and for that reason,
the full documentary evidence of these atrocities have not yet come to light.
What we see thus in other words is that total war had made such radical policies seem possible,
indeed, unfortunately, in some contexts, normal.
This was to be a premonition of acts to come and later to be perfected during the Second World War,
which would see the trends which we've described in today's lecture,
the trends towards the growth of the government,
the trends towards the use of high-tech weaponry,
the trends towards the increased targeting of violence against civilians, increasingly normal.
Genocide as well would come to be a phenomenon recurring,
especially in times of war, against a backdrop or a context of mass violence.
What we'll be discussing in our following lectures is some of the political impact
that the enormous crisis of the Great War would have on the context of earlier ordered regimes.
We'll be examining how total war would cause enormous upheaval in politics,
and the case of one empire, that of Russia, would produce a total revolution.
Total war, by its very nature, would open the doors to a more total transformation of politics,
a total revolution, in which Lenin, who had been shipped back to the Russian Empire
and had been encouraged to do what he could to undermine the Russian war effort,
would see his efforts come to fruition.
In the context of the upheavals and the dramatic transformations of the First World War,
Lenin and other radical revolutionaries would feel that their chance for radical transformations had come,
and it was a chance that they would be determined to take.
In our next lecture, in other words, we will see how total war would create the opportunity for total revolution in politics.
Thank you.
