These uniforms were to show the equality, the sameness of society.
It was indeed dangerous to wear anything else because it would show that one was perhaps a bourgeois individualist.
Wearing jeans was prescribed and the Mao suits would now be worn by a quarter of humanity.
Mao, over time, grew worried that this force he had unleashed, the Red Guards, was starting to go too far.
Indeed, certain Red Guard units essentially devolved into street gangs and could fight one another.
Mao now fell back upon using the army to suppress the Red Guard movement.
Mao's own death finally brought an end to the Cultural Revolution in 1976.
Mao's personality had done much to shape the regime.
At its core had been his overriding conviction of the power of will.
This clearly was not orthodox Marxism.
Marx had stressed material forces, but Mao had felt that it was necessary to adapt this ideology.
Mao, in a chilling quote, at one point appraised ordinary people, the Chinese masses, as a beautiful blank page
upon which new characters could be written, a new humanity could be formed.
Chairman Mao was puritanical in his views in public but became notoriously indulgent towards himself, especially later in life.
In his own train he would entertain scores of mistresses and would live the good life.
He would be called with a sort of grim joking by some Chinese, the Red Emperor, mimicking in his luxury
and his self-indulgence of the emperors of the Manchu period.
Mao finally died on September 9th, 1976.
Just before he died, in what amounts to his last words, he delivered what was perhaps a verdict on his own rule.
His last words, however, were not words of regret or reconsiderations or thoughts of what might have been done differently,
but rather his suggestion that the revolution was still unfinished and that it needed to be continued, it needed to be moved forward.
After Mao's death, a leadership struggle followed.
Deng Xiaoping, who earlier had been purged, and his allies emerged victorious and put Mao's wife and her associates, the so-called Gang of Four, on trial.
The results, however, were mixed, even in the aftermath.
Though the policies of the government turned in more pragmatic directions after Mao's death in 1976,
the Communist government was unable to force a break with Mao Zedong and all that he had stood for historically.
The Communist government still hailed, and still hails, Mao Zedong thought and claimed that his contributions had outweighed any mistakes that he might have made later in life.
What's clear is this, that an honest reckoning with this period, its toll of victims, its triumph of irrationality and pseudoscience,
has yet to emerge in China in the fullest sense.
Slowly, personal accounts, reconsiderations and criticisms have been emerging,
but an open and honest reckoning in the fullest sense has not yet come to pass.
The result is, bizarrely, a case of historical amnesia about some of these darkest periods of Chinese history,
and even stranger cultural phenomena we can observe in China today.
In China today, cultural revolution propaganda styles are sometimes used for advertisements, for restaurants or for products,
intending to appeal to a nostalgia for these days of revolutionary will and fervor for getting their cost.
We'll consider in our next lecture a regime, that of Cambodia's Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge,
who would seek quite deliberately to overtake and outdo even Mao's Red China.
