They established concentration camps openly throughout Germany, not hidden.
It was announced that their purpose was supposedly re-education
or the protective custody of those who had opposed the Nazi regime.
A model camp was established in March 1933 in Dachau, outside of Munich,
which was later imitated widely throughout Germany, a model of terror.
In spite of their brutality, these concentration camps were not as yet places of mass murder
as the death camps of World War II would be,
but they certainly prefigured them in their coordinated, calculated use of violence.
As this was going on, the Nazis announced that they were building the German future,
rebuilding the country with vast public works projects,
including the Autobahn superhighways that one can still see in Germany today.
A promise was made to the German people that the Volkswagen, which one can also see today,
the people's car would allow the German people to enjoy a level of prosperity
and a quality of life that they'd not known before.
At the same time, however, rearmament began.
In 1936, in imitation of Stalin's industrialization drives,
the so-called four-year plan was announced to ready Germany for prosperity and greatness on the international scene.
By 1939, the Nazi regime was boasting of full employment in Germany.
And for ordinary Germans, this certainly made the Nazi regime popular.
Society was on its way to being Nazified.
Nazi propaganda urged an idealized utopia of a united folk working and acting together.
The images that celebrated this were the common images of shared meals of communal stew,
not very appetizing, perhaps today, the so-called Eintopf,
or winter relief campaigns in which charity was organized by the state.
To shape popular opinion in March of 1933,
the Ministry of Popular Enlightenment and Propaganda was established,
led by Joseph Goebbels, a Rhinelander,
one of the few highly educated members of the Nazi elite,
and a propaganda mastermind.
His talents were exemplified by his earlier listing off of ten commandments for national socialists,
transmuting the religious impulse into a political religion.
The regime subsidized, moreover, the production of a particular piece of physical equipment,
which was supposed to spread its message far and wide.
This was the production of millions of so-called Falksender,
or People's Radios, that were now proliferated throughout Germany
in order to spread the message of the regime.
Germany had, at this point, the highest rate of radio ownership in the world.
In this modern measure of a society's advancement,
seventy percent of households in Germany had access to these radios.
For those who did not, thousands of loudspeaker pillars, as they were called,
were set up in public places throughout Germany so that the booming voice of Hitler,
the furor could be heard throughout the nation.
Goebbels announced that the radio would mediate to the masses in this age of the masses.
He announced that the Nazi Revolution wouldn't have been possible without the radio,
and he aimed to use it for propaganda.
The regime also energetically intervened in the family.
Women's chief role was now to be breeders of new soldiers.
Just as in the Soviet Union, medals were awarded to women who were producing large numbers of children.
They were hailed for their contribution to the national cause.
Special attention was also given to young people.
They participated in the ritual burning of books to show the downgrading of traditional education.
This was now replaced with the induction of boys into the Hitler Youth for military training,
girls into the League of German Maidens to take them out of the family,
and instead to induct them into a Nazi-fied society.
Finally, there was the Nazis' perverse triumph in Nazi-fying the German language itself.
A German Jewish philologist, a student of language by the name of Victor Klemper,
who survived the Nazi regime, was famed in our present day for his diaries,
which recorded his experiences.
He also made a fascinating study of the Nazi perversion of the German language,
which he felt was one of their keys to power, and he had the evidence of this ready to hand.
He had been horrified to discover himself, an opponent of the Nazi regime,
sometimes falling into their rhetorical phrases.
He observed with horror that the Nazis had turned terms,
and earlier had been negative, like fanaticism, into the very highest praise of all.
The Nazis also set about a program of racial persecution to bring about their racial utopia.
In their future, they promised racial solidarity, which was defined not simply by being German,
but also defined against others, against those who were labeled outsiders,
German Jews, Gypsies, Slavs, homosexuals, and other minorities.
The Nazi state would attack these groups with growing radicalism,
and the man who steered these policies, Adolf Hitler, is the man we'll discuss in our next lecture.
