In particular, we've noted again and again in our lectures and our discussion of despotic regimes the jokes that even people under the repressive grasp of these regimes have time and again told about their regimes' shortcomings.
These regimes were perhaps not ultimately threatened by such jokes, but those jokes on the part of the suppressed populations that I've tried to weave in now and again into our discussion do suggest that these regimes all ultimately didn't manage to finally quell that last spark of resistance, that sense of irony, or in this case dark humor, that would still be an abiding part of human reality.
Institutions in the form of governments played a very large role in setting the 20th century on its course. We might ask whether institutions might also offer some solutions to these problems for the future.
Many have looked to the United Nations as an embodiment of those ideals which earlier the League of Nations had sought to embody.
But from its founding the United Nations was a collection of states, not a world government with sovereign power. Rather, it has often very usefully been an arena for discussion.
But it's been an arena which has included states whose interests as well as conception of the world have sometimes been irreconcilable, including democracies as well as dictatorships.
And thus the United Nations has not been immune from the contradictions of politics and ideology. To give but one example, in 2002 Libya, a state declared sponsoring terrorism, chaired the Human Rights Committee of the United Nations illuminating these contradictions.
During the time of the Rwandan genocide, the government of Rwanda was a member of the rotating Security Council members.
In crises like Bosnia, Kosovo or Rwanda, as we've seen, appeals to an international community have sometimes paradoxically served precisely to release individual nations from taking responsibility for action.
Some hope that the International Criminal Court, established in 2002, might change this picture with claims to universal jurisdiction.
But there are some anxieties by some nations like the United States which declined to participate, which are concerned about implications for national sovereignty, which is the basis for democratic responsibility and democratic accountability.
But a level that's even deeper than that of institutions and governments is one that I'd like to consider as well.
And that is the baseline level of the individual and how the individual's human rights and human being are regarded in politics and by ourselves.
In other words, this is the question of how we think about human nature. This is an old debate in philosophy and one that's likely to continue, but it's key in our context.
Much of the confrontation in the 20th century with utopias, their hopes, disappointments and terrors, centered on issues of human nature and whether that nature can be changed.
The fundamental question was this, the abiding question. Is there one essential human nature which is enduring and durable, which can be folded, spindled and mutilated, but which will bounce back?
Or is man something different? A product of environment, education, social influence, perhaps infinitely changeable and open to influence.
This is a model which MIT psychologist Stephen Pinker has referred to as the blank slate theory.
One notable and widely respected historian of ideas, the late Isaiah Berlin, spoke, I think, very eloquently to this abiding question of human nature.
In his entire work of the history of modern ideas, and he himself was a remarkable witness of the 20th century in his own work and thinking,
he took as a central model for his own work a quote from the German philosopher Immanuel Kant.
He talked about the crooked timber of humanity. Kant's aphorism of the crooked timber of humanity suggested that human beings are that crooked timber.
They're made up of a material that's so complex, so organic, so grown and crooked in the sense of being distinctive and individual and unique,
that nothing entirely straight as this aphorism continues, nothing entirely straight can be carved or shaped or molded from human nature.
What was meant by that was that a human individuality doesn't fit, according to Isaiah Berlin, the neat schemes and utopian frameworks that are suggested by the ideologies we've discussed.
A central paradox, however, is this.
