There's also, in particular, one very telling innovation of the Islamists, which is in stark
contrast to traditional Islam.
And that is the incorporation into modern Islamist thought of a concept of progress.
The concept of progress, as we've seen with the modern Western ideologies that set the
20th century's violent course on its way, as we've seen in our lectures, was a key
notion.
The notion that a bright future awaited, that things were getting better all the time,
perhaps inevitably, but especially if one had the key to history.
And this is a notion that was not familiar to traditional Islamic belief.
The notion of traditional Islam had been that in the days of the prophet, in the days of
the revelation, one had enjoyed, as it were, a golden age, and that later generations had
deviated from it.
Rather, the Islamists suggested one could instead imagine a perfected future.
And this was something quite new, incorporating some Western ideas.
The adherents of Islamism are often from prosperous backgrounds and often students of science
or engineering.
The movement's use of technology for its ends, its embrace of the machinery of technology,
even as it might reject some of its Western context, whether the internet or the use of
modern weapons is characteristic of this blend of modern with religious ideology.
We see here also something that runs counter to commonly perceived notions about the roots
of terrorism.
We're often prone to understand terrorism as a reaction to desperation, to a lack of
hope in the future, but the prosperous backgrounds of many terrorists, as well as their own professed
determination to live and die for particular ideas, should suggest to us that we need to
take their professed beliefs seriously.
In spite of denunciations of the West and the preaching of the armed struggle of jihad
as a holy war, Islamist thinking is often very heavily influenced by Western ideologies
that it has appropriated, even though those debts might not be recognized.
An excellent example is a key thinker of Islamist thought, the Egyptian Said Qutb of
the Muslim Brotherhood, who studied in the United States and then reacted very violently
against the civilization that he had encountered there.
But he did so, borrowing terms and ideas from Western civilization, but giving some of these
ideologies a distinctive twist.
In particular, Qutb accepted Marx's timeline of historical stages, feudalism, capitalism,
communism, but then did something interesting.
He added one more stage after communism, after the dictatorship of the proletariat, and this
was to be the triumph of Islamism as an ideology.
This was to restore the spiritual dimension that he felt had been neglected in communist
ideology, bringing about finally a utopian harmony of human existence.
Qutb's writings called for a unitary state, consolidation of political control, and a
classless society based upon shared belief that would be achieved through violent means.
Similar trends could also be seen in other schools of Islamist thought, developing in
this period including Revolutionary Iran under Ayatollah Khomeini from 1979.
It's crucial to keep this in mind that Islamism is not a throwback, not a revival, but rather
as a modern ideological form, and its ideas need to be considered in this context as well
as its actions.
We turn now to consider a prominent case of such motivated terrorism, the September 11th
attacks of 2001 and the role of Al Qaeda.
On September 11th, 2001, New York's World Trade Center towers were destroyed by Al Qaeda
terrorists coordinated by their leader, Osama bin Laden, and another attack was launched
on Washington DC.
The attack in and of itself was not merely to do damage to the economy, it was also intended
as an act of propaganda through terror, propaganda of the deed as revolutionaries and anarchists
of the start of the 20th century would have called it.
It was intended to spread fear, to cripple a society, and to impress upon the rest of
the world that the enemies of the Islamists were on the run.
In Al Qaeda texts that were later found in Afghanistan after the Taliban hosts of Al
Qaeda there were defeated, suicide missions such as the one of September 11th were praised
in a booklet which was entitled significantly The Solution.
What was offered here was terrorism as a solution.
