We now understand this psychological phenomenon as part of the debilitating effects of this conflict.
We now call it post-traumatic stress disorder.
As the word shell shock suggests however doctors were at first prone to look for a physical explanation for what had happened.
They suggested that perhaps the impact of the bursting of a shell jarred the brain of a soldier
even if he was not physically injured or scathed and thus produced shell shock
which had a nervous effect upon the psychological functioning of a soldier.
It took a long time for medical doctors of the First World War to understand that this was a real phenomenon
and it's wrenching to read in the historical record that a number of those soldiers who first were diagnosed with this shell shock phenomenon
were suspected of being malinguers or cowards and who were shot when they in fact were the victims
of the experience that they had been sent out to endure in the trenches by their batters.
The phenomenon of the First World War was also grueling for another kind of person
whose helplessness and subjection behind barbed wire would become unfortunately all too typical of people in the 20th century.
It's estimated that some 8.5 million soldiers would spend at least part of the war as prisoners of war behind barbed wire
in camps living in terrible conditions, not conditions approaching those of the death camps
or concentration camps of the Second World War but nonetheless their fate, their lingering behind barbed wire
would become an all too common symbol of the 20th century.
However, there were other psychological effects beyond the breakdown of shell shock
and they belong in our record of the psychological effects of the First World War.
They include the brutalizing effect of this war upon soldiers called stormtroopers who didn't break down
but instead started to feel uncannily at home in the trench environment.
One part of the psychological consequences of this war was the brutalization of participants in trench warfare.
New elite forces and they existed on all of the fighting sides in the First World War were called in general stormtroopers
were created to break through the stalemate of the trenches.
As stormtroopers they are intended to blow through the defenses of the opposite side,
break through the trenches and once again bring about a decisive victory.
The Italian elite fighters were known by the characteristically beautiful name of Arditi,
the bold ones, the ones who had no fear and they were proud of this name.
The German units were called perhaps a little more romantically still stormtroopers or stormtroopers.
One of them Ernst Junger recorded the spirit of these units in his very disturbing memoir, The Storm of Steel.
He announced that here he and his fellows had experienced a new model of heroism.
They were princes of the trenches who loved raids, taking prisoners, risking their lives on a daily basis.
Such units were indeed celebrated as a new breed of young heroes,
but a question presented itself to contemporaries as it presents itself to us.
Such young men who were members of stormtrooper units who had never known a civilian existence
but had come of age in the trenches, would they find it easy to adjust to peacetime?
Would they be able to demobilize psychologically to a normalcy they'd never known as adults?
The answer was clearly no.
The brutalizing effects, the increase of violence in such radical form the trench warfare represented
would continue in reverberations in western civilization afterwards.
Total war was a name given to this comprehensive phenomenon.
It was a term coined to sum up the all-encompassing nature of modern industrial war
which saw not only armies fighting armies, but societies fighting societies, nations mobilized against nations.
This conflict seemed to be of a kind that demanded the total mobilization of mass armies, economies, societies
and the hearts and minds of people in the countries at war.
The stakes of this war were total as well.
Total victory or total sheer defeat would be the outcome, not a reason to compromise,
not after such sacrifices, not after such hatred, not after such bloodletting.
The winner would be paradoxically not an outright winner, but the last one standing after the long drawn out process of attrition.
The total war had finally two crucial implications that would haunt western civilization and indeed the world through the 20th century.
Because civilians were crucial to working for a country's victory in total mobilization,
civilians would increasingly be seen as legitimate targets of violence as well.
However lamentable this might seem in moral terms, civilians would become targets in total war.
The strains of total war would also tear at societies.
A gap could grow up between soldiers in the trenches and the civilians who had not experienced what they had experienced on the home front.
Social tension could lead to the search for scapegoats for such suffering in one's own midst.
Total war was a process that once begun would continue and we'll discuss it in our next lecture on the process of sliding into total war.
