In order to retain control, the state was careful not to relinquish its grasp of what was called the commanding heights of the economy.
These were large industry in certain strategic sectors, major factories, the mines, the transportation industry, and the banks.
The new economic policy was not a break with state control.
At the same time as certain economic measures were being loosened and restraints shed, within the party, control was ratcheted up.
A rule against factions was encouraged by Lenin himself, which aimed to make sure that the party moved together as one without dissent within.
Ultimately, this rule against factions would be a very dangerous measure in other hands, in the hands of an associate of Lenin's by the name of Stalin.
The government also energetically attacked organized religion and the churches.
They had held true to Marx's beliefs that religion was an opiate of the people, diluting the masses, acting like crack on the intelligence of otherwise rational individuals,
and for that reason the Russian Orthodox Church, Jewish religious institutions, as well as other religious faiths were energetically attacked.
Thousands of clergy executed in these first years.
Lenin's period of rule, however, was succeeded by the rise, almost imperceptibly at first, of a curiously gray and indistinct out-of-focus character, a man by the name of Stalin.
Stalin would come to the fore slowly, especially as Lenin's grasp on leadership faded.
In May of 1922, a stroke largely incapacitated Lenin, and though for a while he hobbled on, he eventually died on January 21st of 1924.
And now, the scramble to succeed, this remarkable mastermind of revolution, Lenin, began in earnest.
Lenin had not had a very good relationship with any potential heirs.
He had had few good things to say about many of them.
He had criticized Stalin in particular for his rudeness.
This was perhaps a too mild a statement given his later record, but Lenin didn't endorse anyone on problematically,
and that meant that the Bolshevik leadership had to contend on its own to settle this problem.
The leading contenders for the top position were two men in particular, Leon Trotsky,
this formidable figure of great Red October, as well as the bureaucrat Joseph Stalin.
Trotsky's assets were clear. Personal charisma. He was a great and fierce orator.
He had a fiery intelligence of great sharpness and acuity,
and he had played an active role in the revolution as a prime mover of the seizure of power in Red October.
Trotsky championed radical ideals, the notion of permanent revolution,
to speed up the revolutionary process as a key concept for the future of the Soviet Union and the world revolution at large.
He was clearly an important and compelling figure.
Stalin, by contrast, was very different. He had a lackluster personality,
very little talent for rhetoric or oratory,
but he did have the asset of a certain genius for bureaucratic and organizational activity behind the scenes.
This talent meant that as General Secretary of the Party since 1922,
he had done much to place supporters of his own in key party positions and to win their loyalty.
Stalin, by contrast, who had not participated actively in the Great Red October,
could draw upon such reserves.
While Trotsky was out giving fiery speeches, Stalin worked behind the scenes.
He advanced the slogan, a good deal less radical, so it seemed, than Trotsky's,
of building socialism in one country, urging consolidation and strengthening of the Soviet state at home
as the first priority before other adventures.
The outcome was ultimately a clear one.
Through astute maneuver, Stalin engineered Trotsky's marginalization,
then his expulsion from his own party in 1927.
He was exiled first to Central Asia and then expelled from the country itself
and later assassinated in Mexico by one of Stalin's agents.
Stalin shifted his position repeatedly within the Soviet Union's politics,
allying himself at first with Zinoviev and Kamenev's left wing,
then with Bukharin's right wing, turning on each in succession.
By 1927, Stalin was in a dominant position in the Soviet government and party apparatus.
And in the following years, he would reshape the regime as well as Soviet society in his own image.
And this larger and tremendously violent policy of the Stalinization of the Soviet Union
will explore more fully in our next lecture.
