Like Stalin, like Hitler, like Saddam Hussein, and Pol Pot, dictators will be discussing later in our lectures, Mussolini had in common with them a childhood marked by spotty education as well as what one might call with understatement discipline problems.
But Mussolini was different from his other colleagues whom we'll be discussing later in that he did return to finish his education.
But upon concluding school, he lived a rather bohemian life, unsure of direction professionally and personally, and spent time working in Switzerland.
In a remarkable coincidence, this was exactly where Lenin was at the time, a remarkable communist revolutionary in exile, Mussolini later claimed to have met Lenin in exile and to have discussed with him.
One would find it fascinating to have been a fly on the wall in those conversations if they indeed did take place.
Many historians doubt whether this claim had any truth to it at all, but it's certainly a remarkable suggestion.
Upon returning to Italy before the First World War, Mussolini now entered into a more serious career.
He worked as a school teacher and began a political life as well, entering energetically into socialist politics where he began to make a name for himself.
He edited socialist journals, including the premier socialist newspaper in Italy Avanti, forward.
And also, remarkably enough, in the context of our course, a socialist journal actually called Utopia, making clear the connection between ideologies and these imagined futures.
What already marked Mussolini in this vigorous start in his socialist career was a characteristic belief that in some ways set him apart from some followers of socialism,
that violence and clashes were key to the historical process and indeed were what turned the wheels of history.
This emphasis on violence would become even more accentuated in the years to come.
When the First World War broke out in 1914, Italy was on the sidelines until 1915 when it was coaxed onto the Allied side to fight against its former allies of Germany and Austria-Hungary.
After some initial hesitation about how to react to these world historical events, Mussolini broke with his other more moderate socialist comrades who condemned the war, at least for now.
He argued by contrast that Italy should intervene, not out of support for a capitalist war, but rather because violence could move progress forward.
Much as Lenin was claiming at the same time, Mussolini as a socialist was convinced that the war could be an opportunity for revolution and change.
Mussolini was unpopular in this stance among other socialists who had not followed him through on this development in Italy.
He was stripped of his editorship of socialist periodicals and was actually expelled from the Socialist Party. He began to change.
Mussolini now struck off in his own political direction by advocating energetically Italian entry into the war.
As now is clear from documentation, Mussolini was actually subsidized by the French government, which funneled him money, hoping that his efforts and those of others in a similar position in Italy could bring Italy in on the side of the Allies.
Much as Lenin was willing to use German support for his aims, so too Mussolini showed a remarkable flexibility in his political choices.
Mussolini fought in the First World War and apparently acquitted himself in a distinguished way after Italy had entered the war in 1915.
Mussolini had called for this war. The futurist artists who had praised violence as a hygiene for mankind had wanted war, but the results of this conflict were not those that they had hoped for.
The conflict went badly for Italy. Its war effort bogged down and Italy lost half a million dead.
As we've seen in our earlier lectures, as in the case of other countries, stormtroopers, certain elite troops were created to break through the stalemate of the fighting on the trenches or of the Alpine campaigns in the case of Italy.
In the Italian context, these stormtroopers, called additi or the bold ones, the fearless ones, were hailed as national heroes and maybe even as a new breed of human being.
Victory would come as a disappointment for the Italians and that disappointment would have consequences.
