With the attack on the Soviet Union, the Einsatzgruppen followed right behind the German armies as the front moved forward, and behind the lines they committed mass murder of the Jewish communities of Eastern Europe, killing an estimated one million Jews by the end of 1941.
However, Nazi leaders judged that this mode of killing, the open executions, the shooting into pits of men, women, and children in the Jewish communities of Eastern Europe by the Einsatzgruppen was too open, too inefficient in essence.
Anxieties were voiced about what effect this face-to-face killing would have, even on ideologically motivated killers like the Einsatzgruppen. Heinrich Himmler, who witnessed an execution, apparently fainted on viewing its barbarity not from behind a desk, but face-to-face.
Thus, new plans were laid for a more efficient, more regularized, more bureaucratic plan, and this was known as the final solution, using the Nazis' perverse talent for bureaucratic euphemism.
The final solution was to eliminate the Jews.
The Wannsee Conference, as it was called, took place on January 20, 1942, in an opulent villa outside of Berlin. There's a remarkable museum there today. It's a place around which, in our historical memory, an aura of evil hovers.
Because in this villa, even as operations were already underway, even as the final solution was being put into effect, discussions took place on how to systematize the comprehensive final solution.
The final solution, contrary to much popular memory that circulates out there, was not planned at the Wannsee Villa. Rather, the discussion wasn't about whether the program should take place, but merely about how to fine-tune it.
When the meeting protocol, when the minutes of the meeting, couched in bureaucratic euphemism in an attempt to cloud or veil as much as was possible the reality of what was being discussed mass murder, when these minutes were discovered after the war with justice, they were called some of the most shameful documents in world history.
What had been agreed? Europe's Jews, not just in Germany or in Poland, but from all of Europe, already occupied or yet to be occupied, were to be, in a euphemism, shipped to the east. There, they'd be worked to death or exterminated outright.
Within Germany itself, the obligatory yellow star was introduced for German Jews in 1941, which had already taken place in other occupied territories in Eastern Europe, and thus this community was now singled out, set apart for this fate.
Hitler's role in the launching of the Nazi genocide is still being debated as historians trace his precise actions in the available documentation.
Hitler's aversion, both to regular bureaucratic functioning as well as putting orders down on paper, written orders. His caution about leaving a paper trail that could be traced back to him makes tracing the documentary evidence complicated.
But clearly, Hitler's role was pivotal as he established the long-term goals of the regime and endorsed programs of growing radicalism in the racial sphere. But one needs to keep in mind the larger circle of complicity around Hitler as well.
It's crucial to note that a program of this scope and this magnitude involving the planned murder of millions involved more than just Hitler himself, more than a small circle of planners such as at Wannsee, but that in fact enormous numbers of officials at the highest and the lowest levels of the state and the party,
from generals to mayors of towns to station masters to ordinary guards were implicated and were needed to make the final solution happen. And indeed, wherever the Nazis gained power in the occupied countries of Europe, they found collaborators who turned up in every country to help them in this program.
The program culminated in the erection of what were essentially factories of death, institutions the death camps that produced not goods, not material, but death itself.
By early 1942, death camps were operating under SS control in the occupied eastern territories with names that still ring with horror for us today, names like Auschwitz, Belzec, Treblinka, Chelmno, Maidanek and Sobibor.
These were, as distinct from the earlier concentration camps, devoted to the extermination of those who were sent there.
