Later, he was put in place of leader of the North Korean state and crafted the ideology
of Yutche or self-reliance, preaching autarchy and radical isolation.
In 1994, upon his death, he was succeeded by his son, Kim Jong-il, who was called in
the propaganda, the son of the 21st century.
This man had been born in Siberia, schooled in East Germany, and has the reputation of
being a volatile and cruel narcissistic playboy.
He is said to be enormously vain.
He is apparently only 5'3 in height, but has a high hairdo and platform shoes to emphasize
his prominent status.
Elaborate cults of leadership were built up around both leaders, including the declaration
of Kim Il-sung even after his death as president for eternity, omnipresent statues, mass parades,
songs with titles like The Leader Will Always Be With Us or My Country Under the Sunshine
of the Party, and flower shows featuring blooms dedicated to the leaders are common.
Like many other dictators we've surveyed in this course, Kim Jong-il is an avid enthusiast
of film.
He's said to have the largest collection of Daffy Duck films in the world.
He is in fact even kidnapped actors for his entertainment.
His own lifestyle is enormously self-indulgent and luxurious.
But the tools of state that are deployed in enforcing the ideology and the authority of
the state are also significant, and in many ways mimic ones we've seen before.
Every household in North Korea is said to have a radio receiver called The Speaker,
which broadcasts marches, songs, speeches, and proclamations.
Like the Soviet punked radio, it cannot be turned off or the stations changed, it is
always on, always speaking to the masses.
As a repressive apparatus of the state, a dozen prison camps resembling the Soviet Gulag
and their brutality are said to hold an estimated million.
The state is isolated from the outside world.
There's no access to the internet, the people are shielded from outside influences.
And yet there is an energetic foreign policy, often disastrously irrational, in its approach
that is taken to be characteristic of this North Korean state.
As was recently admitted by the North Korean government, in the past there were kidnappings
of Japanese to serve as agents to spread the message of North Korean ideology.
A former ally, Russia, has in fact reported that North Korea had been experimenting with
chemical and biological weapons.
Sporadic and often disorganized attempts at controlled economic reform have yielded only
more economic crisis and tens of thousands of desperate North Korean refugees trying
to flee to China, sometimes their turn back and face execution.
And these are policies moreover that continue into our own day in the new century.
In the new century, North Korea is one of the last surviving Stalinist states.
And it recently has taken on an intensified, threatening stance towards the outside world.
Perhaps an expression of its interior paranoia, perhaps some have argued a rational attempt
to show its danger in order to extort more food or fuel aid from an international community.
It has kept up arms sales, including those of Skud Rockets and other military technology
to the highest bidder, and has undertaken reckless rocket tests.
It has also been suggested that North Korea has a sideline in the international drug trade,
as recently a ship with North Korean officials carrying massive amounts of drugs was seized
on the high seas.
In 2002, North Korea also shocked the world with an announcement that it had nuclear weapons.
Shortly thereafter, it denied its own announcement that it had nuclear weapons.
And in a brief space after that, it once again re-announced that it had nuclear weapons.
The question of what's going on in this isolated North Korean state is one of urgent import
to the wider world.
I want to conclude with a note on the role of confidence in these regimes.
The role of confidence in utopian futures, it's difficult to quantify, but clearly is
an enormously important ideological and political factor.
The kinds of dictatorships we've discussed so far need compelling visions of the future,
which is said to be inevitable and unstoppable, to both sustain their own inner momentum and
to compel awe from believers, as well as their foes, to convince them that resistance is
not possible.
These are visions of the future that have been propagated with greater or lesser success
on the parts of the regimes that we've discussed in today's lecture, in the absence of such
confidence in the future vision.
With the erosion of that utopian horizon, such regimes can easily stall out and begin to
disintegrate, and that's precisely the phenomenon that we'll be discussing in our next lecture
on the democratic revolutions of 1989, which could either yield democratic stability or
even greater turmoil, as we'll see next time.
