The notion that the better of the two, the more forceful, the more radical, the more determined would win out
was something that Hitler was putting into practice.
Historians have argued over whether this was a deliberate tactic or perhaps unconscious.
I feel that there are much speaks for it being deliberate and a characteristic mode of operation for Hitler.
The outcome of his style of authority was in fact a radicalizing dynamic.
A way of operating, a way of setting about dealing with political challenges that favored radical solutions.
Because as followers contended to please the furor, the most radical one could, in many cases, be sure of the furor's approbation.
Nazi followers indeed would sometimes speak of, and the term is significant,
working towards the furor by anticipating his radical beliefs, anticipating his preference for a radical solution.
Hitler's often chaotic or unsystematic approach to delegating authority has led some historians to suggest that he was a quote-unquote weak dictator.
In fact, however, in matters of ideological importance to Hitler, Hitler always intervened effectively.
He could see himself as delegating authority or not dealing with matters that were of less ideological importance to him.
In cases that were of importance, such as racial policy, he was sure to be the determining voice.
Hitler's dictatorship was also marked by the effectiveness, the aura that was given by a cult of personality, the cult of Hitler as furor.
This was not accidental.
This was a carefully cultivated myth of Hitler as the infallible leader of the Third Reich.
At first, this cult had grown up around Hitler perhaps out of the spontaneous devotion of his followers in the early days of the party,
but over time it was later deliberately constructed by Josef Goebbels, the propaganda minister of the Third Reich.
These two men worked in tandem to produce perverse masterpieces of propaganda.
The cult of Hitler as a furor, which Goebbels delighted in and believed as well in a paradox when often sees this phenomena of ministers of propaganda
coming to believe their own propaganda over time that probably makes it more effective in their presentation of propaganda messages.
This propaganda over time also took on quite explicit religious overtones, as did other imagery of the Third Reich.
Hitler was hailed as the Messiah, the savior of Germany, using or hijacking earlier religious imagery.
The charismatic element that hovered around Hitler and his carefully choreographed and stage-managed appearances could often include an erotic charge
for some followers who would be able to project onto this figure of desire.
To preserve this erotic charge, Hitler's mistress, Eva Brown, was kept out of sight, and he was presented as an austere,
chaste representative of the leadership living for the German people in a mission that transcended such ordinary human concerns.
In a bizarre phenomenon, letters flowed into the chancery from enthusiastic followers addressed to Hitler.
Some of these were embarrassing letters that testified to dreams, in some cases even erotic fantasies about the furor,
and they all testified to the remarkably spontaneous, effective cult of the leader in Germany.
It was another remarkable phenomenon that was tied into this cultivation of a cult of personality,
and that was the way in which Hitler himself was often isolated or insulated from criticism of the regime's shortcomings.
Often the party, the state, even some of Hitler's most senior followers would be blamed by public opinion for this or that shortcoming of the regime,
while Hitler himself was considered to be out of the loop, concerned with a big picture, and not to blame for the day-to-day dissatisfactions of Nazi Germany.
A recurrent phrase was, if only Hitler knew.
Hitler was remarkably exempted from blame for the failings of the regime until nearly the end of his rule in the Third Reich.
What were the keys to Hitler's effectiveness in his rise to power and in his rule over Nazi Germany?
There were several. One that we need to keep in mind, first of all, was a persistent pattern of being underestimated.
