Hannah-Rent observed that when these regimes lost the impetus of forward movement, they threatened to topple over.
And for that reason, these regimes tended to grow more radical over time.
They pursued ever more ambitious, universal, global, utopian aims.
The need to move towards that future would give them dynamism and force.
Debate on the concept of totalitarianism raged after Hannah-Rent had articulated her theory.
In the 1960s and afterwards, the concept was criticized very heavily.
Some argued that in the context of the Cold War, the assertion that communism and Nazism had had similarities was merely a Cold War rhetorical tool.
They further pointed out that in many ways it could be inaccurate in describing everyday life under dictatorships,
where total control had not in fact been achieved by the governments, but where pockets of resistance could remain.
In fact, this was perhaps somewhat unfair to Hannah-Rent, whose theory had not claimed that totalitarian regimes had achieved total control of their subject populations.
Rather, she had emphasized that while that total control might elude them, what was crucial was the aim, the ambition,
the harboring of the notion that total control should and could be realized.
Some political science studies, in fact, following up on some of Hannah-Rent's insights, were perhaps in fact too schematic and too rigid,
and didn't take into account the pockets of resistance that might still exist in totalitarian societies.
But then something remarkable happened in the 1990s, closer to our own times.
After the revolutions in Eastern Europe, many Eastern Europeans who led Hannah-Rent's book enthusiastically endorsed her theoretical notion
and revived this description of totalitarian regimes as they felt, an accurate description of the sort of life they had endured.
We've seen thus a fascinating renaissance of the term and of Hannah-Rent's thought.
It's my conviction personally that Hannah-Rent's book, The Origins of Totalitarianism, is likely to be read hundreds of years from now
for an understanding of the violent trajectory of the 20th century.
Hitler now had been enabled through this cooperation of unlikely ideological opponents to fight his war.
And this war was to be a lightning war, Blitzkrieg, a strategy that the Germans had developed to overcome the immobility and stasis of the trench warfare of World War I.
Instead, in this lightning war, tanks and planes acting in unison would decisively annihilate the enemy.
Quick victory would allow the enemy's territory and population to be occupied and then exploited to pay for the next war.
Blitzkrieg thus was supposed to be a self-perpetuating war machine.
However, the Blitzkrieg idea, historians have pointed out, was also in some other paradoxical ways a symptom of Hitler's mistrust of ordinary Germans.
To fight quick wars that could pay for themselves was supposed to allow Germany to avoid total mobilization.
Thinking back to the First World War, Hitler was afraid of what might happen if the morale of the home front buckled.
He believed in the stab in the back legend, and he aimed thus to spare Germany mobilization.
Poland was soon destroyed.
An attack on Poland had commenced on September 1, 1939, Britain and France then declared war, and World War II had begun.
In spite of truly heroic resistance, Poland was quickly overrun.
German airplanes bombed Polish cities and civilian centers underlining the radical nature of this war.
Special SS death squads called Einsatzgruppen or Special Forces Units were sent in to decapitate, as the term went,
Polish society by murdering those who were understood to be natural leaders, the intellectuals, political leaders, and clergy.
For his part now, Stalin moved to clean and claim his share of the Soviet sphere of influence.
Stalin moved in to his territories to impose his communist order.
On September 17, while the Nazis were quelling their portion of Poland, the Soviet army moved in to claim eastern Poland.
Those Polish officers who had retreated eastwards in a fighting retreat were now captured by Stalin.
Thousands of them were shot and buried in mass graves in Katyn.
This was a crime that the Soviet Union denied until 1990 at almost the very end before finally admitting Stalin's role.
Stalin soon forced the Baltic states, the previously independent republics of Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia, to accept Red Army bases in 1939
and then annexed them as Soviet republics which supposedly had asked for voluntary admission into the Soviet Union in 1940.
He soon began mass deportations of Baltic civilians in June 1941.
