Arriving in Europe for negotiations upon the war's end, Woodrow Wilson was cheered by massive crowds.
Crowds as enthusiastic and frenetic perhaps as those who had cheered war in 1914,
now gathered to proclaim Woodrow Wilson a liberating, savior figure upon the end of the war.
He enjoyed immense popularity, a popularity that he retains to this day in Eastern Europe,
so that in the Czech Republic one encounters streets and railroad stations named after Woodrow Wilson to this very day.
At the very end of the war, democratic states had been declared in Central and Eastern Europe,
in many cases arising out of the shattered remnants of former empires.
We need to be clear about this, such new republics and democracies were not only the doing of Woodrow Wilson,
so if he is blamed for the instability of the breakup of European empires, that's probably not entirely fair.
Instead, Woodrow Wilson was hailed because his ideas seemed to be so consonant with some of the deepest aspirations of many Europeans.
New states emerged where none had existed before in national independent form.
From the Russian Empire's wreckage, there emerged an entire band of states,
not under the control of the Bolsheviks, who ruled the rest of the Russian Empire.
But there now emerged nationally independent Finland, the Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania,
and the resurrected nation of Poland.
Austria-Hungary also broke apart from its once great dynastic unity into the states of Czechoslovakia,
Yugoslavia, Hungary, and the reduced state of Austria.
Germany experienced a different fate.
It changed under the impact of revolution and tried to go a democratic route in the Weimar Republic.
With the war lost on November 9, 1918, a German democracy was declared.
It comes to be called the Weimar Republic because of the place where its democratic constitution is written.
This government was led by moderate socialists, but they faced challenges on the ground after launching their revolution.
The call went out among their former comrades and the radical wing of the socialist movement for a second revolution, a more radical one.
Simultaneously, these radical socialists had declared a communist Germany,
and they challenged the more moderate socialist comrades of yesterday.
It seemed in a very real and threatening sense to the moderate socialist leaders of Germany in the Weimar Republic
that the events of the Russian Revolution, when a moderate provisional government had been superseded by the Bolshevik radical revolution,
these events seemed to be repeating themselves in Germany.
We can see here an ironic progression.
The Bolsheviks felt they were copying the events of the French Revolution of the end of the 18th century.
Now in Germany, it was feared that the Russian Revolution, imitating the French Revolution, was playing itself out again a revolutionary formula.
Germany would find itself wracked by instability as a consequence.
But worldwide, there were also continuing hopes in a new organization that sought to ensure that truly this had been a war to end all wars.
These were the hopes vested in the now defunct League of Nations.
Woodrow Wilson had cherished idealistic plans for a world League of Nations to ensure permanent peace and collective security,
and these plans and their idealism created enormous optimism in their day.
Non-European representatives of peoples who earlier had been under European colonial rule and still languished under that rule,
in fact sent delegates and representatives to the negotiations in Paris and around Paris,
hoping to be heard by the powers, hoping for independence,
hoping for a denunciation of imperialism as a now closed chapter of human history.
They were to be cruelly disappointed.
At the same time as negotiations and discussions continued to the League of Nations,
there was also one other element that gave hope in this context,
and these were the hopes that were vested in the policy of Americanization.
Not a government pursued policy, but rather that broad cultural influence that the model of the United States would have in Europe.
We speak today of Americanization and globalization as new phenomena, they're emphatically not.
After the First World War, a hopeful model for social organization that became very popular in Europe
was the imitation of a youthful America's economic productivity and organization.
There was moreover one word, one strategy that was synonymous with this trust and optimism vested in Americanization,
and that word was Taylorism.
