This war, which featured chemical weapons, trench warfare, human waves of fanatical frontal
attacks resembled World War I in our own times and cost a million lives.
In this international context, the United States often saw Iraq as a useful counterweight
to Iran in the balance of power in that region, and thus on occasion encouraged this role.
Saddam Hussein also waged war on minorities within his own borders who he suspected of
disloyalty, in particular the minority of the Kurds.
The Kurds are about a quarter of the population of Iraq, and Kurdish rebels challenged Saddam
trying to win independence, a long sought goal for their territories.
Saddam Hussein reacted with crushing force.
In the unfall campaign, which was launched in 1988, thousands of Kurdish villages were
wiped out in order to fundamentally remake the landscape, to change society, eliminate
a distinctive Kurdish identity, to concentrate the Kurds into new centers where they'd be
kept under control, euphemistically called victory cities.
This was yet another species of that movement of populations, forced population movement
as social engineering that we've seen before in our lectures.
In the process of this campaign, some 100,000 Kurds were killed, mostly in mass executions
of the men and those suspected of resistance.
One could also see in some of these related campaigns that Saddam Hussein did not shy
away from radical weapons.
In 1987, chemical weapons were used against the Kurds by a man named Ali Hassan Al-Majid,
a cousin of Saddam, whose use of chemical weapons earned him the nickname Chemical Ali.
Notoriously, in March of 1988, the Kurdish town of Halabja was gassed in one of these
campaigns using mustard gases, nerve gases, and perhaps biological agents as well.
Some 5,000 men, women, and children were killed with thousands more wounded in the village
of Halabja, and images began to filter out ones that still haunt us today of those who
had fallen prey to these weapons, including a mother cradling her child, both dead in
the street.
Saddam Hussein, in his ambitions, didn't shy away even from these most radical of arms.
In aid of what?
For what purpose?
Saddam's regime and ambitions had much to do with both ancient models of greatness as
well as more recent models of control.
Saddam Hussein emulated, quite explicitly, in his propaganda and his own thinking, great
past rulers.
These included Saladin, the Arab leader from whose area he hailed himself.
They also included even more remote leaders, such as Babylon's Emperor Nebuchadnezzar
of the 6th century B.C. and Hammurabi of the 18th century B.C.
Saddam's propaganda sought in symbolic form to link their destinies.
Saddam's busts that were set up around his palaces on occasion would show Saddam Hussein
himself wearing the distinctive helmet of Saladin the Great.
In Tikrit, his hometown, a mural showed two armies advancing on Jerusalem.
Armies that were modern as well as ancient.
Saladin's army of medieval times and Saddam's modern army engaged in a common struggle.
On the archaeological sites of the bygone greatness of Babylon, new buildings were
built up in order to reconstruct the greatness that was Babylon.
Good bricks unearthed in those archaeological digs bore the name of Nebuchadnezzar who had
immortalized his memory in this fashion.
And so when the new buildings were rebuilt, bricks using Saddam's name were used to show
that this has been built in his reign.
Greatness re-achieved.
What were his larger strategic aims?
Saddam presented himself as the Balthus ideology suggested as the leader of the Arab world,
leader of an emergent unity just in the future.
And thus he aimed for hegemony in the Middle East evidenced by repeated wars of aggression.
He sought moreover to win that coin of the realm of great power status in the present
day nuclear weapons as well.
But in this project he was impeded by an airstrike by Israeli air forces in 1981 which hit a nuclear
plant that had been built up with French help and according to many experts set his program
for nuclear power back and nuclear arms back considerably.
