Lecture 1 Defining Utopia and Terror
Welcome to this series of lectures on utopian terror in the 20th century.
My name is Veys Gabriel Lalavichus, I teach at the University of Tennessee, and I teach
the history of Europe, especially Germany and Eastern Europe in the modern period.
Our course of lectures will deal with the violent 20th century.
We need to confront a central fact of that age.
The 20th century had a remarkably violent record, and thus, in essence, the main question
this course will aim to address is, why and how has the 20th century been so violent?
This question certainly has tremendous urgency, I'd like to outline the reasons.
We pride ourselves on our progress in our modernity, but the terrible violence of the
century past represents a terrible contradiction and a challenge to that confidence.
The past century has been marked by ferocious total wars, implicating entire societies,
not simply armies.
It has seen the proliferation of the institution of the concentration camp.
It saw cases of industrialized mass murder and ethnic cleansing.
We need to ask ourselves fundamental questions.
One of these phenomena are not merely throwbacks, a recurrence of bygone barbarism, but might
on the contrary still be signs of things to come.
In essence, we need to ask ourselves, what will the next century be like?
Will it break with this violent record?
Will the next century see the intensification of such phenomena, or as we all hope, the abolition
of such experiences?
Scholars have tried to estimate the numbers of the casualties of 20th century wars, civil
conflicts, government sponsored persecutions of their own peoples, and mass murders.
It's important to keep in mind that it's difficult to arrive at final statistical estimates of
these tragedies, and indeed in the course of our lectures, we frequently will be discussing
probable ranges of the casualties of these atrocities.
And I'd like to stress that this in and of itself is a crucial and telling point.
It indicates the orders of magnitude of the millions of victims involved, but nonetheless
certain scholars have tried to tackle this grim business of seeking ever more exact estimates.
The political scientist RJ Rummel of the University of Hawaii has compiled a vast database of
estimates of casualties worldwide during the 20th century.
And those estimates suggest that wars and civil wars, armed conflicts during the course
of the 20th century, cost somewhere in the neighborhood of 38 million lives, 38 million
lives in wars and civil wars.
But there's another horrifying statistic which needs to be laid side by side with this one.
And that is the estimated casualties for another phenomenon, government sponsored persecutions,
mass murder, state organized genocide.
These are phenomena that are estimated to have accounted for about 169 million victims,
thus far more than the earlier statistic for wars and civil wars alone.
We see here in essence a contradiction that hovers over the 20th century as a whole.
These facts, these dreadful statistics, clearly conflict with the 20th century's great hopes,
its aspirations, and indeed the indisputable advances that were made in the course of that
age in technology, in medicine, in the physical standard of living and in social organization.
You'll see that paradoxically, very often it was the very lure of progress that was
used to justify the centuries mass violence, running in tandem with these advances.
Further, we need to note that this was an urgent question because it was not merely limited
to one continent, not merely centrally located in the atrocities of European civilization,
but rather was a worldwide phenomenon in the course of the 20th century.
This order of violence has been seen worldwide.
In our lectures, we'll consider first of all in a special way the case of European history,
the outbreak of world wars, the rise of ideologies on that continent, but we'll then expand the
focus to keep in mind how these ideas would spread and would be adapted elsewhere around
the world.
We'll consider the impact of imperialism and spreading ubiquitous state violence to
subject populations.
We'll consider then how modern ideologies originating in western civilization would affect other
parts of the globe.
Our lectures will seek to survey many sites of man's organized in humanity to man in
the 20th century.
We'll consider the muddy trenches of the First World War and the barbaric warfare that took
place there.
We'll examine as well the banks of the Euphrates River where deported Armenians died in the
course of a genocide that was mounted during the course of the First World War.
