According to some historians, this trust in leaders, this longing for a Caesar or an imperial figure,
in many ways prefigured and prepared the way for the cult of the leader in Hitler's Nazi Germany.
This attempt to muster up conviction and confidence was part of a larger phenomenon.
A word that became ubiquitous in this period was that of propaganda.
Propaganda sought to influence hearts and minds and to give people confidence in the war effort.
Censorship and the banning of bad news or of criticism was an important wartime measure.
It sought to bolster the will of the population at large, but beyond that propaganda also sought to do the opposite,
to positively influence hearts and minds to motivate for the effort of total war.
In earlier centuries, the word propaganda had had an originally religious meaning.
In the days of the Reformation and Counter-Reformation, it had been used in the context of the propagation of the faith.
But now in the 20th century, this originally religious term would be turned to secular purposes.
One of the fundamental discoveries of this period was that the most effective propaganda was often not propaganda
that had been planned or implanted where convictions did not exist before,
but voluntary propaganda that was unsolicited, that built upon things people already believed.
We have mentioned, for instance, in a previous lecture,
that enormous explosion of one million spontaneous war poems written in the first months of the war in Germany.
Effective propaganda indeed.
Propaganda also sought to hide from view the real fortunes of the war when the war was going badly for one side or another.
In the German case, this would have crucial consequences.
Reverses on the fronts would be hidden by that famous phrase, all quiet on the western front,
masking serious difficulties.
In part for this reason, when defeat came to Germany in 1918,
many ordinary Germans would feel that it was nearly impossible to believe the fact of military failure
when previous reports had all been uniformly positive.
Propaganda went beyond this to also dehumanize enemies,
to sharpen negative stereotypes, and to urge the populations into hatred against the opposite side.
Another very famous case of this was a poem, one might call it, I suppose,
by the German Ernst Lissauer.
It was entitled The Hymn of Hate, and was essentially a poem which listed the ways in which one should hate Great Britain.
This is in part indicative of the clunkiness of German wartime propaganda,
which many criticized at the time for being counterproductive.
Consider a poem like The Hymn of Hate by Lissauer.
The Allies simply had to reprint it as an example of German hate-filled rhetoric,
and thus scored points in the international arena.
In the approach of the Second World War, much later, Adolf Hitler would be convinced
that Germany had lost the First World War in part because of the failure of its propaganda,
and that was a phenomenon he was determined not to repeat again.
Government propaganda offices would often become remarkably innovative in their tactics.
They would sometimes blend what looks uncannily to us like the techniques of the most advanced advertising into their propaganda campaigns,
and the American case was, in this context, remarkable as well.
In America, the journalist George Creel was charged with setting up a Committee on Public Information,
in which he gathered together instant orators by the thousands, they numbered in fact 75,000,
who were called four-minute men who were sent out to America's public arenas
in order to agitate the crowds, to fire the masses, to urge them to buy war bonds and support the war effort.
Stars of the movie screen like Charlie Chaplin were also mobilized for this end.
Now, propaganda did not shy away from, on occasion, bizarre and false rumors.
But these were rumors, nonetheless, that tell us a lot about people's dawning intuitions
of just how total war would brutalize their civilization.
One very compelling example of such false rumors came in 1917, when rumors spread of a German corpse factory.
This rumor held that the Germans on the western front were collecting dead bodies,
and were rendering those bodies for raw materials, for fat, tallow, and other chemicals.
This was a rumor which was patently false.
It's instructive that many people believed it at the time.
It seems to us uncannily an eerie premonition of some of the horrors of industrialized mass murder that would follow decades later.
