Today's lecture deals with the First World War.
It was known to its contemporaries who couldn't yet imagine as horrors unfolded before them
that it would be the First World War. They called it and said the Great War. They could
little anticipate that this would be but the first in a succession of such world conflicts.
In our previous lecture we had discussed omens of conflict at the end of the 19th century.
Certain dark signs that conflict had certainly not been abolished from human affairs and
that indeed some looked to conflict for hopes of progress. In today's lecture we'll examine
how those premonitions were met and surpassed in practice in World War I. The war was unleashed
in fact by an act of terrorism that came in the summer of 1914, which many contemporaries
remember as sort of a long summer of beautiful weather but that was but the prelude to coming
horrors. The advent of this war had many causes and indeed historians still continue
to argue about the precise causes of the First World War but these included the readiness
fundamentally of Europe's great powers to go to war and in part that certain mindset
that we had discussed when we considered omens of conflict the conviction that some great
war was in the offing sooner or later and if it were to come inevitably then perhaps
better sooner than later. The First World War really marks in a very important way our
modern experience. It launched the 20th century on its violent course. The First World War
had important consequences for the world in the century to come because of the massive
brutalization it brought. Though it's difficult to quantify precisely, it's clear that some
respect for the status of human life and the human individual was cruelly shattered in
the experiences of the First World War. Historians have struggled for ways to describe what they
see as the truly apocal significance of this four years of carnage from 1914 to 1918 that
then had its reverberations through the 20th century. The American diplomat and historian
George Kennan called it the seminal catastrophe of the 20th century, the original catastrophe
that launched the 20th century on its violent course and this has been in the eyes of many
historians so very apt a phrase that they have borrowed Kennan's words and indeed have
been using them in translation in other languages as well. The First World War would see from
1914 many dreadful firsts, the first use of poison gas, the first mass bombing from the
air of civilian centers, the first genocide, that is to say the first mass killing of people
in the context of a war not for anything they'd done or proposed to do but because of who they
were, the attempted annihilation of an ethnic group. Many of the horrors yet to unfold in
the 20th century clearly had their origins here in these four years and in the dynamics
that they produced. The coming of this conflict in spite of the mindset of those who had felt
premonitions in the years previous was not inevitable but it certainly was made all the
more likely by misapprehensions, mutual fears and instability that was abroad in European
society at the start of the 20th century and within the European continent there was in
particular one spot where this instability was especially strong and that was in an area of
the world that still continues to be a troubled spot today in the Balkan Peninsula. This was an
especially dangerous and friction filled place at the start of the 20th century because so much
was changing there in political terms. The great Ottoman Turkish Empire which was perceived as
being on decline and often called the sick man of Europe because of what was understood to be its
inability to hitch its train to the great onward advance of progress had was increasingly being
pushed out of the Balkan Peninsula by Balkan peoples. Now certainly there had been attempts at
reform in the Ottoman Empire, the so-called Young Turk movement and we still today in fact call
radicals and fiery individuals Young Turks in recognition of this earlier model. The Young
Turk movement had sought to reform the Empire and to modernize it on coming to power in 1908 in
Turkey but in spite of these attempts at reform Turkey had nonetheless suffered tremendous losses
and reverses in the Balkan Wars of 1912 and 1913 wars of such a ferocity that some historians
consider them a dress rehearsal for the atrocities of the First World War.
