Welcome to this lecture in which we'll be examining Stalin, the leader of the Soviet
Union and successor to Lenin, the self-proclaimed man of steel who would make himself synonymous
with the communist state. In our previous lecture, we had examined the evolution of
the Soviet Union, Stalin's rise to prominence, succeeding Lenin. In today's lecture, we'll
take a closer look at the cult of personality built up around the leader figure, Stalin,
his origins, the dynamics of his rule, and how he set about Stalinizing the Soviet Union
itself.
Stalin's youth was not one that would have suggested the role that he would later play
in the history of the Soviet Union. The future dictator was indeed not even born in the Russian
heartland, but rather in Gory, Georgia, in 1879, the name Joseph Jugashvili. He was born
to humble origins, abandoned by his drunken shoemaker father, but doted on by his mother.
He was educated in an Orthodox seminary in Tbilisi, but was expelled from that school
in 1899 after devoting himself to studying Marxism. In spite of his expulsion from the
seminary, it's been argued by historians that influences from that education remained. Religious
liturgical forms seemed to tinge his psychology. Some have suggested that his awesome powers
of memory and total recall of the smallest details might have their origins in this form
of education.
The future Stalin thus went on to radical activism. He took the name of the pseudonym
of Koba after a Georgian folk hero and joined the Bolshevik movement in 1903. His origins
were not those as was the case of many other professional revolutionaries of Lenin's
vanguard party, the origins of an intellectual or of a thinker. Rather, his emphasis from
the start was on action. The future Stalin became a bank robber who set about expropriating
money, as it was called, for the movement and its operations. When we had spoken earlier
in our dissection of key elements in ideological regimes of a mobster elite, Stalin's bank
robber origins and the mystique that hovered around him as a consequence were a key example
of such a mobster leader. Taking the name Stalin as a revolutionary pseudonym which
meant literally the man of steel from 1912, Stalin spent time in Siberian exile where
he gained a reputation among fellow political prisoners for a certain crudeness, raw manners,
and tremendous potential for cruelty. But he didn't have particular talents which were
of use to the Bolshevik movement. He was a tremendously capable bureaucratic organizer
and soon rose to the position of party general secretary. He was nicknamed by Bolshevik
comrades, their comrade card index or card file. It was in many ways a dismissive nickname,
but it suggested something of his capacity for organization and behind the scenes political
maneuver. Stalin's power grew in the course of the consolidation of the Soviet Union,
as we've suggested, and as he succeeded upon Lenin, he and his followers deliberately cultivated
a personality cult around him. And yet there were serious problems confronting the construction
of such a personality cult. Stalin was in many ways an unlikely idol or an object of
such a cult given his personal attributes. He was, for the day, considered quite short.
He was only five foot four inches. He had a partially crippled arm, deformed left toes,
a face that was scarred with smallpox, and a squeaky voice which retained the strong
Georgian accent rather than having a pure Russian enunciation. Stalin also faced other
problems in his personal record. His involvement in the 1917 October Revolution had been minor,
not like that of Lenin or of Trotsky for instance, nor was he known as an important speaker or
a tour or thinker within the Bolshevik movement. Nonetheless, this man would be presented in
an increasingly effective way to the nation at large as the leader or vowsht of the Soviet
Union. He would be hailed as the driver of the locomotive of history. How was this accomplished?
