In an echo of the Cambodian killing fields, those with eyeglasses were hunted down as
intellectuals who were dangerous.
The killing was done with machetes, with guns, and with the most primitive of tools as well,
sharpened car springs, clubs with nails driven through their heads, even screwdrivers.
The massacres grew more radical as they continued.
The first elites had been targeted and men, now increasingly women and children, and even
spouses of Tutsis, were targeted in this killing.
Churches were not able to offer effective sanctuary, and in some dreadful cases, pastors
betrayed their parishioners who were killed in the places of worship.
These pastors included religious leaders of different denominations, Catholics, Anglicans,
as well as Seventh-day Adventists.
In one horrendous exchange, which later provided the title for a powerful book on the Rwandan
massacres, a group of parishioners wrote to their minister with this plea, we wish to
inform you that tomorrow we will be killed with our families, end quote, pleading for
some intercession on the part of their Tutsi, I'm sorry, their Hutu minister.
That minister replied in a chilling abdication of fellow human feeling with these words.
There is nothing I can do for you.
All you can do is to prepare to die for your time has come.
Radiobroadcasts throughout this genocide coordinated the killings and read out the lists of names
of targets, including their addresses, including the license place numbers of those who were
trying to flee, as well as the hiding places where some might be trying to seek refuge.
The killers, it has been reported, went about their task of mass murder with a machete in
one hand and a radio in the other, for the radios were relaying orders.
Some killers afterwards told reporters that they had killed because the radio told them
to kill.
This embodied voices had been directing this genocide from above.
The radio announced at the start of the genocide that the time for the harvest was ready, that
the harvest needed to be taken in, that the work needed to be done.
The radio would afterwards also still comment that the graves were not yet full and needed
to be filled.
The radios also played songs, and this in a dreadful case of an artist's complicity
or reported complicity, was the case of the popular singer Simon Bikindi who is now standing
trial accused of writing songs that incited the killings and participating in the massacres
themselves.
Simon Bikindi had been hired by the Ministry of Youth and Sports by the government.
He was a popular artist, he had been called the Michael Jackson of Rwanda.
His songs certainly showed a flair for powerful rap as well as rhythm.
These songs, however, which denounced Hutu who showed sympathy for the Tutsi and otherwise
incited ethnic hatred were played throughout the massacres over the radio, and it's been
reported that the killers themselves sang these popular songs as they went about their
business of murder.
Another official implicated in this was the Rwandan Minister for Family and Women's Affairs,
a woman by the name of Pauline Niaramasahuko who is accused of actually encouraging the
rape of Tutsi women and their massacre.
But these were not the absolute rule.
There were, however, many other cases of heroic saviors who hid the Tutsi victims and otherwise
sheltered the intended targets of this killing.
At long last, a decisive result was brought about by the force of arms.
The genocide would be ended when the Tutsi-led RPF in July of 1994 finally took control of
Rwanda.
But in a certain sense, the drama still continued with paradoxes yet to follow.
Two million Hutu refugees fled the fighting across the borders of the country to refugee
camps, and the killers mixed in among them.
