Like Stalin, Saddam Hussein purged his following repeatedly and he seemed to relish public meetings at which he lured forth independent thought and then crushed it.
Meetings in which people were invited to speak their mind and then afterwards demonstratively were executed for having done so at Saddam Hussein's invitation.
The security services, the so called Mukhabarat, terrorized and spied on the population.
And in addition to the Mukhabarat, there were also a proliferation of other groups and units who were supposed to uphold Saddam's rule.
These included most recently the establishment of a group of fanatical enforcers who on occasion have been compared to the SS,
the so called Fetahin Saddam, meaning the men of sacrifice for Saddam.
They were said to have numbered some 25,000.
They were known for their brutality, for their lording it over the subject population.
They were distinctive in their black uniforms and their black balaclava helmets and ski masks,
which hid their identities while they went about their mission of terror.
In their black uniforms, they seemed to resemble the SS enforcers of Nazi Germany.
Many of them were recruited from orphanages without ties to a society bound to Saddam Hussein, he hoped, in total loyalty.
Children's organizations, the so called Lion Cubs of Saddam, were also established to breed loyalty from the very youngest ages for Saddam's regime.
And it's said that these children were trained in cruelty against animals in order to deaden their human feeling and to make them pliant servants of the regime.
Saddam Hussein himself held many offices within his regime.
And these offices simply proliferated.
He was President, Commander-in-Chief, Chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council and General Secretary of the Bath Party.
This was a vivid expression, as we'd already seen with Benito Mussolini's proliferation of titles of an aspiration to total control.
A cult of personality was also developed around this formidable person.
His own stature, he stood six feet tall and two inches, made him a very tall man in Iraqi culture.
And thus it was a task perhaps made easier in celebrating him in ubiquitous portraits, in different poses, firing a shotgun or riding on horseback,
or at prayer, in costumes of the Bedouin, in modern Western costumes, resembling a gangster outfit in some cases with a fedora and double-breasted suit,
as well as old costumes of bygone ages all served to develop this cult of personality.
In a break with the traditional disapproval for figurative art in Islamic tradition, Saddam Hussein's statues became ubiquitous as well.
Like Stalin, Saddam Hussein also used propaganda to rewrite his past exploits and to make his revolutionary role in the coming to power even more prominent than in fact had been.
Like Stalin, Saddam Hussein also watched films about himself and on occasion criticized them for not being sufficiently realistic in appreciating his heroic roles.
But Saddam Hussein would rarely appear in public, however, perhaps testimony to a distrust of the population.
The newspapers, including the newspaper Babel, named after the Tower of Babel, run by his son Uday, radio, and television broadcast propaganda all celebrated the image of the all-powerful leader.
And yet he was consumed with paranoia, much as his erstwhile model Stalin had been.
Even his own elite was suspected and reportedly purged again and again.
Saddam Hussein reportedly had eight body doubles to stand in for him at public events or in the routine of his day so that he might avoid assassination.
Saddam Hussein's paranoia also extended to an intense fear, reportedly, of germs and infection.
He might perhaps have been working out some of these anxieties in his relentlessly aggressive armed action and approach to the outside world.
This was first truly evidenced in the Iran-Iraq war, a clash of revolutionary ideologies in the Middle East, which in many ways resembled the Great War, the First World War in its ferocity, a replay of this event.
After Iran's radical Islamic Revolution in 1979, Saddam felt that the country had been weakened and was ripe for the picking and thus he attacked.
