This was the nationalist dream or utopia of a greater Greece, which would span the Mediterranean.
Taking in areas in Anatolia and the islands that earlier had been claimed by the Greeks in classical days of glory around the eastern Mediterranean,
these were areas to be reconquered as part of a national mission.
By 1921, this invasion had turned into a disaster.
Utopia was followed by nightmare.
A treaty was negotiated between Greece and the new Turkish state, the 1923 Treaty of Lausanne.
It agreed to the principle of compulsory exchange of populations.
What followed was a largely unrecorded and today unknown massive uprooting of populations.
It's estimated that some 400,000 people of Muslim background, even though they might culturally have been quite well integrated into the surrounding Greek populations,
were moved from Macedonia and elsewhere in the Balkans to Turkey, a land that they'd never known whose culture and environment was often quite foreign to them.
Meanwhile, the remnants of classical civilization in the eastern Mediterranean, Greek Christian communities from Turkey, were sent to Greece and they numbered some 1.3 million.
Huge masses of people were moved thus in the aftermath of the First World War.
This operation agreed upon in the Treaty of Lausanne, took place under international supervision.
But this international supervision unfortunately simply offered a fig leaf of good conscience for a truly brutal process that was unfolding beyond the horizon of international observers,
which often included massacres, killing, intercommunal violence, and what we today would call ethnic cleansing.
But what it's truly riveting to observe is that in spite of this bloody record of the Treaty of Lausanne, in spite of the atrocities and violence that accompanied the policy of population transfer,
the mark that this procedure left in European intellectual history was quite different.
It was truly starkly in contrast to the human reality that historians record.
It was hailed by European historians at the time as a successful model of problem solving, of the redrawing of borders, of dealing with the supposed problem of ethnic minorities within new national states.
And this hailing of so brutal and expedient, this euphemistic policy of population transfer was truly to have ominous results,
because it would be invoked again and again later in the 20th century as a way of, as it were, offering solutions to ethnic problems.
Nonetheless, there seemed hopes and expectations for something better.
And this was part of a worldwide democratic tide that had followed upon the end stages of the First World War.
In some sense, America's entry into that conflict had changed it ideologically.
It had infused new ideas and new energies, much as the Bolshevik Revolution and the announcement of communist principles had in the course of 1917 as well.
America's entry into the war led by President Woodrow Wilson, a self-proclaimed idealist in April 1917,
helped to overwhelm Germany's fading war effort and led to pleas for peace on the part of German generals, as well as politicians,
who hoped that the democratic principles Woodrow Wilson seemed to be espousing would auger well for a negotiated settlement.
The American President Woodrow Wilson had announced in many ways an agenda radically different from that of the pursuit of a balance of power
amenable to themselves pursued by the European powers.
He had announced in January of 1918 a democratic agenda in his speech on the 14 points declaring America's aims in the war.
Throughout, his concerns were for what he took to be the higher ideals expressed in the American way of life and in the American mission in its involvement in the First World War.
He kept his distance from the other Allied powers, declaring America to be an associated power, not making common cause with those imperialists necessarily,
and declaring in words that were to be remarkably popular to the years of Europeans who had suffered through years of war,
that this was now to be a war to end all wars, a war to end all wars, and moreover to make the world safe for democracy.
