Osama bin Laden, a shadowy figure, was of great importance in stage managing or choreographing
these very carefully planned attacks.
Who was he?
Bin Laden was not of humble origins, but rather was born into a prosperous family in Saudi
Arabia.
When his father died, he inherited millions from the family's construction empire.
He studied in Saudi Arabia without finishing school.
Some contemporaries have suggested that he wasn't particularly drawn to a fundamentalist
version of religion, but then over time he seemed to be attracted by radical activists
in Central Asia near Afghanistan, including a man who had become an important ideological
ally, the Egyptian Ayman al-Zawahiri.
In 1989, bin Laden became the leader of an important group.
His, by all accounts, in some respects, charismatic personality helped in achieving this leadership
role.
He's a tall man, looming over others from his culture as he stands six feet tall with
n five inches, six foot five, very quiet, soft spoken, but a man who is said to have a particular
talent as a stage manager or as an impresario of the framing of such attacks for propaganda
and public relations effect.
The group that he headed came to be called al-Qaeda, which means the base.
The base of operations with a worldwide network.
It's significant to consider how this al-Qaeda group thinks of itself in ideological terms.
One word that is used to describe their self-understanding is a word we've seen before in the context of radical
ideological movements, the word vanguard.
They see themselves as being in the very forefront of a larger ideological wave, which they are
showing the way for.
We'll recall Lenin's ideas of the Bolsheviks as the vanguard of the workers showing the
way.
There are clearly resonances here.
In 1996, Ben Laden as a impresario made a public declaration of jihad against the West,
a holy struggle.
In 1997, he further added that his plans that he was in the process of organizing would
be shown in the future by the media.
I think this wasn't simply an announcement of staying tuned, suggesting that people
keep their eyes open for what he would be affecting.
I think that the very notion of media attention to these acts is crucial to understanding
how a small group aims by such actions to affect, it hopes, worldwide change.
In February of 1998, Ben Laden and his allies Oahiri declared, in sonorous terms, a world
Islamic front, arguing that they would have global reach.
In many ways, this attempt to muster an international world organization is remarkably reminiscent
of ideas we've seen before, of socialist and communist internationals, the organizations
that would seek to further a global idea of change.
They also issued a fatwa or a religious ruling against those they called crusaders, meaning
the Westerners, or particularly Americans, and Zionists, meaning Israelis or Jews in
general.
They ordered the killing of Americans, whether civilian or military, as acts that would further
their ideology.
Here we see a fusion of terror and ideological visions, the proposal of a utopia to follow.
The September 11th attacks, Ben Laden in one of the recordings that circulated afterwards
as a furthering of this propaganda, is quoted as saying that these attacks are what we instigated
for a while in self-defense.
Every time they kill us, we kill them, so a balance of terror can be achieved.
Those very terms balance of terror, I think are significant, terror is being endorsed as
a tool of politics.
Ben Laden followed up on this in a tape that was released in December of 2001, in which
he deliberately spoke of the idea of blessed terror, the inspiring of fear, crippling anxiety,
in order to tear down once enemies and their society is a cornerstone notion of Al Qaeda
and Osama Ben Laden.
