When news of the Nazi Soviet Pact, a pact of non-aggression as it was formerly known,
signed on August 23, 1939, became known, it sent shock waves around the world.
It had been signed by the German Foreign Minister Joachim von Ribbentrop
and the Soviet Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov, but it seemed still hard to believe.
These regimes, after all, were sworn ideological enemies.
They had vowed to fight for their respective extinctions.
This very pact, now announced as an accomplished fact, seemed impossible.
Nonetheless, the propaganda machines of both states, both in Nazi Germany and in the Soviet Union,
literally turned on a dime, reversing their earlier denunciations of the mortal ideological enemies,
and now instead heralding a new friendship facing off against the moribund democracies of the West.
This news came as a dreadful shock to true believers in either regime.
In Nazi Germany, a joke circulated during the time that underlined the improbable nature of this new treaty of friendship.
The joke went that after the treaty had been signed, Hitler had sent a special gift to Stalin as a seal of friendship,
and that special gift had been a copy of Hitler's Mein Kampf, in which he had laid out his plans for destroying communism,
with certain sections personally erased by the Fuhrer himself.
What this underlined in joke form was the very improbability, the implausibility of what had just taken place.
But we need to explore this phenomenon a little further to understand its deeper significance.
Formally, the Nazi Soviet pact, as it popularly was called, was a non-aggression treaty pledging not to go to war against one another,
but it had secret paragraphs, secret protocols, which divided up Eastern Europe, independent countries,
not belonging to either side, into respective spheres of influence.
These two cannibals, in other words, Hitler and Stalin, were engaged in the exercise of carving up Eastern Europe among themselves.
Eastern Poland and Lithuania, independent countries, were given to the Nazis, while Latvia, Estonia, Finland, and Eastern Poland were allocated to Stalin.
Later, the Nazis exchanged Lithuania for more Polish territory.
The cannibals were capable of polite negotiation over the fate of others.
The consequences of this improbable treaty were significant.
Hitler was now truly freed up to launch his attack on Poland.
World War II, which broke out as a consequence, was in this sense enabled by cooperation between the two dictators.
The Soviets continued to cooperate in this friendship by providing promised shipments of raw materials and supplies to Germany as a pledge of cooperation.
Another consequence was that in earnest now, an era of massive modern population movements began.
Now, population movements, the shifting of peoples from one region to another, had certainly earlier existed in human history.
The historical accounts are full of the notion of peoples being removed from their original homelands.
This was truly a traumatic experience when it happened in such ancient times.
It had been a practice of the Ottoman Empire, for instance, to use this for political purposes to shift populations around from areas where it was felt they couldn't be trusted.
It was this tradition that was ultimately radicalized in the Armenian massacres of the First World War that we've discussed in an earlier lecture.
But now, the principle of political population movements became an organizing idea of the modern age on a scale that had not been seen before.
As a first step, ethnic Germans were transported from the Baltic states, which were now taken over increasingly by the Soviet Union,
and settled as colonists in conquered Poland, established in farms and houses whose Polish inhabitants had been expelled only days or hours previous.
This was ushering in a new age of despotic movement of populations.
