This ideology, which was racist and social Darwinist, not religious, didn't call for
conversion, as had once been the case, but rather separation or elimination of the Jewish
minority.
The libelous forged so-called protocols of the elders of Zion, which is a clumsy forgery
from the 1890s of the Russian Tsar's secret police, claimed that the Jews were organizing
a world conspiracy.
And in an act of psychological projection, anti-Semites would use such fabricated forgeries
as an excuse for mounting an international campaign against what they claimed was an
international Jewish threat.
The supposedly scientific nature of this new racial or biological antisemitism and its
far-reaching promises of social integration and of social good if only this one threat
could be eliminated, caused it to be labeled by its critics as socialism for idiots.
The notion was that socialism promised social cohesion and unity.
Anti-Semites were promising a radical utopia of hatred against the Jews, which they promised
if put into action could yield goods for society.
The Nazis now, however, would set about using the tools of the state to put their hatred
into action.
Let's continue to debate today about precisely how the Nazi regime reached the destination
of genocide by what route.
This question has sometimes been formulated thus.
Was the road to Auschwitz to the death camps of Eastern Europe direct and premeditated
and planned out in advance from the first?
Or was the road to Auschwitz, as other historians have argued, a twisted path, a road towards
destruction which might have taken other turns, one that was not foreordained of necessity?
In this debate, there are two schools, the intentionalists and the functionalists.
The intentionalists, as they're called, have argued that the Nazis pursued indeed a blueprint
for genocide from the outset, that this was implicit from the very earliest articulation
of Nazi ideology, and that Hitler pursued by a clear step-by-step plan the realization
of this genocidal agenda.
Other historians who oppose aspects of this argument are known as functionalists, they're
sometimes also called structuralists, who contend that the Nazi regime's functioning
or its structure, in fact, did much to set it upon its murderous route.
They argue that the functioning of the Nazi regime grew more radical in its policies over
time, and that the growing radicalism of these policies eventually would lead to the realization
of a program of genocide.
Many historians today have recognized that this debate, in fact, perhaps poses false alternatives
in too stark, too schematic a form.
Many historians today who study these historical events call themselves moderate functionalists
and try to, as it were, find a middle ground between the positions.
They argue that from the first, the intention was a radical treatment of this group defined
as the enemy of the Nazis, but then on the other hand, certainly, those policies could
grow ever more radical over time.
We can see, indeed, an escalation of Nazi policies against those whom they termed their
racial enemies.
At first, the Nazis sought to remove the Jewish population from Germany by encouraging emigration.
This was not done by means that were legal, but rather through intimidation and violence.
In 1935, these policies were ratcheted up further in the infamous Nuremberg laws which
took away the citizenship and the human rights of German Jews and increasingly isolated them
socially.
The Nazis were adept at prying apart earlier social solidarities and dividing up society.
Many ordinary Germans, now barred from interaction with those who had earlier been their German
neighbors, might more easily assimilate the demonized stereotypes of the Jews in German
society propagated by the Nazis.
The next step was a massive act of violence, the so-called Kristallnacht of November 9th,
1938, where in German towns and cities, Jewish homes, synagogues, and businesses were attacked,
Jews arrested and brutalized.
The Nazis now had stepped towards state policies of massive violence against this targeted
minority.
But there was yet another escalation to come.
With the coming of World War II, the Nazis would have cover as well as rhetorical arguments
for a further escalation of their policies.
Forced immigration would now be replaced with a murderous program of what the Nazis, with
their perverse skill for euphemism and perversion of the German language, would call the final
solution to their racial utopia, which we'll be examining in our following lectures.
