While the leaders of the movements in Eastern Europe were not utopians themselves, some observers, especially in the West, felt what was almost a utopian euphoria about the future of democracy.
Some observers were led to believe that a democratic millennium had arrived.
To give but one example, the American political scientist Francis Fukuyama speculated that we were living through the end of history.
Not in the sense that the clocks would now end or events would stop taking place, but in the sense that the great debates over how to live politically had been resolved and that liberal democracy had won.
In fact, as was being demonstrated even at that time, the democratic wave was not irresistible.
Contemporary events were making clear that there were other alternative futures on offer as well.
One case came in 1989 with a Tiananmen Square massacre in China.
Chinese student demonstrations in favor of democratic reforms had gathered in Beijing in the Tiananmen Square.
But then, on June 4, 1989, as a horrified world looked on, the Chinese army moved in and killed an estimated several hundred students while arresting 10,000 more.
It was clear that this elite, the Chinese Communist Party, had not lacked the confidence to intervene.
The agony of Yugoslavia in the Balkans and events in Bosnia and Kosovo would also make clear that democracy was not foreordained but could, in fact, be hijacked.
The breakup of an earlier unified Yugoslavia, earlier held together by the charismatic communist leader Joseph Tito, who died in 1980, involved mass violence and genocide.
And the international community's record was not a positive one on this score.
Though the United Nations had prescribed the crime of genocide in 1948, the atrocities that were taking place, even at this time of democratic transition elsewhere, at first largely met with international inaction.
The very notion of the international community could be used by some countries to evade a sense of their own responsibility.
Yugoslavia, the so-called state of the South Slavs, had united disparate groups, Serbs, Croats, Bosnian Muslims and Slovenes.
These were groups that managed, for a time, to live together in relative harmony and Bosnia's capital of Sarajevo, which we've already remarked upon as the starting place of the First World War,
a historically resonant spot for a time showcased peaceful coexistence in the mixing of populations of different ethnic groups and religions in the cafes of that once beautiful city.
But with communist collapse in Europe, an ideological vacuum opened up and it was ready to be exploited by cynical leaders, in particular by the Serbian communist leader Slobodan Milosevic,
who exploited the situation announcing a nationalist ideology of greater Serbia.
He would exploit pre-existing ethnic frictions in order to create the appearance of a spontaneous ethnic war to serve his ideological purposes.
Milosevic himself was, in some sense, an outsider. He was born to a Montenegroan family in Serbia itself.
He joined the Communist Party at the age of 18 and then rose swiftly in the process, very cynically betraying his own patron in the Communist Party,
man by the name of Stambolic, who now it's being suggested was killed by Milosevic later and whose body was recently found.
In the year 1987, a crucial turning point in these events, Milosevic spoke to a crowd of Serbians at Kosovo's ancient battlefield.
This was a prime example of the abuse of ancient history to mobilize present-day grievances as he promised the Serbs that they would never be victims again.
Other nationalities grew anxious at this sort of nationalist ambition and in 1991 Slovenian Croatia seceded from the earlier Yugoslavia and became independent after a brief war.
In this new aggressively nationalistic climate, radio and TV were used by Milosevic to spread his message.
The TV stations broadcast historical messages calling the Muslim minority in Bosnia the Turks, using historical references to Ottoman oppression,
pointing to the Second World War and its cruelties as a situation that might be just around the corner.
At the same time, a popular genre of music, so-called turbo folk, which is a blend of folk music and electronic dance music, announced an aggressive nationalist message as well.
