Marx stated that ideas were not the basis of reality, but rather observable matter.
Reality changed and evolved and it did so in material terms.
Hence, Marx's doctrine was based on what was called a historical or sometimes dialectical materialism.
It saw human reality as a base economic and evolving through clashes and changes.
Marxism thus presented much more than just a description of how the physical world worked in the present day.
It also presented, and I think this was one of the reasons for its significant influence and appeal,
it presented a dynamic and dramatic vision of history.
Marxism presented a tableau, a dramatic narrative of progress with starring roles played by toiling masses,
the machines of the industrial revolution, and these impersonal economic forces.
Isolated individuals, ordinary people by contrast, not in the aggregate, not in masses or crowds,
by contrast played less of a role in Marx's vision of history.
And when you came right down to it, his vision of history was a history of class conflict.
Class conflict was the key to understanding historical development.
Through the clashes of groups in society whose identities were determined by the economic realities of the day,
society passed through different modes of social organization, different modes of production
that brought humanity forward in a historical progression that had a beginning, a middle, and an end.
This progression seemed orderly. Slavery had been the mode of production of prehistoric times.
In medieval times, feudalism had become dominant.
Mankind now had reached the stage of capitalism, which was an exciting time to be alive,
because in Marx's analysis, this was the penultimate, next-to-last stage of world history.
What would follow after this would be the opening of a new epoch.
Within the period of capitalism, in which Marx argued his contemporaries now stood,
one saw a confrontation of classes and class conflict between, on the one hand,
the working class or the proletariat, as they were called,
borrowing a term from classical Roman times for the poor who had literally nothing to sell,
reserves to draw upon, except the sweat of their brow and their muscle power,
who confronted a powerful group, the bourgeoisie, the owning class, the middle class,
who owned the means of production, the factories, the mines,
and whose interests conflicted directly with those of the exploited proletariat.
For Marx, in this drama of historical progression,
the growing misery of the proletariat would eventually drive it,
inevitably, by force of scientific deduction to revolution.
This was a process that was perhaps a little bit ponderously described in German as
für Elendung. In English, it's rendered even more clumsy as emissarization.
It simply means the growing misery of the working classes.
And this was a very important part of the driving force that would bring about a great historical change.
It was key to Marx's ideas.
Someday, probably very soon, after an international worker's revolution,
Marx believed the end of history would finally have arrived.
Marx called this stage the dictatorship of the proletariat,
in which the victorious working class, after having thrown over and dethroned
the dominant classes, would itself seize state power,
and after a brief period of exercising, perhaps in a despotic way,
that state power would change society forever.
Class distinctions would be abolished, private property would be abolished,
humanity would find itself placed on a basis no longer of the exploitation of man by man,
of classes by classes, but on a basis of equality.
The state was to wither away, leaving a perfected, classless society,
free of that divisive force of private property.
Equal individuals would now, in this blessed state, find fulfillment in work.
One could perhaps go fishing in the morning, lecture in the early afternoon,
and then work in the fields in the evening.
It was hoped that in this future society, according to the slogan of the communists,
one would take from each according to his ability, and give to each according to his need.
The formula quite different from the world that Marx saw around himself in the age of capitalism.
Now, it was precisely at this point in his analysis that Marx's prescriptions grew vague.
The state would wither away, society would be reformed on a new basis,
