The Germans responded in turn with what we can see as an escalation of total war tactics.
They responded with submarine warfare on the high seas.
At first this was restrained with attempts to give warning or to target only exclusively military targets,
but of necessity as the German generals gambled for total victory.
It grew into unrestricted submarine warfare.
It was claimed by German politicians as well as generals
that this was merely a form of economic war similar to that of the blockade imposed upon Germany
and this was taken to justify even the casualties against civilians that followed.
They however were to have a fateful effect in diplomatic and military and political terms.
The sinking of civilian ships like that of the cruiser Lusitania in May 1915
caused increased friction with a previously neutral power, the United States,
and brought that country into the war in April of 1917.
Meantime one also saw of necessity the massive expansion of the state
in ways which the classical liberal ideology earlier had felt was unacceptable.
Now in a time of crisis governments had to expand
to deal with the enormously complicated bureaucratic tasks of mobilizing populations of millions
and directing the economic control of the war effort.
One could see this in all countries, but there are some specific examples that I'd like to present.
One very dramatic case was that of the patriotic German-Jewish industrialist
who as a German patriot organized Germany's war economy.
This was Walter Rottenau who was a visionary industrial and economic planner
who helped retool Germany's civilian economy to prepare for war
and was an instrumental part of the German war effort.
In the United States after 1917 a heroic engineer of the sort that we've discussed in earlier lectures,
a man by the name of Herbert Hoover, later American president,
became the food administrator.
Today we might say the food czar of America's wartime effort.
Within Germany itself one could see the government changing in dramatic ways
as a centralization of the war effort brought about political transformation.
From 1916 Germany was increasingly dominated,
not as it had been in previous years by an emperor,
as had been the case during Imperial Germany,
but rather by a dynamic duo of military dictators who increasingly relegated the emperor to the shadows.
These were the generals Paul von Hindenburg and Eric Ludendorff
who sought to coordinate the German economy,
to mobilize German labor in remarkably new and controlling ways
that came to be called war socialism.
We need to pause for a moment to consider just how radical this transformation was.
The very idea of socialism, the set of ideas suggested by Karl Marx and other thinkers
in the course of the 19th century had been anathema to German conservative elites
and especially to German generals.
But now German military dictators Hindenburg and Ludendorff
were themselves adopting policies that came to be called war socialism
because they felt that total war made them necessary.
They in essence hijacked socialist ideas of government control of the economy,
national direction or steering of labor as well as resources,
and what was taken to be a rational organization of the economic effort.
They felt that the war justified this.
The growing role of the government and the expectation on the part of ordinary citizens and subjects
that the state take action to ensure total victory
led to a trust in what contemporary is called Caesars.
A cult of the leader, the sense that a remarkable personality
might be someone in whom one could place trust and who could bring victory.
In the German case enormous trust was placed in these generals, the military dictators
and above all in Paul von Hindenburg,
a venerable grandfather like figure many Germans felt would bring victory
by his very determination and iron will.
In German cities and most prominently in the capital of Berlin,
a symbol was erected to as it were give visual form to the trust in which people had in this general.
An enormous wooden idol of Hindenburg was erected several stories tall
as a symbol of national unity and by buying nails that represented one's contribution to the war effort
ordinary Germans could hammer their nails into this wooden idol
which soon would become a metal clad figure representing the national will and national determination.
