This satisfaction of this sort, the increasing erosion of confidence in the Tsarist regime then led to the February Revolution.
On February 23rd, 1917, March 8th by the Western calendar that was not yet in use in Russia, the February Revolution broke out in the capital of Petrograd.
It started from causes that seemed small enough, the protests of ordinary women demanding food for their families, which soon were joined by troops who had been sent to quell them, grew into a larger revolt.
It took on a momentum of its own, and a new, democratically oriented provisional government took power within the Russian Empire.
The Tsar and his family were arrested, and the provisional government promised new liberties, new rights, a new regime within Russia, the advent of democracy.
It was hoped.
In the minds of these revolutionaries, one prior revolution was very present to mind, and that was the French Revolution at the end of the 18th century that we had discussed in an earlier lecture.
They hoped to get it right, to replay some of the events of the French Revolution, which had become a model for such transformation, and to move in a direction that was positive, to move towards democracy and the consolidation of the rights that they promised.
A question that was present to mind for them was, might their revolution also degenerate into a reign of terror, as had been the case in the French Revolution?
At the same time as the provisional government was vesting its hopes in a democratic form of governance, there was also another center of authority, another competing rival institution known as the Petrograd Soviet.
The Soviet claimed to speak for many other Soviets throughout the country.
Now Soviets were simply grassroots councils.
They were forms of, it was theorized, popular democracy, councils that were established by ordinary soldiers, sailors, and workers to rule themselves.
This was taken to be in many ways a much more popular and grassroots form of democratic organization than the liberal led government, the provisional government.
In the period that followed, the Petrograd Soviet claiming to speak for all of the other grassroots Soviets throughout the empire would challenge the authority of the provisional government, and one would have an odd situation of dual power.
Precisely because of the commitment of the provisional government to its democratic allies in the west, the Great Britain and France, Russia remained in the war.
This was probably fateful for the demise of their revolution.
Instability continued within Russia.
The longing for peace soon created a situation which the Bolsheviks could exploit.
Lenin was returned by special train from his Swiss exile, a trip through Germany passing into the Russian Empire facilitated by the German High Command,
which hoped that Lenin would spread a message of revolution.
They thought of it in terms of infecting the Russian Empire with the virus of revolutionary ideas, which would destabilize the war effort.
Lenin was not a German spy, as some believed or charged at the time, but Lenin was certainly happy to oblige the plans of the German military dictators for his own revolutionary purposes.
On his arrival in the Russian capital of Petrograd, Lenin announced ringingly to his supporters and all others in the crowd gathered to meet this remarkable revolutionary, the so-called April theses.
The April theses argued there should be no support for the provisional government.
It represented an older liberal form of government that would be surpassed.
Instead, in another ringing slogan, all power should go to the Soviets.
These councils should form the basis for a new form of government.
Lenin then announced a very appealing slogan, which was far simpler and far easier to understand for the masses than the abstract liberal ideology of the provisional government.
The appealing and simple slogan of bread, peace and land.
Bread, peace and land expressed precisely the longings of a population that was finished psychologically with the rigors of war.
Lenin had support from his Bolshevik group, and he was also supported by other remarkable individuals who flocked to the cause.
Among them was a fervent revolutionary and an inspiring revolutionary orator in the tradition of the French Revolution, Leon Trotsky,
who was a Russian revolutionary who had recently returned from exile in New York on hearing news of the revolution and who joined the Bolsheviks in the summer of 1917, becoming one of their most important leaders.
