Lecture 14, Hitler.
In our previous lecture we considered the rise of the Nazi movement in Germany and it's
coming to power.
In this lecture we'd like to concentrate on the man behind the Nazi movement who was
key to its success and to its growing radicalism, Adolf Hitler.
He came from beginnings that were obscure and unpromising but would rise to become
the leader of the German people, the Führer.
This lecture profiles the man, the dictator, his distinctive characteristics as a political
leader and then considers the keys to his effectiveness.
His long range ideological goals were revealed in aggressive foreign policy, the launching
of murderous programs and ultimately World War II.
We consider, first of all, Hitler's youth.
He was born not in Germany but in the Austrian Empire in 1889 to a middle class family in
Braunau Amin.
His father was a customs inspector, a bureaucrat of the Empire.
Hitler's youth was unremarkable and directionless.
He was considered a slacker, a dreamer, who dropped out of high school to go off to the
big city, to Vienna in 1907 to become an artist, to seek fame.
He was however rejected by the Academy of Fine Arts which considered him a capable enough
draftsman but lacking that spark of artistic genius and after this disappointment Hitler
slipped into a sort of netherworld of poverty in the Viennese capital.
We're accustomed to think of Vienna as a beautiful world capital of art, of cultivation.
That it is but it also had its ugly side at the start of the 20th century.
Hitler claimed that this down and out period in the underworld of Vienna was decisive in
his development because he soaked up those many radical influences that were a swirl
in the imperial capital.
The anti-Semitism of the popular mayor Carl Lueger, the racialist ideas that circulated
on the fringes of its society.
The extreme nationalism of the pan-German movement in the Empire which denounced the
non-German nationalities ruled over by the Hopspergs and the heroic artistic stances
and mythological scenarios of Richard Wagner's operas.
Later in life Hitler would observe that no one could understand his political career
without first understanding Wagner.
Hitler subsisted in the flop houses, the men's hostels, the rescue missions of Vienna in poor
circumstances.
He was also fascinated by the scenes that unfolded in the streets of Vienna by people
for whom he had no political sympathy but whose talent for the organization of the masses
he admired.
He was fascinated by the socialist May Day parades.
He saw how for hours on end the long rows of workers would march by on their celebrations
seeming to him to be, as he put it, a dragon, nearly a superhuman organism and this would
prefigure some of his attempts to mobilize the German masses on his own.
In spite of the personal failure of his attempt in Vienna to become a great artist, forever
after the arts and architecture would remain important to him but he would seek to place
his mark upon the world in politics.
What was decisive for Hitler was the experience of the coming of the First World War.
It fired Hitler's imagination and gave him a sense of mission that he had not had before.
The declaration of war, he later observed, gave him a sense of purpose and belonging.
We've described in our earlier lectures the so-called August Madness of 1914 when crowds
had celebrated the onslaught of war at last.
Well, Hitler was caught up in those crowds in the August Madness in Munich and indeed
he was captured in a photograph of those days, a photographer who had heard that Hitler had
been among the crowds celebrating in Munich the news of the war years afterwards, went
back and with a magnifying glass looked through each of the faces in the crowd that he had
photographed that day and indeed, as we can observe and photograph today, Hitler's ecstatic
cheering shining face was to be found among those crowds.
The analyst of crowd behavior, Elias Canetti, whom we've mentioned a few times in our lectures,
claimed that this was Hitler's decisive experience forming him in his later career.
This sense of belonging to a larger group, a sense of having a place was something that
Hitler would try to recreate for himself as well as the German people in the future.
