Europe, moreover, was on the move as a result of the continuing turbulence that followed
upon the aftermath of the First World War.
With the collapse of the German Empire, the dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian Empire,
the Ottoman Empire, and the Russian Empire, vast borders were redrawn.
New independent states were formed.
People found themselves living in newly independent countries that had not existed recently, discovering
themselves either to be minorities in countries not their own or enjoying independence for
the first time.
Refugees fled continuing conflict, especially from the lands of the former Russian Empire,
where civil war was soon raging.
This was truly a vast migration of peoples, echoing that of the times before the Middle
Ages.
It's estimated that some three million people had fled the lands of the Russian Empire by
1921.
They represented a vast exodus.
It was not uncommon in those days to travel to Berlin or Paris and discover that one's
chauffeur was an aristocrat of the Russian Empire or that the lady behind the counter
at a café was a grand duchess.
These were people who were cast adrift on the tides of history.
Such stateless people, refugees, displaced, were castaways without clearly defined rights.
If they were evicted from a country which no longer existed, what was their place in
society?
Hannah Arendt, that political philosopher who we discussed in the first lecture, had argued
that such figures, such stateless people, were truly quintessential figures of the 20th
century.
She argued that the 20th century would be in a very real sense the century of the refugee
or of the displaced person.
Many would share this fate in the following decades.
With new frontiers in Europe, especially Central and Eastern Europe, with newly independent
countries, some 20 million people now found themselves as ethnic minorities living in
countries in which they did not belong to the dominant nationality.
As an expedient to deal with these new situations, there was arrived at by politicians the notion
of something that's ubiquitously and euphemistically called population transfer.
This is a case of a trend that we'll see repeatedly in the course of our lectures, of the power
of euphemisms, of code words to cover up harsh human realities.
Population transfer sounded and was meant to sound neat, humane, and efficient.
The reality, however, was of a brutal uprooting process of populations who are now to be moved
around involuntarily.
A prime example of this population transfer, which is largely forgotten today, but because
of its long-term impact as a precedent for later events, deserves to be far more widely
known, came after the war had ended in a new conflict that erupted between Greece and Turkey
in the Mediterranean region.
This was a crucial case of the First World War continuing after it seemed to have ended.
These events that followed between Greece and Turkey were to be an important precedent
for later radical measures by states what euphemistically would be labeled again and
again population transfer and often looked back to this precedent.
When Turkey had been defeated in the First World War, Turkish nationalists reacted very
fiercely against the treaty that was imposed they felt upon their nation, the 1920 Treaty
of Sev, which was imposed upon them by the Allies and they resisted.
They resisted Allied occupation of coastal areas and launched a national war of resistance
against what they felt to be an unfair, dictated treaty, which was led by a remarkable individual,
Mustafa Kemal, later known as Ataturk, a title that means the father of the Turks, because
he led the way in the establishment of a new Turkish national republic from the ruins of
the Ottoman Turkish Empire.
Events had unfolded with drama in this corner of the world at a time when people were largely
occupied with the tasks of reconstruction elsewhere.
In 1918, Greek armies had invaded what remained of the Turkish Empire to fulfill a nationalist
ideology.
Their goal was what they called the Megali idea.
