He became the chairman of the Chinese Soviet Republic, established in Qiangxi in 1931,
and began to move up through the ranks.
When the Kuomintang launched their offensive against their earlier allies, but now communist
enemies, in 1934 they had encircled 100,000 communists.
These communists were now forced to undertake a breakout attempt and to move to a new base
of support.
This was the later legendary Long March of the Communist Party, which took place from
1934 to 1935 and sent them on a long trek towards Yan'an, where they would re-establish
their control.
This march, constantly harried and harassed by nationalist forces or locals, led to massive
losses.
It was estimated that some 60,000 or more may have died on this march.
And this march, this elemental movement of the communists, was later turned into a foundational
myth of propaganda, underlining an essential cornerstone notion that determination and fanaticism
and will could overcome even the most incredible material or military obstacles.
This Long March also had another significance.
In its course, Mao became a principal leader of the party.
Only 8,000 of those who had started this trek survived and made it to Yan'an.
And Mao would represent soon the leadership of this hardened core of believers.
Mao soon was the object of legend and of a charismatic myth of the leader.
In Yan'an, Mao lived in a cave, in a hillside, in a Spartan simple way of life, focused on
the political goals of his movement and would become a legend for his austerity and commitment.
Mao had in particular one insight, which I think had a lot to do with his own personal
background and which would shape some distinctive features of Chinese communism.
Mao in particular understood and emphasized the potential of using peasant unrest, mobilizing
the elemental powers and desires of the peasantry, which was inchoate and inarticulate itself,
to mobilize them and to send them off in the direction of revolution, revolt, and transformation.
Mao's own peasant upbringing, certainly in his roots in the countryside, had much to
do with this insight.
Mao felt that in order to unleash this enormous revolutionary potential that was present there
in the peasantry, it would be necessary first to set the peasants against one another in
order to eliminate those elements of the peasantry he felt stood in the way of the truly revolutionary
potential that was implicit in their masses.
In particular, they needed to be directed against slightly richer peasants, those who
were denounced as the exploitative landlords.
Mao called for a short reign of terror in the countryside that would set aflame the peasant
masses and unleash their potential for his political purposes.
Mao insisted in one of his much quoted phrases that revolution was not a dinner party, revolution
was not embroidery, revolution was an uprising, and it would involve violence, it would involve
upheaval, and this was seen as necessary.
We think back to that phrase from the French Revolution of it being necessary to break
eggs in order to make an omelette when here's here the echoes of that earlier revolutionary
slogan.
Mao, it has been suggested by some historians, might have had even earlier models in mind
when he spoke of the revolutionary potential of the peasantry that were not orthodox Marxist.
In fact, in the course of the 19th century in China, there had arisen a movement called
the Taiping Rebellion, which had been utopian and revolutionary in its scale.
The Taiping rebels had promised a heavenly kingdom on earth for Chinese peasants, had
promised the redistribution of land, had promised shared property, had promised equality, and
for a long period certainly had enormous appeal in parts of the Chinese countryside.
Such older historical models, it's been argued, were important in adapting the message of
Marxism to China's realities.
