Shortly after having evaded military service in Austria, Hitler objected to the multinational
nature of the Austrian army, Hitler now volunteered for a German regiment.
He served on the western front and the trenches and was distinguished with a rare award of
an iron cross first class.
In spite of this distinguished military career in ways, Hitler didn't rise through the ranks
and indeed was considered even by fellow soldiers to be a little bit odd, something
a little slightly off about this character.
In part, his propensity to lecture other soldiers about the greatness of Germany's national
cause, the slightly too gung-ho attitude that he evidenced in the trenches.
Hitler was sent to a hospital after being caught in a gas attack on the western front
and it was there that he would learn that Germany had begged for peace from the Allies.
This news struck him like a thunderbolt.
He was devastated.
He underwent a psychological breakdown, in the course of which, as he later claimed
in Mein Kampf, he had had a vision, a vision that convinced him that he had a political
mission to save Germany and to restore it to its greatness.
He would announce that this was the launching of his political career.
Hitler at Lucens, now that peace had come about in 1918, remained in the army, that
place where he had found a sense of belonging, even after the armistice.
He was hired by the army to observe radical parties in Munich and in the process of visiting
one such party, the German Workers' Party, in September of 1919, he had been spontaneously
moved to make a speech and was enrolled as a member, one of about fifty in number at
that time, though in order to make their numbers seem larger, they added several hundred to
their party books, identifying themselves as party members to give the impression of
being a mass movement.
By 1921, Hitler had risen dramatically within the movement to become chairman of the party
and members were now calling him the furor or the leader and a nearly religious devotion,
a sense of the infallibility supposedly of this leader hovered around the figure of
Hitler.
Hitler renamed the party the National Socialist German Workers' Party or Nazi for short, seeking
to appeal across the political spectrum.
After the failed Beer Hall Putsch of 1923, Hitler's legal route to power used Weimar
democracy and the ballot box to destroy parliamentary government.
Growing mass support and intrigue brought Hitler to the chancellorship of Germany in
January of 1933.
Historians have tried to puzzle out what tantalizing clues we have about Hitler's psychological
background and his early youth as well.
Such historians are sometimes called by the unfortunate label of psycho historians as
they aim to understand psychological background.
Such psycho historians have sought to analyze Hitler's childhood or his upbringing, his
education, to account for his later political career.
But many of these attempts, tantalizing and intriguing as they can be, are often, in fact,
not quite satisfactory.
Because placing all of our explanatory weight upon the authoritarian childhood or child
career that Hitler was subject to, and that indeed was common to many in that era, doesn't
begin to explain why this man was launched upon a career of political evil, while so
many others went on to seemingly normal adulthood.
Even the disappointed career goals, obviously alone, cannot explain Hitler.
Rather, we see questions of choice as well.
The choice to pursue political radicalism.
The choice to pursue the route to dictatorship.
We turn now to an examination of Hitler as dictator, and we want to point out that there
was a method to the madness in Hitler's approach to dictatorship.
Hitler's work methods were, even to some of his own followers, maddeningly unsystematic
and chaotic.
His way of delegating authority often seemed to lack reason or rationale.
He would often charge different followers with the same task, duplicating authority.
His personal habits were eccentric, he would keep unusual hours, he loved to watch movies
late at night.
This is perhaps a recurring feature of dictators, and would not keep regular office hours.
This has referred in particular to Hitler's tactic of duplicating authority, giving the
same task to different followers, and letting them contend to see who could best fulfill
that task as bureaucratic Darwinism.
And I think that's a very apt name.
