Back on the home front as well, women were now called upon to play roles that would, as it were, pick up the slack.
They were urged to work in the factories, often at dangerous jobs producing munitions.
They took over occupations that previously had been formally reserved for males.
They also faced a double burden of having to care for their families at home as well.
Women's social roles would be radically affected by how they rose to these challenges,
and in the years following the First World War, very often women would be given the vote,
in some sense, in recognition of their contributions during the course of the First World War.
Not only women and men were called to action, but also little children on the home front were also drawn into the war effort.
In the schools, instruction in subject after subject was notably militarized with word problems,
couched in terms of military necessity or planning for military campaigns.
Children were encouraged to participate in terrain games after school.
This is essentially a form of play outdoors that resembles capture the flag of our own times,
but had the quite obvious intent of preparing children for military service in some future date as well.
And if that were not enough, then after school also children were urged to participate in collection drives
to gather raw materials or scrap for the war economy.
What we see in other words is the importance that civilians would have in the context of mobilizing for total war,
and this unfortunately was a contribution which made them ultimately also the targets of violence,
precisely because of their importance in the war effort.
In spite of the pre-war treaties which had sought to limit violence, to civilize or tame the rules of war,
civilians were nonetheless targeted by all sides in increasing measure as it was recognized that the home front was indeed an integral part of the war effort.
An example of this came right at the start of the war with the German initial invasion of Belgium and northern France in 1914.
Soon, refugees leaving the front areas told stories of the atrocities that had been committed by German troops.
In the years that followed, there were in tune with the increasing skepticism as a war war on against propaganda,
those who believed that these stories had been exaggerated.
But recent historical research, indeed a sort of two-day force of detective work in the documents,
has shown that in fact German troops did kill over 6,000 civilians in these first months of the First World War in 1914,
in part because of what amounted to a case of mass hysteria among the invading troops who suspected snipers or guerrillas
among the population, the civilians, and who took reprisals for what they believed to be atrocities committed against German troops,
but which were often in fact cases of friendly fire.
These atrocities would have a highly damaging effect on international opinion worldwide.
There was also the way in which indirectly the home front was affected by wartime measures.
This included the use of British naval power as the power that ruled the seas to blockade Germany,
which as a modern economy was very much dependent on imports and exports.
The aim was to wage an economic war using blockade by ship to choke off that country.
After 1915, the economic balance precisely because of such blockade shifted to the Allies.
Within Germany itself, substitutes were sought for raw materials and for food,
one saw the increasing adulteration of bread and of sausages, and things got worse still.
As a result of a failure in the potato harvest, in 1916 to 1917, in that harsh winter,
there came an event that Germans remembered for long afterwards as the turnip winter of 1916 to 1917.
Civilians were left in dire straits dependent upon the not very appetizing root vegetable of turnips,
and indeed adults were reduced to a calorie intake of a thousand calories a day in this time of privation.
The historians have been debating for many years afterwards whether actual starvation followed from the blockade itself.
The actual human impact of this economic warfare on the German home front is still being debated today,
but one thing is clear, civilian mortality rose dramatically in Germany as a result of these wartime privations.
