A philosopher, I think one of the truly important political philosophers of the 20th century,
Hannah Rent, who was a witness to this period of turmoil in human history, used the concept
of totalitarianism as part of an extensive study of the dynamics of such politics in
the modern age.
In 1951, at the dawn of the Cold War that we'll be discussing in a later lecture, Hannah
Rent published a large work called The Origins of Totalitarianism, which compared and contrasted
the development of modern dictatorial systems, Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union, to try
to tease out this new form of rule, this, as a Rent felt, very modern form of rule.
Hannah Rent, in her theoretical treatment of totalitarianism, didn't rely only on ideas
and theoretical models, she also drew on personal observations.
She herself was a German-Jewish refugee from Nazi Germany, who later settled in the United
States and taught at the University of Chicago.
Hannah Rent remains a significant but controversial figure.
As a student in philosophy in Germany, she had had an affair with one of her professors,
Martin Heidegger, a philosopher who supported Nazism.
This was a mystery of her personal life.
Her later book in 1963, Eichmann and Jerusalem, was both widely read and widely criticized
for its concept of the banality of evil and other assertions about how the Nazi regime
had operated, how the victims of this regime had responded.
She had claimed in her concept of the banality of evil that the perpetrators of the violence
of the Nazi regime, in many cases, were bureaucrats whose capacity for simply doing their job,
even in genocide, revealed something disturbing about modern bureaucracies as such.
She remains controversial.
Let's examine now the essence of Hannah Rent's concept of totalitarianism.
A Rent was not the first thinker to note similarities between ideologically opposed regimes, even
mortal enemies.
Indeed, other contemporaries had suggested that extremes meet, that there was factors
in common between fascists, communists, and the Nazis in how they practiced a politics
of violence.
A Rent, however, went beyond just this anecdotal observation.
She instead systematically traced the model's origins.
She saw totalitarianism as a new form of rule that grew out of the breakdown of 19th century
classical liberalism, the breakdown of the nation state with its concept of equal citizens
protected by the law.
This breakdown had further been evidenced in the concept of imperialism and its rule
over subject populations who were not accorded rights and privileges, as at least in theory
had been the case in the liberal nation state.
In Hannah Rent's model was in a sense imperialism coming back to Europe.
Modes of rule and terror that had earlier been practiced out in the periphery were
now re-imported into modern societies as a form of rule that was emphatically opposed
to democracy and liberalism.
Hannah Rent cataloged in a structural analysis the similarities that could be observed between
regimes like Stalin's Soviet Union and Hitler's Nazi Germany.
Those similarities, just to mention a few, included the cult of the leader, dynamic claims
of ideological infallibility on the part of the leader and the government, the use of
violence to fulfill those claims or to make good on those prophecies, concentration camps
as microcosms or laboratories of the most total achievement of the most radical aims
of totalitarian regimes, hierarchies of true believers and elites who could cynically manipulate
the masses of believers, institutions of enormous significance in such regimes like the secret
police, the enforcers, and then the raw material of these regimes, atomized masses of people,
no longer bound together in other social identities, but rather isolated individuals
facing the government alone and organized by the regime into mass organizations.
It was almost superfluous to note here that there were uncanny similarities in the monumental
art and in the propaganda of the regimes Hannah Rent described.
As a final and essential feature of these totalitarian regimes Hannah Rent observed,
they shared in common the need for constant motion.
