They were established in colonial conflicts. They were used in 1896 in imperial Spain's attempt to suppress revolt in Cuba.
The aim was to cut off guerrillas or fighters in the jungles and in the hills from their support among the civilian population
by keeping the civilian population interred in such concentration camps to concentrate them.
The British also used concentration camps in the Boer War at the turn of the century from 1899 to 1902
in their fight against guerrilla warfare against settlers of Dutch origin in South Africa which incurred many civilian deaths.
These institutions were not yet the sort of places of mass murder that they would become later in the 20th century,
but we see here in Embryo an institution which later would play a notorious role in the 20th century.
Such strategies of terror and of measures of control could later be re-imported from the colonial periphery back to Europe,
and that certainly would be a case of the empire striking back.
Finally, as omens of conflict, there were on the part of insightful individuals premonitions,
which are often uncanny for us to hear about in retrospect of an oncoming war,
some great collision between the imperialist powers.
The start of the century saw almost uncanny instances of the articulation of the possibility of some new vaster war,
whether this was something to be feared or perhaps welcomed.
Keen military observers of the American Civil War or of the Russo-Japanese War from 1904 to 1905
had already begun to understand something of the new destructive potential of modern industrial war at its worst,
but paradoxically it was that very destructiveness of modern war that led some of them to argue
that such a war would be so devastating in fact that war was made less likely, how wrong they were to be.
There were also quite in tune with the 19th century's emphasis on progress,
its emphasis on hopes for the amelioration of the ills of the human condition,
attempts to civilize war itself, how characteristic of the 19th century.
These included the Geneva Conventions of 1864 and 1906, the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907,
all part of a process to codify and establish what now sounds to us like a bitter phrase,
rules of civilized warfare, limits to what could be possible in modern conflict.
These included attempts to specify sparing of civilians,
the protection and civilized treatment of prisoners and the wounded,
attempts that turned out not to be very efficient to limit the kinds of modern weaponry that could be used
all in an attempt to tame war and turn it towards the purposes of progress if not eliminated altogether.
There were certainly other thinkers, however, who saw conflict as a positive good, not merely a necessary ill.
Some of them were the followers of the German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche,
who had celebrated irrationality and unreason, the breaking through of traditional moralities
in order to prepare the way for the next stage in human evolution, the superman who Nietzsche heralded.
There were artists like the Italian futurists who announced themselves
bored with a long peace and stability and order of the 19th century,
who praised instead, and they meant to shock and they certainly did,
who praised instead speed, danger and war as they put it as a modern hygiene in their manifesto of 1910.
They claimed that the museums had to be blown up because there were signs of a dead past.
To their mind, they explained, even the most ordinary roaring motor car was more beautiful than an ancient statue
because it expressed newness, it expressed energy and vitality and modern technology.
There were more sober revolutionaries, moreover, who welcomed the prospect of conflict
because of the opportunities it would afford.
An example of such a radical revolutionary was the socialist Vladimir Ilyich Lenin,
a Russian at this time in exile in Switzerland, who surveyed what he thought might be a coming conflict
and hoped that such an international conflict could be an opportunity,
that it could be turned from a war between nations into an international civil war of classes,
leading finally to the successful world revolution.
With growing international tension, many political leaders and thinkers began to assume
that a great war was likely in the near future.
This perhaps would become a self-fulfilling prophecy.
And indeed, as we'll see in our next lecture, when the First World War came,
it would fulfill the worst of their prophecies and surpass them.
