Nonetheless, this evidence of popularity and enthusiasm was not feigned.
And in part, one could see the effectiveness, the surprise of this moment of exaltation
in the way in which certain expectations had not been realized.
One of the most important of these expectations had to do with the insistence of socialist
movements following Marx's ideas in the years before the outbreak of the First World War
that workers who had loyalty to their class and not to their nation, which Marx had dismissed
as being a fraud perpetrated by the ruling classes upon workers to make them unaware
of their real, actual class interests, that socialist parties had pledged themselves
in the years before 1914 that if the capitalists should ever try to take the working class
into a war for their capitalistic economic purposes, the socialist movements would simply
in a mass of international solidarity shut down the war.
They would do so by refusing to serve.
They would engage in a general strike that would shut down the economies of those countries
proposing to go to war, and the result would be not the unleashing of a capitalist war
in Europe, but rather, instead, the precipitation of that final workers' revolution.
Well, 1914, contrary to the worst fears of conservative elites, contrary to all those
rhetorical, radical promises of the years previous to the war, socialist parties did
no such thing.
In one European country after another, the socialists voted for war credits, supported
war efforts of their respective homelands, rather than refusing to participate as they
earlier had vowed to do.
It's been said that in that moment of the declaration of war, German workers and French
workers had discovered that they might very well have had much in common with one another
as workers, but that in 1914 they had discovered that they were, first of all, Frenchmen, first
of all Germans, and they patriotically flocked to their national cause.
Radical socialists like Vladimir Ilyich Lenin in exile in Switzerland, who held much more
firmly to the program of international revolution, were disgusted beyond words at what they saw
as the collapse, the moral failure of international socialist solidarity, and they would await
the correct moment to take action in this context.
As young men flocked by the millions to recruiting stations or were called up for arms, many
of them had the expectation of a brief war marked by heroism, chivalry, adventure, and
they enlisted en masse.
Mass armies of crowded soldiers would march into battle, would be hurried towards the
frontiers to strike the decisive blow in the First World War.
The reality, however, that awaited them.
The world of the trenches and trench warfare on the western front would be entirely different
from their expectations.
The plans which generals had hatched for swift victories, foremost among them the secret
schlieffen plan of German military planners, failed very quickly, and instead of the expectations
of quick victory, mobility, glorious cavalry charges, when instead saw a far grimmer scene.
Both sides stood their ground and began to dig in.
They dug in along trenches, preparing for a long drawn out war.
The western front, two opposing lines of trenches with a no man's land in between, would run
from the Swiss Alps for about 500 miles all the way to the British Channel, and it would
create a landscape such as only the most fevered nightmares of former artists could have imagined.
Trench warfare remade that landscape into a landscape of mud, barbed wire, and the surreal
no man's land that lay between the fortifications of either side.
An area littered by corpses, by barbed wire, by shed armaments, and so the myths that circulated
among soldiers stated by giant rats such as mankind had never seen before bred by this
conflict.
The battlefields were ones in which personal heroism seemed to mean almost nothing.
