A key aspect in the building up of the personality cult around Stalin was the deliberate presentation
of Stalin as an heir to Lenin's leadership.
Upon Lenin's death in 1924, the cult that rose up around Lenin was a first step towards
the building of a leadership cult for Stalin as well.
Stalin made himself the high priest of this posthumous glorification of Lenin as the original
leader and genius of the Bolshevik Revolution.
The leadership cult that was posthumously created around Lenin could be vast in its dimensions.
The earlier former capital of the Russian Empire, Petrograd, was now renamed Leningrad.
There were suggestions that Sunday should be renamed Lenin Day, suggestions that nearly
passed apparently, but were not ultimately taken up.
Lenin's own body was marinated, chemically treated, and mummified to be exposed and presented
to the people as a relic of the heroic period of the Great Red October.
In 1930, a granite mausoleum of bright red stone was built outside of the Kremlin walls
in Moscow, the new capital, where Lenin's mummified body would be displayed.
This would become a cultic center for the cult of personality around both Lenin and
Stalin.
In some sense, this was a sublimation of very deep religious impulses in Russian tradition
generally.
The saints of the Orthodox Church, it was said, had bodies that did not decay after
death, and in some sense, this tradition was taken up by the Bolsheviks as they celebrated
their founder.
The mausoleum would now become also a reviewing stand for the great parades and marches that
now took place in front of this center of the leadership cult.
And atop the mausoleum, atop the body of Lenin, Stalin would stand with an inconspicuously
placed box to raise this otherwise short man in stature to review and to give vaguely
blessing gestures to the crowds as they marched by.
Lenin's late criticisms of Stalin for rudeness and other personality defects were suppressed,
it goes without saying.
The cult of personality would also take some more ordinary forms.
Photographs of Stalin were retouched so as to clear up, for instance, the blemishes on
his complexion.
Photographs were commissioned of fabricated scenes, many of which attempted to show Stalin's
supposed centrality to the October Revolution and to fabricate a legend of his closeness
to Lenin.
There were times, indeed, when it seemed that Stalin might very nearly displace the central
figure of Lenin himself.
Stalin was depicted in such countless paintings in idealized terms, in portraits and in statues.
He would often be depicted standing in a heroic pose with a hand tucked into his coat
in a pose reminiscent of that great leader Napoleon as well, not an accident.
When Stalin made public appearances, there were carefully scripted traditions that now
evolved that had to be followed in order to accent and underline his leadership.
Long, thunderous ovations became obligatory, in part, historians suggest, because no one
in the audience wanted to be seen as the first one to stop.
Like many dictators, Stalin had a particular fascination with film, and I'd like to simply
dwell on this for a moment.
Stalin's fascination with film, which he shared with so many dictators, perhaps had something
to do with a fascination for the way in which reality could be manipulated and re-scripted.
Stalin had a particular love for western films, films of the American Wild West, as well as
films of Charlie Chaplin, but he also had a fascination for the films made in the Soviet
Union about himself.
Films about the October Revolution, one can actually trace this development in the cinematography
of the Soviet Union, depicted as Stalin, who was ever more central to the events of
Red October.
There were cases in which Stalin was presented as the chief advisor of Lenin, and in some
cases seemed even more central than Lenin himself.
Stalin had a fascination with observing actors playing him as a fascinating phenomenon, and
in fact, this had a political utility as well.
Some of these actor doubles were on occasion apparently used as stand-ins for Stalin himself,
body doubles at public appearances, or in cases where Stalin feared in his increasingly
paranoid thinking, danger of assassination to himself.
