In our previous lecture, we had discussed the background of 19th century ideas of progress,
the impact of the dual revolutions in politics and in industry. Today we want to consider
in our lecture some omens that were of a darker nature, that promised progress, yes, but did
so through conflict. The 19th century had often in its thought emphasized concept of
progress and there were certainly objective reasons for confidence in the notion of an
ever increasing betterment of the human condition. The confidence rested on things like the growing
influence of liberal ideas such as human rights, toleration, constitutional government, the rule
of law, and very real and visible scientific advances which had revolutionized to a great
extent in the course of just a generation or two the lives of so many ordinary people
in western civilization. At the same time, and this will form the subject of today's
lecture, there were certainly countercurrents in the thought of western culture in the 19th
century extending into the 20th century which didn't reject the notion of progress but explicitly
saw conflict, clashes, perhaps war as the key to advancing progress and to achieving
that betterment that was longed for. One enormously influential set of ideas that made conflict
a key part of its prescription for the future was the scientific socialism of Marxism. This
enormously influential set of ideas of the 19th century was developed by Karl Marx and
by his associate Friedrich Engels. Karl Marx was born in western Germany, he was a student
of philosophy who was unable after finishing his degree to find an academic position due
to his very fervently held atheism, he instead turned from desires for an academic career
to journalism and then to political activism in exile after his radical views had already
closed off other career paths of a more conservative sort. Karl Marx announced his doctrines together
with his associate Engels in a slim booklet of just a few scant pages in 1848 entitled
The Communist Manifesto. This was a small booklet that would affect the lives of literally
millions and millions in our own times. Though it expressed in a concentrated and distilled
form his analysis of the present day, how we had gotten there as well as where the world
was headed, he continued later to work out in much more detail his theories in a multi-volume
masterwork entitled Das Kapital, Capital. Marxism was presented quite consciously as
a science of revolution. We need here to think of the ubiquity of evolutionary ideas
that had already been propounded by thinkers like Charles Darwin. Marx one might justifiably
say aimed to do the same for human history, to discern the deeper laws, the deeper dynamics
and to show how these could be mastered. Marx rejected earlier thinkers in the socialist
tradition as merely utopian socialists. When Marx used utopian socialists it was definitely
not a compliment. Rather, their plans were based not on material realities but instead
on wishful thinking, on hopes and ideals. Karl Marx stated by contrast that his doctrine
of truly scientific socialism was based in observable realities, empirical truth and
the world as it really was. Marxism soon became influential in part because it brought together
so many contemporary concerns. Evolution, the high prestige of science, the increasing
needs turned towards mass politics for legitimacy and as a result of bringing together these
concerns it often exercised considerable appeal for contemporaries because it promised
not just an explanation of how the world was but also seemed to promise the keys to history
and to progress. Karl Marx's thought sought to overturn the thought of the German philosopher
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, a brand of thought known as idealism, which had argued
that ideas, concepts were a truer reality than their expression in the physical world.
Karl Marx was proud of as it were turning Hegel as teacher on his head.
