Half the world away, one could see another phenomenon also of growing aggression in the case of what's called the Empire of the Rising Sun, Japan.
Japan had resolutely modernized and had sought to beat the Western imperialist powers at their own gain.
It had embraced modernization, blending Western models with its own culture after the 1868 Meiji Restoration, adapting Western technology, techniques with Japanese beliefs.
Japan launched imperialist expansion by going to war with China in 1894 to show that it too could be an imperialist predator in the same way as the Western powers were,
and then to the astonishment of an often racist Western world against Russia, which defeated in 1904 and 1905.
After both these wars ended in victory, Japan annexed Korea in 1910 and had carved out for itself an Asian Empire.
During World War I, Japan encroached further on China to make it a Japanese protectorate.
Its ideology made clear the growing aggressiveness of its approach.
Japanese imperialism was increasingly masking its domination of non-Japanese peoples with a slogan, Asia for the Asians, not followed through on in practice.
Propaganda spread the doctrine of Japanese racial superiority and national unity under a divine emperor, and Japan continued its depredations against China to prove its vitality in the dark 1930s.
In the 1931 Manchurian crisis, the Japanese military staged the Mukden incident blowing up a railway and then blaming Chinese terrorists for the act.
This sort of big lie would be a recurring phenomenon, the provocations that we'll see in next lectures.
The Japanese took over the province and established a puppet state of Manchukuo.
After the League of Nations once again criticized in the strongest term this occupation, the Japanese simply left the League in 1933, and their attacks continued upon China unrestrained.
In 1937, fighting broke out between Chinese and Japanese forces at the Marco Polo Bridge in Beijing, leading to eight years of war and Japanese control of northern China and the coastlands.
Chinese nationalists and Chinese communists such as Mao Zedong, who we'll discuss in a later lecture, resisted the Japanese but also fought against one another.
In 1937, in a mass atrocity, when Japanese forces took the city of Nanking, the capital of the Chinese nationalist government, they massacred and brutalized civilians in what contemporaries called the Rape of Nanking.
Civilians were killed by the thousands, and rape and abuse continued for weeks. The record of this atrocity still staggers the imagination.
In the war that followed, the Japanese Army's Unit 731 would also use biological weapons against Chinese civilians.
The event, however, that closer to home for Europeans seemed to represent a dress rehearsal for World War II, was the Spanish Civil War from 1936 to 1939.
In July of 1936, General Francisco Franco led a military revolt against the Spanish Republic, supported by the fascist phalange and nationalist forces.
They opposed the popular front of Democrats, socialists, anarchists, and communists who supported the Republic.
The Civil War soon developed an international dimension, as fascist Italy and Nazi Germany intervened with supplies and troops and airplanes in favor of Franco.
For their part, pursuing the popular front strategy of the common turn, the Soviet Union supplied Republican forces and international brigades of volunteers who felt they could fight fascism in Spain.
At the same time, however, on the Republican side, communist forces were pursuing another agenda as well.
They purged their own anarchist allies in the popular front, jockeying for position in a future Spain that they hoped might become a Soviet satellite, and undermined in the process, fatally, the Republican war effort.
This war took some 500,000 lives. It was marked by atrocities like the April 1937 terror bombing attack on the Basque town of Guernica from the air by the German Condor Legion.
This attack, which lasted for three hours, was considered by its victims to be very nearly a preview of the end of the world and how it would appear.
It was an experiment, in some sense, in how to destroy civilian populations from the air, and it would be perfected during the course of aerial bombardment in World War II.
