Lecture 20, East Germany, the Soviet Union, North Korea
In our previous lectures, we've considered the different forms that communist regimes
in China and in Cambodia could assume, though still claiming loyalty to the same ideology.
In our lecture today, we'll examine how, in the age of the Cold War, many different
routes to socialism could exist, and in particular, we'll focus on the regimes of East Germany,
the Soviet Union, and North Korea.
The varieties of socialist experience, however, would be even wider than those of the communist
east.
Socialism and communism could take markedly different forms in different countries.
In Western Europe, a vibrant social-democratic movement espousing social democracy steadily
moved towards more moderate forms.
Social Democrats increasingly stressed reform over revolution.
As would have been a heresy to Lenin and to other communists, they sought a broader appeal
across classes for the notion of the amelioration of social problems.
Emblematic of this development was the fortunes of the largest and, earlier, one of the best
known and most highly reputed social-democratic movements, that of Germany's social-democratic
party.
In its Bodgo-Diesburg program in 1958, the SPD revised its Marxist doctrines to instead
avow both economic planning and economic freedom as cardinal parts of its program.
By contrast, however, in today's lecture, we'll move our focus to the case of three
hard-line states, which showed not this reform, but rather a movement towards radical models
of transformation.
These will be East Germany, the Soviet Union, and North Korea, and I hope what will emerge
from today's lecture is a sense of both the diversity and the commonalities among these
hard-line regimes.
In the case of East Germany, the German Democratic Republic was declared to be the state of the
workers and peasants.
After the Wall had been erected in 1961, closing off the possibility of voting with one's feet,
a grim stabilization began to set in in East Germany.
Many citizens saw that they must now come to terms with the inevitable and find their
peace with the regime which ruled over them.
But there was another element that certainly gave a sense of optimism to East Germany in
its earliest years.
A certain sense of pride that Marxism, its official ideology, had certainly been a product
growing out of German culture and German experience.
Indeed, in what might otherwise be considered almost a nationalist statement, it was commonly
said or joked that if anyone in the world could make communism work, it would be the
Germans.
The Germans were said to have the requisite virtues of hard work, discipline, industry.
The German Democratic Republic was to become a worldwide showcase, showing how this model
of government and social organization would move towards success.
But at the same time, there were internal contradictions.
In spite of the claims that were being made by the regime to an equality among its citizens,
in fact, one could see the emergence of certain groups with privileges.
The party elites enjoyed what they themselves would not have called class privilege, but
whose special favors could certainly appear in that way to the population.
This included access to special cars, special quarters and districts where the party elites
would live, special stores that were not open to ordinary citizens of the republic, greater
access for their children to education, to movement up in their careers, as well as to
those highly prized international exchanges.
One member of the party elite who rose steadily through the ranks and who would be the leader
of the East German state from 1971 right until the eve of its collapse was Erich Honecker,
who had risen through the party's ranks and was quite clearly a product of the system
that he ruled over.
