We need to break down a little further some of the key elements in the rule of such ideological regimes.
The 20th century saw the rise of a whole succession of ideological regimes using both utopia and terror,
and as a consequence they would be both dynamic and brutal.
Such regimes pursuing criminal policies had four key elements.
These constituted on the one hand the means, the tools, the instruments for achieving their ends,
and the motives, the ends themselves, the final goals that they had in mind.
Masses and machines were the two key elements that would make up the means or the tools to achieve the ideological plans,
while the mobster elites and the master plans that the ideologies gave them, the blueprints for action,
would ultimately show them the way to the future.
Let's consider these in turn.
The means included masses and machines.
Masses of people were mobilized in the rise or consolidation of such regimes, exploiting societies in turmoil,
shaken societies that would be full of uprooted and atomized individuals.
Humans would be caught up in these ideological movements who were often uprooted members of lonely crowds
seeking escape from their loneliness and promises of belonging, anonymity, and equality in ideological movements.
And indeed we'll see that one crucial recurring image that will show up again and again
in our examination of these regimes is the image of the masses regimented and marching, given purpose,
marching off towards an allegedly bright tomorrow dictated by the ideology.
Indeed, one of the remarkable witnesses of the 20th century, one of the thinkers who we'll turn to on occasion
for insights, a remarkable international intellectual by the name of Elias Canetti,
engaged in a long study of how crowds and masses function, what the internal dynamics of a crowd,
a group of people in aggregate, were in terms of mass psychology.
In the early 1960s he produced a masterwork of his insights entitled crowds and power.
This work was a formidable and fascinating study of sprawling erudition,
barely bursting with insight and provocative thoughts on every page.
Crowds and power argued that the masses in the modern period were increasingly organized and drawn into political life.
They were drawn into politics, in particular by the rise of the Nazi movement, which Elias Canetti was able to observe.
The crowd instinct could thus be turned to politics.
The symbol of the instrumentalization, thus of masses of people, was that constant ideal held up by ideological movement of masses on the march.
Machines would also play a role, and by machines here, used by the mass movements, we mean not only machines in the literal sense,
but also the whole apparatus of modern technology, including the use of media for propaganda.
We'll discuss in our lectures how the succession of modern media, the print media, radio, film, then television,
would be used and abused by mass movements for their propaganda purposes and to sway minds.
Furthermore, machines could also include the sheer organizational power of the modern bureaucratic state,
with its capacity to organize, to conduct censuses, to keep people under surveillance, especially the organized police and secret services.
Having considered the tools by which these movements would come to power, let's turn to examine the two other key elements that would constitute the motives or the ultimate aims.
These were the mobsters and the master plans.
By mobsters, we mean the movement's elite itself, including the leaders of these mass movements, who quite self-consciously gathered into organized conspiracies to achieve political power.
And in doing so, they often used criminal methods that had been inspired by gangster bosses or organized crime.
We'll see again and again that the leaders of these mass movements would also, in gangster or mobster fashion, subscribe to personal moralities,
which set them above the morality that applied to the ordinary run of mankind.
They would seek their power as one of their goals, but this would be in the minds of these leaders identified with the realization of master plans.
Master plans were the ideologies that were championed by mass movements.
They were the total blueprints for the future based on their ideas, promising utopia as an outcome, with a comprehensive vision of a future society that was intended to appeal to the masses.
Such master plans were not necessarily inflexible.
Indeed, they could be and often were adapted to changing conditions in their particulars while still claiming to be infallible and fixed on a vision of the imagined future.
As we've noted, such mass movements promised a lot to their followers and true believers, in particular the confidence of knowing that they were headed in the direction that was faded by the very dynamics of history.
This confidence, which is something that's not easy to quantify, would create an aura of dynamism, an aura of forward movement and propulsion.
It would be very important to the self-concept and to the triumph of these mass movements.
