The Marxist social democrats were split in 1903 at a conference in exile when Lenin led his Bolshevik faction, the word Bolshevik or Bolshevik in Russian means the majority, away from the moderate faction who were given the name by default of Mensheviks or the minority Menshevik faction.
The very fact that Lenin's smaller group took for itself the name the majority already suggested something about his sharpness in political maneuver.
Lenin, however, faced a very serious challenge and that challenge could be summed up in one word itself. That challenge was Russia.
The central problem for Lenin's variant of Marxist ideology was that Russia was pretty much classically unsuitable, unsuited for a revolution according to classic Marxist criteria.
According to classical Marxism, a worker's revolution probably had to take place in a country with large numbers of workers and industry.
Russia had only started the road towards that industrialization.
Lenin responded with an argument that has a lot to do with a buzzword common in our own times, not one that Lenin used himself with a buzzword of globalization.
Lenin responded with a sharp argument that suggested the world was now one globalized whole.
He suggested that this had crucial implications and he summed up his argument in a book that was produced in the time of turmoil of the First World War itself in 1916.
This book entitled Imperialism, the highest stage of world capitalism, theorized that Russia was the weakest link in a worldwide capitalist imperialist system
and that it was precisely because it was so weak that Russia was precisely the spot in which one should attempt a revolution.
In a world crisis, war could be turned into a civil war between classes.
Russia was the place to strike because of its weakness and backwardness.
The Russian Revolution, however, Lenin emphasized again and again was not an end in itself, not the end point, not the end station of revolution, but rather the first stage in a revolution that needed to be spread worldwide, globalized and internationalized.
The key to success in Lenin's recipe was his concept of a new type of party.
The Bolsheviks would be the vanguard of the masses, leading them, representing the working class that might not yet be conscious of its political mission.
Lenin warned that the consequences of not having such a vanguard party could truly be dire.
Without a vanguard party, Lenin warned, without a committed revolutionary core leading them, the working class would only fall back on thinking like trade unionists.
This was something that Lenin thought of with scorn.
He felt that the workers would simply seek short-term gains, would not prepare themselves for their great political mission of revolution, and this truly would be a failure of their historical calling.
Lenin's concepts did something very important.
They justified the seizure of power by, if necessary, a small group of revolutionaries committed to their cause, viewing clearly their historical task ahead in the name of the masses, in the name of a working class that was perhaps only coming into being in Russia's beginning of industrialization.
After a failed coup attempt in July of 1917, the Bolsheviks prepared for revolt in fall of 1917.
They had taken leading positions in the Soviet councils.
They felt that they would be able to draw upon that support in their councils to legitimize their rule, and they preached revolutionary defeatism in the war effort.
According to Lenin, the worse things get, the better things get for revolutionaries, providing an opportunity.
The Bolsheviks took power in an event that they called Red October in 1917.
This revolution of Red October, in fact, took place on November 7th by the new Western calendar that was announced and brought into being with the revolution.
But this Red October was mythologized and was depicted in heroic terms afterwards.
The reality was a little bit different.
The revolt was coordinated by Trotsky, as Lenin was in hiding.
Small numbers of committed Bolshevik fighters, the Red Guards, stormed the lightly defended Winter Palace in Petrograd,
arrested most of the members of the provisional government, and took over the capital with remarkable ease.
About six lives were lost in this seizure of power in Petrograd itself.
Lenin compared it to the ease of lifting a feather.
The seizure of power had been easy.
