There was also, moreover, one particularly tantalizing and significant symbolic project
which was never built, but which somehow still attained a symbolic reality in the minds of
ordinary individuals.
And this was the so-called Palace of the Soviets.
Stalin planned a massive ceremonial building in Moscow, which was to be rich in symbolic
significance.
It was to be marked by the very architectural style that Stalin liked, one that its critics
and there are many of them, have labeled wedding cake architecture.
It retained certain nearly religious features in its architectural style, resembling in many
ways a modern temple.
The features of this project from 1931 on were soaked through with symbolic resonances
and ideological messages in this planning.
It was to be taller than the hitherto largest building in the world, New York's Empire
State Building.
It was to dwarf such other monumental structures as the Great Pyramids, or Notre Dame Cathedral,
or the Eiffel Tower.
It was to be, as mentioned, a wedding cake-like temple structure topped by a monstrous huge
statue, a statue of that idol, that founding genius of the Soviet Union, Lenin, who would
be pointing up into the skies, showing where the bright future lay.
The statue of Lenin was to be twice as big as the statue of Liberty in New York.
These competitions with American symbols were not an accident.
The statue was indeed to be 25 stories tall, and the index finger that pointed towards
the bright future was to be 20 feet in height.
This was to be the largest building in the world, rich in symbolic significance.
And it could have been built on any number of sites within Moscow itself, but one particular
location was chosen, one that actually had an occupant already.
And that was the spot occupied by the largest building in Moscow that dominated the cityscape,
the Cathedral of Christ the Savior, the largest Orthodox Church in the world, which was now
in a symbolically significant act recorded by the regime, dynamited to make room for
the palace of the Soviets.
However, it was soon discovered that the project was running into problems.
The ground, it was soon clear, was a bit too unstable for the enormous mass of this projected
building.
Stalin too seemed to lose interest in a project that had earlier so occupied him.
And the fate of this projected construction site was, in other ways, symbolically rich
in ways that had not been intended.
It remained a construction site, soon became a hangout for drunks and prostitutes, and
then later was turned into a swimming pool.
Today, it is once again the site of a rebuilt cathedral, tracing the trajectory of Russian
history in the 20th century.
There were other symbols of modernity in Moscow itself that endure today and continue to impress
visitors.
The Moscow Metro, the Underground Railway, which was open in 1935, was a major showpiece.
It was built at record speed.
It rivaled other underground systems such as those of New York.
It was built at human cost.
More than a thousand dead or wounded were included in the laborers, as it was built under the
direction of Nikita Khrushchev, later to be one of the successors of Stalin.
Other gigantic projects also heralded the newness, modernity, and success of Soviet civilization.
The grant Nieperdam was to be a gigantic hydroelectric project, once again, the world's largest.
It involved foreign companies, foreign engineers, and forced labor.
And it came at enormous environmental cost, as did other industrial projects of the Soviet
Union.
More than a thousand farmers were evicted to make way for the area to be flooded to
create this project.
Another symbol unintentionally of futility was the Baltic Sea White Sea Canal.
This canal, which is intended to be an important strategic project, was built in 1931 to 1933
at record speed by prisoners and forced labor who worked with few tools, instead using muscle
labor and the sweat of their brows to bring this project to fruition.
It was celebrated in propaganda as an example of the humane reeducation policies applied
towards prisoners.
But tens of thousands of them in reality died in its construction, and in the end, significantly,
it turned out to be largely useless.
Too shallow, built using poor materials and design, all at record speed in order to meet
the demands of the plan.
