Precisely who a kulak was was an open question.
To be declared a kulak in the term originally meant a clenched fist or a tight-fisted person
could be a sentence of death.
To have a little bit more than one's neighbors, to have been a prosperous and hard-working
efficient farmer who perhaps had a cow or two more, the neighboring farms could spell
the label of kulak and with it, arrest and annihilation.
Predictably enough, given this sort of upheaval in the agricultural sector, agricultural production
plummeted due to peasant resistance.
Ordinary farmers desired above all to keep their land and to be left alone, and in the
absence of those minimal demands being met, they resisted by refusing to produce or give
their produce to the regime.
By March 1930, as Stalin understood the enormous disruptions that the collectivization drive
was producing, he called a halt to collectivization, but by year's end, resumed the drive once
again.
So important was it as a priority.
The measures that were now enacted were even more severe.
Food was declared to be state property, no longer the property of individual peasants,
and this carried crucial implications.
A 1932 law provided the death penalty, even for desperate peasants who stole food, because
food was now property of the state.
Peasants were, however, allowed, and this was a measure of at least some small compromise
included in the collectivization policies, peasants were allowed to retain some small
private garden plots, and this would often spell the margin necessary for survival.
It was a bitter irony that it was precisely in the most prosperous agricultural heartland,
the so-called bread basket of the Soviet Union, the Ukraine, that collectivization policies
would cause the most bitter harvest of all, the terror famine of 1932 to 1933.
This was not a natural disaster, but rather a man-made human disaster, a political famine,
which had political purposes.
As farmers resisted giving up their hard-earned produce, Soviet troops were moved in to seize
grain from areas even where hunger already threatened because of smaller harvests.
In territories where resistance arose, those areas would be closed off by troops and people
allowed to starve to death inside.
The estimates of the casualties of this man-made disaster are still difficult to specify precisely.
Estimates suggest that five to seven million people starved in Ukraine.
There were cases recorded of cannibalism.
One also struck in other parts of the Soviet Union, but the Soviet government responded
in its propaganda by a term that would later become ubiquitous in the 20th century with
the big lie.
It simply refused to acknowledge that such an event had taken place at all.
Foreign reporters were studiously kept away from the areas in which famine struck.
The Soviet government denied all reports of the event itself.
If a Soviet citizen so much as talked of the famine, he or she could receive three
to five years in prison for the crime of disclosing the state secret.
Stalin, however, is later said to have admitted that some 10 million died in what he saw as
one of the crises of his coming to power in this regime.
Increasingly, the peasants found themselves yoked into a form of control in many ways
harsher than what they'd experienced before, with the introduction of so-called internal
passports in 1932, which regulated who could move from the land to the cities, who could
move about the countryside, their movement was restricted, and they were bound in place.
If these were the plans for the transformation of agriculture, there also were dramatic plans
for the transformation of industry, the so-called five-year plans.
The first five-year plan for the industrialization of the Soviet Union to take a great leap forward,
to turn it overnight into an industrial powerhouse, was put into effect in October of 1928.
It emphasized not consumer goods, but that fetish of classical Marxism, heavy industry.
It aimed to move the country's development forward at a radical pace to force progress
through sheer feats of will.
This agrarian country was now to become an industrial powerhouse in one great leap.
