There was one particular tool which we used in the persecutions and executions of the
reign of terror, which in a perverted way seemed to sum up the ideals of the Enlightenment
in ways that would have horrified earlier Enlightenment philosophes.
This was a machine called the guillotine.
It was developed by Dr. Guillotin.
It was a scientific execution device.
It was considered to be sleek, modern, efficient, hygienic as well, and humane in its execution
of its victims.
A massive blade, which was set in a set of tracks mounted above the body of the intended
victim, would come crashing down instantaneously, and it was said humanely, painlessly almost,
severing the head of the victim of the terror from his body.
This machine, along with other persecutions, took an estimated 50,000 lives in the course
of the reign of terror.
These numbers, as we'll see, 50,000, bad as they were, would later be dwarfed in the
course of the 20th century.
The radicals of the French Revolution, often called Jacobins, were proud of accepting the
label of terrorists.
Terror was their policy.
It showed their determination and their will, and they were glad to accept that label.
It was a label that the thinker Edmund Burke, considered one of the fathers of modern conservatism,
would turn against these radicals and turn increasingly into the term of stigma that
we are acquainted with in our current usage today.
This terror, increasing in its radicalism, ultimately burned itself out.
Robespierre, the incorruptible one, was ultimately betrayed by some of his own associates, who
feared that they perhaps were next in his campaigns for purity of revolutionary purpose,
and that they might be suspected of insufficient rigor and commitment.
They had him arrested and then executed in 1794.
In a bitter turn of events, the French Revolution ultimately ended not in the realization of
the Republic of Virtue, but rather in a far more absolute despotism of Napoleon Bonaparte,
a child of the French Revolution thrown up by his crisis, whose military dictatorship
led France onto the route of empire.
The French Revolution obviously opened up vast questions.
What had gone wrong?
How could the events have taken the course that they did, ultimately leading to failure?
The one revolutionary, by the name of Saint-Just, delivered a statement which seemed to be a
very accurate depiction of how events had unfolded.
He called the revolution a mother who devours her children, and so indeed it had been.
The dynamic of the French Revolution and its increasing radicalism had taken a toll not
only of those who opposed the French Revolution or who were suspected of split loyalties,
but even of true believers in the cause itself.
In spite of its failures and excesses, however, which were discussed in the course of the
nineteenth century, the French Revolution nonetheless, precisely because of those ideals
that had been held out in such a compelling form, breaking with earlier traditions, provided
throughout the nineteenth century a powerful and attractive model for those who desired
change and looked to radical transformation.
In a very real sense, the French Revolution set the terms for the political conflicts
of the nineteenth century.
The French Revolution and its commitment to popular sovereignty represented a challenge
that opened a new and modern political age.
Its challenge would have to be met.
There was no way of turning the clock back.
Politics from now on would increasingly have to appeal to the masses for that abstraction
of the people for legitimacy.
We need now to turn to an examination of that other dual half of this revolution, the industrial
revolution of machines.
From the eighteenth century and accelerating in the course of the nineteenth century, the
industrial revolution had profound consequences, consequences at least as profound, maybe more
so than the political dramas we've discussed.
In fact, the processes that we very neatly, as historians call the industrial revolution,
were not only new machines or new technology, but also, more subtly, new ways of organizing
work, new social disciplines that were most useful to the new factory environments of
the industrial revolution.
Time is money, for instance.
A new governing principle that still rules our lives today, all too frequently, was a
signal of this transformation.
But the effects of the industrial revolution were markedly uneven.
Geographically, they began, first of all, in northwestern Europe, in Britain and in
France, then spread through the rest of the European continent, though there unevenly
as well, and then to the United States, and in our own times, to the rest of the world
with a seemingly irresistible dynamic and force.
