The structure of the United Nations was one that was intended as a compromise between these ideals and the demands of political realism and diplomacy.
There was a General Assembly in which nations would participate, at least in theory, as equals, while above the General Assembly, a so-called Security Council wields real power.
Its five permanent members are the victors of World War II, the United States, the Soviet Union, Great Britain, China, and France.
To the dismay of those who had vested such hopes in the United Nations, however, the recognition soon dawned that Cold War tensions impeded its functioning along the lines that they had imagined.
To give but one example, the Soviets demanded and got extra seats in the General Assembly for constituent republics of the Soviet Union, Ukraine, and Belarusia.
Within the Security Council, vetoes by the Soviet Union or by its opponents in the Cold War tended all too often to immobilize that body and prevented its effective functioning.
Nonetheless, further hopes were vested in an articulation of what were taken to be shared common principles.
And one very important example of just such a public articulation of shared ideals, at least in theory shared, was the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
This was approved on December 10, 1948, in Paris.
It remained, however, a non-binding expression of the ideals of aspiring for the respect of human rights, which unfortunately all too many member states of the United Nations violated and still continue to violate to this very day.
There were also other accounts that needed to be settled in the aftermath of the Second World War.
One outstanding issue was what was to be done with the defeated Nazi Germany.
The regime which its authors had expected would last a thousand years, Hitler's Third Reich, had collapsed.
What was now to be done to reckon up the crimes of that regime?
Contemporary observers, including Hannah Arendt, noted that when one traveled in post-war Germany, one could note a bizarre phenomenon.
It seemed as if all of the Nazis had disappeared.
People now presented themselves as having been either active resistors or passive inward objectors to the Nazi regime.
Hannah Arendt and others observed that it was very difficult to find publicly professed Nazis in the aftermath of this war.
It seemed that the collapse of the regime had been total and the regime's ideology had been discredited.
But now the question still presented itself how to deal with its crimes.
And this was in part answered at the Nuremberg War Crimes Trials.
In the city of Nuremberg in southern Germany from 1945 to 1947, prominent Nazi leaders were tried by Allied judges for crimes against humanity.
The very term was significant because it emphasized that new stress on human rights, which was so hopefully current in the immediate post-war period.
Now some critics of these war crimes trials pointed out the irony of Soviet judges passing verdicts against their ideological allies from before,
now ideological defeated former allies, while Soviet crimes like Katin were in fact not even considered.
One thing was clear, however, the sentences that were finally leveled against these Nazi leaders were richly deserved.
The war crimes trials also accomplished something far larger than holding individuals accountable.
It was also important in setting down the historical facts of the regime and its crimes.
It laid down a historical record, which would be of enormous significance in spreading common knowledge of these events.
We had discussed in an earlier lecture how, in the aftermath of the First World War, in Germany there had arisen a stab in the back legend that argued that Germany had in fact never really been defeated,
but that inner enemies were to blame.
The finality of Germany's defeat in the Second World War and the Nuremberg War Crimes Trials with their registering of a public record made it clear that no such legend or paranoid myth was tenable in the post-war period.
The process of an entire society, of German society coming to terms with and acknowledging the crimes that had been committed in its name was not simply one limited to the immediate post-war period,
but indeed was a longer process, only really gaining steam in the 70s and the 80s, and indeed is still ongoing, a wrenching confrontation with the burden of the past.
