One could see, in spite of all the pledges of communist fraternity, that unity was beginning to break down between these great communist powers.
The Soviet Union was the largest communist state in geographic extent. China, however, was the most populous.
Stalin viewed Mao as a junior partner. He pressured Mao to help North Korea in the Korean War.
Mao, understandably, soon came to resent being treated as a junior partner.
After Stalin's death and after destalinization, Mao grew to despise the Soviet Union,
feeling that it had deviated from the true path towards communism and now declared that the torch had been passed to China, which had a revolutionary calling.
By 1958, the Chinese-Soviet split was increasingly clear and border clashes took place between their armies in the late 1960s.
In 1964, China exploded a nuclear bomb, underlining its independence in military terms as well.
Mao would move towards an imitation of other patterns of Stalin's rule in the Soviet Union with purges.
In 1956 and 1957, in what came to be called the Hundred Flowers Campaign,
Mao first encouraged the blossoming, as it was called, of a hundred flowers and a hundred schools of thought.
This was an invitation to independent-minded thinkers and those who showed initiative in society to criticize, to present new ideas.
This seeming liberalization lured forth dissidents who now felt they could speak up. Mao then attacked.
An estimated half-million people were killed in the purges against such deviationists that followed.
Some historians argue that in fact Mao himself had not expected the extent of criticism or as he saw it,
deviation that followed then that he panicked. In other words, this is still a period of some controversy.
This opened the way towards an even greater determination through will to forge ahead towards the future
in what was called the Great Leap Forward from 1959 to 1961.
The Great Leap Forward was already announced in 1958 as a revolutionizing of the entire country.
Mao argued that it was necessary for China to strike while the iron is hot and to press forward through will, through willpower and dedication.
He praised the Chinese as an especially disciplined people who would do as their government demanded.
And official slogans promised something in return. One sonorous slogan of this time had it,
hard work for a few years, then to be followed by a thousand years of happiness.
What was involved in this policy? Mao explained that if one followed industrialization
and the agricultural reforms he had in mind, China would become a utopia, a paradise on earth.
He explained that new ideas about deep plowing in agriculture would produce food so bountiful
that China would no longer even have any food problem, but in fact would export food.
Food would be distributed for free. Hard work would make people healthy and doctors would soon be unemployed.
Education and production would somehow be fused into one and work together in a synergy.
Clothes would be free in this abundant state. All would be equal. All would enjoy the benefits of this new quality of life.
Others further built on his promises and expanded on them, arguing that ordinary Chinese peasants would soon be living in skyscrapers.
Ordinary Chinese people would have airplanes as their mode of transportation.
But what was needed, they underlined, was hard work and fanatical self-sacrifice.
Workers were to sleep at their machines to fulfill their quotas and to make this plan a reality.
Peasants could be expected to sleep in the fields to be able to leap into work from the earliest morning hours.
The measures involved the consolidation of collectives into huge, gigantic peoples' communes, which aim to achieve economies of scale.
In these peoples' communes, it was expected that the peasants and the workers would practice what was called, theoretically, mixed and intensified production.
Backyard furnaces on a primitive enough scale were supposed to produce steel, even if this meant melting down ordinary household items to produce what was essentially worthless scrap metal.
