The army was also purged. In September of 1937 Stalin had tens of thousands of officers purged.
Nine of ten generals were eliminated, including that hero of the Civil War, General Tukhachevsky.
The military staff was ravaged, leaving crucially as an implication the Soviet Union ill-prepared for World War II.
The secret police had an elaborate structure to make this terror work.
Quotas of numbers of people to be arrested were sent out to the police in separate regions,
and they, too, in a bitter irony, tried to overproduce or overfulfill their production norms.
Family members of those who were accused or arrested were also arrested and drawn into this net
as so-called enemies of the people, to be denounced as a vragnaroda,
an enemy of the people, could often be fatal.
Denunciations would lead to the proverbial knock in the door in the middle of the night,
and the NKVD secret police turned terror into a finely-tuned scientific system.
It even maintained a social science research unit to study the population's state of mind.
Now historians still continue to debate the phenomenon of the great terror and all its magnitude.
Their explanations variously stress Stalin's own paranoia, his conviction of plots and treason against him everywhere,
alternatively the way in which the terror could take on a dynamic of its own,
which surpassed Stalin's own particular impetus or push to the terror,
as functionaries would be eager to rise through the ranks newly opened by the purges,
thus creating an incentive for denunciations.
Another explanation also suggests that the psychology of the accused,
who were often old believers of the Bolshevik Party itself,
could inhibit real resistance against the party, because the party, it was said, was always right.
One German communist by the name of Arthur Kistler wrote a very important book in 1940 called Darkness at Noon,
which stressed in its story of a revolutionary old Bolshevik,
who was convinced to give a self-denunciation and a confession that was false,
a stress the way in which old believers felt that the party, even when it was acting incorrectly in one particular instance,
was in a larger cosmic sense right.
Their cherished principle, that the ends justified the means,
was a political ethic that in many ways left little room for principled resistance.
It was suggested in this novel that the only way in which they felt they could render one last service to the party they had served so many years before,
was to show that it had been right, even in the form of a false confession.
Stalin, however, clearly pursued purposes with a terror.
He affected massive social change within the party, bringing in his creatures,
as well as transforming the country as a whole.
The party structure was transformed.
By the time of the 1939 Party Congress, most of the delegates who had earlier attended the 1934 Congress five years earlier had been purged and were replaced.
Old Bolsheviks, like for instance internationalists such as Bella Coon, who had led Soviet Hungary in 1919,
also fell prey to Stalin's purging of those who he felt had records perhaps more illustrious as revolutionaries than his own.
The saying of that earlier French revolutionary Saint-Simon, that the revolution is a mother who eats her children, seemed to be coming true once again.
There was one institution in particular that seemed to encapsulate the sort of terror that Stalin enacted, and that was the Gulag.
The Gulag was an acronym for the extensive prison and labor camp system established within the Soviet Union,
and it stood this acronym for the main camp administration.
It was part of the importance which was placed on prisoner labor within the planned economy.
Many hundreds of such camps were located throughout the country,
and what later would be called the Gulag Archipelago, a dotting of many hundreds of islands throughout the Soviet Union.
And they included names that were notorious even at the time, and afterwards they continue so.
Names like Magadan, Borcuta, Norilsk, Kolima, Chelyabinsk, Karaganda, and many others.
Names which unfortunately are not as widely known in the West.
Recent archival evidence suggests that by the end of the 1930s, there were some 1.5 million prisoners in the Gulag,
and by the late 1940s and early 1950s, two to two and a half million prisoners.
The Gulag and its forced labor, according to some historians, has accounted for about 12 to 15% of the entire economy in the late 1930s.
But it's important to keep in mind that the Gulag was only a part of a much larger spectrum of forms of forced labor within the Soviet Union.
According to propaganda, the camps were intended to rehabilitate prisoners through supposedly reeducational corrective labor,
but the reality was a far harsher one. Mortality and mistreatment were endemic.
Significant numbers of inmates died every year.
The harshness of the camp experience was recorded and analyzed by Alexander Solzhenitsyn.
Stalin would be called by contemporaries Genghis Khan with a telephone.
He was said to resemble the despotic ruler of the Mongols, but with a modern apparatus of terror.
In our next lecture, we'll examine some other features of the culture of Soviet civilization built up around this atmosphere of terror.
Thank you.
