Leonid Brezhnev's own appearance, stolid, heavy, and increasingly aging in his last
years in office, seemed a perfect expression of the immobility, the lack of will for reform,
or a consideration of new ideas that burdened the Soviet Union towards the end of its time.
The repression of dissidents continued, now without Stalin's emphasis on mass murder
and the gulag, but it could include such brutal measures as psychiatric hospitalization.
The reasoning was that anyone who dissented or who was unhappy with the state of affairs
must clearly ipso facto be mentally ill.
In Eastern Europe and elsewhere in the world, the Brezhnev doctrine was coined as a rationale
for intervention.
The Brezhnev doctrine argued that communist advance was inevitable and was not to be rolled
back.
Since the socialist revolution had been achieved, the Soviet Union would intervene if necessary
to stop it from going back.
And thus, intervention in Czechoslovakia in 1968 was justified by the Brezhnev doctrine
as was the disastrous invasion of Afghanistan in 1979.
At the same time, however, there was a mounting bill to be paid in terms of economic, technological,
and environmental disaster in what appeared to be the mighty Soviet Union.
Visitors to the Soviet Union, and I had a chance myself to visit in these times, would
be shocked by the sights of empty stores selling perhaps enormous jugs of vinegar, I never
really understood what that was for, and otherwise with bare shelves, with little in the way
of consumer goods.
This made economic decline clear despite falsified official statistics.
In the long term, Stalin's decimation of generations of specialists had left damaging
gaps in Soviet science, which now were evident.
The crackpot agricultural projects championed by people like Trofim Lysenko, including the
Virgin Lands project to plow up enormous plains in Central Asia and Central Russia, produced
as Americans could probably have predicted from their own experience with a dustball
environmental disaster with a soil blowing away.
By contrast, the private garden plots that had been still allowed to farmers as a small
concession, perhaps temporary, were enormously productive in comparison to the state owned
farms, and this was already an indication of where things might be headed.
Then came perhaps an archetypal environmental disaster.
In April of 1986, just before the May Day Parade celebrated by the Soviet Union, the
Chernobyl reactor near Kiev exploded.
The costs of this accident and its initial denial by Soviet authorities eroded state
credibility.
One needs to hear the voices of parents whose children were sent out to cheer and to march
in the May Day Parades while a cloud of atomic debris hovered overhead to hear their fury
and their disgust with their government to sense the loss of confidence that had ensued.
This loss of confidence in a ruling elite is difficult to quantify, but nonetheless was
important and jokes about the absurdity of the Soviet regime proliferated making clear
that loss of confidence.
Even the party itself, a mood of crisis led to the elevation of a true believer and a
reformer Gorbachev by 1985 whose attempt to save the system would bring about its end.
A final regime that will consider is that of North Korea.
North Korea had earlier been a Chinese satellite, was annexed by Japan in 1910.
After World War II, it was to become an independent country that in the Cold War was divided into
two states.
South Korean under American patronage, North Korea under the Soviets.
With Stalin's go ahead, the North Korean leader Kim Il-sung invaded the South in 1950.
China then intervened when the Americans counterattacked.
The forgotten war, as it's been called, ending in 1953 claimed 3 million dead.
Without a peace treaty, the tense standoff has endured for half a century.
North Korea remains a massively militarized and isolated hermit kingdom, spending an estimated
third of its gross domestic product on one of the world's largest armies.
At the same time, famine has stalked the land, killing perhaps over 2 million in the 1990s.
The leaders of the North Korean state are significant.
The first leader was Kim Il-sung, called the Great Leader, installed by Soviet forces.
He was born as Kim Sung-joo, near Pyongyang, became an anti-Japanese guerrilla, was trained
and educated in the Soviet Union, and then served in the Soviet army.
