What followed in the Soviet Union was a process of destalinization.
In 1956, Nikita Khrushchev, the following leader, gave a speech at the Congress of the
Communist Party in which he denounced Stalin's crimes, especially those against the Communist
Party.
Khrushchev now announced a new policy of coexistence and competition with the West, promising that
the West would be buried technologically.
Nonetheless, Soviet control in Eastern Europe often needed to be secured through violence.
Soviet forces suppressed uprisings in East Germany, in Poland, in Hungary, and then in
Czechoslovakia.
At the same time, the Soviets hoped to forge ahead with new science and technology that
would put them in the forefront of development.
The launch of the Sputnik satellite in 1957 and the prestige of nuclear weapons gave the
Soviet Union an image of progress, but below the surface there were significant failures
of development, some of which can be summed up in one example, that of the crackpot agricultural
theories of Trofium-Lisenko.
Lisenko believed that genetic theories were invalid, they were a bourgeois invention,
and that in fact, characteristics that had been taught to plants could be passed on through
the generations.
He urged a socialist, communist model of agriculture.
Plants could cooperate to grow better, he argued, and thus he urged the planting very
close together of grain and of other crops.
Well, the predictable thing happened.
All these plants died, starved of the opportunity to grow individually.
Further, he hatched a plan called the Great Stalin Plan for the Transformation of Nature,
in which he urged the warming of Siberia's climate by planting of trees and urged the
transformation of the physical environment of the Soviet Union itself.
Such theories would be disastrous in practice, and they clued us into an abiding paradox.
Regimes of the nature of the Soviet Union claimed to be scientific, but they would
often fall prey to such pseudo-scientific disastrous theories.
The Cold War involved choices and dividing lines, and they didn't run neatly in a geographical
sense between one East and one Western world.
In fact, Alexander Solzhenitsyn had compared the ideological conflicts of the Great Cold
War to a line running through individuals themselves who needed to determine where their
sympathies lay.
The blocks of East and West, in spite of our talking in that way, were in fact not monolithic.
Political sympathies and allegiances could vary greatly.
While the Cold War did not erupt, thankfully, into a full-scale clash, it did cause proxy
wars or substitute wars, such as America's involvement in the Vietnam War or the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan, and indeed, as has been pointed out, frequently alliances on
both sides could often contradict ideological consistency and lead them into relations with
unsavory regimes.
There was one symbol above all of the Cold War that deserves mention, and that was the
wall that divided the Germanies, Eastern Germany under communist control from a Western Germany
under the sponsorship of the Western Allies.
On occupying Eastern Germany, Soviet forces had engaged in abuse of civilians and mass
rapes in a cycle of revenge for Nazi atrocities.
It's been argued that this experience would fatally undercut support for the German communists
that might otherwise have arisen.
In the Eastern Soviet zone, the German Democratic Republic was declared in October of 1949 in
reaction to the setting up of a Western German Republic under a Western sponsorship earlier
in that year.
But this was a regime which experienced massive population flight, a brain drain, especially
the best and brightest, who flocked instead to the West.
In order to deal with this hemorrhaging of population, the East German authorities, with
the sanction of the Soviet Union, built the Berlin Wall on August 13, 1961.
This wall, which at first ran through the divided capital of the Germany's Berlin, soon extended
across the extent of Germany itself, from North to South dividing Eastern Germany from
the West.
It was called, in significant ideological terms, an anti-fascist protection wall, but
in fact, this symbol of division was meant to keep people in.
In the course of the following decades, some 900 people died trying to escape Westwards.
A further phenomenon, which was indicative of the tense standoff of the Cold War, was
a phenomenon of what was called, in a suitable acronym, MAD, M-A-D, Mutually Assured Destruction.
It became especially clear in the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962 over the stationing of Soviet
missiles in Cuba, where Fidel Castro had taken power in 1959 and had come under the orbit
of the Soviet Union, which seemed to bring the world to the brink of nuclear war.
This frightened both opponents and was followed by a tense detente, relaxing tensions.
What followed in the coming decades was nonetheless a balance of terror.
A key concept of deterrence, assured destruction, argued that nuclear aggression could be prevented
by the implicit threat of a second nuclear strike, which would meet any first attack
obliterating the attacker and rendering victory and defeat meaningless to both sides.
This clearly was a balance of terror, which globally kept the world in an uneasy peace
but threatened at any time to tip over into Armageddon and Apocalypse.
In our next lecture, we'll be considering another player emerging in the Cold War, the
Great China of Chairman Mao.
