British reformer Sydney and Beatrice Webb also visited on an official tour and wrote
a book on Soviet communism as a new civilization.
In an act of psychological projection, we might call it, sympathizers celebrated what
they saw as positive changes now taking place while discounting the disturbing impressions
of their visit as mere relics of the past, shortly to be overcome, or perhaps as necessary
sacrifices in achieving utopia.
We recall the saying from the French Revolution of Robespierre about breaking eggs in order
to make omelets, a logic that some subscribe to.
Finally a view that was somewhat different was offered by a man with an insider perspective,
an engineer who experienced up close the direction in which the Bolshevik Revolution was moving.
This was the Russian engineer and author Evgeny Zamyakhin, who wrote what became one
of the most famous novels of utopia as nightmare, or anti-utopia or dystopia, entitled in Russian
Me, in English translated as We.
It's not known as widely as it deserves to be in the western world, I'd like to simply
mention it here.
It was written in 1920, soon appeared in many other western languages and world languages,
but only appeared in Russia itself in 1988.
Written as it was in the first stages of the Bolshevik regime before full-blown Stalinism,
this novel in many ways presented in science fiction form remarkable uncanny anticipations
of later developments in the Soviet Union.
It was a science fiction novel set in the 26th century and imagined a new society entitled
One State.
All life was ruled by daily schedules.
We see here echoes of the ideology of Taylorism that we mentioned in an earlier lecture.
All citizens dressed alike wearing the same blue uniforms.
All were known not by individualistic names, but rather by numbers.
And all individuality was submerged in the collective.
Not the I, but the we was the true reality.
He was controlled by an anonymous leader figure shrouded in a personality cult about
whom little was known, except the fact that he was omnipresent and omnipotent.
This was the so-called benefactor who would be reelected again and again in unanimous
ritual reelections.
The power of the benefactor and of his system of one state was reinforced by a cast of secret
police in many ways resembling the Cheka omnipresent throughout society called the guardians.
In Zamyatn's novel, a revolt of individualists is suppressed in a harsh and total way.
At the end of the novel, in a triumph of abstract reason, the last vestiges of imagination,
this last flaw in the making of a new man and a new woman, are to be removed from the
brains of all citizens in the society through what is hailed as the great operation which
will finally bring the utopia of one state to fruition.
As you can well tell, the novel doesn't end with a happy ending, it ends in failure and
hopelessness.
Zamyatn's message was a dark one.
He seemed to suggest that very many human beings found the burden of freedom in modern
times unbearable and would embrace, even enthusiastically, tyranny if it eliminated uncertainty, finding
their happiness in chains.
Zamyatn in some sense, long before Hannah Renz' writings or the writings of other later
analysts of such systems, was already suggesting that in some sense the ideological utopian
dictatorships of the 20th century were not only an explosion of barbarism from the past
or from outside, but echoed very deeply something within people in these societies.
Zamyatn was surprisingly allowed to leave the Soviet Union in 1931 and died in exile
feeling that his prophecies were coming true.
His book as a very archetype of dystopia of anti-utopian fiction would later be read
by George Orwell and would inform his masterpiece as well.
What we'll consider in our next lecture would be another version of utopia, a despotic system
that would present itself as an opposed model of the future, arguing against the Soviet
civilization, the system of fascism.
