One might add to the list of the role of technology
the way in which fax machines would be used by opposition movements
in order to keep communication with one another
while these democratic revolutions were in process.
Technology also played a very important role in creating a sense of crisis
in the leadership elites of the Soviet Union in particular.
The so-called SDI program or Strategic Defense Initiative
often jokingly nicknamed Star Wars
a program of space defenses that had been proposed by the American President Ronald Reagan
raised the prospect of another unsustainable arms race that might be just around the corner.
Debate still continues about whether this program would even have been technologically viable
but nonetheless we have testimony of Soviet generals as well as politicians
that the very prospect of a whole new round of escalating arms competition
was one that many leaders felt was not sustainable.
And yet the hopes of 1989 and these democratic revolutions
would issue in a remarkably peaceful revolt rather than elemental violent revolutions.
This is an abiding mystery.
Why were the revolutions of Central and Eastern Europe around 1989 to 1991
so remarkably peaceful when the potential for violence seemed so very, very high?
It's a question we need to deal with.
An important catalyst and model for change had come earlier in nonviolent resistance
in particular in Poland which had a centuries old tradition
of social organization to resist foreign occupiers.
In Poland a true workers trade union known as Solidarity or Solidarność
in Gdansk in the 1970s had arisen led by an electrician
not a committed ideological revolutionary by the name of Lech Walensa.
Even after this organization was banned in 1982
it continued as an open conspiracy including about a quarter of the Polish population
a mobilization of civil society from below.
At the same time a sense of crisis was building in the Soviet Union
and I would argue it sapped the confidence of the leadership elites.
There was a joke that was current during this period
about the pass at which the Soviet Union had arrived.
The Soviet Union was depicted in a once very formidable symbol of industrialization
the train and the symbol of the train was deployed to show the way in which
it had ground down and finally stalled out.
The joke was that the Soviet Union's train had been hurtling towards the future
and then Stalin had taken over.
Stalin had suspected that the engineer driving the train was a traitor
and he had him shot and now the train completely ground to a halt.
When Khrushchev took over this joke continued
Khrushchev denounced Stalin's actions and rehabilitated the engineer.
Well the train wasn't moving forward any faster because the engineer was still dead.
When Brezhnev the geriatric leader of the Soviet Union took over
he hit upon a new tactic
and that was to declare that the train was moving forward.
He ordered the passengers to pull the shades down over the windows
and everyone had to sway from side to side and make noises of a train surging forward.
The reality hadn't changed. Everyone knew it was a lie
but nonetheless the system trendled forward for a while longer.
After Brezhnev's death in 1982 the Soviet leadership in this mood of crisis
of having arrived at a moment of decision now gambled on reform.
In 1985 the remarkably young Mikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachev
became the party's general secretary with a mission.
He was charged with saving communism.
Gorbachev had been born to a peasant family in southwestern Russia.
He was a young man who had grown up within the Soviet Union.
He had risen in the Komsomol Youth Organization and then in the party
and in 1985 was the Politburo's youngest member even as he was placed in control.
He now announced that his mission was to break with the totalitarianism
this was a tabooed word earlier now it was being used by the leader of the Soviet Union
to break with Stalin's abuses and to go back to a pure form of communism from Lenin's times.
To this purpose he deployed the perestroika movement
which meant restructuring to seek reform in economics.
In terms of social life, glasnost or openness was encouraged to promote constructive criticism.
Gorbachev himself was probably surprised by the tidal wave of not only constructive
but also very radically critical expressions that now could be heard from society
and soon these programs were out of control.
His reform programs were too radical for hardliners
and too limited for Democrats who wanted to push forward.
