Now, this joke was significant not only for revealing the Nazification of German society.
It was also significant in that the Nazis themselves might not have objected to this
joke.
They might have felt that it was a tribute to the thoroughness of their accomplishment
in Nazifying German society.
Hitler would be able to draw thus not only upon terror, but also upon remarkable popular
enthusiasm, especially for his diplomatic revolution.
Hitler's foreign policy vision was now one that he tried to put into effect.
He envisioned, in private, a new order in Europe and in the world with Germany holding
a dominant position.
But in public, he spoke of merely restoring German repute and German standing in the world.
During the ideas of geopolitics that had been articulated in previous decades, Hitler
believed that the paramount need for Germany then was increased living space or Lebensraum
for his reconstituted German master race.
In the future order, small nations were to be eliminated.
Their day was over.
Instead, great consolidated power blocks of superpowers would rule the world.
This was Hitler's long range aim.
He now said about it with an innocuous self-image of a man who was asking, he claimed reasonably
enough, for revision of the Versailles Treaty.
And Hitler's demands for the revision of the Versailles Treaty, the end of the First World
War, were in fact enthusiastically seconded by ordinary Germans, though his aggressive
long range plans were not yet revealed and probably would not have been as popular.
Hitler could also count on allies, that is to say the so-called axis.
His earlier model, now associate, later junior associate, Benito Mussolini in Italy, coined
the term axis in 1936 to describe the new friendship, the new solidarity of Nazi Germany
and Fascist Italy in a new era of changed alignments.
Italy-Germany would later sign the Pact of Steel with Italy in 1939, when sees these
rhetorical flourishes in international politics.
In 1936, then, Hitler also signed the anti-comintern pact with Japan directed against international
communism.
Hitler could also benefit from the stance of the Western democracies, which was a stance
of appeasement.
This understanding, Hitler and his true intentions and, understandably enough, determined to
avoid a repetition of the horrors and suffering of the World War.
The Western democracies sought to meet Nazi Germany's demands insofar as they could be
met.
Hitler, however, exploited this willingness for compromise by systematically breaking
the Versailles Treaty and affecting a diplomatic revolution.
He took Germany out of the League of Nations, in which so many hopes for peace had been
vested, re-armed Germany in violation of the Versailles Treaty, moved troops into the
Rhineland and annexed Austria, proclaiming that he was bringing it back into the German
Reich.
When Hitler was prepared to move against Czechoslovakia over the Sudetenland border region, where
German minorities were exploited as an issue to provoke a conflict, there took place the
Munich Conference in September 29th of 1938, where Britain and France gave in to Hitler's
demand for the area without a fight.
Hitler had gotten what he wanted without violence, but then in March of 1939 he occupied the
rest of Czechoslovakia, making a mockery of the hopes for peace.
Appeasement by the Western democracies had been a failure, both in political as well
as moral terms.
The Western Allies had sold out the sole functioning democracy in Eastern Europe, Czechoslovakia,
and they had not managed to take a stand against Hitler when such a stance might truly have
brought significant results.
Hitler would now also pursue another priority, anti-Semitic programs.
Now, these anti-Semitic programs were not merely a new feature on the political landscape
of Germany or indeed of Europe.
They drew upon a longer European history of anti-Semitism in Western civilization.
Centuries of religious anti-Semitism, Christians discriminating against or abusing the minority
Jewish populations in Europe were the background of the context to a growth of a new variety,
of a virulent radical hatred.
This new variety, which built on but also differed in significant ways from earlier religious
anti-Semitism, was often called radical racial anti-Semitism or biological anti-Semitism.
