We see in this use of technology and communications a remarkable phenomenon.
We tend to hope that as communications spread around the world,
that mutual understanding becomes more common.
In this case, television, which some have considered to be more immune to the sort of manipulative message
that the Nazis might have passed along with their radio stations before, was used to devastating effect.
And one trembles at the notion of what the Nazis might have been able to achieve with this modern medium.
Bosnia was the first to fall victim in the largest sense.
When Bosnia tried to secede in 1992, Milosevic mobilized paramilitary groups to seize territory.
Mortars and snipers targeted the once beautiful city of Sarajevo and besieged it.
And practicing the big lie in their relationship with western media announced with remarkable cynicism
that they were merely observing the city from the hills around Sarajevo,
while those people within were bombarding themselves and killing their own people in an attempt to manipulate western opinion.
This was the big lie practiced to an enormous degree.
Paramilitaries like Arkhan's Tigers, private armies in essence,
engaged in ethnic cleansing at Milosevic's direction.
Ethnic cleansing, a term developed to describe this particular period in our own time,
so the phenomenon had certainly existed over previous centuries,
involved an almost sickening regularity of pattern,
terrorizing of civilians, men, women and children,
raping of women in order to terrorize and then killing to force mass expulsions.
The stages of ethnic cleansing were systematized and became a horrifying routine.
It's estimated that some 10 to 20,000 rapes took place,
not only the humiliation of those who were subjected to this mistreatment was involved, however,
but also a symbolic attempt to destroy the culture of the Bosnian Muslims,
which also became clear in the dynamiting of mosques and other cultural monuments.
In concentration camps such as those at Al-Marsqa, non-serves were abused, tortured and killed.
When Srebrenica, a town that had been declared a United Nations safe area,
was overrun by Serbian forces in July of 1995,
Muslim men and boys were separated from their families under the very eyes of UN peacekeepers
and some 7,000 of them were killed and thrown into mass graves.
International inaction, however, followed.
The international community found it easy to fall back on the notion of age-old hatreds in the Balkans.
The notion that those people had always been killing one another and what could one do?
There was very nearly in the sort of ethnic stereotyping an element of racism involved.
The notion that unlike the civilized West, such people were simply it was to be expected of them
that this sort of behavior would be common.
European diplomats declared that this was a European problem but did not intervene.
And then in a brutal cycle, ethnic Serbs who lived as minorities in other areas were likewise driven out
from those territories where Milosevic was not in control.
At long last, out of shame perhaps at this constant television reporting of scenes that seemed to be
from documentaries of the Second World War, the international community at last did intervene.
NATO air war against Serb forces in August of 1995 helped end the war leading to the Dayton negotiations
in November with de facto partition of Bosnia, no return for refugees,
essentially a ratification of ethnic cleansing.
In those four years of fighting, some 200,000 were killed and 2 million were left homeless.
And then these scenes repeated themselves once again close to the end of the 20th century in Kosovo.
Milosevic now turned his energies to this region.
Brutal repression of the majority ethnic Albanians in Serbia's Kosovo province led to an Albanian guerrilla movement.
In the summer of 1998, Serbian police actions of increasing ferocity took place
and culminated in a mass killing in Rochak in January of 1999.
As NATO forces now without UN approval began bombing the Yugoslav army in March of 1999,
Milosevic sped up an ethnic cleansing which was presented as being in response to the NATO bombing
but actually clearly as a massive logistical operation had been planned before,
Operation Horseshoe was put into effect.
And now television once again showed scenes of railcars of Albanians being expelled.
Nearly a million Kosova refugees were forced from their homes.
But after long bombing in June 3rd of 1999, Yugoslavia at long last surrendered, losing control of Kosovo.
After losing presidential elections in the year 2000,
in part because of the disastrous series of defeats that Milosevic's ideology had led Serbia to,
Milosevic was then handed over by Serbia to the Hague to stand trial for war crimes.
Want to close with an observation on the way in which the past does affect the future and yields a legacy.
A crucial point now comes into focus.
The past, those archetypal and stereotypical ancient hatreds do not in fact always dictate present or future actions.
But the past can and often is manipulated for visions of a desired future by cynical politicians like Milosevic.
It's precisely this that makes knowledge of the past and a critical perspective on the past so very important to our present day.
In our next lecture we'll consider yet another case of genocide that the world wished to keep at a distance
and to ignore but that nonetheless of necessity pressed its image upon the world's attention.
