Films and the viewing of films were often the crowning event of Stalin's workday.
He kept an eccentric schedule.
He tended to rise around noon to put in a workday of about perhaps six or seven hours,
then arrange obligatory parties for his cronies and the Politburo of the Communist Party,
in which, for instance, he would lean back and would insist that his colleagues and associates get drunk.
Stalin had a predilection, some odd fascination, for seeing others lose control while he,
as the only person in the room, retained a measure of control,
and he would force them to watch films together with him into the small hours of the night.
The Stalin cult had a remarkable effectiveness.
What were the reasons for it?
Well, in part because of a loyalty that hovered around the figure of Stalin
on the part of newer party members who understood that they owed their position,
not necessarily to long careers of established records within the Bolshevik Party,
but rather because Stalin had eased their rise to power.
Stalin's removal and marginalization of older Bolsheviks, the old revolutionaries,
who were well aware, opened up career paths for the new men, the new generation of the regime.
The remote dictator, Stalin, would often be not blamed for the shortcomings of life in the Soviet Union.
It was often assumed that if only the great leader knew he would do something about these abuses,
he became rather, as a deliberately distant figure, the object of ritual adoration.
It was estimated that he received some 7,000 letters monthly from ordinary citizens of praise or making requests.
Society was being increasingly Stalinized.
The system that Stalin established was called by historians of this day or later, totalitarian,
because of its seeming ambitions for total control,
not necessarily because those ambitions were realized or put into practice,
but because of how far reaching they were.
After coming to power, Stalin turned on his earlier allies who had smoothed his rise in the party ranks,
and by 1929, with a personality cult in full blast, had become supreme.
A series of campaigns were now mounted by Stalin to transform the Soviet Union's structure.
These campaigns involved the mobilization of masses of people on a new basis,
the construction of new machinery and apparatus of control,
and the deliberate use of finely calibrated police terror.
One of the first measures was the reorganization of the economy of a largely agrarian country still,
the Soviet Union through collectivization and the attendant terror famine that followed.
To gain firm control, so crucial to the consolidation of central authority of the food supply,
Stalin, beginning in 1928, called for the collectivization of agriculture.
What collectivization meant was the putting of agriculture on an entirely new basis.
Classical Marxism had long had an animus against the traditional cycles of agriculture
and what Marx had called the idiocy of rural life.
Classical Marxism had praised the notion of someday organizing agriculture on an industrial or factory basis.
So collectivization aimed for replacing independent small farms and farmers
with a kind of agriculture that would be organized into large-scale, state-owned collective farms
where peasants would now work like factory laborers, not on their own land,
but rather in a rational scientific way pursuing some of the ideas of Taylorism
that we'd earlier mentioned in efficient scientific agriculture collectively.
In November 1929, Stalin upped the pace. He demanded forced collectivization.
More prosperous peasants who are now labeled Kulaks were to be eliminated as a class.
Their property and the property of others was to be taken away.
Those who were defined as Kulaks were arrested in the hundreds of thousands
and deported to an uncertain fate in Siberia.
