In our previous lectures, we've discussed Hitler and the Nazi Party.
In this lecture, we turn to a discussion of Hitler's war, World War II.
The Second World War was unleashed by Hitler in 1939 with some help from an unlikely newfound
friend, the Soviet Union's dictator, Joseph Stalin.
Until recently, ideological mortal enemies, these two dictators aimed by swearing a pact,
the Nazi Soviet pact, to bring about fundamental change in the world.
Now, contemporaries had already remarked on some similarities, some intriguing resemblances
between their regimes, will be discussing them today.
The Second World War would see more violence directed at unarmed people.
It would be an intensification of the patterns of total war that already had been to a degree
evident in the First World War.
On all sides, this perfected model of total war would take civilian casualties on a massive
scale, especially in the terrifying war from the air, which at the end of the Second World
War would usher in the atomic age.
We need first to consider the road to war.
World War II was very clearly Hitler's war.
Historians have now been debating for nearly a century the reasons for the causes of the
First World War.
Historians debate far less the origins of the Second World War.
Those origins have to do with Hitler's will, Hitler's desire for a great conflict and what
we hope to gain from it.
Forces had already been gathering for war in Hitler's gaining of an ally in fascist Italy
and later his approach towards Japan.
Both fascism and Nazism were distinctive as ideologies in the sense that they saw war
not merely as a necessary evil, but looked upon it as a positive thing.
This was the exception, as they saw it in human affairs, war the natural state.
For this reason, they would collaborate in the nearing conflict.
As Benito Mussolini, earlier a model to Hitler, now increasingly his junior associate, drew
nearer to his earlier disciple, he began to imitate certain features of the Nazi regime.
In 1938, anti-Semitic racist policies were adopted and thus it was hoped to give some
racial coherence to the alliance between Italy and Germany.
It was more difficult to explain why Japan should be an ally.
The Nazis, after all, in their racist ideologies saw Asians as being inferior to European races
and thus some contorted racial justifications were found for alliance with Japan by claiming
that they were in a sense the Aryans of the Asian part of the world and thus were the
allies.
At the same time, Hitler and his associates viewed the western democracies as weak and
was convinced that in all likelihood, further aggression, further invasion, following on
that of Czechoslovakia would not be met with decisive resistance either.
Convinced to the weakness of the western democracies, Hitler now resolved to attack Poland disregarding
the security guarantees that had been given by Britain.
But there was one other fear that Hitler needed to deal with and that was the anxiety about
the position the Soviet Union would take in such a conflict.
Hitler aimed to avoid a two-front war, that perennial nightmare of German politicians and
diplomats, by a diplomatic revolution.
He sought the cooperation of Stalin.
This was an unlikely alliance to put it mildly because the Communists and the Nazis had been
ideological mortal enemies, but the start of World War II would thus be a common project
of the two dictators who cooperated in facilitating its outbreak.
Both of these dictators vested utopian hopes in this war moreover.
They believed that the conflict would usher in a new epoch, reordering Europe, maybe
even the world, and hurrying the abolition, the demise of their common enemy democracy.
We need us to consider a truly remarkable document, the Nazi Soviet Pact.
