Thanks for coming to our first Origin of Life IAP seminar this year.
Today we have Lauren Williams from Georgia Tech.
So Lauren is a biochemist that studies the origin of life,
especially from the perspective of the origins of the ribosome, translation,
and how that intersects with some of the earliest polymers and biomolecules
that would have arisen in prebiotic systems on Earth
and some of the earliest complex macromolecular systems
that we might think of as being alive.
So we'll just jump in with Lauren's talk
and then afterward we will have a Q&A session with the audience
for as long as people are happy to stick around.
Thanks.
Great.
Thank you guys for coming out and hearing me.
Yeah, so I'm going to sort of be talking about the Origin of Life,
but I have sort of an unusual take on the Origin of Life,
which is that I don't have any model that I am advancing or that I even like.
I'm just obsessed by the ribosome,
and we just try to read the history of the ribosome as far back as we can,
trying to understand the evolutionary origins of the ribosome.
It turns out, I didn't know this in the beginning,
but that, as far as I can see, is the origins of the ribosome
and the origins of life are sort of the same thing.
So that's kind of how I came to be working on the origins of life,
really just trying to understand the evolution of the ribosome.
So I really don't know who my audience is quite,
but I thought I would give a little bit of introduction to what the translation system is.
The translation system is this really special thing in biology.
The way to think about it is the transduction of information between two polymers
that are in different chemical spaces.
So you have mRNA down here, and you have protein coming out here,
and of course the sequence of the mRNA dictates the sequence of the protein.
And one of the reasons why translation is sort of special
is because the information is going between polymers that are chemically distinct.
If you think about replication and transcription,
there's a famous line in Watson and Crick's paper where it says something like,
it has not escaped our notice, you guys probably know this,
that the mechanism of replication is immediately obvious from the structure we propose.
So as soon as they saw the structure of DNA, they could say,
yeah, we can kind of understand how this molecule could replicate.
But translation is totally different.
You can look at the structure of RNA and the structure of protein
and try to understand how information passes between them,
and it's not at all obvious.
Even now, the more we know about the ribosome, the less obvious it is.
We have these two really distinct polymers.
There are different chemical spaces.
They have nothing to do with each other chemically.
One is polyanionic, one is neutral, one assembles by its backbone,
one assembles by its side chains.
These are in totally different chemical spaces,
and yet we can transduce information between them.
So this is a special part of biology.
This is, I believe, biology's crowning achievement.
I'm obsessed by the ribosome, by the way.
But the ribosome is how you get information between two polymers
that have nothing to do with each other chemically.
It's a very special thing in biology.
So we have the small subunit.
It's nice because things are kind of separated for us.
We have the small subunit, which is where decoding takes place.
And we have the large subunit,
which is where the chemical reaction takes place.
It's called the peptidyl transferase reaction.
Just some players.
We have tRNAs that are charged.
I mean, you have an amino acid on a tRNA,
and you have 20 synthetases that actually do that charging.
This is where the genetic code is kind of maintained and enforced
by these 20 synthetases that put the right amino acid
on the right tRNA.
That's the genetic code of that relationship.
These subunits, when we're not doing translation,
they can live separately.
They're happy, independent of each other.
They're stable.
They don't associate really until it's time to actually do the work,
make the molecule.
This is, of course, a cartoon I got from the web someplace.
I want to talk about this part right here.
This is a special place.
This is the tunnel.
This doesn't really show up very well.
This is called the exit tunnel.
The exit tunnel is, I look at sort of like the birth canal of protein.
It's a sort of special place that protects protein
and keeps it from being functional,
and it kind of slowly delivers it into the world.
In fact, the evolution of the tunnel is so important to the ribosome
and the function of the tunnel is so important to the ribosome.
In fact, until we really could understand the evolution of the ribosome,
we didn't really get how important the tunnel was.
But the tunnel is central.
When you think about the evolution of the large subunit,
you should really think about the evolution of the tunnel.
The evolution of the large subunit is really all about the tunnel
and I'll show you that in a while.
that in a while.
OK, so it's a tunnel, is that right?
No, it's a tunnel.
We've sliced through here.
It's a tunnel.
In fact, this tunnel was discovered by Alex Rich here
at MIT originally.
It's a tunnel.
This is a slice through.
No, it's a tunnel.
It's a long tunnel.
OK, so this is one of the peculiar things
about the ribosome, about the translation system,
that when we talk about universal biology, things
that are universal to you and to bacteria and to archaea,
those things are essentially the translation system.
This is called what I call the universal gene set of life.
These are the genes that are observed in everything alive.
And I've color coded them.
It's kind of faint here.
But the ones that are related to translation are pink.
And the ones that are related to transcription
are blue, replication.
There, I don't see any replication.
And there's this little outlier.
I don't know what that's about.
And this is not the full list, because this
is none of the genes that encode for RNAs.
So the genes that encode for tRNAs and ribosomal RNAs
are not there.
If they were on this list, there would be a lot more pink.
So the point of this is that the universal genes in biology
or the universal gene set of biology
is essentially the translation system.
And this is a problem in the origin of life
because when we think about the origin of life, at least
many people, they think about replication.
Biology is all about replication.
And we would really like it if these were all genes
to do with replication, because then that
would make sense that the universal gene set of life
would tell us about the origin of life.
I think it still is, but I think it's not telling us
what we want to hear.
So the origin of life is really about the origin
of translation.
That's what I'm saying.
And the standard models are, if you think about RNA world,
et cetera, it's all about replication.
But I think the ribosome is telling us
we need to think about things a little differently.
So everything alive has these genes, these genes.
Everything alive has a ribosome.
In fact, the definition of biology to me
is something that translates.
If you do translation, you're alive.
Like viruses are not alive until they get control of a cell,
and then they can do translation, and then they're alive.
So anything with a ribosome is alive.
Anything without a ribosome is not alive.
That sounds kind of like a trivial statement.
But really what it means is that, to me,
biology is defined as the transduction
of information between dissimilar polymers.
That's my definition of life.
That's what I think NASA, if they
want to look for life on Mars, that's
what they need to look for.
Because that's the special universal part
about biology on Earth.
OK.
So this is the Banfield, the recent Tree of Life,
which I have kind of distorted and bent.
But this is everything alive pretty much is represented here.
And you can see that life is mostly bacterial,
that there's some archaea.
And then Eukary has really, we're a branch of archaea.
That seems to be, I don't know if Greg
agrees with this Tree of Life.
There's a lot of different Trees of Life.
I like this Tree of Life.
I like this version because it really
shows you how bacterial the biosphere is.
If when we think about biology, we always think about us,
Eukaryotes, and we're so interesting.
But really, the genetic diversity of biology
is all out here in bacteria.
OK, so but the reason this is a Tree of Life
is that everything translates.
In fact, what this is, is the distance relationships
between translation systems.
That's what this Tree amounts to.
In fact, you couldn't make a Tree from anything else
because nothing else is universal.
If you tried to make a Tree of Life from membrane biosynthesis,
you couldn't do it because there's
no universal membrane biosynthesis.
There's no way everything could be on the same Tree.
The only way you can make a Tree of Life
is using translation.
In fact, if you look at Carl Woos and how
he discovered the third branch, the archaeal branch
of the Tree of Life, it was because he used the translation
system to do it.
He used ribosomal RNA sequences, and he
could make a universal Tree of Life.
If he had used anything else besides translation,
we never would have heard of him.
Maybe he would have done something else.
I don't know.
But he certainly would not have discovered archaea.
He could only do that because somehow he
was wise enough to know that translation was
the universal biology.
And I've read his letters.
He actually wrote some letters to Francis Crick
about he deliberately chose translation.
And he said, translation has got to be
the oldest part of biology.
It's got to be the core of biology.
So I'm going to use the translation system
to answer the deepest, oldest questions in biology.
So this, to me, is one of the smartest, most profound
thinkers in recent science history, I think, Carl Woos.
OK.
So we're trying to understand the origins of the ribosome.
And we need to go beyond this universal gene thing.
And what we've done is with a lot of labor,
we've gone into all the ribosomal genes and structures
and everything.
He said, what is universal about the ribosome itself?
So that's what this is.
These red parts, this is the bacterial ribosome.
This is an archaeal ribosome.
This is a eukaryotic ribosome.
And the colored parts are the universal thing.
They're the thing that everything has.
So for example, if you look at this helix right there,
let's look at that helix right there.
It's there.
And it's there.
So it's blue.
Everything alive has that helix.
If we look at most of the, OK, if we look at this,
that thing right here, see, it's different down here.
So this is actually, this is something
we're going to talk about here.
See that black there?
That's because this helix is different in archaea.
And then it becomes really gigantic in eukarya.
So the black parts are the part that are non-universal.
So the main point of this is this is just
looking at the E. coli version of this.
And the blue parts are the universal part.
So the point I want you to take away
this is to a first approximation,
the bacterial ribosome is universal to everything alive.
What it means is you and the microbes in your gut
and everything alive has these blue parts.
These colored parts are what are different.
So another way to say that is you
have bacterial ribosomes inside of you.
Everything alive has a bacterial ribosome.
But not exactly because there are expansions.
In fact, these colored regions here, these gray regions,
excuse me, are where the eukaryotic ribosome has sort
of sent out various things.
So yes?
So if you compare just bacteria and archaea,
is it blue all over?
No.
Where does it differ?
Well, I mean, this is eukaryotic.
So for example, he looks 25 here.
See how big it is?
I'm talking about the small.
Oh, it's small.
OK.
See that?
So there's differences.
There's differences.
This is a small subunit.
Yeah, right?
See that?
See, that's larger in bacteria than in archaea.
So there are differences.
One of the things you can see in archaea
is, in general, you can sort of anticipate eukaryotic.
A lot of the places where there is divergence here,
like this is an archaea, this is larger than in bacteria,
and then it's like way larger in archaea.
So there's a lot of places where you
can see that archaea is on the road to eukaryotic
as far as the expansions.
Expansions aren't there, but you can see it's kind of bubbling
away.
It's about ready to explode into sort
of this eukaryotic expansion.
You can see that in archaea.
OK.
So this is basically the point I want to make here
is that the bacterial ribosome is universal.
It's pretty much to everything alive.
Basically, the blue parts here are universal.
But now let's go into three dimensions and look at that.
So now we're looking at the backbone trace
of part of the bacterial ribosome.
We're ignoring sequence.
In fact, in my lab, we're really structural.
We look at phylogeny by sequence.
We don't really look too much at what we use.
So we use structure.
We really don't focus on sequence too much.
So this is the bacterial part of the bacterial ribosome.
This is part of the arcane ribosome.
This is part of the eukaryotic ribosome.
And you can see how similar these things are.
The atoms basically have not moved.
And then to go into the lunatic fringe of evolution,
where things happen in crazy ways,
we can look at mitochondria.
This is a human mitochondrial RNA.
And so this is basically four billion years of evolution
for nothing.
Over four billion years, nothing has happened.
In fact, one time I took RMSDs of these atoms
and converted it to miles per hour
because we have four billion years
and we have about a quarter of an angstrom of RMSD.
And you can convert that to miles per hour.
That's how fast the ribosome is changing.
It was very slow.
I don't remember what the number was,
but it was a very small number.
So one of the ways to say is you can,
I predict that in two billion years,
nothing is going to happen.
Some people say you can't predict
what's going to happen in biology.
I can predict confidently.
In fact, I'm going to write this in cement
and blast it into outer space and say,
the ribosome is not going to change in two billion years.
That's my prediction.
I will bet money on that.
Okay, but that's just the core.
On the external ribosome, this is really what's happening.
So this is this common core.
I'm just showing you the large subunit.
I'm focusing on the large subunit here.
And this is the part that's universal to everything.
But then eukaryotes have another shell
around the outside of that.
That's called the eukaryotic shell.
And then metazoans, especially, it's very strange.
I'm not sure what this is, but we're now
in what we call the octopus phase,
where the ribosome has sent out these tentacles
that are really long, I mean, immensely long.
I think this is the longest double helical RNA
in all of biology, I would bet.
I don't really know that, but I've been saying that
and nobody's contradicted me.
So if anybody knows a longer one,
these are hundreds of angstroms long
of double helical RNA that shoot out
and they're not integrated with the ribosome.
Okay, they're out there, hanging in space.
And we're doing a lot of work in our lab.
We're doing pull down experiments,
trying to figure out what proteins these bind to,
trying to understand these things.
We don't fully understand, but it has to do
with warm blood, you know, chickens, humans,
you know, metazoans have these tentacles.
They're really interesting and nobody knows what they do.
Actually, so this is a human ribosome.
And I'm showing you, these are these tentacles.
And so they're hard to see,
like this is a cryo-EM structure of Beckman, I think.
And so this part that comes out,
we're only seeing like this part of it.
This is the B helix.
So this thing shoots way out.
You can see on the scale of the ribosome,
this thing goes way, way out here.
Okay, so these are enormous tentacles.
And if you imagine polyribosomes, you know,
we have these big arms of RNA waving out in space.
We think these are docking sites for proteins,
you know, they have to do with protein quality control
and maybe degradation of misfolded proteins, et cetera.
So that's what we think these are about.
Okay, so actually, so this is just that.
I wanna focus, what we call expansion segment seven.
That's this purple part right here.
And we've done a lot of work with expansion segment seven.
And here we have mapped it
onto the eukaryotic phylogenetic tree.
So you can see things like,
these are like, you know, giardia pathogens
that are kind of dependent on their hosts.
They really, they look almost like bacteria there.
But then you get into yeast, it gets bigger.
And then this is the tentacle phase right here,
starting with warmth.
This is right here, chickens,
mouse chimpanzees and humans.
I made this before the election.
I guess I even knew that was my campaigning I failed.
Anyway, you see these long,
and this is, I find this really interesting.
Humans have these long tentacles here.
Chicken, the tentacle is in a different place,
but it still has tentacle.
So there's something about warm blood.
We think maybe complicated brains or something,
because it could have to do with protein misfolding
and the sensitivity of neurons to misfolding.
That these tentacles are,
because we have, when our pull down experiments,
we have seen the proteasome
and other sorts of things involved
in protein quality control associated with these things.
So it's really interesting to think,
the protein makes ribosomes.
I mean, it makes protein,
the ribosome makes protein,
and it has these arms that are holding the proteasome
and it degrades it at the same time.
So in fact, it's known that protein comes
right out of the ribosome,
goes right into the proteasome and gets degraded.
It's made and degraded at the same time.
That's how dangerous misfolded proteins are.
It's very inefficient,
but it's very necessary.
So we think all of these arms have to do
with the sensitivity of metazoans like us
to misfolded proteins.
Bacteria, you can misfold proteins in bacteria,
they don't care, but for us, it's very dangerous.
Okay, so now let's,
this is a nice thing that has just happened recently,
is we can make movies of the ribosome growing
in three dimensions.
And the reason we can do that is because we now have
so many structures of ribosomes,
and we know their relationship on the phylogenetic tree,
and so we can basically watch the ribosome grow
in three dimensions, and I'll show,
and this is unbelievable.
I've shown this in many talks,
and I still get excited every time I show it.
So look at what this looks like.
This bacterial,
this is just this one, helix 25,
and this is the bacterial,
this part of the ribosome,
this is our best approximation of Luca,
the last universal common ancestor.
So this is the oldest part of the ribosome,
and when it gets bigger,
this is how it grows.
So this is what I want you to see.
This base helix stays here,
and something grows out of it.
So this is like a tree growing,
where you just grow a branch out,
but the other branch doesn't die and go away.
So this is an archaea,
then we know that eukarya came out of archaea.
So this is the, so look at,
basically this is the helix that's still here,
and essentially the whole archaean RNA is there.
We actually bent a little bit,
but the yeast has grown bigger things.
It has sent branches out,
and then this is a fruit fly.
So the common ancestor of fruit fly and yeast
is closer to yeast.
So now we, the thing is you can still see
that the fruit fly has its ancestral RNA,
but it has grown additional branches out.
And now if we look at the next step,
here's the human ribosome,
and you can see now our best estimate
for the ancestor of human and fruit fly
is closer to fruit fly.
So you can see that the human has sent,
has basically has maintained its ancestral state
and sent out appendages.
This is what I want you to think about here.
This is like a time-lapse movie of a tree growing, right?
It just adds on, and when it grows new things,
it does not remodel the underlying structure.
So it's like a tree growing.
If you think about a tree accumulating rings, right?
You don't remodel the previous rings,
you just put rings on, and that's called accretion.
So the ribosome grows by accretion,
just like a tree grows by accretion.
And this is a beautiful thing for us
because just like a tree records its own history, right?
You can look at the weather 30 years ago
or whatever by a tree,
because a tree has recorded its history.
The ribosome has recorded its history also, okay?
This helix 25 never, ever goes away.
It is in every ribosome, and that will never go away.
So the history of macromolecular structure at that point
is fixed, and we never lose that history.
So this is an, I won't go over this in detail,
but this is just, we see many of these examples
of this kind of thing.
So we can see that the ribosome grows by accretion.
Okay, so there's a couple points here
I want to make to this.
Firstly, is that the ribosome,
even though I told you everything alive
has the same translation system,
but actually on its periphery, it's changing, right?
So you have a bacterial ribosome inside of you,
but you have a lot of stuff on the outside.
You have that, what we call the protus shell,
the eukaryotic shell,
and then you have these tentacles coming out.
So you have the bacterial ribosome,
but then you have these appendages on it.
And this is sort of a thing we've done.
This is, I don't know what the significance is,
but we have made a graph of the largest ribosome
on the planet versus time.
And so, I don't know really when the origin of life was,
something around four billion years ago,
but we presume there were no ribosomes at that point.
If anybody knows different, I'm open to that.
But then, pretty soon we have fossils,
so we know that the bacterial ribosome
was basically done quite quickly,
the prokaryotic ribosome,
and then nothing happened.
For several billion years, nothing happened.
And now we're in this log phase,
there's something about mammals and warm blood,
and we can predict out another couple billion years,
and the ribosome is gonna truly be gigantic.
So we are in log phase of ribosomal growth right now.
And actually, you could say the same thing
for the spliceosome and for other parts of biology.
This sort of elaboration that is going on
in the most complicated organisms
is just a general phenomenon that you see in the ribosome.
But the size of the ribosome
is a very good proxy for complexity.
If you wanna know how complicated an organism,
just look at the size of its ribosomal RNA,
and that basically, you can scale things like that.
Things with big ribosomal RNAs are complicated, yes.
So why would you expect that the small subunit
doesn't really change that much?
Oh yes, really?
Because actually it doesn't expand.
Yes, you know what it does?
If I scale this up 10 times, it looks the same.
So it is doing it by very small, yes.
And I'll tell you why, because I think
that the small subunit never sees protein.
This is all about protein.
And interactions with protein and delivery of proteins
to various organelles and all sorts of stuff like that, right?
The small subunit is not involved in that, right?
So, yes?
What happens if you scale this ribosome
by the total number of proteins that the organism makes?
The total number, that's a good question.
I don't know that.
That's a really good question.
I don't know, what do you think?
Do we make more proteins than these?
I know we make more than that, too.
Yeah, I don't know, that's a good question.
I don't know the answer to that.
Yeah, but the size of the genome doesn't work.
You know, a lung fish has a genome a hundred times
the size of us, right?
And so basically, in fact, there's
something that used to be called the C-value dilemma, which
is that complexity, organismal complexity,
does not correlate with genome size.
That's for sure.
Yes?
One other thing.
The way the large subunit has grown,
as you have shown so beautifully, is like it's growing bigger
and it's IDM-like.
Whereas the small subunit is not doing that.
It's not growing IDM-like.
And you go back to the origin of the small subunit,
it's growing quite differently than the large subunit.
So you're not getting that sort of IDM-like growth
and the explosion on it, really.
That's right.
One of the ways to think about the large subunit
is this monolithic hemisphere that's growing and growing.
And the small subunit is like a dendrite
with these sort of flexible things.
The small subunit and the large subunit
have different evolutionary origins.
They have different structures and they are very different.
For a long time, we were stumped to figure out
why the large and small subunit were so different.
But I can tell you why.
I think we have an idea for it.
Yes?
So one of the other processes that happens in many languages
is a reduction of genomes or simplification,
especially in parasites or in specialist microbes.
Do these also shrink their ribosomes?
Yeah.
Yeah, I showed you Giardia.
Yes, there's some small ribosomes.
And in organelles, the ribosomal RNA
shrunk, the ribosomal proteins have gotten increased
in quantity.
And in plants, the chloroplast ribosomes are like,
some of them are gigantic.
All kinds of crazy things go on in chloroplasts.
So yeah, this is cytoplasmic ribosomes here.
OK.
All right, so this was all introduction
to what I really want to talk about, which
is the origins of the ribosome.
So let's talk about that for a minute.
So this is one of the things we saw a while ago that
sort of opened a big, big door to us,
that when the ribosome expands, and we know a lot about
ribosomal expansions, because we have all these structures
of eukaryotic ribosomes.
So we know the structures of ribosomes of various sizes.
And we know them in a lot of detail.
And there's a lot of them now.
It's really good.
So when ribosome expands, it does this thing.
So I'm going to show you.
This blue thing is a prokaryotic ribosome, part
of the prokaryotic ribosome.
And the red is part of a eukaryotic ribosome,
except I've colored this part.
This is also eukaryotic.
And what you can see here, this is what I mean by accretion,
is the eukaryotic part has expanded out
of the prokaryotic part.
So this is a recent growth on the ribosome.
And it turns out that there is a very distinct structural
fingerprint when that happens.
And so we looked at a lot of these.
These are called expansion segments.
We looked at a lot of these expansion segments.
Here are some of them.
You see, the blue is the old, and then the red and the green
are the new.
And here's, so this is helix 38.
This is helix 24.
And so there is a very distinct structural fingerprint
when the ribosome grows.
We call this an insertion fingerprint.
I won't go into the structural details,
but you can see, you can recognize this.
So basically, you have a nice helix,
and you grow another helix out without perturbing this one.
I mean, really, look at the nucleotides here
are essentially in the same place.
You can grow one of the amazing things about RNA,
which we think is like a critical structural element
of RNA, is that you can insert things out of it,
and you can do these elaborations
without changing the underlying structure.
And protein, you can't really do this.
When you add something to protein,
it really perturbs the backbone structure
because it's so much more constrained.
RNA structure, the backbone, has a lot of degrees of freedom,
and so it allows you to do these insertions
without messing up the underlying structure.
So this is what we call an insertion fingerprint
that we see in the ribosome.
So we know this.
This is like, I don't know what it is,
it's eukaryotic, and this is some prokaryotic.
And this is another one.
Now, this is different.
This is a place where we looked in the ribosome
in the universal part of the ribosome, and we faked it.
We cut this off, and we resealed it with a computer.
So here we have walked back in time,
and we have tried to simulate what this process looked
like in the universal part of the ribosome.
So the idea is that by seeing these fingerprints
in the parts of the ribosome we know has grown,
we can look in the ancient, universally conserved part
of the ribosome, and we can figure out how that grew.
Does that make sense?
And just for example, this is DRNA.
When Paul Schimmel, when he was here,
I actually did this experiment for us,
where he didn't think about it in this context,
but he actually cut this off and made this red part of RNA.
And it's charged.
This is Paul's mini helix.
So we see the same kind of insertion fingerprints in TRNA.
So we can use these insertion fingerprints
to figure out how RNA grows, even if we don't have
a series of structures.
Once we recognize the fingerprint,
then we can look at any RNA, and we can say,
this is where a growth event took place.
Does that make sense?
So these are two observed ones.
This is an inferred one.
This is an observed one, but we don't
have the ancestor of TRNA, except the one that Paul made.
OK, so this is basically, this is the part you can decide
whether you want to believe me or not.
So we observe that the modern ribosome grew and is growing
by this accretion process.
That's an observation.
And we observe that the modern ribosome,
some of these growth events left these very distinct
observable fingerprints.
So these are things we know to be true.
Then we make these two assumptions.
We assume that the common core, the universal part,
also grew by accretion.
And we assume that it also has these fingerprints.
So this we don't know, because all the universal part
is the same in everything.
So we don't know this.
We're just assuming this.
So if you don't want to believe these assumptions are
credible, then that's fine.
But this is our working model.
So then based on that, we can look in the common core
and we can figure out how it grew.
So it's like, this is, I think, a really good analogy.
You've seen trees grow, so you know how they grow.
So if I gave you some yellow sticky tabs,
and I said, I want you to give me the yellow dates of everything
on this tree.
I want you to give me the relative dates of everything
on this tree.
You could do it, right?
The leaves are the most recent, the big branches.
Because the tree grows by accretion.
If this tree died every year and then grew back,
then it wouldn't work.
But since a tree, it records its history,
it maintains its history, it keeps adding and adding.
And so you can go in, like right there,
that's the oldest part right in the center.
So the ribosome for us is just like this tree.
We can look at the universal part of the ribosome,
and we can date everything in the ribosome.
Because just like you're familiar with how a tree grows,
we know how the ribosome grows.
So what this means is that the molecular record
of the origin of life, and I call the origin of the ribosome
is the origin of life, is maintained
in the translation system.
Because these fingerprints of growth
are recorded for us in the ribosome.
I believe that says the same thing in Spanish.
I gave a talk in Mexico, and they translated.
But I really don't know that.
OK, so now we're looking at the common core.
This is the part of the ribosome that
is universal to everything alive.
And every place the color changes,
we see one of those insertion fingerprints.
So there's a lot of them.
And the secondary structure is not
a very good representation of three-dimensional structure.
So it might not make sense here.
But so what we know is this green is older than that red,
which is older than that green, which is we know the dates,
and we know the specific events by which the ribosome grew.
We don't know all of them, because we also
know that sometimes helices elongate.
And when that happens, there's no fingerprint left.
So we're not seeing everything.
We're seeing some things.
We know the lot of growth events took place that we don't see,
but we see a lot of them.
In fact, we see enough.
In fact, we see more than we want to,
because we don't really know what to do with all of this.
There's 56 in the large subunit, and I
don't remember, 26 in the small subunit.
And that's actually a lot.
Did you have a question?
What is the degradation after a while?
Only in general, no.
The general process of the ribosome is it grows.
In some of these systems, like in organelles and in pathogens,
like guillardia, then we do.
But in general, no.
We don't see very much cutting back.
So it just keeps growing.
Keeps growing, yeah.
That's what we see.
But that has nothing to do with strength.
Well, proteins, we equate proteins with strength, don't we?
R and A.
Yeah, but no, I would say not strength.
I say the bigger the eukaryotic ribosomes
can produce more sophisticated proteins that
are more problematic as far as misfolding.
And so they have to be.
So that's one of the things about the increase in size.
I mean, I can show you what, later on,
I'll show you why the ribosome is increasing in size.
At least in the up to Luca, I can show you that.
I think I know.
I think I know.
OK, so there were so many of these things
that we didn't know what to do with them.
So we grouped them.
We simplified it.
We just grouped them in what seemed to us a reasonable way.
So instead of having 56 growth events in the large subunit,
we have six phases.
And that's just we've grouped them.
So just to be clear of what we have here,
we know where growth events occurred.
And we know their order in many cases,
like this because of the dependence.
And then we have some other information,
like let me just give you an example.
OK, everybody has to close their eyes for a minute.
OK, have your eyes closed?
OK, now let's say I did that.
You can open your eyes.
Now, let's say I did this with only one hand.
And I put my coffee there, and that my laser pointer,
which one did I put first?
Right, how do you know that?
Yeah, we call it dependency.
This laser pointer is dependent on the coffee cup,
and the coffee cup is not dependent on the laser pointer.
And we use this all the time in our daily lives
when we look at things.
Like if you see a rake leaning on a fence,
you know the fence was there before the rake
because of this dependence thing.
OK, turns out RNA structure has these sort of things built
in.
One class of them are called A minor interactions,
where you have something just like this.
You have a helix, and then you have another stem
coming in and grabbing it.
And Sergey Steinberg worked out that the helix
is older than this donor part of the A minor interaction.
So we have these sort of dependencies
built into the ribosome that are part of our model also.
So yes?
How many different types of fingerprints
that indicate both are there?
We have this paper where we list them all.
They're basically all, the vast majority of them
are the ones that I showed.
I think there are some cases where helix elongate,
and we can see the effect of that elongation on other RNA,
I think.
But essentially, the vast majority of our growth events
we infer are these fingerprints.
And especially here, I'm not sure if I had it on a slide,
but in the oldest part of the RNA,
we have a lot of really beautiful.
I mean, it's just so detailed what
we can see in the deepest, deepest oldest part of the RNA.
It was a very clean growth process there.
So this means we have a model of how
the ribosome originated, the common part, the part before
Luca.
We can look back before the last universal common ancestor,
and we can see how the ribosome grew.
And this is based on structure, right?
I haven't really talked about sequence.
And it's molecular.
And it's atomic level, right?
We know the positions of the atoms,
and how the atoms change over time.
So there's a very, very detailed atomic level
model of ribosomal evolution.
And this is what I haven't explained to you.
It actually shows us the origins of RNAs.
And I don't mean of RNAs.
I mean of RNA.
I want to get this small r out.
It really shows us the origins of RNA,
and it really shows us the origin of prokine.
That's what I'm going to show you next.
And this is experimentally testable,
because these are all atomic level models.
And we make them, and we test their predictions.
We look at their folding and their function in the lab.
That's one of the things we do in my lab.
We make all of these.
It's fine to draw pictures on the screen,
but you've got to actually make the molecules.
OK, another thing I want to say about this.
Where are my time-wives?
OK, that's good.
OK.
Is that one of the interesting things about RNA in general
and the ribosome in particular is that function
is kind of separated in space in the ribosome.
So if we know sort of the order of addition
of these various structural units,
we actually know the order of addition of function.
We can say what happened when.
And so one of the things really important is the interface.
The interface happened after the green part.
So this tells us right away that the two subunits
had independent lives before they ever met up.
There was an ancestor of a large subunit
and an ancestor of a small subunit,
and they were doing something before the interface.
That's just one of the, and there's
a lot of different sort of functional things
we can say about the order of what
happened in the ribosome.
OK, now I want to talk about the tunnel.
The tunnel is, this is not something
we anticipated or built into our model at all,
but it's something we noticed right away.
OK, so I'm going to walk through the evolution of the ribosome
according to the phases.
This is a large subunit we're looking at.
And we're just going to walk through dark blue.
We're going to add each phase as it was added.
And we are looking right down the tunnel.
But the tunnel doesn't exist yet, right?
Because this is the oldest piece of RNA.
This is your mother, right?
This is that dark blue thing.
We believe the oldest piece of RNA in the known universe.
That is where the ribosome comes from.
There is no piece of RNA we know of that rivals this thing in age.
And then this gets added on.
So right away, we get, it's not a tunnel, it's just a pore.
But one of the first things that happens is the pore.
Then it gets longer.
Then it gets longer and it gets rigidified.
Actually, in fact, this green, you
can't really see this here.
This green thing right here, this wraps all around.
This is a donut around the tunnel.
So this green phase right here, this green phase
is essentially building the tunnel.
That is what that's about.
And then the yellow, you can see the tunnel gets bigger.
And then the orange adds to the tunnel.
And then the red adds to the tunnel.
So every single phase of ribosomal evolution
is building the tunnel.
And so we think about this kind of like Huckleberry fin.
There's all these stories, but really the Mississippi River.
People still read Huckleberry fin?
I've read it when I was young.
The Mississippi River is the theme.
All the stories are kind of wrapped around that.
That's the way you should think about the evolution
of the ribosome.
The ribosome is all about the tunnel.
Building the tunnel.
There was a lot of other things that happened,
but they happened at one point and then nothing.
You build an interface, then you're done.
You do this, then you're done.
But the tunnel, every single phase of ribosomal evolution
builds a tunnel.
And why is that?
What does that mean?
Building the tunnel.
You can see it's a really long tunnel.
This tells you really, I think, that the ribosome
is all about protein.
And since this is a protein, especially in the early ribosome,
think about it.
Before there was a small subunit,
the ribosome was synthesizing something.
And basically, this is before the small subunit, right here.
So the tunnel was there.
We don't have a small subunit yet.
We're not making coding.
There can't be any coding.
We're making something, and it's going through a tunnel.
And before that, the tunnel was shorter.
So somehow give a longer tunnel conferred advantage.
Maybe it allowed the ribosome to make longer products.
And some of those products bound back and stuck to it
and made it better.
So we think that basically the ribosome
synthesized a bunch of stuff, probably a bunch of useless stuff.
A small fraction of it bound back, conferred advantage.
And the bigger those things got, the bigger
the ribosome could get.
So big tunnel, bigger products, and you just
went around and around in a circle.
So that it wasn't necessarily synthesizing proteins.
I didn't say proteins.
I don't believe it was proteins.
Alex Rich, you heard of MIT?
Do you guys heard of Alex Rich?
No?
Really?
Are you all geologists?
OK.
OK.
Alex Rich, who discovered the tunnel,
also showed that the ribosome can make polyester.
The ribosome doesn't have.
If you put the wrong thing on tRNAs,
ribosome doesn't have to make polypeptide.
Ribosome can do a lot of chemistry.
So we think, at this point, the ribosome
was probably making polyester, or thylester,
or things like this.
There's no reason why it.
In fact, if you look at abiotic chemistry,
if you look at the Murchison meteorite, for example,
there's a lot of oxyacids, there's
more oxyacids than amino acids in the Murchison meteorite.
So I can't think of any reason why the ribosome was not
making polyester at this point.
And some of those polyesters were binding back
onto the ribosome and conferring advantage.
And it didn't have to be very good.
It only had to be better than the competition,
and probably the competition.
If you're the first, the competition wasn't very good.
So the ribosome was a terrible enzyme.
It was doing a really bad job, but it was just good enough.
OK.
So now, this is kind of an amazing thing we can see.
If we look in the ribosome, we know
the dates of all the RNA, the relative ages of all the RNA
in the ribosome.
The ribosome has a lot of proteins, too.
I haven't talked about those yet.
The large subunit has 30 proteins.
And we look at those proteins, and we can date them.
And we do that by the RNA that's around it.
So this polypeptide has old RNA.
This polypeptide has less old.
And this polypeptide has less old.
So I've color coded it.
Actually, I've color coded it exactly the same way here.
We don't have a way of dating the protein the way
we date the RNA.
We date it really by the RNA that's around it.
That's how we date the protein.
And so when the protein passes between a phase
in three dimensions, we slice it.
OK?
That's what these slices are.
So this part is in the green phase.
This part is in the yellow phase.
This part is in the orange phase.
OK.
So we can date the proteins.
And look what we see.
There's a lot of protein, so this isn't just anecdotal.
The oldest part of the protein is not folded correctly.
It looks like what we call frozen random coil.
In fact, we believe this protein,
this is before protein learned to fold.
In fact, it was maybe not even protein.
It was ester and things that we didn't learn to fold.
I mean, it wasn't chemically the right thing.
This was ester.
You can't make a beta sheet out of ester.
So we think we're looking very far back in biology here.
We're looking at protein before it was protein, right?
This is a fossil now.
It's now it's polypeptide.
But we think we're looking at the molecular record
of what it was before that.
And then we see this thing here.
So look at this.
This is what we call a beta-beta structure, right?
Two beta strands.
And in general, in biology, you do not
see isolated beta strands.
You see a lot of beta strands in various proteins,
but you don't see isolated with no protein around.
This is what we see in the protein.
These are all isolated beta-beta structures.
And by isolated, I mean they're wrapped in RNA.
These are not isolated from everything.
They're isolated from other proteins.
So these are all structured proteins
that have starting to learn how to fold,
and they are doing this in a C of RNA.
So we believe that the RNA is essentially
teaching the protein to fold.
And these are molecules, obviously, you don't teach them.
But basically, the RNA is selecting
for molecules that can fold into these structures,
and they stick to the ribosome and confer advantage.
That's what I really mean by that.
And so this can be ester, but not fully,
because this has to be a proton donor.
So this cannot be an ester.
This can be an ester.
So this can be a mixture of ester.
See, this part here can be 100% ester.
This can be maybe 50% ester.
This has to be 0% ester, right?
So we're seeing a chemical evolution of polypeptide
in the ribosome.
And so this is mapped, all of the sort of statistical data
we see, mapped out of the phases of the ribosome.
So the oldest part of the ribosome is this blue part.
We don't see any protein there.
We think this is older than protein.
So RNA seemed to have lead protein in biology.
Then we see this frozen random coil.
Then we see these collapse, what we call beta-beta structures.
Then we see beta-domain proteins.
Then we see these more complicated folds.
And then the next phase, which I don't have here,
which is the protist phase, the proteins
have reached out and started to touch each other.
So we can see that this looks like what's
called a protein-folding funnel.
But it's not.
It's really just proteins taken out of the ribosome.
But this is a history of protein folding,
which is mapped into the ribosome.
Yes?
So do you think that the amino acids that
you made, these proteins, as you evolve the ribosome,
were all 20 amino acids were there at the beginning?
Because in order to get alpha helices, you need hydrophobics.
And if you look at how you make amino acids today
from the citric acid cycle, hydrophobics
are hard with making glycine or prolinegine.
And those are the ones that would fold without complicated
folds.
So it really is a measure of the amino acids
that are available in the proteins that they're making.
I mean, that's what we've published.
I've read your papers.
So yes.
High rights, great papers.
This is a high-hard menu, guys.
So now I've totally lost my train of thought.
All right, thanks a lot.
Yeah, we don't really know from our data,
we don't know specifically what the amino acid
sequences are.
But I think it's safe to say that there
had to be cationic amino acids here.
This is not going to stick to the ribosome.
But let me tell you guys, we are doing this experiment
in the lab.
We can make abiotic peptides.
My collaborator, Nick Cut, has figured out
how to use dry-down cycles, take pre-abiotic components,
and make peptides.
And we can select for things that bind RNA.
We can actually recapitulate this in the lab.
And that is something we're doing right now.
And we have to make guesses.
In fact, we believe, like for example, now
we have lysine and arginine.
Those are the two cationic amino acids.
But as high outlined in his paper,
previously, the sort of abiotic ancestors of those
were probably shorter cationic amino acids.
And so we're using those sorts of things in our experiments.
So this is the origin.
OK, so let me just put everything on the same scale here.
This is the evolution of the ribosome
that we can see assume.
And our two assumptions are that the ribosome grew
by accretion early on, just like it did late.
And that these insertion fingerprints
mean the same thing now that they meant previously.
So that's our assumption.
But assuming that assumption, we really
have a very detailed molecular model of the ribosome.
And along with that, we have a molecular model
of protein folding that comes out of this.
And so we also have, I haven't really shown it here,
but we can say, when does the GTPA center
get and all of that sort of stuff?
So basically, what I would say to you
is if you wanted to talk about the origin of life, where
you go from chemistry to biology, I would put it here.
Right here, you really don't need,
I mean, you need some kind of coding,
but it doesn't have to be much.
I mean, exactly what, this was probably not
fully protein.
And there's no energy transduction here.
This is not a motor.
This is a Brownian diffusive machine.
And this is a totally different beast.
Here, we are transducing energy.
The GTPA center is here.
To make this, this requires coding.
You have to code your protein in order
to make molecules like that.
This thing is capable of being a sophisticated enzyme.
This is not.
So even though this kind of looks there,
everything changes here.
It requires genes.
You need genes to make this, right?
You don't need genes to make that.
I mean, you need some short thing, right?
So this is the transcendental state of the ribosome,
where you have to go from chemistry to biology.
You cannot go through, you cannot get from here to here
without transcription and replication
and all those other things that I'm not even showing.
We don't know what's going on there.
But here, you could say I have some chemical evolutionary
process that can maybe get me here, not here, right?
This is where we go from chemical evolution
to Darwinian evolution at this point.
So OK, I think I can wind up here.
I have a, let me, this is not, I think I'll leave that.
OK, yeah, let me just conclude with this one.
OK, so now let's go back to the Tree of Life.
So this is the sort of state-of-the-art Tree of Life.
And this is Luca.
So Luca is our last universal common ancestor.
And usually, people stop here when they draw the Tree of Life.
They stop at Luca.
But I really don't think that's necessary.
We can go back.
We can see beyond.
So in fact, these are the phases of ribosomal evolution.
And we have extremely detailed information
on what happened before Luca.
So we can look back to the root of the tree.
And we can see what's going on there.
And I want to just conclude with sort of a little bit
of a philosophical kind of statement.
If you look at biology, this is something
that, studying the ribosome, I mean,
maybe I've just gotten weird from studying the ribosome.
I dream about it every night.
So I will confess that.
But if you think about it, I showed you
that RNA taught protein to fold, right?
That's what we see in the ribosome.
We can see protein learning to fold,
but it's doing it in a sea of RNA.
Everything that's happening there is surrounded by RNA.
I didn't really show you this.
I should have.
But the RNA is changing at the same time.
So the old part of the RNA is not really forming base pairs.
It's in these strange sort of non-canonical states.
And as the RNA gets, as it progresses,
as the protein learns to fold, the RNA learns to fold also.
So these molecules are teaching each other what to do
and what to fold.
And so we call this a mutualism relationship.
And this kind of logic is seen everywhere in biology,
where you have systems that take care of each other, right?
You have microbes in your gut that take care of you,
and you take care of them.
And in fact, plants make you oxygen, right?
So this, I mean, it's all for some kind of self-advantage.
But still, biology is just this network of mutualisms.
And we believe that when you think of a cell,
you just think of molecules in mutualism, right?
All RNA is made by protein, right?
All of it.
All protein is made by RNA, right?
So these are molecules that are taking care of each other.
There's making in modern biology that you can certainly
describe them as a mutualism relationship.
And one of the things about mutualism relationships
is the systems co-evolve, right?
They don't, like when you think about a lichen,
you know, you have a fungus, and you have an algae.
And neither of them can live without the other, right?
They become codifanta.
In fact, I guess that's why I, yeah.
OK, think about the mitochondrion, for example.
Your mitochondrion is a cell living inside of your cells,
which is in a symbiotic relationship with its host,
which was some previous cell, right?
And your mitochondrion takes care of the host,
and the host takes care of the mitochondrion, right?
And the mitochondrion has evolved intensely
since that original endosymbiotic event.
So you could not pretend to understand the mitochondrion
except in the context of its host.
And you can't understand the nucleus
except in the context of the mitochondrion, right?
Doesn't make sense to think about these things independently.
And that's how we think about macromolecules, right?
If you want to think about protein,
you cannot think about it.
You cannot understand its evolution
except in context of RNA and vice versa.
This is why these molecules are sort of the antithesis.
This thing assembles with its backbone.
This one assembles with its side chain.
This is neutral.
These molecules are in a yin-yang relationship, right?
Because, and it's not an accident.
It's because they created each other,
and they needed complementary competencies.
So the reason why RNA and protein are so different
is because that's the only thing.
That's the thing that would succeed best.
OK, thank you guys.
Oh, I need to talk about some people.
Anton Petrov is a research scientist in my lab.
And he's been with me a long time.
And he sort of runs my whole bioinformatics program.
He has the ribosome of almost every organism in three
dimensions memorized in his brain.
And in fact, he was visiting, thank you,
Ramakrishna's lab a while ago.
And they had a ribosome structure, and he said,
oh my god, the peptidyl transferase has changed.
This ribosome is different from all other ribosomes.
And they looked, and there was a problem with their refinement.
They had misconnected to nucleotides in their refinements.
That's how detailed Anton's understanding of the ribosomes.
And this is Chad and Nicholas, who
are also helping me with my bioinformatics part.
And then Jessica Bowman is my lab manager,
who sort of does all kinds of, I mean,
she does a lot of great experiments
and has made a lot of the RNAs I've talked about.
And I also need to thank NASA.
I should have a big NASA logo and a little NSF logo here
to scale them to their contributions, but whatever.
I need to thank them for supporting my lab.
And thank you guys for your attention.
Thank you.
Thank you.
It's hot in here.
You did well.
Thanks, Lauren.
That was great.
So we have 15 minutes for general questions from the audience.
And then after that, I would ask the students
that are enrolled in the course to stick around
for our roundtable session with Lauren.
Yes?
That's a great question.
I'll repeat the question.
She said she assumes that the RNA in the ribosome
is protected by proteins, but these long tentacles
seem to be naked and would seem to be very vulnerable
to all kinds of bad things happening to them.
MicroRNAs.
Yes, exactly.
We tried to cut them off with microRNAs, actually.
So one thing is that the ribosome itself is not,
you can't really describe the RNA as being protected by protein.
You know, one of the ways to think about ribosomal RNA
is, I mean, it's a special cast of RNA.
It's been around forever, and it's very selected.
So if you take ribosomal RNA and you just leave it,
sit out on the bench, and you compare it to an mRNA,
an mRNA will degrade, and ribosomal RNA is just so tough.
It's just because it's assembled,
and I guess it's been selected, things that degraded went away.
So ribosomal RNA is the same way.
It just doesn't degrade very quickly.
Now these tentacles, in these structures,
they seem to be naked, but we assume in real biological systems
they're not.
But we don't think they're protected by,
I never thought about protected, but we
think they're docking sites for proteins,
that proteins that are ancillary to ribosomal function
that might change over time and various state of development
or tissue dock onto these sites.
Actually, one really interesting thing I can tell you
is that they are very GC rich.
And so they're really stable, and we
think we have detected G quadruplexes in the human ribosome.
And actually, we can see those sequences in other ones.
So you say, why would there be quadruplexes in these things?
I mean, that must be for protein binding, I would think.
So I don't think they're just naked in real biology.
One of the things to think about in the ribosome,
about a quarter, maybe more of the cell mass of any cell
is ribosome.
So to a first approximation, you are just a bag of ribosomes.
I mean, that's what we are.
And what it means is that things that bind, even
with low affinity to the ribosome,
will bind to it, because the concentrations are so high.
I mean, it's impossible to be in a cell
and not run into ribosome.
So normally, when we think about things binding in biology,
you think about nanomolar or something.
If you have millimolar affinity for a ribosome in a cell,
you will be binding to a ribosome,
because that's how things are just so concentrated.
Everything in a cell at some level sticks to ribosomes.
They're just so many of them there.
So I don't believe they're, when you purify these things
and you do cryoEM, maybe those proteins get stripped away.
But I think, yeah, they're probably not just sitting out
there.
Yes?
Two quick questions.
One quick maybe, if the other is a little longer.
I think you're choosing to know how to know that the small
subcutit is not as old as the large subcutit.
Oh, yeah.
I would also like to know a few things, that dark blue section,
synthesize it and look at it chemically in the lab.
OK, I'll answer the last question first.
Yes, we have made a whole bunch of those.
In fact, we've done all those expansion sections.
We have all those pieces of RNA in the lab.
I'll just talk about the oldest piece.
Yeah, the oldest piece, and then the next oldest.
And we've made them all.
Yes, and?
It's definitely.
Yes, we are doing that right now.
In fact, we're doing these dry down experiments,
where we're making peptides abiotically.
And we're putting those pieces of RNA in there.
And we're seeing if that will redirect the products
or change the products of the.
Well, enzymatic activity is sort of
in the eye of the beholder at this point.
So for example, we're saying, if we make peptides abiotically
by drying things down, we can do that easily.
We can make 20 mers.
And then we add this RNA.
And does it change?
Does it make them longer?
Does it change?
This itself can't work, would be a question I don't ask.
Or it can't work.
Yeah, I don't believe so.
We haven't seen.
Yeah, I don't believe it's autocad.
The guy who definitely is.
Yeah, OK, first question.
OK, now what was the second question?
First question.
What was the first question?
First question was, how do you know that the large is a puter?
Yes, OK.
So I didn't really show this.
But we have a lot of information
on the evolution of the interface
and on what happened when in the interface
and on what the stages of the two ribosomes
were when the interface formed.
And so we do have.
Well, number one, we know when the interface happened.
And then we have these dependencies in the interface,
the same ones I talked about you where we have the.
So we can say that the large is a puter.
Oh, how do we know what happened?
OK, we know what the interfacial RNA is.
We know because we know what the ribosome is.
We have our insertion fingerprints.
And we have the temporal evolution.
So we know that phase four is when the ribosome.
And so we know what happened to the large subunit.
The small ribosome isn't older, it wasn't floating around.
Yeah, OK.
I should say that in a different way.
I should say that the small subunit was less developed
and was smaller.
It could have been older.
Yes, absolutely it could have been older.
Yeah, yeah, that's a good question.
Right.
Right, yeah, no, thank you.
Right, it could have been way older.
We have no idea.
Right, good.
I mean, there's a number of reasons
why the large came before the small.
The first one was you have a cell folding RNA
that forms the site, the PTC site.
You have nothing like that in the small.
I beg to differ.
Hi.
I think we do have a cell phone.
Yes, we do.
We think we do.
Is that the one that you published with Petrov?
I don't know if we publish this one yet.
I don't think so.
You did have a small RNA.
The active site of the small RNA does not have a cell folding
RNA.
OK.
The same sense of the PTC.
When you show the PTC, that beautiful structure that
is invariant from T0, there's nothing like that
in the small thing.
OK, wait, let me, let me, let me somewhat.
Hi, this is my time.
OK, I'll talk to you later.
Well, yeah, he calls me once a week.
OK, so guys, with the large subunit, it really,
it grew, you can kind of think about it,
mushrooms growing out of mushrooms.
That's kind of how, especially the early evolution of the
life, with the small subunit, we think there was a little bit
of that.
But then something happened, which is you form a pseudonot.
The very core of the small subunit is a pseudonot.
And in order to form a pseudonot,
you have to strip a piece of RNA.
You have to melt the helix and bring that other strand
to make the pseudonot.
So we think the single-stranded binding functionality
was built very early into the small subunit.
So we can see that there was some fundamental difference.
We don't really know.
I mean, ancestrally, we think we kind of know what the large
subunit did.
We don't know what the small subunit did, except that it
had a single strand sitting out there to bind to something,
which is now the Shindel-Garnel sequence.
But that was built in very early.
And we can see that because the pseudonot requires that you
peel away a strand and expose a single strand.
And then the small subunit grew by this sort of what we
call a dendrite thing, where the large subunit is just
monolith.
And if you think about building a tunnel, I mean, think
about driving on a tunnel through the Cascade Mountains
or whatever.
If things move, the tunnel is going to break.
So that large subunit is just this rigid, nothing moves in
the large subunit.
The small subunit doesn't have a tunnel.
And it is a dendrite with all the, there's a lot of motions
going on in the small subunit.
So these two subunits have different functions.
They have different histories.
And they have totally different structures.
Anton has a talk.
He says the large subunit is from Venus, and the small
subunit is from Mars, or something like that.
Yeah, I can't remember.
OK, I got that backwards.
So maybe that question is vague, so you don't have
to answer it.
But from ribosomes that just put those things
without transduction to ribosomes that actually
encode and perform the transduction, how do you
kind of conceive that, is it like a grapple thing?
Or is it like something special?
OK, so one thing, we think everything was gradual and
incremental and conferred advantage at every step.
That's sort of our nothing.
In fact, we think everything, if you were there watching, you
could predict the next step, maybe, right?
That nothing, if we really knew the conditions, it would
be like watching rust grow on an iron, right?
Everything happened.
Nothing.
In fact, a lot of times when people are talking about the
origin of life, they want to talk about sort of esoteric or
exotic kinds of things.
We just think this was all just basic, simple chemistry
happening on a grand scale.
And that, OK, so OK, I'm not sure I fully sort of answered
your question.
So for coding, what we think is that, number one, coding
was gradual.
And initially, there was a mini helix, Paul Schemmel's
mini helix.
And whenever you have a mini helix, you have some kind of
unpaired nucleotides at the end.
I mean, that's sort of a necessity of a stem loop.
And a GNRA tetra loop, which are very common, have three
unpaired nucleotides.
Looks just like an anticodon.
And we think that initially, the origins of coding was a
piece of RNA that stuck as a cofactor and positioned things
in order to get better chemistry.
So that is the ultimate origins of coding.
That you had a stem loop, and there was one precipitous
event, which was the doubling of tRNA.
In fact, because we do know that tRNA was a stem loop, and
it just, boom, it doubled.
It inserted and doubled.
So initially, you have the amino acid acceptor step.
Then all of a sudden, you get the anticodon 70
angstroms away.
And that doubling, we believe, drove the association of the
subunits.
Before that doubling event, there was no reason for the
large subunit and the small subunit to talk to each other.
So actually, the precipitous event was the doubling of
tRNA, which drove the development of the two subunits.
So that, we think, was maybe a precipitous event, the doubling.
Everything tRNA is what really drove that.
If you didn't have the anticodon 70 angstroms away from the
amino acid, for an enzyme, this is a crazy amount of
distance, right?
And that was kind of an amazing event during the
evolution of the ribosome.
And there's no reason for the subunits to ever come
together before that happens.
Does that sort of answer your question?
But we don't think anything was precipitous, except a
doubling event is by nature sort of precipitous.
Yes?
I'm one of those geologists in the audience where a lot of
the terminology goes over my head.
I understand space into the science.
I appreciate the sort of layman's way you presented it.
But one of the things that concerns me a little bit, you
keep using term by learning and teaching molecules and
intelligence embedded in the terminology you're using,
product or layman to understand.
I'm assuming these are all happy accidents that survive
and gain advantages, as opposed to unhappy accidents
which cause the extinction of the ones that just went away.
I don't know if I called them accidents.
I guess I would say, so this is sort of the way to think
about it, is that we think there was enormous numbers of
ribosomes that were different, involving all different
kinds of polymers and everything.
And we're only looking at the winner.
So it's not necessarily an accident is sort of a result
of a statistical process.
And you're right, you shouldn't say learning and
teaching, you know, they're molecules.
Yeah, I mean RNA did not teach protein to fold.
RNA selected for protein that folded is actually the correct
way to teach it.
Even in the discussion of the tunnel that you talked about,
the tunnel is obviously early for reform, and it had some
function we don't fully understand.
Obviously, the next happy accident is going to block the
tunnel and make it useless, so it had to grow somewhere.
We think the original function of the tunnel was to keep the
ends.
The problem with making peptides abiotically is the ends
come around and cyclize and kill the polymerization.
I'm saying it wasn't growing to make the tunnel bigger on
purpose, but it didn't block the tunnel so it couldn't work.
It made it bigger, it had a happy accident, it could do
something new that would have been dangerous.
Yeah, I guess the reason I don't like the word accident is
that it makes it seem like kind of an unusual event.
What we think is there was a statistical process of all
kinds of things going on.
Everything was tried.
Even now, in biology, when we think about the expansions of
the ribosome, we say, oh, this expanded.
Actually, everything's happening, but we're only
looking at the survivors, right?
So that's kind of the way to think about it, yeah.
We think the original function of the tunnel, when it was a
pore, was to keep the ends apart.
Because when you make a dipeptide, it just
recyclizes, and that's it.
You're done.
And that's very stable and happens really readily.
And so it looks like really that the initial function of
the ribosome is to allow you to go beyond that and make a
trimer, that we think the original pepital transferase
center, that was really what it was about.
And some fraction of those stuck to it and allowed it to
survive and then sort of bootstrap this tunnel thing.
So Lord.
I have one last comment for you.
Obviously, you are dreaming about ribosomes, and that is
a beautiful, your talk was spectacular.
The only problem is that the code comes in with the
synthesizers, and the evolution of the tRNA is
coupled to the evolution of the synthesizers.
There's things called the operational code in the arm.
And the question really then is, and there's the anti-codon
interaction.
So the question that I think you should think a little
carefully about was, how does this correlate?
What happened in the synthetases with what's
happening on the ribosome?
I agree totally.
Absolutely.
And the sophomore finding on the evolution of the
synthetases.
Anyway, all I'm trying to say to you is the ribosome is part
a mutual system with the synthetases.
I think you should think a little more carefully about that.
One thing, let me say this.
The oldest, this is a ribosomal protein.
This is what we think is the oldest ribosome.
And you see, this looks a lot like a synthetase, right?
The conserved oldest synthetases are the same fold.
So the evolution of synthetases cannot be extracted from the
evolution of ribosomal proteins.
There are a couple.
Yeah, OK.
The question is, which end of the question?
All right.
I agree with you.
Any time for one last question?
OK, well, let's thank Laura again.
Thank you, guys, for coming on the same channel.
