These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by the teaching company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in just weeks.
Browse our catalogue or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by the teaching company and its customers for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled, Rome and the Barbarians, Part 1.
The lecturer is Professor Kenneth W. Harle.
Dr. Harle is a professor of history at Tulane University in New Orleans where he has been teaching since 1978.
He earned his bachelor's degree from Trinity College and went on to earn his master's and PhD from Yale University.
Dr. Harle specializes in the Mediterranean civilizations of Greece, Rome, Egypt and Byzantium.
The author of two books and numerous essays, he is also a veteran field researcher who has served since 1999 on the editorial board of the American Journal of Archaeology.
Dr. Harle's skill and dedication as an instructor are attested by the many teaching honors he has won.
Eight times, he has earned Tulane's annual student award for excellence in teaching.
He is also the recipient of Baylor University's nationwide Robert Foster Cherry Award for Great Teachers.
Professor Harle prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, a timeline, biographical notes, maps and an annotated bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines or review them before or after each lecture.
Music
Lecture 1 Greek and Roman Views of Barbarians
Applause
My name is Kenneth Harle and I'm a professor of history at Tulane University where I teach classical Byzantine and Crusader history on a regular basis.
And I shall be leading you through a course of 36 lectures entitled Rome and the Barbarians.
And this course will look at the interaction between Rome and the barbarian peoples from essentially the year 300 BC to about 600 AD.
That is over a 900 year period.
And before we start looking at the main themes of this course, I think it's useful for us to think for a moment about the types of images and connotations that come out of the term barbarian, especially when applied to Rome.
Barbarians are usually seen as these Nordic warriors sporting horned helmets, fur clad, wielding axes and swords and slashing their way through the Roman world.
The vandals are notorious for destroying art. Others for destroying Romans.
There's also the step nomads with their sturdy horses from Mongolia, quipped with composite bows, sweeping out of the steps, destroying cities, leading populations off into slavery.
These are all popular images. They've been popularized in film and novels.
One only has to think of the rather recent film Gladiator, which opens with this spectacular battle reenactment, which is really quite accurate in many of its details between the Romans and Germanic tribes set in the time of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius.
All of these images are very powerful and still endure.
There's also notions that especially emerge in the late Roman period, that is, in the period of the fourth and fifth century AD, period we call late antiquity.
That is the age where Roman emperors were now Christians and classical civilization is reinvented on a new basis.
And in this period, Christian authors begin to write about barbarians as the agents of the devil. They are the bringers of the apocalypse.
One only has to read the writings of Saint Jerome, or Saint Augustine, the goth sac Rome, and this has to be worked out in Christian ideology and theology.
And that image and that connotation meant that barbarians were pagans. They were worshipers of the demons and old gods.
They had not yet been given the benefits of the Christian faith.
And these two images that come down through antiquity still live with us.
Europeans, especially during the period of the Age of Discovery, the overseas expansion, applied such images as part of the reason why they were out on missions to Asia and Africa.
So the image of barbarians endures well down to this day.
In the Enlightenment, you'll find in the European tradition the notion that the barbarians are somehow noble savages.
And that they have been untouched and unspoiled by civilization. Their morals are higher than so-called civilized people.
This, too, is an image that goes back to the Greeks and the Romans. It goes back deep in antiquity.
The Romans loved to use the barbarians as sort of a moral foil.
You can see this in Caesar's writing, Julius Caesar, who had conquered Gaul and knew very well the Celtic peoples of Western Europe, the Gauls, who were the longtime dreaded foes of the Romans.
He talks about the fact that the Gauls are losing their virtues because they've had too much contact with Romans, especially such things as drinking wine.
And there's even a story that the first Gaelic warriors to taste wine wondered what it was and they explained that it's a fermented grape.
It comes from Italy and they said, well, we have to visit this country so they invade it in Sac Rome.
It's a nice anecdote, but it brings forth this notion of the moral degeneration of the barbarians because of the contact with supposedly higher civilization.
We find this again repeated by Tacitus writing in the very end of the first century beginning of the second century AD.
One of the most important works we'll be looking at in this course, the Germania.
The Germania is supposed to be an ethnographic study.
It was written to describe the German tribes in central Europe.
And it turns out in many ways as a way for Tacitus to carry out all sorts of moral and political judgments of what the Roman Empire was like.
And the Germans are always the foil to that.
So these two images, the noble savage, the ferocious warrior, they're very much rooted in the classical tradition.
And they still exert a very powerful hold over our literature, history, and even the view of ourselves.
Because one way to examine oneself is to look at another people and the barbarians provide this marvelous way of examining another group in order to understand yourself.
Well, those images of the barbarians, not all of them quite accurate, do have some contact, some roots in reality.
Another point that will come out in this course is that we want to balance that image by looking at both Roman, the barbarians, the two principal actors here.
And a lot of new evidence that has been uncovered by archaeologists who have provided a wealth of information about the material life between Romans and barbarians at various stages in Roman history.
Remember, we're going to cover nearly a thousand years here, so the situation is constantly changing in terms of the economic and social patterns we're examining.
And there they provide information about material culture, exchange between Romans and barbarians, the fact that while they did clash, there was also intermarriage, there was exchange of customs, material culture.
Some historians going so far as to say that remember that the normal contact between Romans and barbarians was not war, but something else, which could be intermarriage, it could be trade.
And perhaps it's best to see Roman the barbarians more as bitter friends rather than as enemies.
And also we'll be drawing on the works of scholars trained in anthropology who've supplemented and confirmed literary sources of the ancient world by discussing this issue in terms of what has been learned by observing other societies in the modern age,
such questions of identity, how customs are exchanged among different peoples, and this is going to be an important component.
So in discussing this issue, we'll be looking at a variety of sources, not only the literary traditions that are fed into the powerful images we hold today about the barbarians and with the traditions of classical art.
And these are from largely the Roman side, or sometimes the Greek, because the barbarian didn't leave the same type of literary record.
And we'll be supplementing it with all the new information coming out of archaeology and excavations as well as observations made by people in anthropology and other disciplines.
So the course is ambitious. We're going to look at not only Rome and the barbarian peoples, but we'll also be approaching this through different types of sources and methods.
And I think what will come out of this course is a much better understanding of this whole issue of Rome and the barbarians.
And a fact that I should stress right now is that the barbarians keep changing over the course of the 900 years.
As Rome conquers, and few people have been as successful as the Romans as conquerors, the barbarians are always the next group that are not under immediate Roman control.
So the barbarians change identity, and the old barbarians that are incorporated into the Roman world in effect become provincials and eventually become Romanized themselves.
And that leads to the point I made at the start of this introduction, and that is, what are the main themes in this course besides the popular images?
Well, in order to understand the complexities of this course, we have to address especially why the Romans were so successful of all the peoples in the ancient world in bringing barbarians to heal and conquering, absorbing different territories.
There were a number of successful empires in the ancient world, going back to the first empires of Mesopotamia.
But Rome has this enduring image as the greatest of the ancient empires, the Pax Romana.
And as many a historian and politician has pointed out in the history of Europe, perhaps one of the most extended periods of peace was under the high Roman Empire of the 1st and 2nd century AD.
And that was a period of at least 200 or 250 years of institutional stability, political stability, and great cultural achievements.
Well, this gets us into the first theme, which is to look at Roman institutions, particularly from the angle of how did they enable the Romans not only to conquer, and it was important that they had the means to conquer these people, but also to assimilate.
Now, that depends on a lot of different Roman institutions.
We'll have to look at political and military, the peculiar social bonds of Roman society, all of which gave the Romans this unusual edge in mastering and eventually incorporating these different barbarian peoples.
To be sure, the Roman success in assimilating and bringing these people under their control very often depended on what existed in the area before the Romans moved in.
And we will see that as much as the Romans get credit for their institutions, there was also something there when they arrived.
This will be very much the case in Gaul, in the Celtic world, both in northern Italy and in Gaul, which we think of as France and the Low Countries today in parts of the Rhineland.
And I have to stress this, northern Italy at the start of this course is part of the Celtic world.
The line of the Arno Rubicon today was called Cisalpine Gaul, that is Gaul on this side of the Alps as opposed to Transalpine Gaul, which is Gaul on the other side of the Alps in western and central Europe.
And these Celtic peoples had achieved a great deal of success in their metallurgy and town life, economics, and the Romans built upon it.
We'll see this also in Britain, we'll see this in Africa, north Africa, the regions of Tunisia and Algeria today, in Spain, in the east, along the desert frontiers and the upper Euphrates and all these areas to be sure the Romans built upon existing structures.
But that points out two important points about the Romans.
The Romans' ability to make any kind of institution and arrangement work for them.
They were the most successful and adaptable of imperialists.
And we'll see at times it will be very difficult to generalize about the Romans as conquerors and how they administered their provinces of former defeated barbarian foes because they were so adaptable, they used what worked.
The second point is that the Romans did have some remarkable ways that looking at these barbarians as outsiders and as potential allies and provincials, and that gets us into the Roman institutions themselves.
The second point is that we will be constantly trying to draw in these barbarian societies and describe what they were like at the time of the Roman contact and conquest, followed by the incorporation of these peoples in most instances as provincials.
And in this theme, it'll be sometimes difficult because as I mentioned earlier, the barbarians don't leave the same kind of written records at the Romans did.
There are some exceptions. We'll deal with these barbarian states to the east, Parthia, and later Persia, which the Romans were not quite sure what they meant when they called them barbarian.
But they at least have some kind of written records. They were organized states, in some ways rival civilizations to Rome.
We have a bit more information. But when we look at the peoples of, especially northern and central Europe, who are the barbarians par excellence, we are very heavily depending on Roman sources.
And we will see in the development of this course that the northern barbarians always come through as the most dangerous, the most dreaded.
They come first in the form of the Celtic speaking peoples, the Gauls, Celts, we use to designate a language group today.
And Celt originally meant, it was a Greek word that simply meant those people living in the far west.
The Romans usually called Celts Gauls, but since Gauls is usually associated with France and has sort of a geographic definition, I use Celts because it has more of a linguistic sense and a cultural sense that spreads across western and central Europe.
So in this theme, we will see very much how these barbarian civilizations, cultures, whatever you want to call them, contribute very much to the success of the establishment of Roman provinces.
And then what are the barbarians beyond the frontier like? As Rome advances, you get new barbarians, Gauls are replaced by Germans, the Germans become the new threat after 9 A.D. when they slaughter three legions in the Teutonburg Forest.
And this theme will run through continually in the course. Well, who are the newest rivals to Rome?
And as one, quote unquote, barbarian king said, the king of the Mauritanians to another barbarian king, I got to give you over to the Romans.
This is Jugurtha, because if not, the Romans will come and trash my kingdom. And Jugurtha says, well, that's very well and good. You'll hand me over as Rome's enemy.
But once I'm gone, you will be Rome's neighbor and you will be the new objective target of Roman armies. And so the Romans are always pushing out and encountering new barbarian foes.
The third theme of this course is going to deal with what was the role that these bar these most recent or the last of the barbarian foes, especially the Germans and the Persians played in bringing down the Roman Empire and bringing this course to a close.
And this is a theme very much tied in with those popular images foremost that the Germans, the Germanic peoples, and when I use the term German in this course, please remember that it's a linguistic term.
These Germanic tribes did not have a sense of being modern Germans. There was no sort of sense of nation. They remain very much tribal in their loyalties, very much personal in their loyalties.
Many of them saw themselves as agents and clients of the Roman emperor. And so when we talk of the dramatic peoples, we're using a term to describe a linguistic cultural identity, which becomes more and more defined over this course,
but ultimately is nothing like the kind of German national identity we have today. In any case, these Germans and the Empire to the East, the Susanne and the Persian Empire played a very important decisive role, in my opinion, in bringing down the Roman political order,
at least in Western Europe, the Eastern half will endorse the so-called Byzantine Empire. And this gets us very much into the question of what gave these barbarians the military or political edge to do this?
Because as we shall see later in the course, most of these barbarian tribes that moved into the Roman Empire in the late fourth and fifth century had no idea that they were going to topple the political structure of Rome.
In many ways, they thought they were moving in, well, in the case of Alaric, who sacked Rome in 410, it was a career move. I mean, essentially what he really wanted to be was a Roman commander, and he was twice turned down for that, and really had to become king of the Goths as the door prize,
and ended up sacking Rome because he was trying to pressure the Western government into giving that command.
And so the last part of this course will spend a good deal of time looking at that period of late antiquity, especially the fourth and fifth centuries, when the barbarians now emerge as the group that has a monopoly on military power in the Roman Empire,
and eventually turn it against their masters, the Roman emperor, and carve out these kingdoms, which become the basis of medieval Europe.
So it's an ambitious course, looking at Roman institutions, the barbarian societies and civilizations, the interaction of the two, and the final act, the dissolution of the Western Roman Empire.
I think it's important also, before we venture on to this course, to discuss the term barbarian itself. The Greeks coined the term.
For the Greeks, the term barbarian in many ways designated foreigner, and in more modern translations of Greek sources these days, that's how the term is very often translated.
And the reason for that is, well, the Greeks divided the world essentially into Hellenes, which is their name for Greek, and foreigners, barbarians.
Barbarian, as far as we can tell, is a word that was coined to explain the fact that they couldn't speak Greek. They went bar bar like their animals, bar bar barids, oh my, they babble like animals.
It essentially meant the babblers, the people who couldn't speak Greek, and therefore their foreigners.
And probably the terms had this origin, and there were other terms that could be used for foreigners. One would be Xenoi, where we get the word xenophobic that is foreigner.
But barbarian came to take on this designation as the Greeks forged their peculiar institutions in the 8th, 7th, and 6th century BC, that is the city state.
The city state, or polis in Greek, polis is the plural, was a community, eventually gets associated with an actual city, but a community in which the Greeks believed that they as citizens of the city state, the polis,
lived under the rule of law. And the rule of law required that the citizens pass the laws which the citizens themselves obeyed.
And this was a very powerful definition. It added a peculiar conceit, a political conceit, that only the Greeks in effect ruled constitutionally because they had these peculiar institutions.
And it went beyond the definition that many peoples would have used for their identity, and which the Greeks themselves used, which I guess is best put by the historian Herodotus writing in the 5th century BC.
Why are we Hellenes, he states? We are Hellenes because we have common altars, that is the same gods, common ancestors, the same descent, common language.
And by Herodotus' time, and also we all live in a polis, we all have this rule of law.
And that means the rest of the world are barbarians, and barbarians don't have the rule of law, ergo, they can only be either slaves or tyrants or despots.
Now, in the Greek definition, in the classical age, that term barbarian really is accurately translated as foreigner, because it doesn't carry the kind of cultural and moral implications that we'll find in the later Roman age,
and gets transmitted to the modern age. It also doesn't have the notions of a kind of racial prejudice as would become characteristic in the early modern and modern ages,
because the barbarians could be very civilized, they just didn't have the rule of law, they didn't speak Greek.
And that meant everyone was a barbarian. And if you read the account of Herodotus, which is histories, which is to explain the war between the Greeks and the Persians,
he spends a great deal of time talking about these barbarian societies.
Some of them fall very much in the category of barbarians. The Scythians, the people who dwelled on the steps of southern Russia, and perhaps extended the range of their migrations into Central Asia.
These were Iranian-speaking barbarians, they scalp their opponents, they have all sorts of strange customs, they very much come across as the archetypical nomadic step-nomad warrior.
There were the Thracians in what is now Bulgaria, giant red-haired barbarians, they swung two swords, were habitually drunk on things like beer, they didn't drink wine, they have to be disgusting.
You've got those group of barbarians, but also you have people such as the Phoenicians, the Egyptians, the Persian kings themselves.
These people were all admired. Some of them as teachers, as mentors to the Greeks. Egypt absolutely impressed Herodotus, the Egyptians were the oldest people in the world.
The stone monuments just overawed him and Herodotus comes across as the rambunctious Greek tourists asking questions of the Egyptian priests.
Tell me more, tell me more. Some of these stories I suspected reports were told by the Egyptian priests.
Well, that ought to keep the Greek busy for a while. Let's tell them another wild tale.
The Persians foremost were seen and admired as noble masters of the Near East.
To be sure, they ruled as kings, or as the Greeks would prefer to call them tyrants, but the Greeks noted that they had an enormous number of moral virtues.
Herodotus goes on at great length. Every Persian boy is taught to ride, to shoot straight with his bow and arrow, and never tell a lie.
Would that the Greeks be so good? The Persian nobles for all of their dignity and their great wealth, whenever the Persian king was threatened, they would sacrifice their lives for him.
There's a story of King Xerxes coming back from his disastrous expedition in Greece. The ship runs into a storm.
What do the Persian nobles do? They jump overboard to lighten the ship so that their king can be saved.
And there's numerous tales of the nobility of the Persians that are told by Herodotus, later by the historian Xenophon, who was a historian and would-be student of Plato.
He wrote also philosophical tracks, and he wrote of a Persian prince called Cyrus the Younger, who was a chivalrous prince and worthy of emulation.
And all of these images that come through the Greek literature are repeated in later Western traditions in the Middle Ages and the Modern Age, in which these noble barbarians become the moral exemplars.
One thinks of the Greek admiration of Cyrus the Younger as the premier prince and gentleman.
He's a Persian. He's a would-be pretender to the Persian throne, and yet at the same time he comes across as a model for Greeks to emulate.
And you think of how Christian authors in the era of the Crusades compared themselves to Saladin, the great Muslim conqueror.
He was not a Christian, and yet he was a better and more chivalrous gentleman than many Christians.
And this tradition goes right back to the earliest classical texts and this notion that we study barbarians, we look at these other people in order to examine ourselves.
This is one of the unique dimensions that comes out of Greek literature, and as I always say, that makes the Greek tradition so immediate and real.
And the Romans fall heir to this tradition and very much build upon it with the so-called barbarian peoples they encounter in Western and Central Europe.
The Greek notion of barbarian actually changed in the course of their own history.
The conquest of Alexander the Great brought the Persian Empire under the political domination of Macedonian kings.
Macedonians were always dwelling in that world. Are they really Greeks or are they not, which is a very hot question even in the ancient world as it is today.
But the result of it was the extension of the notion of what it was to be Greek.
And already before Alexander's day, that political conceit, if you live in a polis ergo, you can become a Greek, you can become civilized, was trumpeted by Athenian intellectuals, or so-called pan-Hellenists.
And that point is put forth in 380 BC by Socrates in order to live reputedly to 99 years of age.
And he claimed that even barbarians become Greeks if they would live in a polis, if they took on those institutions.
And this notion is spread in the period after Alexander. This is the period called the Hellenistic world where Macedonian kings ruled the great successor states of Alexander and founded Greek-style cities.
And the cultural or the dominant cultural coin, the dominant common culture in this world in the Near East was Greek, although there were lots of other components to it as well.
And this brings us finally back to the Romans and their use of the word barbarian.
In the 4th and 3rd century BC, when the Greeks really started to come into contact with the Romans in Italy, and there were Greek colonists settled in southern Italy and Sicily, the Romans at first were regarded as barbarians.
They fell into that category. And the Romans, ironically, never quite made it to Greek. They never wanted to really be Greeks, so they wanted a lineage that made them respectful in the eyes of Greeks.
But the Romans inherited the term barbarian, and they inherited the Greek definitions of it, but they also added their own dimension to it.
And the Roman use of the term over the course of this class becomes very much more along the lines of what we think of barbarian.
I think it's best expressed in an etymology that is a word origin that appears in a number of Roman texts, that the word barbarian really came from the Latin word barba, beard, meaning there are a bunch of bearded barbarians.
Now, it's completely wrong, etymologically speaking. But it does bring across a stereotypical image of the Romans, and that is they were fighting these savage, bearded tribes from central and western Europe.
Whereas Romans legionaries were clean-shaven. The Romans were always clean-shaven, unlike most of the peoples in the ancient world, and that had to do with a very pragmatic Roman attitude, which is they fought close with a sword.
You don't want any beard for someone to yank on, so they're always clean-shaven when they went in action.
So the Romans took over the term barbarian to use it as a way of designating uncivilized outsiders.
But even for the Romans, that was a condition of their laws and culture rather than their race.
And while the Romans may have stressed this cultural divide more strongly than the Greeks did, nonetheless they didn't have the kind of racial prejudice as we would understand it in the modern age.
Barbarians could become civilized, and we shall see this in the course of the lectures that follow, that many of these barbarians, once subdued, once they had surrendered, are put under Roman rule, received the benefits of Roman rule, and because of those peculiar Roman institutions, get assimilated into the Roman body politic by various means.
And that is an important point that will be coming up very soon.
And just to close, I think this two different ways of looking at the outsider, the Greek and the Roman, has something to do with when these civilizations formed, their formative, their critical period of formation.
The Greeks evolved their notions of city-state, their definition of barbarians, in a period of relative security. There was very little outside threat.
And so the Greeks came up with these unique political institutions, this unique way of looking at themselves as being in the polis, as living as a face-to-face community.
Citizenship was very precious. It couldn't be extended beyond a certain number of people. There had to be a certain sense of dissent. It came from common ancestors, common altars.
We also lived according to the laws we passed.
And that, in many ways, restricted the ability of the Greeks to bring in outsiders.
The only way to bring them in is if the barbarians set up a city-state like themselves, but it would ultimately be that relatively small, autonomous community.
On the other hand, the Romans looked at it from quite a different viewpoint, and this will have a lot to do with Roman institutions and social attitudes from the beginning of Rome in her formative period,
when the Republic is declared in 509 BC. Rome was at the middle of the invasion routes of central Italy.
The Romans very quickly learned that unless they forged institutions and alliances with other peoples around them, they would go under.
And the Romans devised very quickly a way of looking at citizenship and outsiders in a very different perspective from the Greeks.
There were barbarians. They eventually took over the Greek word. There were foes.
But these people could be brought in as allies, as dependents, as clients to create a ring around Rome.
Eventually, some of them could be brought into the Roman body politic.
Why? Not because of any great political reasons or moral or philosophical reason, because they needed the manpower.
And Rome devised the political military institutions to conquer and assimilate neighbors, to bring them out into the Roman state,
and to build this widening ring that allowed them first to master Italy and then the Mediterranean world.
