In this lecture I wish to cover the constitutional and political institutions of Rome in the
period of what we would call the Middle Republic and that would designate the period from 264 BC
to probably maybe 190 BC or a bit later. This is the period where Rome emerges with her main
institutions in place, military, political, constitutional, and we have a great deal of
information about the Romans, largely compliments of a Greek author named Polybius who wrote an
account on the rise of Roman power and will provide a lot of the information for this lecture in
the two accompanying lectures in which I'm going to deal with the political, the social, and the
military institutions of that Middle Republic, the Republic that expanded the limits of Mediterranean
civilization beyond its core into the barbarian lands, whether it be Spain, the Celtic world,
the North African barbarians, and eventually even over to the east where the Romans bump into these
eastern barbarians. This lecture is going to center on how the political institutions
operated in the Republic and again with an eye to why these institutions were so important in
overcoming barbarian foes and assimilating them as provincials and allies and ultimately as Roman
citizens. And as we shall see the Romans worked out these institutions in the course of conquering
and incorporating the various italic peoples, the people who spoke related languages in Italy,
and then these institutions were used on a wider scale once the Romans left Italy.
Now in understanding Roman political and legal institutions it's important to keep one point
in mind and that is the Romans never carried a political reform out to its logical conclusion
nor did they abolish anything that was obsolete. So the Roman constitution is really quite maddening
to understand and our main source Polybius was really quite at a loss. He thought that the Roman
government was essentially an ideal mixed constitution, he was drawing on Greek models,
it was democracy, oligarchy, or aristocracy is the nice word for it, and monarchy and that it was
somehow a balance of the three that Rome provided that balance just becomes the basis of mixed
constitutions, it's very much taken in the Enlightenment, it leads to our notions of checks
and balances in the American Constitution. Unfortunately Polybius, even though he lived
in Rome at the time when he wrote this up, he was sort of a political prisoner and hostage from
he was a member of the Achaean League who was shipped to Rome by his political enemies.
Nonetheless he never really quite got it straight, Rome never really was a mixed constitution,
it was a republic, a race publica, but as we shall see it was very much dominated by a very
tight-knit aristocracy. Well first, what was Roman citizenship like? And I raise that issue
in the very first lecture and it's important to keep in mind that the Romans ultimately
define their citizenship as a group of political and legal rights. On this I said great variance
with Greek and other notions, that is it wasn't dissent, it wasn't even necessarily culture as
we shall see the Romans very often incorporated people in these different statuses or classes of
citizenship or part citizenship-aligned status without interfering with local institutions,
whether they be gods or even local political institutions, social arrangements, the Romans
were very flexible about this. Their main concern was bringing people into the Roman body politic
because they needed that military power and that military power was expressed in a term very often
known as the ex-formula togattorum, that is the formula of the togated people, that is those
people who wore togas in Italy and that would include even the Etruscans who didn't speak an
italic language, that these people owed a military service on Rome's demand, they would fight under
Roman commanders but otherwise the key local institutions, customs and institutions were
not in any way violated or consciously molded after Roman institutions, it's an important
point to keep in mind. Well let's take 264 BC, this is an important year in Roman history,
it's the year when the Romans went to war with Carthage, that is wage their first major war
outside of Italy that transformed Rome into a Mediterranean power. Now the population of the
Roman Republic would fall into four major legal categories, in 264 BC Rome controlled what they
would have called Italy, which is about 65% of peninsula Italy, if you drew a line from the
Arno where Florence is today on the river Arno across Italy, joining up with the Rubicon, the
famous river that Julius Caesar will cross, everything south of that would be classified as
Italy, to the north was that region of Sassalpangol settled by Celtic peoples and others, it wasn't
part of Italy at all. Within Italy the Romans had four classification, there were Roman citizens
who had the full rights to vote in assemblies, hold offices of state, there would be magistrates
and those ex officials, those ex officers of the Roman state, then went into this advisory group
known as the Senate. There was another classification of half citizens, these were people who had been
incorporated into the Roman body politic, very much in the area of Campania today on the Bay of
Naples, they were extremely loyal allies who got a status in which they had the private
protection and rights of Roman citizens, but at the time they were deemed to be too far away,
they couldn't get to Rome to vote, and therefore they didn't have the public legal rights.
These half citizens, they were very often called in Latin, Kiue Sinesufragio, were eventually
all incorporated as full citizens as Rome expanded and security and communications improved.
There was a third class, these are the Latins in 264 BC, there were 30 Latin communities,
they were known as colonies, colonia in Latin, colonii where we get the word colony,
these were military settlements, they were comprised Roman citizens and other allies,
and this was a kind of half status to citizenship. Latins were independent communities,
they used the Latin language, they were seen as related to Romans, they had the right,
Latin could migrate and resume his Roman citizenship in Rome, but he would have to leave a son or some
family member to take on the military obligation. The Latin colonies were essentially self-governing
bodies, but they owed military service to Rome and they had no independent foreign policy.
On the other hand, they had the rights to intermarry with Romans to carry out contracts,
but one important point, and this will come through in all of Rome's arrangements with
barbarian peoples after they leave Italy, each Latin colony had a separate treaty with Rome,
but not among themselves, this is the principle of divide and conquer, that is each ally,
dependent client state of Rome, the obligation ran between Rome and that ally, whereas the other
allies were not to be allied among themselves in any way. And finally, there was a category of
allies called in Latin, sochi, where we get the word social, so it sometimes causes confusion,
and these were the various members of Italian communities, tribes, cities, could be Greek
cities, it could be, majority of Italy spoke what are known as Ascan Umbrian dialects, which were
not Latin, not related to Latin at all, except kind of remotely, they were probably mutually
unintelligible. These allies, again, had military service to Rome and their own institutions,
and they may have been as much as two thirds or 60% of the people living in that Roman
Republican Commonwealth. So, from the start in 264 BC, when the Romans entered their first overseas
war, the majority of people fighting in Roman armies, the majority of men, are not legally Roman
citizens. And as we shall see, the Romans are extremely good as imperialists of getting someone
else to die for them rather than their own citizens. From the beginning, Roman citizens
were clashed into two orders, patrician and plebeian. These are terms that are very loaded today,
we think of patrician as an aristocrat, a blue blood, and plebeians as the unwashed masses,
and probably that was the original notion in Roman law. But in 509 BC, when the Romans had kicked
out their last kings and set up a city-state government, the patricians represented that
noble class, noble ace, whose ancestors claimed to hold high offices of state and the priesthoods,
and they alone had the right to hold office. And those offices included above all the consulship,
the consul, the man who had the imperium, where we get the word imperial, which is the right to
command armies, the right to impose military discipline on citizens. The patricians claim
they were the only ones allowed to do so, they had a monopoly on this right. And the rest of the
citizen body, the plebeians, and the Roman word for that other class would be ordo or order,
they did not have the right to hold office or the high priesthoods. That did not necessarily mean
that they were all poor. We know from the start of the republic that there were a number of plebeian
families that were quite wealthy, noble, but for some reason, whatever their origins, they didn't
have the right to hold that high office of state. And in 264 BC, Rome had concluded just a couple
of decades, about a generation earlier, a long struggle between patricians and plebeians, whereby
the plebeian class or ordo in Roman terms, which ordo is probably or order is a better term because
it doesn't imply the kind of economic classes in the modern world, that the plebeian order had
rested the right that its members could hold high office of state. And also that public land,
that is land taken in conquest was distributed to the poor plebeians. There was negotiations on debt,
there was recognition of the plebeians as tribal assembly or as it's called the consilium plebis
with the tribunes could protect the plebeians from the arbitrary decisions of judges and magistrates.
This had been worked out in a series of laws between 267 and 287 BC, in which Rome came through a
social political crisis with a new in effect concordia or concord, understanding among the
various groups in the citizen body. A new magisterial class of nobles, men who were patrician or
plebeian in origin, whose families held high office in Rome, had the right to stand as magistrates.
And so part of the Roman aristocracy was not that original patrician elite in 264 BC.
The rest of the plebeians had gained a number of important rights. One was, well,
they always had the right to vote. But they also had the protection of a special group of officials
known as tribunes. There were 10 of them, tribunes of the plebeians, who could protect
any plebeian by the right of appeal from an arbitrary decision by a magistrate. And this was
extremely important. There were other rights, for instance, the abolishment of debt slavery,
better conditions and services in the army, distributions of public land, and a number
of other benefits. But in 264 BC, there was this compromise that had been worked out.
And that meant that the two orders of the Roman Republic did understand how their constitution
operated. And ultimately, whatever the details of the constitution, and I think of the 19th century
British constitutional historian, Walter Badgett, ultimately the constitution functioned
because of the reasonableness of men. That is, the citizens agreed to play by the rules.
And this is one of the reasons why the Republic was so successful in its expansion.
Now, in that arrangement of plebeians and patricians, there are three components to the Roman
Constitution that have to be kept in mind. And they will come in, especially in the first
third of this course, play a very important role. First, the Roman political body, the populace
Romanus, that is, the Roman people, the citizens, voted. They were ultimately sovereign.
Unlike our notions of voting, it was not one man, one vote, far from it. The voting went in
assemblies of Roman citizens, which had group voting. That is, if you carried a majority of the
units, you won the election. Now, for our purposes, there were only two key assemblies that you have
to worry about. One was the Centurion Assembly. This was an assembly based on centuries, that is,
units in the Roman army. And it was very heavily weighted towards population, towards age and
towards property. These were the property landowners who elected the high officials of state,
including the councils, praetors who were junior officials who could command armies,
the dictator and emergency office, the censor. These were the most important offices in state.
In addition, there was a tribal assembly, or sometimes when the patricians weren't present,
a thing called the Consilium Plebeus, it was the same thing, which was based on residents.
You were registered in one of 35 tribes, that is, large districts of Roman citizens.
And there, again, a majority of tribes would carry the vote, and that vote was for legislation.
That is, you passed bills, whatever they would be. Now, all these Roman assemblies that, man,
there were several others that were not important at this point. But all of these assemblies did
not have independent initiative. Assembly had to be summoned by a magistrate. There were set of
religious institutions, observation, observances you had to go through. And so the assemblies
ultimately had a passive role. They either voted yes or no. They voted for this candidate or not
that candidate. The tribal assembly was the closest that the Romans ever came to democracy.
And as we shall see in a coming lecture, it wasn't all that democratic because of the social bonds
between the majority of citizens and the political elite. The centurion assembly was very much
weighted towards property and towards age. And there, perhaps 15 or 20 percent of the Roman
electorate essentially determined the outcome. In addition to these assemblies, there were the
magistrates who were elected. And the magistrates, the highest ones were known as courial officials.
They saw it on these special chairs. The consuls and preachers had lictors, the men with these bundles
of rods, and axes which showed that they had the power of life and death over citizens. These are
the foskates. It's used as a fascist symbol. It was actually on American coins, the dime,
the so-called mercury dimes for the first half of the 20th century. It was very odd we had this
foskates. We were fighting the fascists in Italy and Germany. But that's another story of American
iconography coming from Rome. The magistrates with those bundles of axes and rods were consuls
and preachers. And these magistrates were elected by the centurion assembly. However,
they were restricted. This was an aristocratic republic. The Roman political classes never
wanted to go back to the earlier monarchy. And so the one key point about Roman public offices,
you always had a colleague. The office was annual. And in the event of a dispute, the negative vote
won. And this was to prevent any one man from acquiring too much power. Also, there were a
number of age restrictions. You couldn't hold the consulship except after a 10-year interval.
To be consul, you had to be 43 years of age. There was a sequence of offices that had to
be worked out. And there was this aristocratic conceit in the republic that only members of
that high upper class, of noblists, that elite of perditions and plebeians alone,
were entitled to hold these offices. And the attitude was, any noble could hold that office.
I mean, there was almost a notion that, well, so long as you were born of a great family,
you were reared in the great traditions of your ancestors, you were fit for command.
And that is an important point to keep in mind. From the start of the Roman republic,
the political classes were always expected to undertake military service. They were the commanders
just by birth, training and tradition. And so when you move from Roman political institutions
to Roman military institutions, it was a very, very easy transition. The people who dominated
the political life were the same upper class figures who commanded in the army. The Romans
assembled and voted in units, particularly in the centurion assembly. They assembled on what is
known as the campus marshes, the field of Mars just outside the sacred limit of the original city.
And they assembled in the very types of military units they served and fought in. And sometimes
people wonder, well, why are Roman political assembly so violent? Well, whenever the Romans
assembled for voting, it was like assembling for the army. So I sometimes wonder whether
this notion of violence just carried over from one type of marshaling to another.
So that aristocratic upper class group from the start knew that it was bound for a political
career. Now this type of arrangement had enormous virtues. For one, it allowed the Roman upper class
and there you're talking about 30 great clans. The Latin word for that would be gents,
plural gentes, where we get words such as gentile. That Roman upper class of patrician
and plebeian gentes, clans, monopolized high office and commanded the armies and agreed
to play by the aristocratic rules. That is, everyone gets to serve as consul, that all members,
unless they're mentally unfit, all members of those great families would get their turn.
They could never get too powerful because they were checked by the limitations of office,
they had colleagues. But that meant all of them had the opportunity to gain glory, booty,
the kinds of praise and emulation of their ancestors that gave them in Latin the word
altoritos, where we get authority, prestige, influence, which was literally the lifeblood
of this aristocracy. Now there were also some rather peculiar problems with this arrangement.
It was essentially a political decision to keep power from ever turning into a dictatorship
or kingship again, but it could cause some really rather peculiar screw ups in Roman
military operations. What happens when two consuls command an army together? There were
several situations of this, we'll encounter a few of them. One was that, well, you command on
alternate days, that was a solution that was worked out early in the republic, and so one
consul would command on one day and one on another. This of course led to some colossal disasters,
the most famous is in August of 216 BC in the battle of Conai against Hannibal,
where one consul Lucius Emilius Paulus, who didn't want to engage Hannibal, commanded on one day,
he wouldn't fight Hannibal in the open because he was such a great general, and the other one,
Gaius Torentius Varro, wanted to fight Hannibal, he had a reason to gain glory, and he commanded
on the alternate day and it was on Varro's day when the army, a double consular army,
marched out to face Hannibal and produced probably one of the most extraordinary defeats in history
in which a larger Roman army, numbered by some authors at 80,000, was encircled and destroyed
by a smaller Carthaginian army of 40,000, really a first class disaster and completely at odds of
all military principles. A larger army is supposed to encircle the bigger army, but that's another
case of Hannibal's genius, so that there were always these weaknesses within the Roman political
structure, and they became evident as the Romans expanded overseas. The limitations of
political office would hinder the Romans in carrying out their conquests, and as I mentioned,
the Romans were always very, very adaptable in changing their institutions to meet these changes.
In the case of consuls, the Romans made a number of changes when they had to wage wars overseas.
One was creating a whole class of officials known as pro-magistrates, pro-consuls, pro-preters,
these are words that still survive in English. We talk of pro-consuls as some kind of colonial
governor. It's used especially in British English when they're talking about the 19th and early 20th
century empire, and these would be a magistrate who had held his office in Rome, had finished his
term and under the rule should step down from office, but because he was overseas, he was extended
as a pro-consul, meaning in place of a consul for an additional year or two years, whatever
amount of time necessary to conclude a campaign because of the difficulties of communication
time, and you just couldn't replace them, and the Romans often were fighting simultaneous wars,
and that was an adjustment, and pro-consuls were beneath consuls, and then again, the Romans very
strictly defined it. That is, you could only exercise that power as a pro-consul within a
specific area, a pro-winkia in Latin, province, and originally all that province meant in Latin
was a theater of operation. It was very vaguely defined. It was an area where you, with that power,
that imperium, that a right to command citizens, and that even included violating citizens'
rights by imposing military discipline, which was very harsh. You might have to execute soldiers
for lack of living up to their obligations, so you had that special right. That's why you had the
Lictors running around with those Fasces to show that, that you could only exercise that power
within that specific province, wherever it was, and so the Romans made that adjustment.
They even made such minor adjustments, which might baffle people today, is why does the calendar
year start on January 1st, and we will find out in a upcoming lecture. That's because Roman
commanders of consuls, magistrates, traditionally took office on March 15th, the Ides of March,
day Julius Caesar got knifed, and if you think about it for a moment, the months of our year
come from the Roman names. Why is December the 12th month? Well, it wasn't originally the 12th
month, or November the 11th. It originally was the 10th month, because the year started on March 15th,
but as the Romans got involved in conquering Spain and fighting all these nasty Celt-Iberian
barbarians, they found out if they sent their consuls out on January, on March 15th to Spain,
they didn't have enough time to get out there, mobilize the soldiers and beat up the Spaniards
and get back in time to Rome for the, for the next set of elections, so they moved the calendar to
January 1, just so the consuls could get out there in time, in ergo, we have this rather
strange naming of our months. And of course, as I said, the Romans would never abolish any name,
or institution, or change it. I mean, they would carry a reform out and very reluctantly leave
they change as little as necessary, so the old names of the months held on. So even though the
Romans went out to conquer the world with essentially what were city-state institutions,
it became very adept at adapting them to the demands of overseas empire. Now that gets us
to the third point, we have the assemblies which are ultimately sovereign, but as we shall see,
are rather restricted, they're not really representative or democratic in our sense of the
word, and we have these magistrates who are annually elected officers who ultimately are
responsible to the assembly, but the key element that came to run the, the, the republic and for
almost 200 years the overseas empire was the senate term that is still used in the American
constitution today. The senate comprised the ex magistrates. The Roman senate was all of the
former consuls and pleaders, the great men who had held office, they went into the senate, there was
a, after a series of reforms, it was automatic once you elected to high office, or in this
period of the republic, there were censors elected every five, every fifth year, there was a sense,
two censors were elected, and they selected the most worthy to be put into the senate,
but the senate in effect was the advisory body, so you had the elected, the, the assemblies that do
the elections, you have the, the officials that are the closest thing we have to executive and
financial agents, as we understand as officers of state, and then you had this body, the senate,
and the senate had collectively Alctoritas, it had influence. These were the senior men, these were
often the fathers, the grandfathers, the uncles of the men who held offices, the, the magistrates,
they were in effect the same families, they were the same nobles, and since every magistrate only
held office for a year and wanted to move on the fast track to get into the senate, you will see
that Roman magistrates on the whole were very reluctant to use any of the implications of
those assemblies, especially the tribal assembly, the one based on residence, to carry out too
much radical legislation of reform, because ultimately they wanted the respectability
and the authority of sitting in the senate, and the senate was as hierarchical as an organization
as you could come up with, uh, speaking was done in a strict priority, you know, with seniority,
once you were in the senate you were in senate for life, and there are many, there are many, many
stories about senior senators known as a prinkepsin honest, a prince of the senate coming in and
swaying the vote of the junior assemblies, the most famous is Appius Claudius Polcaire,
who was the blind one, the Caicos, he built the Appian Way, and the Romans were treating with
King Pyrrhus, who invaded Italy, the man who won the Pyrrhic victories, and they're, they're
about to negotiate a treaty, and Caicos comes in led by his servants, he's now blind, and he says,
oh would that my ears be deaf, as well as my sight being lost, that I hear Romans treating with an
enemy on Italian soil, and then goes on, no deals, we do not in any way deal with Pyrrhus,
and the senate says, you're right, you're right, no treaty, we're going to fight to the end until
we win, and then eventually Pyrrhus went on to win a Pyrrhic defeat, which, um, did him in, uh,
so that political body, the senate in the end, uh, ended up dominating the, uh,
Roman state during the period of expansion overseas, because it was the only permanent
standing office, or institution in Rome, it had the collective experience of all the great magistrates
and leading families, and therefore could act for the name of the Roman state, and in all of the,
uh, inscriptions that you find in the Roman Republic, they, oh, you often see them ending with SPQR,
Sinatius Populesc, Romanus, the senate and people of Rome,
note that the senate comes first, the people and assemblies and their magistrates always come second.
These three public institutions, which are the way the Romans governed themselves,
voted their magistrates, carried out their policy, uh, they endured for the next,
well, almost 250 years, and won Rome her empire. Uh, it is often thought that a great
deal of the success of the Romans, uh, rested on the fact that they had this hierarchical
therefore, that the lower classes deferred to the upper classes, uh, that the Roman peasants were
land hungry, they wanted booty, they followed their officers, uh, and their consuls, uh, their social
betters in conquering the empire, and there's a great deal of truth to this. Uh, one could just
see the way Romans plunder city, no cities, no one plunder, plunder the city methodically than a Roman
army. Uh, it's done on a very logical basis. But ultimately, it also rested on the fact that
at, in 264 BC, there was this understanding of a political consensus, and hence Roman citizens
would repeatedly respond to the halls of the standards and crisis, and would give themselves
over to those magistrates, magistrates to serve. And there was this bedrock of Roman patriotism,
however it's defined, however much it's romanticized, and it was largely based not only on the,
it was based on two pillars, not only on the political arrangement, they followed their
off, but also on the bonds of society that tied the classes together and would still tie the
classes together in Italy to tie a patient and client, and that is the next component
in understanding the success of the Roman Republic.
