Lecture 4 The Roman Way of War
In this lecture, I want to follow up with the third of the institutional lectures of the Middle and Late Roman Republic.
This one involves the army, the Roman Way of War.
This is a really central lecture because the Romans turned out to be some of the finest soldiers that the ancient world ever produced.
The army of the Republic, the famed citizen legions, and the professional legions of the Roman Empire are still envy today.
The highest compliment you can pay to an army is to say that they are the new legions.
A phrase that comes in the 17th century applied first, I think, to the armies of Gustavus Adolphus, the king of Sweden.
In any case, the Romans perfected weapons and tactics among their citizen legionaries so that they could wage campaigns against tough hill peoples in south, central Italy, the so-called Samnites,
and above all, the Celtic tribes of northern Italy, that is, the region called Sassalpangol, north of the Rubicon Arno rivers.
Our information on the Roman army is sometimes very, very schematic for the early period.
We get a great deal of information from the late Republic, early imperial age, and then we don't have the same kind of documentation for the later Roman Empire.
So very often we're operating from information that really refers to the Roman army from about 150 BC to about 200 AD,
and we're being a bit speculative when we project it back into the middle and early Republic.
But with those provisos, we can still look at certain important features and advantages the Romans had in 264 BC
when they began to undertake that overseas expansion, that is, they broke out of their traditional Italian homeland.
Well, Rome, not only in the Republic, but through most of the imperial age, always retained the right to levy citizens in a draft, a delectus.
Every Roman magistrate elected with imperium, that is the right to command citizens, had the right to raise a levy of soldiers, of citizens,
and to summon allies to serve under the eagles, that is, the standards of the legions.
In the Roman Republic in 264 BC, the data I chose to sketch out the political and social institutions,
only Romans with property, who would have been classified as assidue, that is, an assiduous as a man who has a property qualification,
that enables him to equip himself with the full armor and weapons required of legionary, that is, heavy infantrymen,
only they have to respond to the draft when summoned.
Now, those who didn't have the full arms, they would see military service, they could be summoned, those would be proletarii,
where we get the word proletarian, they had little or no property, they would serve as the light infantry,
those would be the veletes, or the veletes in classical Latin, they would serve as missile soldiers,
they threw javelins, slings, bows, were not equipped with the heavy arms, and weren't expected to do the serious fighting.
The very top classes of Roman society, that is, the senatorial, the political elite, they, of course, served as the generals,
the officers, and above all, as the cavalry, because in 264 BC, citizenship was very much dependent on military service.
You were expected, as in all ancient city-states and constitutions, you were expected to provide your own weapons,
and your position in the army reflected your property, and therefore your worth to the state,
and the way the Romans graded their citizens, that is giving more emphasis to property and age,
very much reflected the fact that those were the people who were most likely to serve in the vital arm of the heavy infantry, the legionary.
Between 264 and 200 BC, as best as we can tell, the Roman army was in a state of evolution in its weapons and tactics,
and we'll get to that in a little later on in this lecture, but they're shifting in effect from using a pike,
that is a spear into a thrusting and cutting sword, the so-called gladius.
All Roman citizens were expected to be able to train themselves.
One of the obligations of a father was to train his sons to fight in the proper Roman fashion,
so when the citizens were summoned in 264 BC, it was also expected that many of these men already knew the basic drill,
the marching and the techniques, and everyone could fall in and perform as they were supposed to.
Furthermore, those bonds of social bonds of patron and client also played into the draft to the delectives.
There was the pressure of answering a magistrate who was your patron.
Of course you served, your sons served, your family, so there were social pressures, there was a sense of patriotism.
You were already partially drilled, and most Roman soldiers, even those with property, were used to hard, heavy manual work,
and therefore showing up for legionary service, especially when wars were largely seasonal in the conquest of Italy,
was not seen as the kind of burden that it would come to be viewed later on.
The effectiveness of the Roman draft in the conquest of Italy, and certainly for the first two generations,
well, it's not until about 150 BC that the Romans started having trouble with their draft,
was very much premised on the voluntary service of its citizens, the willingness to show up for the draft,
and a draft as in many societies turns out to be essentially a way of inducing enlistment
and encouraging men to offer themselves for service.
Well, as to the tactics and the weapons and the skills of the Roman army at the start of this course,
we have two descriptions of the Roman army that come down from literary sources.
One was penned by the Roman historian Livy and later accounts, looking at the army in about the third century BC.
The other and the more detailed one comes from Polybius, writing about 150 BC.
He was a political hostage. He had been banished to Rome by his political opponents back in Greece,
and he attached himself to a very important Roman of the time, Publius Cornelius Scipio Emileanus,
the younger Scipio who finally destroyed Carthage in 146 BC,
and Polybius got a great deal of information by direct observation and also from one of the great commanders of the Middle Republic.
It is clear that by the time the Romans clash with the professional armies of Carthage,
they undertake their wars in Spain and northern Italy, they are shifting over to shock action based on a sword.
The tactical units seem to be in change in 264 BC.
They fought in smaller units known as manifolds.
There seems to have been a diversity of equipment.
That is, the manifolds of 120 men in a legion would form up in three ranks.
The front ten, the Principace, the second rank, the Hastate, the Tiari in the back.
The front two ranks had probably a version of the pilum.
That is the spear that was thrown at the opponent, usually to disable him, kill him.
The pilum eventually is devised by Marius to be a two-foot iron head with a shaft of about four feet,
and then the shaft would detach.
So if this thing sunk into your shield, you're so burdened you'd throw your shield away,
and then you'd be without most of your protection, and that would expose you to attack by Roman swordsmen.
So that a classic Roman attack in the second and first century BC would open with a volley of these pila,
these heavy javelins, followed with close shock action with the sword,
the gladius, the famed cutting and thrusting sword,
and there's a diversity of opinion as when this sword took over and replaced earlier sabers.
Some see it in the fourth century BC fighting the hill tribes, the Samnites,
others see it as modified by fighting in Spain.
The likelihood is the Romans were constantly modifying their weapons and devising variations,
and sometime in the third century BC had really come to depend on the sword as their main weapon of choice.
So legionaries were usually drawn up in manifolds, later in cohorts, which are larger units,
but whatever the actual tactical unit, they could draw up in sort of a checkerboard fashion.
There would be a front rank, a second rank and a third rank, then they would attack,
and those ranks could spread out in an open order, they could close up in a more dense formation.
They probably didn't attack the people as little checkerboard squares, they would fan out and cover the whole frontage,
but the legionaries are extremely flexible, and the best observation is they combine cavalry tactics,
the flexibility of cavalry with the steadiness of infantry.
The legions could move in, would fight for 20 minutes with the sword, they could fall back, reform open lanes
so the next line could attack, they would assault the enemy, they would fall back,
then the third line would attack, in effect they could fight in relays.
They could also move the back ranks out to form flanks.
The flexibility is seen in the wars against the heavy Macedonian phalanx in the east
or against barbarian forces in northern Europe.
The Roman army could change fronts, it could move, you could shift forces from the left flank around to the right flank,
remarkably flexible infantry formations.
They were usually screened by light infantry that might start an attack with missiles,
it wasn't necessary always, cavalry played the function of patrol reconnaissance and supporting the flanks.
But the main attack was that legionary, that infantryman,
and it would take two years to train a man to that kind of effectiveness with the sword.
The result is the Romans inflicted casualties.
There's reports that come from Livy, the historian writing at the end of the first century BC,
of when the Macedonians first encountered Roman soldiers in an action in northern Greece.
There were cut to pieces by legionaries with swords, the Greeks tended to, and Macedonians depended on the long pike.
The Romans got in close, they would smash the edges of the pikes off,
go in there and fight closely and kill people.
And that shocked the Greeks, they were used to the push and pull,
and in most traditional Greek phalanx battles that decide that broke ranks and lost,
took the losses and the winner took very few casualties.
In the Romans they moved in close for the kill, they were taught to go for the neck, the vital parts.
We have skeletons excavated from sites captured by the 2nd Augusta,
the legion operating in southern England in 43-49 AD, in which they broke in it.
Maiden Castle is one of the sites, and the wounds are perfectly consistent with the kind of wounds
you would expect from a gladiator or a Roman legionary.
They made war violently, and all their foes knew it.
They combined this disciplined attack with the viciousness of close order fighting,
and very few armies have depended on that kind of close order fighting.
They went in for the kill, and that demoralized opponents.
Even the barbarians were reputedly greater warriors, the Celts,
the Romans' worst nightmares, as we'll see, are taller than the Romans.
They were hulking, standing maybe 5'9", 5'10", over the small Romans,
charging with slashing swords, supposedly tinted blue, that is, they had war paint on.
They come charging and crashing.
If the Romans could resist that charge and push them back, they could get them with the swords.
The Roman body armor was perfectly adjusted for that type of fighting,
it left the arms free, the ears were exposed so they could hear commands,
the shield they adapted, this wooden reinforced shield, reinforced with leather and metal,
the scutum, it was a cylindrical, semi-cylindrical rectangular shield,
covered the body and meant that each Roman swordsman could fight individually with full protection.
And the power and effectiveness of the Roman army depended on the individual skill
of each soldier and his ability to operate in teams with his fellow centuries,
that is, units of 100 or 80, which formed larger tactical units,
and the fact that the Roman soldier was interchangeable with any other Roman soldier,
and that the units were interchangeable, and above all in the Republic,
that the reserves, the men not called to the colors, were just as good as the men who were called.
There weren't going to be weak soldiers in the Roman army.
The Romans used an open-order formation, not a column attack,
column attacks just need the men in the front and the men in the back
to know what they're doing.
The guys in the front, in the middle, are just providing the impetus, the strength,
the legionaries span out and kill opponents on a wide front.
This is what gives rise to such terms as Pyrrhic victories.
Twice the Romans were defeated by the mercenary king Pyrrhus,
and on both instances, inflected heavy casualties.
The Romans are one of the few armies, as they go down fighting,
they inflict enormous casualties on their opponents,
and there isn't anything more destructive than a Roman civil war,
because the two armies will go at it all day and hack each other to pieces.
So in terms of fighting ability, the Roman army was superb,
and as I mentioned, they are constantly innovating on their equipment and tactics,
always refining it to the point that these citizen soldiers,
when they embarked on those overseas wars,
they certainly may not have been professional in the sense that this was their only occupation,
but in their ability to fight, in their sense of comradeship,
in their sense of devotion to their units,
they were as professional an army as could be.
There were other advantages the Romans had over their opponents.
That included the vaunted engineering skills,
and their ability to construct roads, to fortify camps.
As I mentioned earlier, the Greeks always regarded the Romans,
at least initially, as barbarians.
I mean, there's Greeks in the 2nd century AD who still think the Romans are barbarians.
But the Romans are barbarians, they're not Greeks.
And again, going back to that King Pyrrhus,
who in 280 BC intervened in southern Italy to help a group of Greek city-states
against the power of Rome,
he was led to believe he was fighting a group of Italian barbarians.
He arrives, he assembles the citizen militia of Tarras, Tarentum,
the modern city of Tarento today on the heel of Italy,
and marches off to fight these barbarians.
He gets up with his reconnaissance and looks out at a Roman consular camp,
and turns to his offices and says,
this is not the manner of barbarians.
That is, the Romans laid out a perfectly regular grid camp
whenever they were moving in enemy territory,
and that grid camp becomes the basis of setting up permanent camps in the Roman Empire
and still survives as the street plans of cities in Western Europe and elsewhere
that go back to Roman military establishments.
It's very well laid out.
You always know where your tent is.
There's a certain regularity, predictability in these tents.
There's a wall that's constructed to protect you for sleep.
It's a point to rally.
Again, the Romans approved in their military organization
just in their other public activities.
If you organize, you can achieve great results.
The most impressive cases of engineering in the late Republic
will be the Siege of Elisha in 52 B.C.,
which climaxes the campaigns of Julius Caesar in conquering Gaul,
and that was an impressive set of fortifications still there
in which 12 miles of fortifications close off the Gaelic city of Elisha
where the Gaelic rebel forces on Diverse and Jeterix are trapped,
and then another 14 miles are constructed facing outward
to repel the relieving Gaelic army on the way.
It's a truly stunning piece of military engineering.
And the Romans, like all professional soldiers, knew you dig.
Professionals always dig.
They fortify. They entrench.
Behind it was a supply system, artillery, ballistic catapults,
Siegecraft.
Roman soldiers were skilled engineers as well as soldiers,
and that will explain also the importance of the Roman army
in Romanizing and mastering the Roman Empire.
Above all, all Romans praised bravery, glory.
They waged war violently.
The great commanders expected to gain where tos.
That is a demonstration of their bravery.
We get the word virtue, and virtue in Latin originally meant manliness,
very much like the Greek word arite, the equivalent,
and only comes to take its moral connotations really in the hands
of philosophical writers and then of Christian writers.
They needed laos, laos, where we get laud, praise.
And above all, the height of success would be the great Roman triumph,
which is not only a way of magnifying the glory of a Roman commander,
but it also points very much to the Roman passion of counting and organizing.
You get a triumph by defeating foes,
by which the Romans hoped to be barbarian foes,
not Roman citizens, not civil wars,
and you have to kill over 5,000 enemies.
And I'm certain the Romans went around and counted,
and if you're one short, you got an ovation.
You didn't get a triumph, which is a much lesser event.
And it's an enormous parade in which you march through the city of Rome.
The consul, the preter, the magistrate leads it.
The army is marching behind you.
You're in a chariot.
You represent, in effect, a proxy for Jupiter.
There's a slave behind you telling you,
remember, you're only a man.
And there's been a couple of them recreated in the movies
that really are quite good.
And above all, you follow with a parade of all the booty and captives.
This is the closest the Romans ever get to the National Geographic
way of understanding the world.
You have, you know, these are Celtic barbarians
and so much booty and so many people killed.
And as I say, it's very carefully counted.
And historians like Livy tell us how many coins were captured,
how much treasures, how many torques,
those are the necklaces of Gaelic warriors
are very, very concerned about this.
And so all of that is a way of magnifying
not only the glory of the commander but the bravery of the army
and reinforcing those traditions of citizenship and patriotism
that fed into the levying of these great citizen armies.
Commanders were expected to leave from the front
as the modern parlance would be.
That is, they were expected to be an example to their men.
The best case of that comes from the writings of Julius Caesar.
Nothing more vivid than his orations, his speeches before battle.
These have been studied often by literary scholars as well.
They're sort of pedestrian.
They're standard oratorical works.
Nonetheless, if you read those speeches before a body of men
ready to, you know, clash swords with the Germans or the Gauls,
this is exactly what the army wanted and needed
in order to get them fired up into battle.
Caesar shows remarkable ability to act under a cool,
under difficult conditions to rally his soldiers,
his performance at the Battle of the Sombra in 57 BC
is a brilliant case of generalship.
Centurions, the men who were the non-commissioned officers,
the sergeants of the army who trained the sentries,
the 100-man basic unit, the tribunes,
the junior officers of aristocratic background,
there were six to the legion.
They were expected to give examples.
There are numerous instances of this in the landing in Britain
when the Roman soldiers were reluctant to land in Britain in 55 BC.
This is Julius Caesar's first invasion of Britain.
There are all these nasty Britons on the shores underneath,
on the Kentish shores, you know, ready to attack the Romans
as soon as they come off their ships.
The young tribune takes the standard of the 10th legion,
that is, its eagle, races ashore,
and the soldiers knowing if the eagle falls in the enemy hands,
their unit is disgraced, follow behind him.
And there are numerous actions of this sort
that come down in Roman literature,
while they may be stock patriotic examples.
These are the sort of examples and expectations
that forge these citizen soldiers to that professional level.
And it also explains the enormous success the Romans had
in mobilizing manpower.
And that is something that is often forgotten in the modern age,
and that is the tremendous logistics it took
to support these armies.
They had to be fed, clothed, transported overseas,
or marched to distant frontiers.
In 225 BC, we have our earliest good statistics
on the Roman population.
There are well over a million Romans,
Latins, and Italian allies,
adult males, ready for military service,
trained to fight under Roman commanders.
At the height of the Second Punic War,
the war against Hannibal between 218 and 201 BC,
we think at one point there were 280,000 men under arms.
These are staggering numbers.
Between 264 and 31 BC,
one-half to two-thirds of all Romans and Italian allies
saw military service,
and the state could call military service for 20 years,
although they were reasonable.
They never took you more than six years at a time.
If you failed to show up for military service,
you let down the state, you let down your patron.
They could auction your property right there on the spot,
or you would have to offer substitutes,
meaning your sons or your close male relatives.
After 200 BC, annually, the Roman army
kept at least 150,000 men overseas
as effectively a standing army
to defend the far-flung provinces against barbarians,
and if there were military expeditions
against powerful opponents that meant additional forces
that meant fleets, this was a staggering commitment,
and it is a testimony to Roman social and political institutions,
as well as the logistics that the Romans
could keep these sustained armies overseas.
On average, one estimate is 17% on average,
without any major wars,
and the Romans usually fought two-three wars
in the late Republic, middle and late Republic,
two-three wars simultaneously.
17% of the adult male population was under arms.
Now, that figure only takes on meanings
when you think of the early modern age.
The first professional army in Western Europe,
since the fall of the Roman Empire,
is the army of Louis XIV.
He couldn't mobilize 5% of his population,
his adult male population.
The army of Prussia, Frederick William's army,
4.5% of the total population of Prussia was mobilized,
and that 4.5%, most of them weren't even Prussians.
They were the dregs of Europe that were sandbagged
or induced to enlist as Prussian soldiers,
as well as a big hunk of the Austrian army
that got captured in some of the wars,
war of the Austrian succession in particular.
So, Roman military power is awesome.
It also can be compared against the opponents
that are pitted against the Romans.
Now, a Roman consular army
could number 20,000 to 40,000 men.
Half Roman or two-thirds of it was allied,
one-third Roman.
But most ancient armies fell between 20,000 and 40,000 men,
which was about the most effective army you could assemble.
You had the power, the strength,
and you could feed and equip supply and move them.
Yet, the Romans had this enormous ability
to mobilize other forces behind them.
So, if you destroyed a Roman army of 20,000,
which was a big mistake,
other Romans would then mobilize another 20,000.
The strongest opponent the Romans faced
in the conquest overseas
were the organized kingdoms in the Hellenistic East.
Macedon, the king Philip V of Macedon,
King Perseus, the best they could do
was 150,000 men available for military service.
If they got in everyone and hired
half the barbarians of the Balkans,
the Romans had a million men.
You could see the figures are very heavily in the favor
of the Romans.
And the Romans were willing to use that power.
And nothing is a greater testimony
than the wars fought against Hannibal,
the battles against Hannibal.
In the first three years of the Punic War,
the Roman army lost 100,000 dead
out of 10% of its manpower.
A third of its Senate was killed in battle.
What did they do?
No deals with Hannibal.
They raised more legions and got it up to that 280,000 level.
In the wars in Spain against the Keltiberian barbarians
or fighting against the northern barbarians,
again, there's military disaster.
The Romans raised more men.
In time, this would take a terrible toll on the citizen body
and it would have major implications
of why the republic broke down
and this empire came to replace it.
But the organization and skill
of moving these vast forces into legions
and training them to that level
was a real testimony to the organization
and discipline of the Roman army.
And perhaps this is a good point
to close with a passage coming from Livy
who's a very patriotic historian
writing in the time of the Emperor Augustus
after the civil wars are over and the empire has come.
And he is his account
which would cover the whole Roman history,
only parts of it survived.
He's a major account for much of what will follow
in the, well, for the next five or six lectures,
the Roman wars in Spain
against the barbarians of northern Europe.
He tells us a great deal about these wars
and he gives us a speech probably, again, invented
or largely embroidered by Livy,
writing to, well, about 150 years after the event,
but it's given by a centurion, a non-commissioned officer.
He'd be equivalent of a sergeant in our army
in 171 BC.
And this was at a time where you're getting into a point
where the wars overseas are really taking their toll
on their citizens.
There's reluctance to be summoned to the draft.
There's a war against Macedon.
And this, followed by the name of Spurius Lingustinus,
comes before the Senate
and gives each to the reluctant draftees as follows.
This is what Livy tells us.
Citizens of Rome, I am Spurius Lingustinus
of the tribe Crustumena.
And I come of the Sabine stock.
These are people of Old Central Italy.
My father left me half an acre of land and a little hut
in which I was born and bred
and I am still living there today.
And came of age, my son gave me his brother's daughter,
who brought nothing but her save,
her free birth and chastity,
together with her fertility,
which would be enough for any wealthy home.
We have six sons and two daughters,
both daughters already married.
Four of my sons have taken the Toga of Manhood
to still wear the purple stripe.
That is, they're still adolescents,
would be the Roman term.
The Toga of Manhood means you're now a man
at age 15 or 16.
I joined the army in the consulship of Publius Sulpicious
in Gaius Aurelius.
And I served two years in the ranks of the army,
which was taken across to Macedonia
in a campaign against King Philip.
This is in 199-198 BC.
In the third year, Flamininus promoted me
for bravery to Centauri of the 10th Manipul of Stot.
That's an important position.
He's a non-commissioned officer.
He came up from a grunt to an effective sergeant.
After the defeat of King Philip and the Macedonians
when we had been brought back to Italy and demobilized,
I immediately left for Spain as a volunteer
with the consul Marcus Weisbeck.
This is a photograph of Spain.
This is not a place you would go.
First, the army's army is getting in the plunder.
It's not.
It's out there.
And he goes on and produces Marcus Portius.
I listed for a third time, again, as a volunteer,
the army sent against the Etolians and King Antiochus.
This is, again, in the east.
Marcus Aurelius appointed me Centaurian
of the first century of the Principais.
This is the highest post he could get,
a non-commissioned officer.
Marcus Aurelius had been driven out,
and the Etolians had been crushed.
But twice after that, I took part
in the reigns of King Antiochus.
After I came to Spain,
Marcus Aurelius sent me to the Etolians.
The Etolians sent me to the Etolians.
That's a very important operation.
I was brought home by Flockus with others,
whom he brought back with him from the province
for his triumph on account of my bravery.
Now, then he tells us about his bravery.
What is bravery?
Four times in the course of a few years,
I held the rank of Chief Centaurian.
Thirty-four times I was awarded
the honor of bravery by generals.
I have been given six civic awards
for saving the life of a fellow citizen
on the battlefield.
But even if I had not completed my service,
served 20 years,
and if my age had not given me an exemption,
at this point he's over 50 years of age,
it would still be right for me to discharge
because I have four soldiers as substitutes.
His four sons could serve in his place.
But I should like you to take this
simply as a statement of the case.
I could make from my part,
as long as anyone enlisted in the Army
deems me fit to service,
I shall never claim exemption.
It is up to the military tribunes
to decide what rank I deserve.
That is, he's a veteran, but they'll decide where I serve.
I shall make it my business to see
that no one in the Army outdoes me in bravery,
which is what I have always done
as my commanders, as well as my fellow campaigners,
can testify.
As for you, my comrades-in-arms,
because you don't want to be drafted to Macedon,
you are chlor-claiming your rights by appeal.
As citizens, they can do this.
They don't want to go.
The tribunes could prevent this.
And yet it is only fitting that you,
when youth never did anything
against the authority of magistrates in the Senate,
and this brings back that patron-client connection,
they've always followed the rules,
should now also be at the disposal
of the consuls in the Senate,
and should consider every situation honorable
in which you'll be defending your country.
Well, perhaps a lot
of propaganda and patriotic rewriting,
but nonetheless,
it was an example that all Romans
held to, and it was this type
of patriotism, ties and clients,
a patronage and
the traditions of the Republic
that gave the Roman Army
its decisive edge.
Thank you.
