In this lecture, I plan to introduce the Celts of Western and Central Europe, who in many
ways represented the epitome of barbarians to both Greeks and Romans, and it's important
for a moment to explain some of the terms I'm going to use in this lecture.
The preferred term is Celts, or in Greek it was Keltoi.
This is a term that has acquired a linguistic sense.
It refers to a large group of related languages, which at one point were spoken from Spain
through what is now France, into Central Europe, in the British Isles, Northern Italy, and
was even brought by a group of Celtic invaders into Central Turkey today, into the Anatolian
Plateau.
They were known as Galatians, Galatheoi in Greek, which refers to the Celtic peoples
who settled there in and around the area of, say, modern Ankara today.
And those people retain their distinct Celtic language well as late as the 4th century.
Saint Jerome claims that the language spoken there was still very much the same to the
language he knew in Gaul, especially around the city of Traveri, a modern tree, or in
Germany today.
The Romans called these people Galoi, Gauls.
Gaul has come to mean essentially France, an extended sense of France with the Rhineland
and parts of the Low Countries.
And so we tend to use the Celtic name, the Keltoi, the Celts, to designate these people
because Gauls has more of a geographic connotation.
In modern parlance, when one speaks of Celts, you think of Irish, Scots, Welsh, Cornishmen
and Breton in Brittany, often referred to as the Celtic fringe, and as should become
clear in this lecture, even in the Celtic era of Europe, that was still the Celtic fringe.
These island and western areas were pretty remote to the central areas of Celtic civilization,
and Celts moved into those regions later.
The core of Celtic civilization was really in southern Germany and eastern France and
spread out from that area.
Well with those terms in mind, let's take a look at who these barbarians are.
The Celts are known to us both from Greek and Roman literary sources.
As early as the 7th century or 6th century BC, I think the first author is Anaximander,
a Greek writer in the Aegean, writing roughly around 600 BC.
He refers to the Celts as the people where the Danube takes its origin, the Danube River.
And there are reports of Greek merchants and colonists, especially through the city of
Massilia today, Marseille, which was established as a Greek colony about 600 BC, having contact
with these people, entering into commercial transactions, selling them wine.
As I told you, it's an apocryphal story that the Celts learned how to drink wine, therefore
they invaded Italy in order to find out where this wine was made.
It's a story that comes down to us later, and while it's not true, it ought to be.
And that is one set of information, and there, the sources are pretty consistent.
They understood these people as representing a group of related barbarian peoples.
We also have an enormous amount of archaeology, really significant work that's been done
in southern Germany and in France, and here archaeology has revealed a much more complicated
material culture than the literary sources tell us, and we're always in this balancing
act of what does the physical evidence say, and it can only tell us certain things as
opposed to what does the literary record tell us, which is largely written by Greeks
and Romans, who often saw these people as foes.
And so what we're going to try to do is marry those two sources together and give you some
idea of the complexity and variety of Celtic civilization at the time that the Romans came
into contact with these people and saw them as the quintessential barbarians.
Well, there are two phases in the material culture recognized by archaeologists.
The first is known as the Hollisdott period, and that takes its name from a site in Austria
today, which was a major salt mining area, and that's a period that runs approximately
from about 800 to maybe 450 BC.
It's a little difficult to assign precise dates, and it sees a dramatic shift in the
material culture in central Europe and in what is now eastern France.
There is the adoption of an iron technology, more land is put under cultivation, villages
increase in size.
They begin to fortify certain settlements.
Now, it's hard to characterize what these settlements are, and I will use them both
for the Hollisdott and particularly the succeeding archaeological period, the La Tienne, which
runs from about 450 BC, well, really up to the Roman conquest of Gaul and 50 BC.
And both of these archaeological periods show an increasing number of these settlements
with ditches and palisades enclosing very large areas, much more, they're not cities.
There's somehow a bizarre cross between a town and a village.
There's large areas turned over to gardens, to agriculture, to keeping of animals.
There's obviously pens.
There's also a lot of manufacturing going on.
Usually when you came into the gates, there would be certain sections which would be reserved
for iron work, for ceramics, but what they do represent is concentrations of people in
the hundreds and later in the thousands that are in effect incipient towns.
And this begins to develop with the adoption of iron technology, improved agricultural
and stock raising, and it particularly begins to take off after 450 when you move from that
Hollisdott into that La Tienne phase.
What the archaeology shows us is these people are extremely adaptable and imaginative.
They are very, very skilled metallurgists.
Their iron tools and weapons are quite impressive.
And furthermore, it's clear that these settlements that begin to form in Austria, Slovakia, for
instance, has produced a number of important sites with iron working, that these settlements
were not strictly subsistence.
They had to live on trade.
Now, initially that trade was probably regional at Hollisdott itself.
They would have brought in the foodstuffs.
It's in a pretty remote, it's in a mountain zone, and you're really impressed by the shafts
to go down there in which to lug out these 20-pound blocks of salt.
They obviously had to bring foodstuffs in, and that meant someone was buying the salt.
And initially that was a regional trade.
Salt was important for preserving food.
It was also a condiment.
And in time, that trade begins to extend to the Mediterranean shores.
And it's the Greek contact, especially on what is now the Riviera, centered at the city
of Marseille, Massilia in Greek, and also the Etruscan cities, the cities of Tuscany
today in North Central Italy, which it also extended their range into Northern Italy,
into the Po, into the future site of the city of Milan.
On the east shore of Italy, there are Greek and Etruscanized cities.
All of these cities came to contact with the Celts, and they had a demand for the iron.
They had a demand for the salt.
And between 600 and 450 BC, these commercial transactions are very important in stimulating
the development of these towns, these fortified towns.
And by 450 BC, these towns are usually called an opidum, or opidum in plural.
It's a Latin term.
It's a term you encounter in Julius Caesar.
And very often we prefer to use that term, that Latin term, because it does convey the
sense that it's a fortified area.
It's a big, you know, a couple of hundred acres could be within an opidum, and the population
is comparatively small.
There's manufacturing going on there.
There's also agricultural activity.
And it's not a town in our sense of a medieval town.
It's certainly not a city in the Roman sense, but they are important collections of population
engaged in all sorts of activities, depending very heavily on trade, and showing the kind
of specialized occupations that could sustain, well, what would be called tyrants or kings
in Greek and Latin, chiefs, certainly aristocracies of considerable wealth.
Now in addition to those opida, all of these sites, especially in the earlier period, have
impressive burials around them.
And this is where we learn a great deal about these people are the burial mounds.
And the burial mounds point out the types of products coming in from the Mediterranean
world, which is stimulating the Celts to engage in more specialized activities.
All sorts of ceramics, both Greek and Etruscan, cretars, these are drinking cups.
Wine is one of the big commodities.
Also jewelry, textiles are coming in.
Some of this trade is coming from the East through the so-called Scythians.
These are nomadic peoples of the South Russian steppes.
We'll talk about them in a separate lecture.
But they are actually bringing in products as far away as the Near East, the Assyrian
and Persian empires.
There are ivories carved, especially at Hollisdott, which originated ultimately from Central
Africa.
They were brought up through trade routes.
There's a constant amount of movement of goods.
Now it wasn't that the Africans came up and brought them to them.
These goods were exchanged in a series of exchanges that brought them there.
But it gives you some sense of the far-flung connections, the type of prestige goods these
Celtic elites were interested in obtaining.
And in obtaining these, they got ever better in expanding their products.
That is iron, salt, and above all, the products of the forested zones of Europe.
That included timber, which is always in short supply in the Mediterranean, hides, woolens,
flax, slave trade.
One of the biggest commodities was labor.
All of these are developed as items that are sent through the Greek and Etruscan ports
and exported to the rest of the Mediterranean world.
And that trade results in the transition from the Hollisdott into the Le Tien period.
It sees a shift of the gravity of Celtic economic and political power from what is now South
Germany in the Danube area and Slovakia and the Czech Republic to essentially where pretty
close to where all the rivers come together.
That is the Seine, the Seill, the Loire, the Danube, the Rhine.
That whole area of Eastern France, the Alpine regions, parts of the Rhineland, and the spread
of Celtic-speaking peoples and Le Tien technology across Gaul into Spain, certainly by the
4th century BC, there's a number of Celtic tribes that have crossed the Pyrenees and
are occupying Western and Central Spain, the Meseta, the Highland, the regions of Portugal,
which the Romans would have called Lusitania.
There are a number of different waves of immigrations into the British Isles.
Distinct Celtic languages evolve there over a long period, so that Ireland, Britain, are
brought into this Celtic orbit and will talk in a moment of Celtic immigration into Italy
and into points farther east.
All of this stimulated by the trade connections, which were extremely important in precipitating
these developments.
Well, clearly by 300 BC, the Celts have developed a pretty sophisticated culture, and especially
in Gaul and southern Germany, where we have very good archaeological evidence cited in
southern Gaul, which has been excavated.
These people are putting together political structures and economic systems that really
are the basis for the success of Roman provincial administration several centuries later.
By 300 BC, there are adaptations of Greek and Etruscan alphabets into a writing system.
Now these writings don't survive.
There is already the beginning of this priestly cast, the Druids, described by Julius Caesar,
who seemed to be distinct from the warrior elites.
The Celts transmit a lot of these innovations to the Romans.
For one, they are very successful traders and merchants, and they are very, very good
in wheeled vehicles.
Most of the loan words in Latin for carts and harnesses, all of that sort of equipment
come from Celtic words.
The burials, especially in the Hallstatt and the early Le Chien period, the opulent burials,
and these are found in eastern France, they're found in Austria, are very often interred with
carts.
They're interred with the wheels sometimes taken off, sometimes in place, or models of
carts, all of this as a sign of wealth.
The Celts believe there's some kind of journey in the afterlife, but you go overland, whereas
in the Mediterranean world, you always go by sea.
Also in northern Europe, in the Baltic, where the dramatic peoples are, you'll see this
in the Viking Age, you have ship burials.
But in central Europe, it makes sense.
It's carts, and that's where they excelled in the construction of carts and springs,
and this technology stands behind the kinds of carts and harnessing that we find later
in the Roman Age and have been recovered in excavations, especially in Germany.
So as a group, these people are far from just the slashing crazy barbarians that may come
through the literary sources of the Greeks and Romans.
Now that is not to downplay their ability as warriors.
The Celts were formidable opponents, and that gave them the advantage when they migrated
to these areas in Spain.
There is a term that's used by the Romans.
They call them Celtiberians, Celtiberioi, especially Appian, a Greek who writes about
the wars of the Romans in Spain.
And they are clearly marked as distinct from the other Spaniards, not only by their height,
but their method of fighting.
They are regarded as exceptionally good infantry.
There are reports of them going into battle, stripped naked with these large slashing swords,
tinted blue that is tattooed.
There's reports that they're huge in Latin.
If there's any kind of racial prejudice or fear in the classical world, it's toward
these northern Europeans, these Celts, they're big.
And the Latin sources and the Greek sources always stress the physique.
They have this wild, crazy look about them.
They're blue-eyed, they're red-haired or blondish-colored.
They're not normal.
They're too big.
And the terms used, they're ingents, magnum corpus, all these words in Latin that come
through repeatedly stressing their size and ferocity.
They're usually seen as coming in a wild charge and breaking their opponents.
And this is a method of psyching out their opponents before the actual battle is engaged.
And they're regarded as exceptionally good infantry, particularly in open-order tactics.
They're also impressive as cavalry.
And as we shall see in Britain, they're still using chariots, that is, the Celts exceeded
in the use of carts.
And they were increasingly arming themselves, especially the upper classes, with body armor
and equipment comparable to what the Greeks and Romans themselves could produce.
And by 300 BC, these stereotypical images of the wild, savage warrior have to be modified.
The Celts are actually far more disciplined and able to fight on the battlefield than
you're sometimes led to believe by the ancient sources.
Well, let's look at the two points of contact that the Celts had with both Romans and Greeks,
which stimulate it some very important developments.
Not only the stereotypical images of which I've spoken, but also they influence the developments
of Rome herself and even, to some extent, of the wider Greek world.
The Celts, as I mentioned, and I have a separate lecture coming up on this, crossed the Alps
sometime at the end of the 5th century BC and began to settle in northern Italy, especially
in the upper reaches of the Poe Valley.
The tribes all bear names that are similar to names in Eastern Gaul, the Boyi, the Cenones,
and Soubriets, they're kindred to these Eastern Gaelic tribes.
And a group of them, the Cenones in particular, drifted down the Poe and positioned themselves
where they could easily swoop down the Tiber into the heartland of the Etruscan cities
and of Rome.
And we are told in 390 BC, one such war party came down the Tiber from the lower Poe into
the Tiber and attacked Etruscan cities and crashed into a Roman army on a tributary of
the Tiber known as the Alia on July 18, 390 BC.
And this is the report of the first time the Romans came into contact with these warriors.
Now we're told that the Roman army, I don't know, 10, 15,000 strong at most at this time
Rome was only a small central Italian power, the Roman army collapsed.
The initial charge, Latin, the impetus, it just broke them psychologically.
The army panicked.
Most of them ran before they even fought.
They retreated to a city called Vae in Atraria where they regrouped under Marcus Furius Camillus,
the dictator who had captured the city a few years earlier, a very famous figure in Rome
who held the consulship seven times.
And the Gauls went on to sweep into the city of Rome under a leader called Brennus and sack
Rome.
They didn't take the capital line, that is the fortified zone.
The reason is that the garrison there was alerted by the sacred geese of Jupiter and
if anyone has ever dealt with geese, you know those are far more nasty animals than any
watchdogs.
They alerted the garrison and the Gauls were repelled from taking the capital line.
That's where the temple to Jupiter capital line is.
It's the compadaglio today overlooking the Roman form where that beautiful square that
was designed by Michelangelo.
But otherwise the city was sacked and the Gauls retreated.
They were there for plunder and loot.
They may have been mercenaries on the loose, that is they had been brought in by Truscans
in their constant, internecine battles over who should control Atraria and what happened
is they could have been discharged, had no employment and ended up sacking Rome along
with other cities in order to find booty and food.
The Romans never forgot this defeat.
This was a humiliation.
July 18th was a dias aterra, a black day, no public business.
And this is true centuries later.
The Romans, that sack was seen as a humiliation the Romans would have to overcome.
They fortified the city afterwards.
This is the so-called Serbian wall, a wall that is attributed to the 6th king, the legendary
king of Rome, but was really constructed primarily in the generation after the sack as a way
of fortifying the city from a future Gaelic attack.
The Romans also in the course of the 4th and 3rd century BC perfected their tactics of
the legion to cope with these sort of charges.
One line of argument is the Romans increasingly shifted over to the use of different types
of javelins, of missiles, eventually culminating in the pilum, fighting with the sword in order
to counter the Gauls who excelled in close order fighting with those slashing swords.
And to some extent the Roman fencing was a way of coping with these Gauls with the slashing
weapon.
So the Romans remember this very clearly.
And even coming through the Roman accounts at this point, largely written by Livy, who
is writing the reign of the emperor Augustus, well he ruled from 27 BC to 14 AD, Livy who
reports this based on earlier accounts gives us a very romanticized and patriotic vision
of the rise of Rome in Italy.
But even coming through the pages of Livy is this sense that the Romans really had to
put their house in order for the next two generations after that sack.
The capture of the city by the Gauls was seen as a real blow to Rome, and the Romans found
themselves fighting to put their Latin neighbors and other people in central Italy back under
Roman control, back into alliance because of the fact that the city had been sacked.
And that was seen as a sign of Roman weakness.
Now ultimately Rome benefited from these Gaelic raids because the targets for many of the
Gaelic raiders were in the cities of Atoria and Tuscany, which were much older cities,
which were more wealthy, had developed at a much faster rate.
Rome and Laetium, that is there's essentially three planes in Italy.
There's Tuscany, there's Laetium, there's Campania.
Laetium, the one in the middle, Lazio today in Rome, is by far the poorest of the three.
And Rome as a city had no reason to be the capital of Italy.
The only reason Rome became important is because the Romans made it important.
The real wealth was in Tuscany or in the Greek or the Hellenic cities of Campania on the
Naples.
And so the Gaelic attacks were directed towards the Etruscan cities and the region immediately
to the East Umbria, which weakened these opponents, which gave the Romans part of their success
in bringing Aturian Umbria under control in the fourth and third century BC.
And part of Rome's reputation in Italy was based on the fact that the Romans were one
of the few people in Italy who could resist the charge of Gaelic infantry.
And that went a long way with these Italic peoples.
Well, I mentioned that the Celts not only attacked Italy, you know, migrations brought
them into Italy, but they also moved farther east.
And here they followed traditional trade routes that go certainly back into the Bronze Age.
I mentioned that the gravity of this Celtic civilization was on the Danube in southern
Germany and Eastern Gaul.
We always think of it as France, but it's really a central European culture.
And so the various routes that brought Gauls into Western France and Spain and the British
Isles, there were also these trade routes going down the Danube that brought them into
what is now the Balkans and ultimately to Greece and Asia Minor.
And again, we encounter some of the same tribes, at least tribal names, names of chiefs that
we would find in Gaul and southern Germany reappearing in these tribes that appear in
the Greek world.
As early as the 4th century BC, some of them have moved into what is today the Czech Republic
and Slovakia.
They moved out from into that area and into the Hungarian plain and eventually came down
the Danube.
Now, they weren't so interested in settling in the mountainous zones and the Balkans.
They looked for areas where they could farm and also to herd animals.
But they followed the Sov and Drav rivers, which flow into the middle Danube, and then
picked up rivers such as the Vardar, the Oxios and ancient times.
And this brought them right into the Aegean world.
In 281 BC, a Gallic tribe, collection of tribes, there's probably three or four of them, showed
up on the borders of Macedonia or Macedon to use its Greek name in this period.
Now the kings of Macedon who ruled there, the guy at the time was a fellow named Ptolemy
the Thunderbolt, one of the more notorious figures in the period after Alexander the
Great.
Ptolemy had just seized the throne of Macedon by the dubious effort of, well, he murdered
his previous master, Seleucus, and he took control of Macedon.
And when these Gauls showed up, he marched out with the Macedonian army to oppose them
and they went down in crashing defeat.
They were overwhelmed.
Ptolemy was killed.
His head ended up as a drinking cup, which is verified by the archaeology that the Celts
did take heads as a way of counting their dead and using them as decoration.
And that's how Ptolemy ended up.
And then they proceeded to raid Macedon and cross into northern Greece.
Celts got as far, these Gauls, the Greeks called this particular group Galatians, got
as far as central Greece.
They crossed Thermopylae.
They came close to raiding Delphi, the great shrine of the Greek world, which is regarded
as the umphalus, the center of the world.
And the Greeks were just terrified by these barbarians.
They'd never encountered people like this before.
Now, they, Galatians withdrew into the Balkans and it's unclear what they were going to do
when they received an invitation from a king of Bethinia, and this is a kingdom in northwestern
Turkey today.
This is a local dynast who tried to represent himself as a Hellenized king.
He invited these Galatians over to Asia Minor to serve as mercenaries.
And we're told that compliments of the king, the transportation was provided, and this
large Galatian army, three separate tribes, as far as we can tell, perhaps 10,000 fighting
men or more, along with their families.
There might have been 50,000 people involved in this migration, we believe our sources,
were brought into Asia Minor, and of course they helped Nicomedes win his local battle
and then went into business for themselves and terrorized Asia Minor for the next generation,
attacking Greek cities, got a lot of armed and hungry mercenaries unemployed, and their
activities were not so different from their kinsmen in Italy.
They were brought in under mercenary contracts once the war was over and the king says, well
guys, you're on your own, they took them literally, but at it.
Eventually these Galatians were brought under control by the Seleucid kings.
The Seleucid kings were heir to the Asian Empire of Alexander the Great.
The second Seleucid king, Antiochus the first, is credited with a great victory over the
Galatians.
He brought in elephants from India and the Galatians didn't know what to do with these
things.
Elephants are very terrifying animals and the Romans learned how to counter elephants and
actually the Romans are so good, they managed to usually turn the elephants to stampede
into the army of their opponents, but the Galatians didn't have that expertise, and
even the Romans themselves first panicked when they saw elephants.
They're very intimidating animals, there's sort of 50 elephants come charging at you
at a battlefield, all you have is a sort of a slashing sword, you know, there's no high
powered rifles or helicopters that get you out of there.
So the Galatians were defeated and they were pushed onto the Anatolian plateau and they
settled there.
And those are the Galatians that are encountered in the New Testament.
They very quickly come to terms with the local population there.
The city of Gordian, which was one of the most important cities in central Anatolia,
it was a site of the ancient Phrygian civilization, there is Celtic settlement, and as far as
I can tell I've been working on the coins from Gordian.
The Galatians didn't disrupt the pattern there, they established themselves as a warrior elite,
but they engaged in trade, a fresh excavation since 1988 revealed that the Galatians actually
took over the lifestyle of the Greek or Hellenistic world, that is the Greek-like world after Alexander
the Great, and what they became were mercenaries for employ, and in a way the Galatians were
rather an economic boom once the sacking was over because they hired themselves out as
mercenaries to the Hellenistic armies and brought money into this area and really made
Gordian an important center, commercial emporium, in Anatolia by military service.
That didn't stop the Greeks from depicting the Galatians as the new Titans, the new mythological
creatures like Amazons, the city of Pergamon in western Turkey today, which was the site
of a Hellenistic kingdom, the Adelaide kings, there are all sorts of important war memorials,
the Altarite Pergamon, there was a whole, it's called a Gallo Machi, these were statues
of Gauls, the famous dying Gauls, the Gauls being defeated by the Adelaide kings committing
suicide, there were similar groups that were set up in Athens, and these Hellenistic sculpture
groups and relief panels which showed the triumph of civilization over the Gauls, the
Romans later encountered them and thought that well, you know, we fight them in Italy
and they took over this tradition and most of our Greek originals actually survived from
Roman copies of these dying Gauls, there are a number of copies that have come down
through us from the Roman age and it really encapsulized the whole Greek and Roman view
of these barbarian peoples, they were ferocious warriors, they were noble, rather than suffer
servitude, they would kill their wives and themselves and in many way they become in
the literature the moral foils to the more decadent Greek and Romans, and I would like
to close with the thought on this, the Greeks always found these Celts terrifying and I
think only very provisionally accorded a certain nobility to them, but the Romans who respected
the Celts as martial warriors, you know, really prized them as soldiers and allies and we
will see they recruit them very happily into their armies and I always, I can't prove
this, but I always believe that a Roman consular preter who had a choice of going to the Greek
world where he would be an administrator or to fight a bunch of Celts in Western Europe
would always opt for the Celts because a Roman consul would much more prefer to fight these
indomitable warriors in a fair fight rather than go to the Greek world and meet something
far more frightening and that is Greek lawyers.
