Lecture 6 – The Conquest of Cisalpine Gaul
In this lecture I wish to build on the information I provided in the previous lecture on Celtic
Europe to explain the position Celts, or Gauls as the Romans called them, played in
northern Italy. And the profound influence these Celtic people had on the development
of early Rome, especially in the 4th and 3rd centuries BC. And I want to stress that point
that the Romans in many ways looked north. They would unite Italy and in 264 BC where
I essentially started sketching out Roman institutions. The Romans were potentially
pulled into directions. One would be north into central Europe, into western Europe as
eventually they did cross the Alps and conquer essentially the Celtic world. Or they could
be pulled into the Mediterranean world, that is, to the Greek world, to the east, but especially
against their opponent Carthage in North Africa today in Tunisia. So Rome was always poised
in this two possible directions. And they had very close dealings with Celtic people
for 200 years before they actually brought them under control and turned this area north
of the line of the Arno and the Rubicon today, Cisalpine Gaul, into what we would call northern
Italy. So what I wish to do in this lecture is explain the kind of diversity that existed
in Cisalpine Gaul, northern Italy today. A region that still in many ways is more closely
associated with central Europe than it is with the rest of Italy. And then I want to
look at how the Romans moved into this area, the way they conquered and mastered the Celts,
which the Romans considered a major achievement that they were able to defeat these people.
As I mentioned earlier, they always saw the Celts as ferocious warriors reporting that
they were generally six, seven inches taller than the Romans. The Romans had to devise discipline
and tactics to deal with them. And then look at how the Romans interacted with these people
and how Cisalpine Gaul evolved into northern Italy because it brings out important features
of this process, which is called Romanization, whereby the former barbarians are turned
into provincials and ultimately into Romans themselves because all of this area eventually
gets the full Roman franchise. And northern Italy is essentially merged into the rest
of Italy in 42 BC, and this is a region that essentially loses its provincial status and
becomes part of the greater Italy. Now, that process, I call it Romanization, and I do
want to put a qualification on it. It isn't a conscious policy that would be articulated
the way you have in the 19th and 20th century by colonial powers. Oh, we're going to turn
Africans into Frenchmen or Indians into British or whatever. This is a very often an unconscious
policy. It's a byproduct of the Roman conquest in which the conquered barbarians acquire
a lot of the material culture of Rome, eventually the Latin language, through a variety of activities.
It could be military, service, and trade, and come to assimilate themselves into this
Roman identity. At the same time, the process is operating in the other direction. That
is, the Romans are learning a great deal from these Celtic people. I mentioned the Romans
took over all of their terms for carts and harnesses from Celtic loanwords, which is
an indication that the Romans learned a great deal of technology about overland vehicles
from their Celtic provincials. So it is always a two, a two, a double street process here
where influences are coming from the Celts onto the Romans and vice versa. And this is
true in all provincial zones. And the Romans themselves are very proud of the fact that
they're extremely adaptable and can assimilate other people. They take the best from their
opponents. And there are many tales in Roman accounts of this. So when I use that term
Romanization, it has to be qualified in this way. And there are colleagues of mine who
have essentially abolished the word from from use. It's the way medievalist abolished feudalism.
It can conjure up more images of of organization than really existed. And it gives a deceptive
image. But when I use that term, I use it in that sense. Well, first, let's take a look
at what Northern Italy was like. And let's take the year 264 BC again with the Celts firmly
established in Northern Italy. If a Roman traveled north into these regions, he would
have encountered a really diverse group of people in the region. What is today called
Lombardy in the upper Po Valley area around Milan, Mediolanum is the is the Roman name
for it was an old Etruscanized city. He would have found a Celtic city in many ways. There
would have been some of the urban structure of the Etruscan age, but it was a major Celtic
settlement. He would have encountered a number of Apida. That is those distinct Celtic incipient
towns, tribes such as the Insubrius, the Kenomani, the Boyi, the Sanones, all tribes
who had their kin over in Gaul. And the Celts had moved down the Po, had settled in the
lower reaches of the Po, and had settled south of the Po between the Po and the northern
ridge of the Apennines in an area there that later became the Roman district, the region
of Italy known as Amelia. So there were two distinct zones. One would be in the upper
northern reaches of the Po. One would be in the southern reaches of the Po and the accompanying
Piedmont area of the Apennines. There were also other areas to the far west between the
northern settlement of the Celts and this area of Amelia would have dwelled the Ligurians.
These are people who speak a language that seems to be related to say modern Basque today.
There were the Iberian languages of Spain to peoples in southern Gaul. There were part
of a Mediterranean population, very ancient going back to the Bronze Age, that stretched
from Italy through southern France into Spain. And they were pastoralists, they were mountain
people, practiced a much simpler form of agriculture and transhumans. And we're seen as quite distinct.
They're often described as people of Mediterranean in complexion and size, regarded as extremely
tough light infantry. They were hunters and herders in this mountainous zone. Also, if
you crossed the southern Po and went into what is now Venezia, the area around Venice,
you would have encountered people known as the Venetians, where the word Venice eventually
comes. These were an italic people, apparently related to the other people of Italy. They
opposed the Celts and they saw Rome as an ally. A Roman appearing in this area would
have actually been immediately well treated, and yet the Venetians themselves come under
very strong Celtic influence. So you had a mixture of people, which when Italy was reorganized
in the time of the Emperor Augustus at the end of the first century BC, represented four
distinct zones of Italy, numbered 8, 9, 10 and 11. They were all seen as distinguished
zones with other zones within them, distinctions. It was a very diverse area. The Celts, however,
played an extremely important role. They had brought in their metallurgy, their town organization
from central Europe. These were the achievements of the Le Tien. They also established important
trade routes going into central Europe and into Gaul, and were very, very keen in getting
the prestige goods of the Mediterranean world, and so traded through Genoa, or Genoa as we
would call it today. They were active in trading with the Venetians and trying to get their
products exported through the cities on the Aegean shore, and of course, many of them
served as mercenaries or possible immigrants and merchants with the cities of Atrui and
Umbria and central Italy. So they were a very dynamic force in this area, and the Romans
saw them as the most dynamic force and the most dangerous opponents, and hence the whole
area was called Cisalpine Gaul, even though it included large numbers of non-Gaelic people.
And that meant Gaul on this side of the Alps, as opposed to Transalpine Gaul, Gaul on the
other side of the Alps. That is, what is today France, the Low Countries of the Rhineland.
And the Romans saw Cisalpine Gaul as part of that wider Celtic world. They certainly
did in 264 BC. Well, by 264 BC, the Romans had unified essentially Italy. They had unified
the people that the Romans would call the Togated people. That is, the Etruscans and
the various Italic people who were brought into the Roman alliance, the structure I described
earlier, as allies. The Romans had gained a great deal of experience in the process
of doing this. It took them about 150 years to bring these areas under control, and in
the process had learned how to deal with Celtic charges. And as I mentioned, the Romans never
forgot the humiliation that their city had been sacked by a Celtic warband back in 390
BC. There was in the Roman tradition an official state of an emergency. It was called a tumultus.
That is, a large Gaelic tribe was on the move. The Senate would issue this. There would
immediately be emergencies. Everyone eligible for the draft had to be levied. The last such
tumultus was officially issued apparently in 225 BC, when there was a very large Gaelic force
moving and was intercepted about 60 miles north of Rome in a trorry at the Battle of
Telemond. And that movement was feared so much by the Romans, it's one of the rare instances
we have a report of actually human sacrifice. Two Gauls and two Greeks were buried in the
capital line to ward off, to propitiate the gods, to ward off this Celtic attack. So the
Romans took these Celts as very, very serious opponents and adjusted accordingly. And the
whole of the 3rd century BC, down to 264 BC, was an effort, the whole first half of this
century, was an effort to bring the invasion routes under control in the upper Tiber and
ultimately into the Po. And it was a series of significant battles in the 280s, where
the Romans smashed Gaelic resistance, particularly the Sinonesa and the Boi'i, which are two
tribes settled in the southern reaches of the Po, that allowed the Romans to secure a
territory in Umbria, that is north-central Italy, to block the invasion routes and to
begin to think of taking the offensive into the heartland of Cisale-Pane Gaul. It was
also those victories that gave the Romans the sense of security that they took on Carthage
in 264 BC in the First Punic War. If the Romans had not secured that northern area,
I really wonder whether the Roman Senate and the Roman Assembly would have accepted the
invitation to intervene into Cisale and that drew them into that 23-year-old, 23-year-long
war, which transformed Rome into a Mediterranean power. Forced Rome to build her first navies,
they kept losing them due to storms, they had to build five of them, but nonetheless
the Romans always persist. If it hadn't been that these victories 20 years earlier had
led to the consolidation of those positions against the Gauls.
The First Punic War also allowed the Romans not only to become a Mediterranean power,
but in some ways to exploit indirectly the wider western Mediterranean. The Romans always
imposed harsh terms on their defeated foes. There was no sense they had to rehabilitate
the defeated. The Romans were going to make imperialism work and part of it was to humiliate
the foe. Carthage was slapped with an enormous indemnity which had to be paid in silver and
the Romans were very insistent that these payments be made. There's a report in 199
BC and a later payment by the Carthaginians, the Romans actually melt the silver down and
said it's not 100% fine, it's 25% base, go on the spot market and make it up. They forced
people to make these payments over 25 years, 50 years. It's brought into the Senate, you
weigh it, you have to grovel to the Romans. It's a way of the Romans showing don't mess
with the Roman state and these terms are imposed on all the defeated. In order to pay this indemnity
Carthage had to go into Spain and develop a colonial empire to pay off the Romans, which
in the next lecture we shall see actually revives Carthaginian power and allows the Carthaginian
general Hannibal in 218 BC to reopen the struggle with Rome by recruiting an enormous
mercenary army in Spain, large numbers of Celt Iberians, marching them over the Pyrenees,
over the Alps and attacking Italy from the north. That invasion by Hannibal, which is
seen as one of the great military moves of the ancient world and Hannibal is clearly
in the Hall of Great Generals, nearly brought Rome to her knees in the Second Punic War.
As I mentioned earlier, between 218 and 216 BC, Hannibal and his mercenary army killed
probably 100,000 Romans and allies out of a population of maybe a million men. That's
10%. That is a high, a percentage of fighting men to lose in a war that would then last
almost, well, it's not concluded until 201 BC. It's almost a 20 year war. It's essentially
a generation growing up. Now, that Second Punic War in part was sustained by the fact
that when Hannibal got to northern Italy, to Sassalpane Gaul, he found many Gauls able
and willing to join his army as mercenaries. There was a long Gaelic tradition of this.
There were Gauls that had been used in Carthaginian armies as early as the 4th century BC, but
when the Carthaginian army arrived, and it wasn't particularly big, Hannibal may have
crossed the Pyrenees with 60,000 men. There's only 26,000 left. Contrary to popular opinion,
most of the elephants died. I think all but one died in the first winter from, well, probably
some form of tuberculosis or they just couldn't endure the northern Italian winters. It was
the Gaelic infantry and cavalry that revived Hannibal's army and formed such a large component
of Hannibal's army. That led the Gauls to attack the Romans. The Romans had to move
into Sassalpane Gaul. They had to detach legions. And this was at a point very critical in the
Roman relationship with the Celts. The Romans had already established two important colonies
on the Poe Valley. One at the city of Cremona and the other one in Placentia in 218 BC.
Those were Roman Latin colonies. They had brought the Venetians into alliance. They had
imposed treaties on the Celtic tribes around Milan. There were local treaty obligations.
The Gauls who had given the Romans so much trouble in the Poe Valley had been cleared
out. There was actually reports of depopulation moving in Italian settlers. So in the two decades
before the Second Punic War, the Romans were making a concerted effort to move in and start
what we would call an offensive into these areas, putting in colonies and with them military
highways to secure control of all of Italy up to the Alps. And the Romans at this point
were beginning to think that, well, maybe Italy isn't the Rubicon and the Arno. The
National Frontier of Italy is the Alps. And there are reports, and this is early as the
1980s BC in speeches by Cato the Elder. So when Hannibal's army comes crashing into
northern Italy, he finds all these willing Celtic warrior elites ready to take up arms
against the Romans. And they had good cause. The Roman conquest in its initial stages in
the third century BC was brutal. Both sides saw this as a difficult fight. The Romans repeatedly
kept between two and four legions of Cicelpangol during the whole of the Second Punic War.
And after Hannibal's army evacuated Italy and the Romans won the Second Punic War into
a 1 BC, for the next decade thereafter, the Romans repeatedly sent consular armies into
northern Italy. At least four out of four years in that decade, both consuls campaigned in
Italy. That is, this region was far more important to the Romans than wars in Spain,
than the great clashes with the Hellenistic kings in the east. The Romans saw this area
as a region they had to control militarily. The Gauls actually sacked one of the Latin
colonies, Placentia, around 200 BC. At least one consul was killed in fighting the Gauls.
There were very embarrassing defeats and the casualty figures are very high, probably on
both sides. And it isn't until about 190 BC, when the final Gaelic resistance is broken,
I think there's a tumultuous might have been issued in 187 BC, it was a rather minor affair.
But by the 180 BC, the Romans have imposed their hegemony over these Celtic tribes in
northern Italy. The Ligurians, those mysterious mountain people to the west, continued to
give the Romans difficulty for the next generation. The Romans move in there, and the only one
way they can handle these mountain tribes in some instances is completely deporting
the tribes and sending them into southern Italy. There's one group of Ligurians who
are moved into what is called Samnium, it's in south central Italy, and they're still
there even in the Roman Empire as a distinct group, and they remember they originally came
from these mountain zones. But by the 170 BC, the Romans have secured northern Italy. Now
what happens in these regions differs, and it shows the kind of variety of interaction
that goes on between Romans and barbarians when those barbarians have been defeated and
reduced to something of the role, well, as provincials. In Roman legal terms they were
called peregrines, they were free foreign people, not Roman citizens. In certain areas
there was intensive Roman colonization. Nothing on the scale of European colonization of North
America, but large numbers of Italians, that is Roman allies in Italy, Latins, people holding
that special status between the Italian allies and full Romans, and Romans moved into the
regions immediately south of the Po, the region that is called Emilia. In 173 BC, the Roman
council, Marcus Emilius Lepidus, distributed large amounts of grants of land to Italian
and Roman settlers, to allies and Romans. These are called Latin veritum, that is man by man.
These are allotments of farms, a highway is constructed, there are settlements known
as a forum, a fora and plural, market towns and centers. This region, and it's called
Emilia after Marcus Emilius Lepidus, it's his clan name, his gents name that becomes
the name of the region, and it retains that region even today in Italy. There was very
intensive colonization, the Latin colonies are refounded, more Latin colonies are sent
in, modern city of Bologna is turned into one, Parma is another one, many of those
cities trace their origins to these Roman municipal foundations. A colony is sent north
of the Alps to Aquileia, which is essentially the predecessor of modern Venice, that's another
Latin colony, they come in on invitation, and so what happens is this region south of
the Po gets incorporated into the greater Italy. North of the Po, where the Celtic tribes
and the Venetians dwell, there the pattern is quite different. And a lot of the information
comes from archeological evidence and also the study of inscriptions from the second
first century BC, first century AD. There are very few Romans subtle, there are merchants
that come in, there's a very important highway constructed in the middle of the second century
BC that essentially links Aquileia, and think of Aquileia as essentially being close to
where Venice would be today, that cuts across northern Italy and links to where today Genoa
is, the two great commercial centers of northern Italy. And that highway becomes, it's a military
highway originally, but it becomes a major economic access for all sorts of trade that
draws the Venetians and the Celtic peoples into closer relationship with Rome. Within
a generation, these Celtic warrior elites very quickly learn a couple of important facts
one, by being defeated by important Roman consuls and generals, they now have a patron
in Rome. And as I mentioned earlier, they very quickly learn how to manipulate those
ties of patron and clientage and get to represent their tribes and their communities to the
Roman Senate. So the local elites in some ways are reinforced by this Roman connection.
They also buy the Mediterranean culture and tastes. They already had it. And when they
moved into Italy, these Celts were sophisticated people. They understood wine and the fine
dining and all the products of the Mediterranean world. Now that they were under a Roman hegemony,
it actually, and the Romans are constructing roads, they're putting up markets and cities
in the lower Po Valley. And as the urban civilization of Italy develops, northern Italy, all of
a sudden finds itself in an ideal position. Animals, all sorts of cattle, geese, you name
it, all of this meat becomes absolutely ideal for export to Rome. In the course of the second
and first century BC, Rome grows enormously. In 218 BC, there may have been 50,000. By,
within a generation and a half, it's up to 180,000. It then doubles again in a generation
to 325,000. By 50 BC, it's 600,000. By the year one, it's over a million. Now a city
that large in central Italy, with a company in smaller cities and satellite cities, that
population has to be fed. And the northern zones of Italy, the Po Valley, some of the
richest farmland in Italy, becomes one of the centers of feeding Rome. It feeds it on
the slave trade with all sorts of consumables. And the prices in Rome, high, five times higher
than anywhere else, it is worth your effort to take the cattle to market in Rome.
Very quickly, the provincial peoples in northern Italy realize there's an immense amount of
wealth to be gained by getting engaged in this trade. And over the course of the second
and first century BC, the economic development of this area is quite impressive. It has major
social implications. And that is many of these Celtic warriors, descendants of Celtic warriors
see that they're making money. They have patrons in Rome. They start undertaking military
service. They serve as cavalry for the Romans. Some of them gets Roman citizenship. They
acquire the knowledge of the Latin language. They, they link themselves by marriage and
hospitality to the Latin colonies. That is the Roman style cities that have been founded
in the general region. So that by 100 BC, this area, which would had once been part of
Celtic Europe is quickly being integrated into this wider Roman world. And the amount
of immigration or conscious policy of doing this in northern Italy is almost nil. North
of the pod is very limited evidence of, of immigration. This, this can be documented
by the funerary inscriptions into the first century AD, where many of the names, a person
has a perfectly good Roman name on his monument, but then names his parents and grandparents
and they're almost pure Celtic names or Venetian names. They have taken on the Roman names
and acquired this Roman identity to be sure many of the traditional patterns still obtained,
especially among the peasants, the ancient gods are worshiped. Bellas, the God of Aquilae
is still being worshiped in the third century AD is identified with Apollo with a Roman
counterpart. But what has happened is a sort of North Italian provincial culture and amalgam
of Roman and Celtic and other elements has emerged in the, in about, you know, two or
three generations from the conquest. That's an important point to make because it had a
couple of major implications. In, well, 105, 106, 105 BC, a barbarian migration crashes
into, we think they're early dramatic peoples, the Kimberians, two Tonnes, crash into southern
Gaul and attempts to cross into Italy. The peoples of Sassalpain Gaul feel no identity
with these new barbarians. They look to Rome. They are demanding protection from Rome, especially
Gaius Marius, the great hero who defeats these barbarians. At this point, the populations
of Northern Italy don't see these people as, as related at all. They're, their destinies
are now with the Roman Republic. In 90 BC, there is a major revolt against the Romans
in southern and central Italy by Italian allies clamoring for the Roman citizenship. And we'll
get into this question later on. Over 150,000 allies go into rebellion. The Romans are fighting
for their lives to put down this rebellion of Italian allies. And the way they succeed
is by making political concession. They give the Italians the citizenship. And in a series
of bills in 89 BC, the Italian allies are enfranchises Roman citizens so that all of
Italy south of that are in a Rubicon area becomes Roman. Well, at the same time, the
Romans realize that the Northern regions that former Cisalpain Gaul was too important
to ignore that there are too many powerful elites there with connections in Italy and
Gaius Pompeius Strabo, the console of 89 BC, the father of Pompey, the great, he proposes
a bill that makes all the Latin colonies. That is all the cities of Northern Italy that
were set up as, as Latin foundation Roman colonies. That is, they're all officially
now Roman and all the people residing in this province. Well, this is an extraordinary
move. This was a remarkable, the Romans extend a potentially the franchise to all of these
people who are not part of the original togated people of Italy, who could potentially become
Romans. Julius Caesar is so successful in part because he makes himself the patron of this
area. He will recruit many of his legions that conquer Gaul from what we would call Northern
Italy from people who in their ancestry include many people who are Celtic. And if you go
through Julius Caesar's account and pay careful attention to a number of the names of Centurians
and officers in his army who are being recruited from Northern Italy, a number of them reveal
that these are Celtic sized name, Latinized Celtic names, that these people are clamored
for the full citizenship. Caesar represented them in the season 50s BC. Caesar championed
the people in Northern Italy getting promoted from Latin to Roman citizenship. And indeed,
when he becomes dictator of Rome, he delivers. There is a bill that is passed. It doesn't
take an effect until after Caesar's assassination. But in 42 BC, this, this law passed under
Caesar's dictatorship takes effect. Not only do the people of Cisalpangol acquire the Roman
citizenship, Cisalpangol is officially abolished as a province and merged into Italy. So in
this region where the Romans first came into contact with the Celtic peoples in Northern
Italy, the subtle exchange that follows after the Roman conquest produced this remarkable
provincial society and the Celts themselves learned the advantage of getting involved
in this provincial society. And the range of it is really quite impressive. If you think
of it for a moment, you don't need to run around and teach Latin to everyone. It doesn't
have to be a mandatory Latin examination. All the Romans did was put in certain military
colonies, set in the Rome roads and impose order, peace. And very quickly, the benefits,
the prosperity, the predictability of peace and normal trade got the elites hooked on
these goods, got them to start to market the goods to make money to buy it. That meant
they forced their tenants, their own clients to produce more to engage in commercial farming
or mining or timber on a scale hitherto unknown to produce surpluses to bring the market to
get the money to buy more goods and steadily, unconsciously, these people were brought into
the wider Mediterranean community and ultimately assimilated and Romanized. Now, that doesn't
mean there was a conscious policy, but the process was real, nonetheless, and it produced
a peculiar Northern provincial society in Northern Italy and actually in some ways the
blueprint for the Roman assimilation of the rest of Central and Northwestern Europe.
Thank you.
