Lecture 8 – The Roman Conquest of Spain
In this lecture, I plan to look at the Roman conquest of Spain, primarily from the year
97 B.C. down to 133 B.C., that is, through much of the 2nd century B.C.
This is a period where the Romans were forced to come to terms with the commitments they
took on by defeating the Carthaginians in Spain.
It also put the Romans in very, very close association with all of these barbarian peoples
of the Iberian Peninsula.
And as I alluded to, the Romans were going to have to find new ways of cementing relations
with these people, and especially working out their own institutions, military and political,
eventually administration as well, into dealing with what were now overseas provinces.
One point that has to be always kept in mind about the Roman expansion in the 3rd, 2nd
and 1st century B.C. – it was still very much Mediterranean-based.
The Romans had moved into northern Italy, Saussale-Pangol, that taxed them.
But ultimately, Roman armies that went to Spain were sent by sea.
They didn't march along the long coastal roads from Italy to Spain as much as possible.
Forces were sent by sea.
The supplying and equipping of Roman armies in Spain very heavily depended on the Greek
and Punic cities, the Iberian towns that had acquired the ports and the institutions
of a Mediterranean city.
So the cities such as Taraco, or Gades, or New Carthage, or Carthago Nova, as the Romans
would call it, became the major foci of Roman influence in the peninsula.
And so as the Romans then got their military forces over to Spain, they were then faced
with the major problem of moving them into the interior and mastering all of these different
barbarian people, and that took a great deal of effort on their part.
Between 206 B.C. and 197 B.C. for the first decade, the Romans tended to treat these possessions
very loosely.
They sent out governors, and they really shouldn't even be called governors.
They sent out magistrates, many of them from the Cornelian Ghents, that is, they had the
same name as Scipio-Africanus and his father and uncle had been so instrumental in winning
the peninsula's tribes over to Rome's side in the Second Punic War.
And essentially the Romans wanted to dodge the responsibility of running this area.
They knew the wealth was important.
Furthermore, the Romans were committed to the pacification of Sassalpangol, they had
wars with Carthage, there were wars in the east, and another aspect about Roman expansion
in this period of the late republic, running from the end of the Second Punic War down
to the triumph of the Emperor Augustus at the Battle of Axiom in 31 B.C., when the Roman
monarchy really was established, is that Rome fought war simultaneously.
The Romans were not in the habit of, well, we'll deal with this problem, we won't deal
with, the Romans were more than capable of fighting three, four wars simultaneously in
very far-flung frontiers.
Nonetheless, that meant they had to marshal their resources and give their attention to
one frontier over another, and as I noted, in the 190 B.C., the key frontier to most
Romans were the Celts in northern Italy.
And by 190 B.C., that situation had changed, and northern Italy was quickly assimilated
into greater Italy over the course of the second century B.C., and that accounts for
why the Romans paid much more attention to Spain, they were able to put more magistrates
and efforts into the Spanish provinces.
In 197 B.C., the Roman senate took an important step by dividing Spain into and affect two
provinces, and again, the whole thing is so Roman in perspective, I mean, the Romans divided
them into provinces called farther and nearer Spain, just like Gaul, whether you were farther
or closer from Rome determined what name you got.
So Hispania Ulteria, the farther Spain, comprised the southern coasts around Gades, New Carthage,
that is the old Punic core, and nearer Spain, Hispania Caterior, was the Ebro Valley, that
is the river that runs into the Mediterranean, it included Iberian and Greek cities, and was
closer to Rome in Italy, and was generally regarded as the more senior post, that is,
a consul was more likely to be sent there, and a junior official like a preter would
be sent into farther Spain.
In addition to that division, the Romans found themselves, from 197 B.C. on, saddled with
some really tough wars against the Celtic Iberian tribes, they didn't lay down their arms suddenly
after the fighting ceased between Romans and Carthaginians, and initially these were raids
on the order of cattle rustling, but after a while, the Celtic Iberian tribes were very
well armed and disciplined by Carthaginian and Roman commanders, that is, these people
had been armed and given the organization and the incentive to fight in the course of
the Second Punic War, were attacking the towns in the coastal zones in the hinterlands
of the coast, and that meant the Romans had to do something to protect these areas, and
also to protect the roots linking these towns to the mineral wealth, the mines. There were
extremely important silver mines already known in the area immediately to the west of New
Carthage in the region now known as Mercia, these mines by 150 B.C. were producing fabulous
amounts of wealth to the Roman state. Carthage likewise, I mean sorry, Spain likewise, had
large amounts of other resources which helped feed the development of urban Italy in the
course of the Second Century B.C. One commodity that eventually took over was Spanish olive
oil, which was being exported to Italy already in the Second Century B.C., and Spanish oils
and wines would grace the table of the best families in Rome by the end of the Second
Century B.C. So the Romans had reasons to hold this area. In 195 B.C., Marcus Portius
Cato, the elder, Cato the censor arrived as consul of the year with a very large army
into the nearer province, that is, Hispania Caterior, the north eastern corner, and that's
because that province was closer to Rome, which is another aspect of Roman identity.
In Latin, erps, city, there's only one city, it's Rome, erps, and everything else doesn't
count as a city. The Romans are equally obnoxious on that attitude as well, but he arrived in
nearest Spain and waged campaigns for two years. He was extended as proconsul for another
year, that is, he held his powers even though the office had lapsed, and he gives us a fairly
detailed account of what went on. This is one of the rare instances where a Republican
governor or commander actually tells us the types of fighting, and it's very mobile. I
mean, Cato doesn't pay attention to any kind of administrative lines he's moving around.
It's clear part of the problem the Romans faced from the start, his army was very large.
He brought with him a full consular army, which meant he had two Roman legions, legions
of Roman citizens, and two allied Italian legions. And the fighting force in a legion
is about 5,000 men or more, that's 20,000 Italians. He recruited local olies. He's in
a constant problem of finding money and supplies. He's trying to protect loyal towns. He's
raging very tough battles in the middle and upper Ebro, especially against the cities
of Segovia and Numantia. These are Iberian towns where there's a certain Celtic population
in it as well. They prove very tough opponents. These Celt Iberians understand siege warfare,
and some of the earliest and most impressive Roman fortifications we have in the provinces
of siege works comes from the city of Numantia, which was to plague the Romans down to 133
BC. And so what Cato's governorship represents is the opening of a very long and desultory
war that runs from 197 down to 179 BC, about a 20-year period in which both provinces called
for repeated Roman attention to battle these Celt Iberian tribes that are in central Spain,
attacking towns, interfering with the mining operations from the Roman viewpoint. From
the Celt Iberian viewpoint, this was perfectly logical. Probably these tribes were suffering
from overpopulation. They had a very powerful professional warrior elite, drilled by the
best Carthaginian officers and Roman officers available. They found no other outlet for
this. There was no mercenary service. And in central Spain, populations get overcrowded
and too many mouths to feed very, very quickly. The only way to export the population is by
migration or mercenary service or slave trade. And the result was this constant fighting
going along. And from the start, the Romans very quickly found out in Spain as any colonial
power does is that borders don't mean anything. And the Romans didn't even attempt to draw
some kind of line of demarcation. Well, this is going to be Roman territory and this is
Celt Iberian territory. They very, very quickly understood that the only way the system could
be brought into some kind of equilibrium is to establish alliances and arrangements with
the native populations and that you could have frontier zones. And you try to regulate
the fighting going on in there and you try to regulate the movement of populations, give
encouragement to the building of highways and you maintain certain military positions.
But you really can't impose any kind of border as it would be understood by a modern state
today. It just wasn't possible. And the Romans didn't even think of those terms, probably,
didn't even try. So from 197 to 179 BC, the wars were primarily
wage to break the power of the individual tribes. And that meant, given the nature of
Roman command structure, that at best, Kato's there for two years, he comes back, he celebrates
a triumph. He did break the power of tribes in and around the area of Emporium, which
is in northern Spain, a Greek colony that was threatened. He imposed certain order there.
But each year, at most two years, a Roman magistrate would break the power of one particular
tribe and restore order that meant nothing that the whole overall situation had been
restored. And very quickly, the Senate understood this. It started proroguing commands to two
and three years. I mentioned earlier they changed the whole official calendar by 180 BC. The
year now started on January 1 in Rome, not on March 15. That would give an extra two
and a half months for the elected council to get to Spain to recruit and drill Spanish
allies along with the soldiers he's bringing in from Italy. Increasingly, the fighting
is taken over by Italian allies. By the 180s BC, two thirds of the Roman army going into
Spain, and this is not local allies recruited on the spot, but the Romans arriving from
Italy are either Italian allies or allies of Latin status. From the reports we get,
and we have very good reports on this in Livy until we lose this account in 167 BC, the reports
are that probably almost all the cavalry coming from Italy is not Roman, it's Latin. Much
of the infantry, most of the infantry are Italian allies from South Central Italy who
have increasingly learning Latin, learning Roman tactics and drill that has its own implications
back home. And so these are really very much a mixed imperial army, one only has to think
of comparisons with the British Empire in the 19th century. Most of the English soldiers
fighting overseas were Irish, Scots, Welsh, people coming from the marginal zones at home,
and that's what was obviously serving in the Roman armies in Italy, the mountain peoples
of Italy who were not yet Roman citizens, but were only allies of Rome. So these armies
are battling in Spain and they're creating a whole new identity in these armies. This
first phase of fighting, which we dignify by the term the first Celt-Iberian war, which
hard to really understand as a war as we under know it, was brought to a close by an extraordinary
governor, a preter, that is a junior official, Tiberius Sampronius Gracchus, a name that
might sound familiar because he is the father of a son with the same name, Tiberius Sampronius
Gracchus, who is remembered today as the great reformer in Roman tradition. He sponsors
an important land bill in 133 BC as Tribune gets killed for it, and that political agitation
as Rome is seen as a turning point in what is often called the Roman Revolution. Well
his father had served in Spain, he was a very high plebeian noble family, married by
the way into the Scipionic family, that is the Cornelii, the family that originally had
gotten Spain, and that helped. I mean that was recognized. The Spanish, the Celt-Iberian
chiefs and particularly understood that. Tiberius Sampronius Gracchus campaigned for
two hard years, broke several tribes, got Numantia, that critical city in the Ebro Valley
to agree to terms, extended some sort of control over the high plateau, and he signed a group
of settlements in which he authorized the settling of tribal units within the provinces
and he gave land. A number of tribes that either agreed to lay down their arms or in
some cases surrendered were resettled by the Romans. We're told of one town in particular
Gracchus named after Gracchus, it's founded in the Middle Ebro Valley, was established
as a Spanish community but it had the kind of municipal institutions and organizations
you would associate with the Roman city. And Tiberius Gracchus was finally remembered
by the various Spanish peoples, he had given them land, he had founded towns, and Gracchus
understood that the only way to stabilize this situation was to use some of what was
learned in northern Italy, that is promote towns, trade, cement alliances with the different
tribal leaders, settle the overpopulated populations in vacant lands that were technically under
Roman authority but were either underused or could be put under cultivation, that is
extend the arable, and hopefully relieve some of that population pressure that had built
up on the plateau. It proved a success. For the next 20 years, the Spanish provinces
are quiet and this is not a function of the fact that we lose Libby's main account, it
seems that it solved the problem at least temporarily. It set in place a set of economic
and social relations which tied a number of these tribes to the towns and ultimately
linked them to the Mediterranean community much along the lines of what I described in
northern Italy, except Spain was just a far greater and more daunting task than northern
Italy could ever be. Furthermore, there were Celtiberian tribes in the west, particularly
the Lusitanians in Portugal and southwestern Spain, who were not really brought into this
alliance structure. There were enormous mining opportunities, that is Romans moved in to
exploit the mines, many Roman veterans who had served in Spain start settling in these
communities and that caused tensions, especially in some of the mining districts, and there
grew up along this very ill-defined border, a very rough and ready frontier society characterized
by a lot of hard living, a lot of brigandage, and one only has to think of the type of towns
that pop up in any kind of gold rush or silver rush. These are not places of high Roman society.
These are tough miners and people coming in to exploit the miners, especially the mines
in Mercia, and a typical mine might have a couple of thousand miners working, but there
are thousands of people, especially the gambling establishments and all the entertainment industry
that goes with it, all the usual problems you would expect as you bring these people
into traditional community. So there were a number of points of conflict between these
Roman provinces and the Celtiberian tribes. Furthermore, the population pressure is mounted
and it is about 20 years, that is in time for another generation of warriors to grow up among
the Celtiberians, where the Romans start experiencing difficulty again and find that
they're going to have to increase the garrisons and do something about it. Now this leads to the
eruption of several wars. They are fought almost simultaneously. There's a war fought against
the Lusitanians in the southwest and that rages from 154 to 138 BC. There's a second
Celtiberian war in the 150s. There's an old one that breaks out in the 140s and the 130s.
What these wars really are is just a series of actions against different tribes who never
really stopped fighting. I mean, there was extended time out and armistices along the way,
but the Romans found themselves constantly fighting one group. They would shift forces
over there. That would lead another group. What the Romans found in this particular set of wars
that went on from 154 to 133 BC, they found that this was far different from the previous group
they fought. For one, the Romans now face Spanish opponents who were very, very adept
in exploiting Roman weaknesses. There were clearly methodical operations. We would call them
guerrilla operations. These were not raids along the old tradition of attacking a town,
driving off livestock, enticing the Romans into a battle to show your individual valor.
The Lusitanian wars were waged by two different leaders. We know their names as Punicus and
Chisorus, which are odd. They're Latinized names and that suggests that the leadership,
especially for the Lusitanians in the southwest, are coming from natives who are already
partially acculturated to Roman and Iberian institutions and are able to impose a discipline
in which their wars are really guerrilla operations, destroying bases for the Romans. The Romans have
to move in there. The second point is that these tribes become much better at organizing in larger
groups and they carry out some really embarrassing ambushes. There are serious defeats, not just
long service and the usual losses you get from disease and accidents. You have to remember in
any ancient army, two-thirds of your casualties were through disease and accidents. A lot of vehicle
accidents, desertions are common and one always has to think of the common of Frederick the Great
of Prussia where he said, never have your army camp in a forest because you never know who's
going to show up for roll call that next morning because all the guys desert into the forest at
night and you can't find them the next day. The Roman army endured all of these problems,
but they were embarrassing defeats. Lucius Mumius, who was preter of the farther province in 153
BC, was lured into an ambush in which 9,000 men fell. Now, if those statistics are at all accurate,
that's most of his army. He was a preter, that is a junior official, he had two legions. He went on
later to become the conqueror of Gorinth and organized the Roman province of Greece and he nearly
got killed in an early action in Spain. And if you follow the careers of the Roman great aristocrats
of the second half of the second century BC, every major figure who is of any political or
military importance in the Roman Republic had major service in Spain at this time and it molded
and shaped their attitudes very powerfully. Twice in the course of the fighting against
the Lusitanians, his name was Quintus Fabius Maxus Emilianus and Publius Cornelius Scipio
Emilianus. These were two brothers of the Emilean Gaants who had been adopted into other families,
the Fabii and the Cornelii. The second one is the second Scipio-Africanus, he's by adoption the
grandson of the first one. Both of them went into Spain with armies recruited from volunteers.
We are told that they deliberately did not look at the property qualification, they took volunteers
and it is suggestive of the increasing hardship in Italy in fighting these wars. And that men,
if you brought in volunteers from the landless, men who didn't have the property for the arms and
the training, you're going to have to recruit and drill them. We also find the Romans engaged in
some really sleazy tactics to break Spanish resistance. One of the most sleazy was in 150 BC,
Servius Sopusius Galba, convinced a tribe of Lusitanians to surrender on the promise of land.
He was going to give them a settlement like Rackus did back in 179 and as soon as he got
these Spaniards disarmed, he immediately massacred them and this is repeated in several other
instances. He violated all of his oaths and really this was seen as pretty good. He got
tried at Rome for this. He got off and he probably bribed the jury. But nonetheless the Romans at
least put him on trial which suggests that even the Roman Senate, the aristocratic Senate, which is
hesitant to ever put one of its members on trial, even they, this is really getting pretty bad.
Sopusius went on to now a successful but if not distinguished career. Ironically,
there was another massacre that was staged by a successor in 147 BC and in that massacre,
a guy by the name of Varyathus escaped and Varyathus turned out to be one of the most
successful Goroleaders fighting the Roman down to 130. They eventually had to buy his assassination
in order to break that revolt. So in some ways the Romans found themselves faced with an opponent
where you just couldn't use the types of methods to sell paying Gaul. You couldn't get them into
the kind of pitched battles against a civilized opponent and you fought these horribly difficult
wars with all sorts of supply problems where your army could starve to death. If it broke up,
it would be defeated in detail and this characterized the wars of this really bloody
generation running from 154 to 133 BC. The fighting of what is known as the third
Celtiberian war and as I said this really just extends into the operation in the 140s and 130s
BC in the Middle Ebro Valley really characterized the problems the Romans faced. New Mantia was a
important Celtiberian stronghold in the northeast. It was one of the major threats against the
nearer province and general after general was sent against this city and as I said from 153 to
133 BC the city was put onto Roman siege several times. We have awesome siege works from there,
some of the best around and the Romans still couldn't reduce this town. The new mantines and
their various allies in the interior just prove extremely tough and in trying to break New Mantia
you can see some of the problems. In 141 BC the consul Gaius Quintus Pompeius,
related to the later Pompey the Great, he's a collateral line, a new man was elected,
led his army in there, fought a battle against the new mantines, actually was tactically defeated
but concluded a treaty with the new mantine so he could claim a triumph back in Rome which the
Senate immediately tore up and said no treaties, go defeat them. They sent other generals in who got
no success. The worst of it was in 137 BC Gaius Hastilius Mankinus who was sent in as a consul,
this is like the fourth army sent against New Mantia and Mankinus blundered his armies,
typically had the supply problems, he encamps in a position that gets surrounded by the new
mantines, the next morning he wakes up and these Celtiberians are ready to slaughter him and after
the way the Romans have dealt with them for the last 15 years you would think the Roman army would
be annihilated and instead they hear that Tiberius Gracchus, the son of that governor back in 179,
is in the ranks, they invite him and the young Gracchus, he's only a quiester, he's a financial
official arranges a truce and the Roman army escapes. Now the Spanish know enough about
a Roman military procedure to send them under the yoke, that is they set up two spears with a
bar over it and as you walk through you have to bend down as a way of subservience, so they
they're not going to humiliate the Romans, they come back with a treaty, there's popular outrage,
Mankinus is put on trial, Gracchus is put on trial, Pompeius, it's a complete fiasco,
Mankinus is actually tried and convicted for military incompetence and is sent back to the
nothing more bizarre than sending the consul stripped nude in chains to the Spaniards who look
at this nude consul, don't know what to do with them and send him back to the Romans, fighting
continues, Mankinus disappears from the record and finally the way the city is broken is they bring
in Scipio Emileanus, the adoptive grandson, he raises a volunteer army, he's elected to consul
in violation of the rules, he goes in there and eventually captures and breaks the city in 133.
Well that action and that I've focused on the Ibro Valley, that action, that fighting in that
area as well as simultaneous fighting in the West eventually wears down the Spanish opponents and
breaks the power of the Celtiberian tribes, but they're still fighting, that goes on, there's
large sections of Spain that remain outside of Roman control for the next century and it isn't
until 25 and 19 BC when the far northwest is finally brought under control and that requires
an imperial army of seven legions, it requires the emperor Gustus's best general Agrippa,
the fighting in Spain has been costly, it has been brutal and we will see some of the costs of
that later on in this course and how difficult this fighting was for the majority of Romans and
Italians who had to undertake that service and I think the worst piece of information you could
receive as a Roman citizen in the second century BC is that congratulations, you're about to be
drafted for an expedition to Spain, I mean it was just you were not coming back and if, well if
you did your family was going to be ruined if you were fortunate. On the other hand, in the course
of fighting these wars against the Celtiberian tribes of the interior, the Romans learned some
very important and difficult lessons, one was that there aren't clear frontier lines and when
older generations of scholars in the 19th and 20th centuries studied Roman history in relations
with barbarian peoples, there's always an obsession to draw lines on maps and of course
they do have their value but the Romans very quickly in Spain learned there isn't a clear
definable border and that in dealing with barbarian peoples you're cutting, you're imposing a
political control to achieve certain military and political objectives and often these boundaries
run right through important cultural and economic zones, for one rivers never function as very good
boundaries, rivers are really lines of communication, this will become a major theme of the Romans on
the Rhine in the Danube and Central Europe and so you don't set up any kind of machinile line.
The second important point is absolutely imperative to win over those elites, those local elites,
the kind of perfidious treatment that some of these leaders and tribes received in the 150s
and 140s BC which sparked a series of political trials, that's indicative that this wasn't going
to work in the long run, it might get a governor a victory and so a triumph but the senate and
the assemblies back in Rome had to think in longer terms and this was a problem given that nature
of rotating commands, governors went out there with maybe one or two years and Spain became a
particularly sleazy case of triumph hunting in the 150s and 140s, that is governors going out
trying to lure a tribe into a battle and defeating them, there are there are two instances where a
treaty was actually concluded with a major caltiberian tribe and the next governor showed up,
actually one of them was the brother of the previous governor, tears up the treaty because he
wants his war and he wants the honor of concluding the war and this is one of the problems built
into that roman constitution, that better methods of dealing with these peoples would have to be
evolved, this would be solved in the imperial age where you begin to get governors as we understand
them who went out for three and four terms in some cases six years who could then evolve some sort
of relationship with the local peoples and that in turn would allow them to administer these provinces
but in Spain they found very very quickly that the whole system could break down very quickly when
a new governor came in, third it became important that the only way to succeed in Spain is you had
to win over Spanish allies, you needed them for their manpower, you had to put in settlements
that would encourage the development of cities at strong points, highways became all important,
that is the methods that had worked in uniting Italy uh uh overland through highways and this
this was going to have to be applied to Spain on a very wide level and this is what's going to
characterize Spain in the late second century bc and first century bc putting in a lot of what we
would call that infrastructure to build a provincial society
