Lecture 9, The Genesis of Roman Spain
In this lecture, I plan to discuss the Genesis of Roman Spain, which is a topic that takes
us from the last two lectures and moves us into an area of social and economic change
brought on by the Roman conquest of the peninsula.
In the last lecture, I concluded with the main fighting that the Romans had with their
most tough barbarian opponents in Spain, that is the Celtiberians.
By 133 BC, the backbone of the resistance had been broken.
There would still be fighting.
There were still Roman commanders who went out to Spain for the next century.
Some of them triumphed hunting, as I call it, others fighting actual foes.
And by 19 BC, the last of those wars had come to a conclusion, and those were wars waged
especially in the far northwestern areas where the Vascones and the Contenabra held out.
This would be in the very difficult mountain areas.
The regions that later became the Christian kingdom of Astorias in the early Middle Ages,
which defied the Moors, the Muslim invaders of Spain in the 8th century.
But the majority of the peninsula after 133 BC was more or less under Roman control, and
I had stressed a great deal of the nature of the fighting, the administrative arrangements
the Romans put in.
And I think that where I want to start here is with, well, what happened once that major
fighting was over?
In fact, the only significant fighting after 133 BC was essentially a Roman civil war,
in which a man named Quintessitorius, who represented the popular, the popularis party
in Rome, fled to Spain and was able to organize a counter-Roman government in Spain from
82 BC down to 73 BC, and that was based on the Hispano-Roman population, as well as his
ability to court Celtiberian tribes as allies.
Satorius is a remarkable man.
He actually got many of his Celtiberian allies to fight with him because he convinced him
he was favored by Diana.
He had a tame fawn that would follow him around and would be making these magical appearances,
which many of the Celtiberians thought was a good sign from the gods and meant he would
be propitious in battle.
He understood how to use a variety of ways of appealing to these warriors.
But that's a significant point, that the real fighting in that period was essentially a
Roman civil war that had been removed from Italy to the provinces.
And that's a testimony to the extent of Romanization that had occurred in the generation and a
half before that civil war was fought, and that's the main question and the main topic
of this lecture.
How did Spain end up being such a success story for Romanization?
And as I mentioned earlier in one or two lectures, I use the term Romanization in a qualified
sense.
It doesn't mean that every Spaniard became a perfect Roman in Italy, far from it.
In fact, Italy itself, the peninsula was by no means all Roman at this time.
Most of the people living in Peninsula Italy were not Roman citizens, as this process
of Romanization was going on.
I've also stressed that it was a two-way street.
That is the Romans who settled in Spain or those Spaniards who took on Roman names, adopted
the Latin language.
They also brought a lot over from their traditional society, which the Romans themselves adopted.
So that Rome is being changed as well as the local population.
So long as we use the term in that sense, I think it's a legitimate term.
And as always, those who farmed in the countryside, the villages and the scattered hamlets and
those engaged in stock raising and herding of animals, there the pace of Romanization
would be much less and traditional patterns would hold on, even though there is evidence
to show that they too would be affected by the process.
So with that proviso, let's look at why Spain turned out to be such a successful case of
turning barbarians into provincials and ultimately Romans.
And Spain is really remarkable because the peninsula was not contiguous to Italy.
It wasn't, as in northern Italy, Cisalpangol, where the southern portions of Cisalpangol,
up to the Bo Valley, it was very easy to move Italians in and colonize that area, the district
of Emilia.
The Romans chose not to move into Cisalpangol, but you could have brought immigrants in very
easily in large numbers given the road system.
Spain was distant through much of, it wasn't until the late 2nd century BC, the Romans
bothered to secure a highway that ran from the city of Genoa essentially to, well, Tarragona
was the main city in northeastern Spain on the Mediterranean shore where the Romans based
their administration in the New York province.
So that all the traffic from Italy to Spain had to come by sea and sending 20,000 soldiers
by sea is an impressive shipping job by anyone's standards.
Spain reveals several important patterns about this process of Romanization and transformation
of barbarian cultures and societies that become instructive for looking at other areas of
the Roman Empire later on.
For one, the Romans inherited a urban-based set of communities stretching along the Mediterranean
shores in southern shore Spain.
I mentioned from Tarragona to Gades, there were towns that were either of Greek origin,
Greek origin, or in some cases native Iberian origin.
They would have had a pattern in life that was perfectly compatible with Mediterranean
civilization.
And it's no accident that the Roman settlement, which often took the form of veterans deciding
not to go back to Italy, staying in Spain, merchants who had moved in, members of the
mining communities, whether they were the miners themselves or the vast entertainment
outfit, the loan sharks, the gamblers, and the prostitutes that flocked to every mining
community, they settled.
But they settled in very specific areas and from what we can tell, and again our information
is coming from usually the very end of the Republic, the beginning of the Empire, when
we have a lot of inscriptions and documentary evidence, the Romans who stayed in Spain and
the areas they settled, they tended to settle in areas that approximated their homelands
back in Italy, which makes sense.
Most of them were probably coming from Northern, North Central and Central Italy, from places
like Umbria, the Abruzzi today, Pretoria.
They found regions of Spain that were approximately similar to what they knew at home.
We can tell this by the nature of the Roman names that are adopted in Spain, that the
Spaniards took over the names of Romans and they would adopt them and use them themselves.
Those names are very revealing because they can be localized in certain parts of Italy.
We will find that when the Romans settled in Africa, the region of Tunis, Tunisia today,
that the Romans that settled there were coming from the Bay of Naples and Sicily.
And we're again settling in areas that would have been similar, sort of similar to what
they knew back in Sicily and Southern Italy.
And this is a pattern that is very common, that is the Roman populations and maybe better
sense is Italian, because a lot of them are not really yet Romans, they're Italian allies
or Latin allies, would settle in areas that were conducive and therefore you had heavy
settlement in Southern Spain, the Baitis Valley, as the Romans would call it, the Guadalupe
today.
And that is the region now known as Granada or Andalusia in the Middle Ages.
This is where the Muslim population settled, cities such as Cordova, Seville, which go
back to early Roman foundations.
In 171 BC, Cartea is the first city mentioned in the literary sources, which was established
as a Latin colony.
These were discharged veterans who had married local women and their children, their mixed
offsprings were given Latin status.
And they stayed there.
Other cities such as Seville, Cordova, Italica, name is telling, some of them claim that they
went back to veteran settlements of the Second Punic War by Scipio Africanus.
These cities were very Mediterranean in climate, they approximated conditions back in Italy.
You had olive growing groves, you had grain production.
So the Romans who moved in there very easily mixed with the population and established
patterns of life that would have been familiar back in Italy.
There was also a certain amount of settlement around the city of New Carthage, Cartagena
today and just to the west of it were the fantastic mining operations.
Well the result of this pattern of settlement is that the southern area, the region became
the province of Biteca, think of that as essentially modern Granada.
The area of the lower Ebro Valley, that would be the region of Catalonia, where modern Barcelona
is located.
And the area around Cartagena became Romanized certainly by the opening of the first century
BC.
It could be documented in a number of ways.
One is the export of Spanish olive oil that's going to Italy, we've got information that
gives us this, literary as well as archeological evidence.
The cities begin to mint bronze coins based along Roman standards.
These are the fractional money you need for weekly markets, daily markets.
They are adopting the Roman monetary system for small transactions.
This is local money to be used in tandem with imported Roman silver coins.
That's instructive and there's been a good deal of an analysis to show those towns that
adopted this type of currency were clearly towns engaged in daily markets, export trade.
And again, they cluster in the regions where you'd expect to be.
By the year 48 BC, the city of Gades, Cadiz, could boast that it had 500 members of its
community of Roman equestrian status.
That is men who had sufficient property to be in the class just below the political
elite in Italy.
And that is comparable to the largest towns in Italy at the time.
There were towns in northern Italy and central Italy that could boast the same number.
I mentioned that Lucius Cornelius Balbus, a financial agent of Julius Caesar, who later
ended up bankrolling Caesar's adoptive heir and son Octavian, was the first provincial
not only to get Roman citizenship but to be elected, that is to be selected into the
Roman Senate and he held the consulship in 40 BC, the first non-Italian ever to do so,
which is a testimony of the pace of Romanization in these towns.
So there was a very important settlement by Romans, merchants, immigrants, discharged
soldiers that helped that transformation.
The Spaniards themselves, as I mentioned, became extremely adept in manipulating the
patron client system and using it to their advantage.
The first efforts to prosecute corrupt governors in the provinces come from the Spanish towns.
In 171 BC, we have a case of them bringing a suit against a governor in the farther province
and the Senate setting up a day repitundus, that is a court concerning corruption.
In 149 BC, this was made a standing court in Rome, that is, after a generation of these
cases, the Romans decided to institutionalize it and that came from the pressure of Spaniards
who were being represented by the Roman patrons, that is, leading senators in Rome, but it
meant that there were close connections between those elites and those Romanized cities and
Rome.
Another important force that was Romanizing Spain were the mining operations and I mentioned
that briefly.
Initially, the Romans were indirectly exploiting the mines, that is, they imposed tribute and
indemnities on Spanish towns and Celtiberian tribes.
When you're defeated in the war, the Romans always, in effect, find you for daring to
attack the mastery of the Roman Republic.
Well, that meant you had to find the money to pay it and that stimulated mining operations
in central and southern Spain.
But in the 150s BC, besides getting involved in another major set of Celtiberian wars,
the Romans also financially reorganized the Spanish provinces and there's indication
that essentially the Romans shift from tribute to taxation.
They call it tributum in Latin, which is a little misleading, we get our word tribute.
But from the 150s BC, the Roman Republic starts exploiting its revenues in Spain quite systematically.
There are taxes to be paid and mining revenues.
The mines come under state regulation.
The miners are brought in under very generous contracts.
They're expected to get room and board.
Very good wages from what I've studied in mining contracts.
They're extremely well paid.
There's probably an understanding that anything you mined on your own on off days, you could
keep as well.
And we get some remarkable statistics.
The mines that were about some 45 miles west of New Carthage were told in 150 BC employed
40,000 workers daily, of which I think only about 5,000 were really miners, and produced
probably an annual output of silver of eight and a third tons.
And this is the government's take.
We have no idea of the unreported sums that were hauled out.
It's thought that by the 170s BC, the Roman Republic was annually getting something on
the order of 10 million denarii and revenue from its mines.
And that at the time would have represented probably between 20 and 25% of the revenues
coming into the Roman Republic's coffers.
That's an extraordinary amount of money.
And in the early imperial age, there would be even more mines found in northwestern Spain,
gold mines, once the areas are brought under control.
And there was a gold rush essentially into northwestern Spain.
The Romans brought in their deep mining techniques.
They were able to essentially wash away mountains if necessary.
They had all sorts of deep shafts that they could sink in the equipment.
And there was an enormous outpouring of gold from Roman Spain in the first half of the
first century AD.
And again, it was a major component of the revenues coming into the imperial.
These mining operations brought in large numbers of outsiders who transformed traditional
societies in the area.
Many of the tribes, Celtiberians end up working as laborers in the mine.
There's the mining towns that spring up.
There's the roads that have to come there.
And you can just add the patterns.
And so what you get is in some of the rather remote areas, since metals have this annoying
habit of being on remote mountain sides, they're not conveniently located and you have to
protect from brigands and the like.
These remote areas become very much Romanized because of the mining activities.
And Spain had enormous mineral wealth besides gold and silver.
A copper, large copper deposits, iron, lead, which was extremely important in construction.
So that throughout the entire imperial age, even into the period of Visigothic control,
that is when you get into the early Middle Ages, these Roman mines continue to be exploited.
Now some of the big gold and silver mines had been tapped out.
That is the big surges were gone.
But there was still constant activity.
And the Lusitanians, who gave the Romans so much trouble in Western Spain, to a large
extent they had to be brought under control because they were in the unfortunate position
that they were on the highway running from Seville right up to the northern mines and
the Romans were just going to have to bring them under control if they wanted to tap that
mineral wealth.
So mines were another important aspect of the Romanization.
We'll see this again in areas of Central Europe, such as Dacia, even in remote spots of Wales
where mining was a major way of Romanizing.
A third area was, I said, military service.
And here the Romans, and this is a case, a really good case of how the Romans are being
changed by these barbarian wars and provincial experiences as much as their foes and eventually
their subject.
The Roman army, when they initially moved into Spain in the second century BC, largely
fought with forces brought in from Italy.
And they didn't hire the Celtiberian tribes in large numbers as mercenaries to be serving
overseas in large mercenary armies the way the Carthaginians did.
And that was part of the problem, is you had all these unemployed Celtiberian warriors,
and since you didn't take them overseas, they turned their swords against the Romans.
Well, in the course of fighting, especially that second surge of wars from the 150s into
the 130s BC, the Romans began to understand they had to use a lot of Spanish allies and
go back to what was done in the Second Punic War.
Many of these Spaniards were prized as cavalry and light infantry, and from the end of the
second century BC on, we find the Romans using these forces outside of Spain.
This is the beginning of the evolution of what became institutionalized in the Empire
as the Auxiliary Army.
That is, the army of soldiers, essentially professionals, non-Roman, provincials fighting
according to their specialties, not in their immediate area, their homeland as garrison
forces or supplementary forces or allies, but overseas in Rome's great wars of expansion
or frontier defense.
And in Spain, these Auxiliary forces are being raised and trained, and we know, for
instance, in 90 BC, we have the document, the Roman Consul of the Year, Ganias Pompeia
Strabo, who was the man who sponsored the citizenship bills for Northern Italy, Cisal
Pangol, gave a document to 30 Spanish horsemen, men who had fought in a military unit, discharging
them, and they got the Roman citizenship, and the war they were fighting in was in the
Roman Social War.
They had been brought into Italy to fight the insurgent Italian allies.
These Spaniards were now being discharged for their bravery with the grant of Roman citizenship,
and they took the Roman name, the Trianomina.
It's one of the earliest documents we have showing this, and what generally a provincial
did, it could be a Spaniard or a Kelt or a German, is they took the first two names,
the first two Roman names, the three-name system of the Romans, Ganias Pompeias.
And then as the third name, which in Latin would represent the family, the middle name,
the second name represented the clan, so they're part of the Pompeii, that's the Roman commander,
but the third name would usually be their ancestral name.
There could be their personal name, it could be a Celtic name, a Iberian, and so when you
look at these military documents, you can tell immediately, ah, these provincials, they
probably got the citizenship from this particular Roman governor, the first two names show it,
and then the last name is the tip-off, well, they may have been from Spain's, the South
Bangal, or wherever, and that becomes a very common pattern in the first century B.C. and
into the Imperial Age, so that Spaniards were serving in military units.
We have instances of Spaniards serving in military units not getting the citizenship,
then going back to Spain and passing themselves off as Roman citizens, taking Roman names
and pretending to be Roman citizens, and one wonders, well, that's kind of curious, why
would they do that?
In certain parts of Roman provincial society, Roman citizenship was an advantage.
These would be discharged veterans who fought overseas with the Romans, they'd probably
learned Latin, they had contacts, the Roman commander would become their patron, therefore
they're the clients of a powerful Roman, if the local community, whether it be a tribal
community or whether it be a city, now had people in its midst who had the contacts in
Rome to have abuses corrected or get them some kind of advantage, patronage, back in
the Senate.
And these ties become very important and powerful from the late second century B.C. into the
Imperial Age, and also account very much for the Romanization.
Military service becomes a way of acculturating people, it's a social advancement.
Many of these provincials added Latin as one of the languages they spoke, and they retired
to their home, or at least in the vicinity of their home, and played upon these ties
to raise their status in the home community.
And so Spain shows all of these activities, the Roman settlement and development of cities,
the export trade, and all the economic pressures to Romanize, the mining activities, as well
as the military services, ways of transforming barbarians into provincials and ultimately
Romans.
I also mentioned that it was a two-way street.
Rome, the Romans in general, could look upon Spain with a great deal of pride as a success
after those brutal wars were over, and there's no doubt the wars in Spain, besides I mentioned
the fact that the Romans just looted Spain and forced the Spaniards to conquer the new
world to make up for the lost medals, the brutality of the wars in Spain in some way
or sort of a dress rehearsal for Cortez's conquest of Mexico.
But that aside, by the end of the first century BC, say 40 BC, let's take Cornelius Balbus,
who became consul in Rome, many of the cities in the more Romanized areas, the southern
and eastern districts of Spain, were adopting the Latin language as their official language.
They were applying for municipal charters, and this is a process that continues for
the next, no, about 150 years, and climaxes in the Flavian Age.
That is the second dynasty of Rome that ruled from 69 AD to 96, it was founded by the Emperor
of Espasion, we'll bring them on later on.
One of my most favorite Roman emperors, he's a no-nonsense fellow who doesn't put up with
a lot of the pretenses on Roman aristocracy, and in any case, the Flavian emperors issued
Latin status charters to numerous communities, hundreds of Spanish communities.
One of the charters from Malacca has survived, this is a Roman town in southern Spain in
the old Punic areas in which it's laid out in Latin, and it's a perfectly normal Roman
municipal charter.
And these adoptions of the Roman municipal charters, the Latin language, were accompanied
by the use of Roman public buildings and the acquiring of a Roman identity by the cities
and towns of Spain, and that's an extremely important process.
Now from the Roman viewpoint, Spain and the Republican age also put an awful lot of strain
on Rome, and it transformed Rome in a number of ways.
The easiest way to measure were the administrative adjustments I spoke, the use of prorogation
that is sending governors out, extending the terms of annual magistrates by one or two
years so they could finish the job, rather than trying to simply rotate every year.
And that is the development of what we would think of as governors.
It also saw the steady moving of the term prowinkia province from meaning simply a theater of
operation to a definable area, even if those borders are a little unclear, but there's
an administration from the 150s BC on, there's regular taxation that has to be collected
by Rome, their revenues, that is an overseas administration for running regions not connected
to Italy, not incorporated into Italy or near Italy under the old Italian alliance structures
is now being evolved, and we would think of this as a colonial administrative apparatus
and the Romans have to create this in order to run the Spanish provinces.
So those are two important points.
Another important point is that the Romans begin to essentially unwittingly move that
citizen army ever more towards a professional army.
As I mentioned, the fighting in Spain was heavy.
From 197 to 178 BC, and again from 154 to 133 BC, on average between 50,000 and 75,000,
Romans, Italians, and Latin allies were serving in Spain.
There would be somewhere between 25,000 and 30,000 men in the fleets to support them.
Well that Rome would be putting in a military effort of easily 100,000 men.
That is veritably a migration out of Italy.
Two thirds of them were non-Romans, that is they were Italian and Latin allies, and the
process of the fighting came to identify themselves as Romans.
That type of fighting would involve men in expeditions for years, two, three, six years
became probably a normal term of service.
In those situations, these men became essentially professionals.
All sorts of changes in weapons and tactics.
The development of the so-called cohort, the larger military unit of 600 over the Manipole
120, was originally a unit for auxiliary forces, it wasn't used for the Roman legion.
It's probably adopted to the legion in Spain because they found it more useful.
The veterans also had to each year take in maybe 10,000 recruits to make up for deaths
and disease and accidents and the guerrilla fighting.
Those men would have to be trained and socialized and so what happened in Spain is that slowly
a professional army began to emerge, an army that even knew how to mutiny in order to demand
its back pay.
One can make a very, very strong analogy again between the development of what was essentially
originally a citizen-allied force into a professional army to say the way the Spaniards had to
maintain an army in the Netherlands in the 16th century and 17th century, try to put
down the Dutch revolt and that army of 95,000 essentially developed into a peculiar professional
force.
So that Rome was getting a professional army whether they wanted it or not and was well
on the way to having this professional army when Gaius Marius came along and made some
more changes and that's at least a generation or more before the so-called Marian army reforms.
It also meant that many Italians being discharged from service in Spain either settled down
as Romans in Spain or returned to their home communities now in many ways as a Roman and
that's going to be important for the background of the so-called social war.
The mortality rates in Spain were nothing short of frightening, especially in the second
set of wars.
It was not uncommon for the expeditionary forces fighting against Veriatus and the Celtiberians
involved in the siege of New Mantia to experience 40% casualties in battles, that 40% killed
in action, you add in the wounded and the diseased, the numbers are frightening and it is no
accident that that second round of wars starting in the 150s and raging for the next 20, 25
years results in political agitation back in Rome, disputes over the draft, bills to
redistribute public land in Italy to restore the status of many veterans and Roman families
that have lost their property because the men have been overseas fighting in Spain in order
to make them a sigioui again, that is people of property rank so they'd be eligible for
legionary service, they'd have the money to buy the arms, the money to support their families.
All of that political agitation associated with the events that led to the Roman Revolution
had their immediate background in these wars in Spain and the enormous bloodletting that
went on.
As I said, the Romans suffered enormous casualties in this fighting which also indicates that
the barbarians, quote unquote, get very, very good at learning Roman techniques of fighting
and turn it on their masters and that is a theme that we will encounter again in the
imperial age where the most effective of the native leaders who resist Roman rule, the
most impressive barbarian figures are menace who bushwhacks and destroys three legions
in Germany or the two batos, bationes in Latin, the men who raised the great revolts
in the Balkans, all of them had served in Roman auxiliary forces, all of them knew Roman
training, all of them understood Roman discipline and knew how to exploit those weaknesses and
so in a very ironic way these extended Roman conquests often forced the barbarians to get
better organized, get better tactics and weapons and above all to gain the training and organization
necessary to attempt to counter the Romans.
Now in Spain these rebels were beaten down and eventually defeated and we hear of no
such other rebel leaders after those wars from the 130s BC but in other provinces later
on in this lecture series we will encounter very, very successful resistance leaders,
the most successful being Arminus who essentially kicks the Romans out of Germany.
So the historic results of Spain were to create provinces in the southern and eastern sections
which by the first century AD, especially the province of Byptica were regarded as virtually
Italy, Italy overseas, many of the privileged cities in Spain by the year 100 AD were actually
declared use Italicum that is they had the right as if they were on Italian soil, all
the benefits of being Italy, it just happens to be geographically located in Spain and
there's no better way to conclude that if the first non-Italian to hold the consulship
came from Spain, the first non-Italian emperors also came from Spain and that would be the
Emperor Trajan, Marcus Ulpius Traianus, the offspring of Roman settlers and Iberians from
Italica and Marcus Ulpius Trajanus would be the most successful emperor of the early Imperial
Age, well only the Emperor Augustus is greater than he because he's remembered as Optimus
Prynkeps the best of emperors and that will be a separate lecture coming up.
