Lecture 14 Julius Caesar and the Conquest of Gaul
In this lecture I plan to deal with an important period in the career of Julius Caesar, perhaps
one of the most memorable of Romans, and clearly one of the great commanders of all history.
He may not be on quite the order of Alexander the Great or Napoleon, but he is an extraordinarily
brilliant and talented general.
And we're going to concentrate on his conquest of Gaul for two key reasons.
One, the conquest of Gaul, which was an enormous undertaking for any Roman commander, and certainly
one of the most ambitious projects undertaken by the Romans to date, would transform the
whole axis and dimension of the Roman world.
I mentioned in the previous lecture that in 60 BC, and this is just two years before
JC goes off to Gaul, that the Romans had a Mediterranean-wide empire.
They had acquired frontiers which marched side by side with various barbarian peoples
who lived beyond that Mediterranean zone.
But with Caesar, a huge area was conquered which put the Romans deep into northwestern
and central Europe, and ever after the Romans were committed to extending that range of
Mediterranean civilization farther and farther out to frontiers on the Rhine, on the Danube,
ultimately across these rivers into central and eastern Europe, into Britain, farther
east across the Euphrates, and also coming to terms with those desert nomads in the south
and the southeast.
And so Caesar represents an important point in this whole relationship between Rome and
the barbarian peoples.
Furthermore, he brings the Romans in contact with new barbarian peoples, or peoples that
were really not too well understood up until that point for most the Germans in central
Europe.
Also, he opens up the island of Britain, which was essentially previously unknown to most
Romans, and therefore, as I said at the beginning of this course, the identity of barbarians
began to change.
It can't be stressed too much that Caesar was hailed as the conqueror over the traditional
Roman foe.
The conquest of Gaul, essentially affected, not affected, ended the domination of the
Celtic civilization, that late Iron Age civilization, which was really the principal organizing
civilization in western and central Europe since, well, you know, since it began back
in the 5th century BC.
Furthermore, the efforts to get this command in Gaul to extend it, Caesar had two successive
runs as proconsul, that is, effectively military governor, it was a ten year position he held
from 59 BC down to 49 BC, was the perhaps the most memorable of the great extraordinary
commands which the republic found had to be voted to these imperatoris, these generals,
in which we get the word emperor, imperatoris, the plural, means a commander who is won a
victory or legion salute you with that title.
That set of positions that Caesar acquired, first as consul, then as twice as proconsul,
set the stage for an imperial monarchy.
It really was the beginning of the end of traditional republican government, they would
have to fight two civil wars to determine who was going to end up being that imperator,
but it does mark a turning point in the republic and really a transition to the empire.
Caesar was elected consul for 59 BC and that election itself was instructive of what happened.
Julius Caesar, Pompey, who was another leading imperator of the period, and a man by the
name of Narcos Licinius Crassus, another aspiring commander, all got together in an informal
arrangement that is sometimes called the first triumvirate, that's really a misnomer in many
ways, that means a power of three.
They agreed to pull their voters, their money, and their influence together to get Caesar
elected as consul, to get him his command in Gaul, and then Pompey and Crassus also expected
Caesar to pass all sorts of legislation on behalf of their veterans, on behalf of their
clients, and what that informal agreement was, in some ways it was traditional Roman
politics, but these three men together had so much influence and power and potential
that they could dominate the Roman state.
They could effectively suspend normal constitutional government, choose who was going to be elected
to plan out the political life of the republic for years, in some cases even for decades.
The way this operation succeeded was the fact that Caesar acted as the go-between with Pompey
and Crassus, old lieutenants of Sulla, who hated each other, and Julius Caesar was the
lynchpin that kept the three of them working together.
We'll meet Crassus later on in dealing with the Eastern, Barbarians Crassus is quite a
talented character of his own, made an enormous amount of money, and is reputed to have said
no one is truly rich unless they can buy an army, and he will come to a bad end out in
Parthia, in the East.
In any case, Caesar in 59 BC was consul, he ran through a whole bunch of legislation which
was quite illegal, with violence and rioting, and in 58 BC he went up to Sassalpangol to
assume his proconsulship, that is his governorship.
He had in effect three provinces, he had Sassalpangol, northern Italy, Lyricum, by which the Romans
meant whatever you could overrun in the Balkans, and Transalpangol, that is the southern regions
of Gaul, which had been incorporated back in 121 BC when the Romans were forced to move
in there and protect the Greek cities and their friends against various Celtic tribes
pressing from the north.
When I last described that area, I stressed the fact that the whole security of Gaul rested
very much on a network of alliances that had been forged back in 121 BC by leading Romans
and the leaders of important tribes in what we would today call central France.
Foremost among these tribes were the Aedui.
They controlled an extremely important trade route, that is the Seon, which flows into
the Rhône River at a point, which is today the city of Lyon, the Romans called it Lugdunum,
which was recognized as one of the key market towns in Gaul.
Furthermore, the Aedui had many far-flunged allies through most of eastern Gaul.
They had leading men who were connected to prominent families in Rome, that included
the Demetriah, Honour Barbie, and other groups, the Fabii.
And the Aedui were thought to be the type of guardians for the Roman province.
They were not in the Roman province, but they were friends of Rome, and they were there
to protect the invasion route into southern Gaul, which had been taken by the Kimbris
and Tutones back in 105 BC.
So in many ways, this was simply extending the old patron-client network to a group
of tribes.
Now, by aligning Rome with the Aedui, that meant there were other tribes that were not
so friendly to Rome, particularly the Aedui's relatives to the west, the Avernae, mentioned
them earlier, they're controlling the Massif Saint-Proil today, they reside in the region
of the Avernia.
They had many clients, and beyond the Aedui and the Avernae were a whole group of different
Celtic tribes stretching to the English Channel, up to the North Sea and Britain, with whom
Rome had very little dealings.
The Romans at this point really knew very little beyond the limits of where the Aedui
were.
So when Caesar came to take his governorship in 58 BC, he was actually entertaining the
idea of going east into the Balkans.
There are a number of good reasons for doing that, first you get to Greece and you have
more plunder for your soldiers potentially, but also you secured important land routes
between Italy and Greece.
Well what happened through a twist of fate is that Caesar immediately got appeals from
the Aedui.
They had been giving alarming reports earlier that there were movements from central Europe
coming into Gaul.
Part of these movements were apparently Germans.
They're called Suebe by Caesar, or sometimes they're known as Sueves.
These are dramatic peoples, they were headed up by a king called Ariovistus, who had been
invited into Gaul by dissident Celtic tribes as allies and mercenaries, largely at the
expense of the Aedui and their clients and allies.
So the Aedui were quite concerned, these people were pressing into what today would be called
the Belfour Gap, that is in the regions of Alsace, of Eastern France.
There were also other tribes set in motion, secondary movements probably coming out of
these migrations of the Germans, among them the Helvitians, which today still uses the
term for Switzerland in Latin, the Helvite who are a Celtic people dwelling in what is
now western Switzerland.
They wanted to migrate west, they along with several other tribes, the Sequane, and they
included in their ranks people who were opponents of the Aedui, and this tribal movement would
go right across the Roman province, particularly at the city of Geneva today on Lake Geneva
which was under Roman control.
Well these migrations were potentially dangerous and disruptive to the Roman province.
It could be argued that Caesar pounced on these as an excuse to intervene and conquer Gaul.
There's a great deal of truth to that.
In 58 B.C. Caesar responded by moving in and taking on both of these group of barbarian
emigrants, tribes on the move.
He claims that the Helvitians alone numbered 365,000, there were 200,000 Germans coming
across the Rhine.
We really don't know how large these groups were, but given the memory that the Romans
had of the earlier barbarian invasions back in 105 B.C., many Romans, particularly Romans
in northern Italy, felt this was a potential threat.
It gave Caesar the excuse to increase the size of his army.
He acquired four legions, he raised it to six.
By the time he finishes his governorship in Gaul 10 years later, he has drilled 12 veteran
legions to absolutely superb ability.
So he triples the size of his army in the course of conquering Gaul.
He also manages to subject many Gaelic tribes at furnishing cavalry and allies and provisions
and lots of money is made, so what in effect Caesar does by this conquest of Gaul is make
himself the greatest commander in the Roman world and give him all of those resources
that enabled him to buy tribunes in Rome, guys like Curio and Mark Antony, that enabled
him to buy votes, to use his force to threaten concessions out of the Senate and the Roman
government that eventually leaves to the outbreak of a civil war in 49 B.C.
So Caesar did make his career in Gaul.
There's no doubt that his ambitions were very, very much satisfied by this conquest.
At the same time, any other lesser commander would have probably been overwhelmed by the
dimensions of what this conquest involved.
In 58 B.C., Caesar marched against first the Helvetians, whom he defeated in a battle
of Bebrocte, and then later in the same summer in Alsos defeated the German army under King
Ariovistus.
Both of these battles showed Caesar at his best and skill, and they are still remembered
today by the speeches that he gave his men before they went into battle, stressing Roman
discipline.
He gives an account of these battles in his commentaries, the commentary, which apparently
were based on reports that he was sending back to Rome over the course of, well, they
essentially stop in 52 B.C. when the main fighting is over, but they are reports that
are sent to Rome that become the basis for this account, this history, which discusses
the Gaelic Wars.
And it's a history just filled with ethnographic details, information about Celtic society.
It's written in a very lean, clear, pristine Latin.
It had the misfortune of becoming the Latin primer of generations of schoolboys, especially
Victorian England and Vilhelmani in Germany, so that lots and lots of classes is trained.
Even to this day, always think of Caesar as well, it's just a little textbook to learn
to do your Latin and understand the subjunctive.
It isn't a really serious work, and that's unfortunate because it's one of our best sources
we have on the Celtic peoples at the time of the Roman conquest.
It is also one of the most remarkable accounts of generalship, especially in these first
two battles I mentioned in 58.
The Emperor Julian the Apostate, who was sent to Gaul in 357 A.D. to repair the Rhine frontier
and beat the Germans then.
The first thing he did was read Julius Caesar's Gaelic Wars as sort of a textbook of how to
learn generalship.
And even such a famed general as Sherman in the Civil War, so one of the finest compilations
he could pay for his army, he's never had an army operated through for its own more successfully
than mine in Georgia and the Carolinas, since Julius Caesar, I mean it's just understood
that this is a model textbook for commanders, especially campaigning in these northern areas,
these densely wooded areas fighting Celtic and later German barbarians.
Well Caesar was audacious, he understood speed, he understood logistics, he also understood
political networking as we would call it today.
Between 58 and 56 B.C. he used the excuse of this intervention to beat these tribal migrations
off that could have potentially threatened the Roman province in the south as a means
to intervene in the Hall of Gaul that is everything west of the Rhine, which would be today France,
the German Rhineland, the Low Countries, parts of Switzerland, everything to the Atlantic
and down to the Pyrenees to bring all of this area under the power of the Roman people.
It was done largely by dividing his army up into columns, by swift, audacious movements,
there were several critical battles, I mentioned the most famous was in 57 B.C. against the
Nervai, a Belgic tribe, a very powerful tribe in northeastern Gaul which surprised his army
anyway, they were making pitch and camp and Caesar brilliantly rallies his forces and drives
off the attackers, but most of it was done by intimidation, by the speed, most Celtic
tribes laid down their arms and furthermore Caesar enrolled large numbers of Gauls into
his cavalry, he picked out the men in the Gaelic communities who were favorable to him,
he made personal friendships, these men sometimes were rewarded with citizenship and by getting
it they took the name Gaius Julius as their first two names and kept their Celtic name,
it's one reason why the name Jules is so common in France even today, that many of these Celtic
leaders got citizenship, they brought in their aristocratic warriors as cavalry, the Gaelic
communities however had to furnish provisions, that gets us into another issue, that wasn't
so popular with Caesar's army, but by a combination of diplomacy, speed and logistics Caesar pacified
this area within well about two and a half years, an enormous undertaking, now to do
so meant that Caesar had to keep his army mobile, he had to divide them up into winter
quarters quite frequently because for all the success of Celtic society and there are
Apida and Hillfords, there's no way they could feed and support large numbers of Roman legions
especially as the army grew to 12 legions by the end of the conquest, at one point it's
14, but essentially in the later stages he's got between 10 and 12 legions, 75,000, 80,000
men under arms, that meant the armies were dispersed into winter quarters, that large
demands were made on the population to furnish grain and supplies, that caused great deal
of resentment in the lower ranks of society, among the lesser tribes who had to pay tribute
to the greater tribes who had to answer to Caesar, by 54 BC there was very widespread
discontent among the Gaelic tribes at Roman oppression, furthermore the Roman army was
always followed by its wagon train of entertainers of merchants buying booty, buying slaves,
Roman investors and bankers moved in, began to exploit the opportunities, there's a great
deal of anti-Roman sentiment there as well, so in the course of conquering Gaul, the Gauls
surrendered in large numbers but they really hadn't been defeated, Caesar also carried
off a couple of operations that were to prove momentous for the later history of Rome and
Rome's relation with the barbarians, he twice invaded Britain in 55 and 54 BC, he equipped
a fleet across the channel, close to probably where Boulogne is today, landed on the shores
of Kent, the first expedition was essentially in a reconnaissance and force, they fought
their way on the beaches, won a victory in return, the second one Caesar took five legions
with them, Gaelic cavalry and including several Gaelic nobles he apparently intended to set
up as client kings in Britain, his forces penetrated into southeastern England, maybe
about 12 miles, defeated the Cattu Wallone, one of the principal tribes in southeastern
England, took hostages, made all sorts of claims on these rulers and that was the basis,
the legal basis or pretense for the later Roman conquest in 43 AD that is almost a hundred
years later by the emperor Claudius that initiated the Roman conquest and settlement in Britain,
he also crossed into Germany twice, in fact one could argue and many of Caesar's opponents
did so that Caesar created Germany, largely as a way of defining his own province and
his own triumphs in Gaul, he crossed the Rhine by building stupendous bridges, pontoon
bridges, which he claims stunned the Germans and I have no reason to disbelieve that,
the Roman army just threw these bridges across the Rhine, they cut down trees and build what
is called essentially a corduroy road, they moved in, they carried out reprisals, putative
expeditions, now we're not sure exactly who was being targeted, we're given the name
of a number of tribes and as in the case of Britain, the pretense was well they were
supporting Gaelic rebels, they were harboring Gaelic exiles who had fled to them, who should
have been turned over to JC, in the case of the Britons, the Britons were supposed to
be the heartland of the Druids and the Druid priests were anti-Roman and therefore we're
going to go into Britain and clear out those nest of Druids, that's an argument being
used in the first century AD as well, but what these expeditions into Germany did was
to define that the lands beyond the Rhine were not the same as the lands west of the
Rhine, the Celtic heartland Gaul which Caesar conquered, those lands out to the east were
a separate region, that was Germania and for the first time the Rhine is being used as
some sort of cultural barrier definition and as I stated in the earlier lectures that was
a very, very artificial and really arbitrary demarcation, Celtic civilization both in
its Le Tien and its earlier phase, the Hollisdott was centered in south Germany and the Danube
and the lands of the Rhine land on both sides and as Germans today always like to remind
their French neighbors, the Rhine is a German river, it's not the boundary of France, Pache,
Louis XIV and that the Rhine was really a line of communication and many of the people
on the other side of the Rhine were probably Celtic or certainly in their material culture
very similar to the Gauls, but Caesar drew this demarcation as a way of defining this
is where I'm going to stop, this is what I'm going to accomplish, we have conquered the
Gaelic foe and that was to have major implications for Roman policy in northern Europe and attitudes
towards barbarians for the next five centuries and it reoriented the whole, as we shall see,
the whole access of trade and connections in Gaul once this demarcation was accepted
as final after 9 A.D.
Well Caesar's achievements as of 54 B.C. were stunning, it gained him popularity that made
him the envy of every figure in Rome, it's what drove Crassus, one of his partners in
that political alliance to seek a command against the Parthians in which Crassus went
to a, well, a catastrophic end, he and his army had defeated and destroyed by the Parthians
in one of the great humiliations of Roman history. It also drove Pompey, the other great commander
who was for the longest time linked to Caesar by a marriage connection, he was married to
Caesar's daughter Julia who dies in childbearing probably late in 53 B.C. and that is part
of the reason for the parting of the two men, but it drove Pompey to recall his connections
with Sulla, to resiment ties with the political conservatives in Rome, the optimates, the
leading senators such as Cato the Younger who stood for conservatism, who opposed reform
so that in the civil war that ensued after the Gaelic conquest in 49 B.C., Pompey ends
up fighting for the constitutional, the conservative position as Romans would like to call it,
the better cause, which is one of the most peculiar ways for Pompey to end his career
and if you study Pompey's rather contorted career, for him to end up fighting on behalf
of the Senate is really a, there's a real irony in this altogether.
Nonetheless, the prominence of Caesar meant that when he would end his governorship in
Gaul he would have numerous political enemies back in Rome and Caesar had put himself in
a constitutional dilemma. He had all of this primacy in Rome. As soon as Caesar stopped
holding in Perium, either as a consul or a pro-consul, he was going to be subject to
political prosecution for his many illegal acts as consul and it didn't take much imagination
to find out how he had used violence and coercion to pass all his legislation and pass the bills
that gave him his special command and there were plenty of Roman political figures. If
they couldn't defeat Caesar in terms of reputation and excellence on the battlefield, they used
that time honored method of nailing their political opponent in the law courts and Caesar knew
that he risked prosecution, political humiliation, ruin, potentially even exile if he did not
continue to hold political office, which in the Roman constitution made you protected
from all actions. This is a very unusual aspect of the Roman constitution. So long as you
were a magistrate of the state you couldn't be prosecuted. As soon as you became a private
citizen again you were subject to prosecution and what Caesar needed to do is he had put
himself in a position where he had to keep holding office after office extraordinary
command out of extraordinary command and as Caesar would have you believe it, well I'm
forced into a civil war because if I play by the rules I'm going to be ruined so they
wished it on me and Caesar is very good at putting all of his opponents in the wrong.
So that was going to be one of the main reasons for driving him into this civil war. On the
other hand in 54 BC there was already evidence that well, Gaul may not have been as quite
as pacified as Caesar would lead you to believe in his commentaries. There were indications
of widespread resentment. I mentioned that the logistics came down very hard on the Gaelic
population, that the Roman army had enormous food requirements and really you were going
to have to restructure the economy if you were going to support an army of this size
and Gaul and that would only come later in the imperial age. Caesar had tried to impress
not only the Romans but the Gauls by his expeditions into Germany and Britain. That in a way caused
Caesar to neglect those very important political alliances among the numerous Gaelic elites.
You have to keep cultivating people who are favorable in the tribes, who would keep the
tribes loyal to you and ergo to Rome because these connections are very personal.
Well in 54 BC there was already evidence of a problem. In the fall of 54 BC and these
revolts are usually timed in the fall or spring when the Roman army is scattered into
winter quarters. A Roman force numbering anywhere between 6 or 9,000 we are not sure how many
are lured out of their camp. The Duke commanders Sabinus and Cota, this is a northeastern Gaul
by the Eberrones, are lured out and are destroyed on the march. It is a horrible ambush, most
of the army is killed. The Nervai, one of the most recalcitrant of the Belgic tribes
where we get the word Belgium, they are in northeastern Gaul. They gave Caesar so much
trouble. They attacked the camp of Quintus Tullius Cicero, who is the brother of the
Oritus Cicero. I mean every prominent Roman family as much as they opposed Caesar politically
were sending relatives into Gaul to gain careers and experience, including Cicero's
brother was there. Caesar resolutely smashes this resistance by his lightning autumn campaigns,
he puts down the revolts, pacifies it, harries the rebels into the winter, but those uprisings
were indicative of a much more general discontent and it blew up that spring in 53 BC as Caesar
was busy trying to impress the Germans again. It started near the modern city of Orléans,
where the local Celtic populations butchered the Roman merchants. It swiftly spread to
the Avernes, who were the leading tribe of central Gaul, long opponents of the Aedui,
the friends of Rome, they found a leader in versing Jeterix, who today is enshrined in
all sorts of highly romanticized, some might even say tacky, 19th century monarchy, and
monuments as the embodiment of the French national hero. This happens to a number of
rebels against Rome, Arminus in Germany, Boudicca in Britain, somehow they're turned into sort
of patriotic figures in the nationalism of the 19th century and lead on to these rather
strange Victorian style monuments, or even some cases neoceltic monuments in the case
of versing Jeterix. In any way, versing Jeterix, the principal chieftain of the Avernes, manages
to rally many of the Celtic tribes in what is presented as a national revolt. The revolt
bears a lot of similarities to other rebellions that we'll be seeing in the Roman imperial
age. Caesar responds quickly, however, the revolt is so widespread, the Aedui defect.
Caesar suffers a minor setback at the town of Jagovia, which he fails to capture, and
it climaxes in Caesar regrouping, rallying his forces from the defeat at Jagovia, and
surprising versing Jeterix at the city of Elysia in central France today. At that city,
which was the city of a set of allies of versing Jeterix, he encounters versing Jeterix before
he can mobilize most of this Celtic army, and the Celts have great trouble of putting all
this manpower on the battlefield given their logistics. He defeats versing Jeterix, drives
him into the city of Elysia, and puts the city under siege. A relief army comes to help,
but what Caesar does is build 12 miles of fortifications to block off the army in Elysia,
and then 14 miles facing outward to face the relief army, which climaxes in a two-day battle
some of the best sections of the Gaelic Wars, in which Caesar repels two different attacks
by the outside relieving force, compels versing Jeterix to surrender, and essentially the
national revolt collapses. There's still operations going on for the next two years. Versing
Jeterix goes to Rome to triumph, to grace Caesar's triumph, and eventually is executed
by the usual method of strangulation afterwards. The conquest of Gaul had major repercussions,
not only for the immediate political situation. It gave Caesar the confidence and the legions
to risk civil war and win it. There's no doubt when he crossed the Rubicon in 49 B.C. when
his governorship had lapsed that he knew he was going to win this war, and go on and
establish essentially the first monarchical dictatorship in Rome, which led to the Roman
Empire. But for Rome in the wider sense, for European civilization in the wider sense,
what Julius Caesar didn't realize is that he had disrupted the Celtic world forever,
that he had brought Gaul and all of these vast lands into the Mediterranean Empire of
Rome. He was going to reorient by these actions the access of Western civilization from Rome
into Western and Central Europe. As a result, the dramatic tribes emerged as the new barbarians
in Central Europe. In some ways, the victories of Julius Caesar tipped the balance in the
favor of the dramatic peoples who were already moving into Central Europe. That is a question
and debate we can get into in a future lecture. And unknowingly, Caesar also created the foundations
of French civilization. If you think of it for a moment, with the scale and dimension
of the area that Julius Caesar had conquered, he did engaul in less than a decade, which
took the Roman Republic two centuries to do in Spain. And in the process, he marked the
birth of the Roman Empire. A stunning achievement indeed.
