Lecture 15, early Germanic Europe
In this lecture I plan to introduce the Germans, the Germanic tribes or peoples, who came to
epitomize the most ferocious barbarians the Romans encountered. They didn't intend to
start out that way and to some extent they are accorded that honor by Roman authors and
sources who report Roman defeats at the hands of these northern barbarians. We're also
going to start a series of lectures that are going to bring in other new barbarians, those
include Iranian speaking nomads of Eastern Europe, the Parthians who succeed to the Asian
Empire of Alexander the Great and are dwelling in what is now Iraq and Mesopotamia or Mesopotamia,
ancient Mesopotamia or Iran and Central Asia to some extent the Arabs along the southern
frontier in Syria and eventually the Dacians of Central Europe. So as I mentioned the identity
of barbarians changes to some extent in the early imperial age. That is Rome has conquered
the traditional foes, the Gauls and various people of the Balkans. They are being turned
into provincials and ultimately into Romans so that whoever is on the other side of the
Roman frontier has now got the honor of being dubbed barbarian.
Prior to Julius Caesar's conquest of Gaul the Romans had very little contact with these
dramatic peoples and as I said Caesar was the first to mark off Germania, Germany at
the Rhine and eventually also the regions north of the Danube as the Romans advanced
their frontier from the Alps. The Germanic tribes that Caesar discusses and he has a
very brief description in which he compares them to the Gauls and very often the Germans
are being used as a foil of people who had a much lower material level than the Gauls
but have higher valor and have a stronger sense of morality whereas the Gauls have been
too much subject to Roman influence. They have lost their martial skill because they
have become addicted to wine and dice and all the good things of Mediterranean civilization
so part of this is just a stock rhetorical exercise. On the other hand Caesar was observant
and he did encounter these people and he does make several important remarks that are born
out in the archeology that indicate that they are a distinct group, that the dramatic peoples
were not necessarily just some kind of offspring of that Latian Celtic civilization. The core
of the dramatic peoples is to be found in the Baltic. In the Danish peninsula, the Danish
islands, southern Sweden today, the northern shores of Germany along the North Sea and
primarily along the Baltic, it's in that area that archeological evidence has been found
since, well, at least the middle Bronze Age going back to about 17 or 1800 B.C. of a continuity
in material culture, what we could tell of skeletal remains of a people who've been there
and we suspect, and these dates are very difficult to pinpoint, that by 500 B.C. the dramatic
languages or dialects had emerged as a distinct group of languages that would eventually give
rise to modern English, German, Dutch, the Scandinavian languages, that these were languages
quite different from the Celtic languages then being spoken in Gaul in central Europe.
They were mutually unintelligible, they were quite different in structure even though they
go back to a common Indo-European parent. So by 500 B.C. there is probably origins of
the Germanic languages. Furthermore, the archeology does indicate that there's a great deal of
trade between the Germanic peoples and the larger Celtic world and that many skills gets
transmitted from the Celtic world to the Germanic North, especially skills in metal work. There
are some fantastic achievements in the Bronze Age. The most famous is a sun chariot. It's
a sort of miniature version of the sun chariot in bronze with gold guilt. It shows two horses
pulling what was undoubtedly the chariot of the sun or we think that's what it is. It
comes from the Danish island of Zeeland and it's one of the early achievements of about
11 or 1200 B.C., one of the early achievements of Germanic art. But starting in the Iron
Age from say 800 B.C. on, the metal technology of the Celts begins to arrive in Scandinavia,
the working of iron, especially large numbers of Celtic prestige goods. These include impressive
vases and metal, some ceramics. That is, the Celtic world starts exporting to the Germanic
world a number of goods which they can produce and also it is through those Celtic intermediaries
that the Germanic peoples probably learn about writing. It's still a very hot debate among
German philologists when the first ruins, this is RUNES, the ruins are the ancient Germanic
alphabet by the Scandinavian Viking age. There are only 16 in number, maybe anywhere
from 24, 16 letters, based on North Italic alphabets. When were those first used? That
could be as early as 200 B.C. The idea of writing is being transmitted to the north.
We are told by Julius Caesar that Ariovistus and his Germans, before they locked swords
with Caesar in Alsos in 58 B.C., were consulting ruins as to the outcome of the battle. This
is a magical art, a divination that is reported in the later medieval sources, particularly
in Scandinavian literature. Already there is evidence of not only this Celtic influence
and influences coming up to the Mediterranean, but adapting all of these borrowings and influences
to a very peculiarly Germanic society. What Caesar also noticed that marked the Germans
very much from the Celts is their tendency to migrate. They are always on the move. There
are reports of their wagon trains, they are forming of these loggars, you use the Dutch
German word, these fortified wagons which are set around as a settlement. When they
are on the move you have to attack them and clean them out. It leads to some disastrous
Roman defeats, especially at Adrianople later on. The archaeologists suggest that the agriculture
in northern Germany and Scandinavia was rather simple. It is known as slash and burn. You
have to clear the forest, you exhaust the soil quickly and you have to remove from your mind
the notion that Germany, and by Germany I mean all of central Europe, sections that
are now Poland, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Scandinavia, that all of these areas, the
Romans would have called Germania, are not the tame and well groomed parks of today.
These were dense forests, in many instances virgin forests or second growth forests that
covered the landscape. Northern Germany is filled with marshes and heaths. In Scandinavia
the forests literally break up the landscape. Southern Sweden's Skane is virtually an island,
it's cut off from the rest of Sweden by dense forests, that's true well into the Viking
Age and beyond. The Danish islands, the Danish peninsula Jutland, the Swedish islands in
the Baltic, those are areas where there are settlements because the arable land is easy
to get to and they are connected by sea to trade routes. Furthermore tribes try to occupy
critical valleys along the river systems, these would be the Vesa, the Elba, the Oda,
the Vistula, because those river systems are lines of communication from the North Sea or
the Baltic Sea down to the Danube or over to the Black Sea, they're easier to clear.
But that means large sections of central Europe are largely underpopulated or unpopulated
at all. Caesar explains that the Harkinian Forest, which we would call today Schwarzwald,
the Black Forest in southern Germany, literally spread, extended from the lower Rhine from
where Frankfurt today is across much of southern Germany and essentially cut off the northern
Danube Valley which was a Celtic zone from the farther northern areas where dramatic
people as well, that forest was a much greater barrier than any kind of river, even mountain
system was. So that's a point Caesar makes and that's also borne out in the archeology
and the types of settlement patterns we find, these are villages and hamlets and the Germans
for all of their contact with the Romans and a good deal of the succeeding lectures are
going to deal with the interaction between Romans and Germanic peoples, the Germans never
acquire the idea of living in cities. I mentioned that Celtic Europe, this will be true in Britain
as much as it has already been true in Gaul and parts of Spain, that there were towns
or incipient towns, a so-called opidum where you had these settlements, that these become
the basis for Roman provincial civilization, the success of Roman urbanization, these towns
are organized as what Latin legalists would call a Kiwi Toss, a community, a community
with a constitution which could evolve ultimately into a Roman style municipality. Well the Germans
never acquire that, for all of their knowledge of Roman military tactics in the late Empire,
for all the number of Germans who come into the Roman Empire, get assimilated, the urban
culture associated with the Roman Empire and Mediterranean based civilization never penetrates
into the Germanic lands and in fact in many areas it doesn't move into those regions until
fairly late in the Middle Ages in the 10th through the 13th centuries and in part hinges
on the introduction of the cultur plows, the three field system, the menorial arrangements
and the clearing of those forests to get the agriculture and the food to a certain level
where you can support towns and even cities in Northern and Central Europe and that is
an achievement of the later Middle Ages rather than of antiquity. So these are by Roman standards
very forbidden areas, forbidding areas with tremendous forests and quite scary. It explains
for instance some of the peculiarities of German warfare that we'll have to talk about
in some of the later lectures. The Germans excel as well as warriors, as individual warriors
and they're very very good in ambush as we'll see when they ambush some legions in the
Tuttenberg forest in 9 AD but they really never get the hang of fighting in open battles
until quite late in the Roman age in the 4th and 5th century there are open battles and
the only way they succeed is that the Roman army has deteriorated to the level that they're
not much better than the Germans and they never get any kind of hang on siege warfare
which is understandable. These are people who never learned how to build cities so ergo
they're not very good at capturing cities and there are a number of reports to this
effect and if I could just digress for a moment some of them are rather comical and amusing
told by Greek and Roman authors. The best ones come from the 240s AD when Goths, the
East Germans are invading into what is now Bulgaria, sieges of the city of Marchianopolis
and Philippopolis which are two fortified towns. In one instance these poor Goths showed
up in the 240s they didn't know what to do, they faced the walls, the gates were locked,
they couldn't intimidate the cities, they couldn't, citizens they couldn't get the city gates
to be opened by treachery and so they spent a great deal of time for several days assembling
vast amounts of piles of stones and when they had finished that they proceeded to throw
the stones against the walls and attempt to drive the citizens off the walls and I guess
they were going to scale the walls and all the citizens did was put up their shields and
the stones bounced off and as the Greek historian recording this dexippus says it was like the
sound of a great hail stone and after all the stones were expended the Goths didn't
know what to do and went away. There was another effort at building a siege machine by the
Goths about the same time and they built this huge cart from the description with wheels
and they knew that when they got near the walls nasty things could happen to them boiling
oil, arrows and the like because gravity always favors the defenders and sieges so
they built this huge square box on wheel, put some warriors in it and they pushed it
up to the wall but once they got the warriors up to the wall they're quite at a loss at
what to do next and before they could figure out the citizens simply rolled a huge stone
on top of it which fell on the unfortunate fellows who were in the box and then once
again the Goths simply gave up and went away and if you trace the siege warfare, a practice
among these early Germans, it doesn't improve much even when you get to the 6th century
AD when they're fighting the Byzantines in Italy and that's a testimony to the fact
that they never learned to live in cities, they never got the skills of building walls
and those Germans that did come into the Roman world and did get assimilated into cities
lost contact with their ancestral ways and began to identify themselves with the urban
culture of Rome and there will be some very significant examples of that during rebellions
against Rome where cities that are largely Germanic or at least a significant percentage
of them are Germanic in ancestry because they live in cities, see themselves as quite separate
from their tribesmen who are out there in free Germany who have not yet moved into an
urban culture and that's an important point to stress and that is the Germanic tribes
never gain any sense of being a distinct nation. I will be speaking of Germanic tribes and
people, sometimes I lapse into using Germans but this is not a term that designates anyone
with any sense of unity, in fact the Germans probably had far less of a sense of unity
than did the Gauls, the Gauls very briefly rose up in a rebellion against Rome under
verse and jeterics and there were actually some national sanctuaries, there were nothing
like those institutions among the Germanic peoples and even tribal ties were very loose.
As I said they were constantly on the move, most people probably identified themselves
by family and clan, there was always a tendency of tribes to attack each other over the limited
value of real estate and we get constant reports of these movements from the Latin authors
not only from Julius Caesar but from the later Roman historian writing about 100 AD his name
is Cornelius Tacitus, he is the historian of Rome, he writes the history of the early
Roman emperors, much of it which survives, he wrote a biography on his father-in-law who
was governor in Britain, very important source on the Celtic peoples of Britain, we will
be discussing that later and he wrote above all a work known as the Germania and this
is the second really major classical window we have into the Germans and it's written
about 150 years after Julius Caesar penned his account of the Gaelic Wars in which he
described the Germans. Tacitus' work is a bit difficult to use at times, it's very
generalized, his information is only as good as his sources so when he's describing dramatic
tribes living close to the Roman frontier, it's generally pretty good, these are people
who have been in contact through trade and warfare, he can check his sources, they would
be known by his readers so you can't go too much out of bounds, as he moves into the northern
reaches, regions around the eastern shores of the Baltic, his account gets increasingly
fantastic and in some cases even fanciful, nonetheless he gives some really impressive
information and it's a source that just can't be ignored, he for instance gives us information
about the various gods and cults that were observed by Romans among these dramatic peoples,
he just as Julius Caesar points out there is no priestly caste, there's nothing equivalent
to the druids that you would encounter in Gaul which represented apparently quite an
important aristocratic caste in its own right, the Romans report about these people, the
Roman government actually outlaws the druids, in part the official reason is because they
practice human sacrifice but all of these, even the Romans on occasions practice human
sacrifice and if you really think about it, gladiatorial games were essentially originally
a form of human sacrifice but the real problem with the druids is they incite anti-Roman
activities, they're always supporting rebels and the Romans have to stop that but there
is no such priestly caste, Caesar reports that the Germans have no images of the gods,
that's probably an overstatement, we do have some indications of depictions of the early
Nordic gods that come from the Bronze Age and early Iron Age and some of the attributes
that is the features of these gods can later on be matched up with gods known from Norse
literature in the later Middle Ages and that is always a tricky game, what does Caesar
tell us, what does the archaeology tell us and what does the later Scandinavian accounts
from, well really from the 12th, 13th century on tell us, Tastus reports that the Germans
worshiped Mercury, Mars and Jupiter, Mercury receives human sacrifice, we think Mercury
is the god Odin in Scandinavian legends, Mars is Tyr, Jupiter is Thor, enshrined in
the English names for the days of the week. He also gives us a report that the tribes
dwelling on what he calls the Kimberich Cursinesis, that's where the Kimberich came, those nasty
Germans who came crashing into Rome, Roman territory in Gaul and tried to invade Italy,
made Marius's reputation, he means the Danish peninsula apparently, that the tribes dwelling
there carry the cult statue of a mother goddess, he calls Nerthus, around and they declare
a peace and this is a fertility goddess and the description of the cult seems to conform
to what we were later told in Scandinavian sources about the cults of the Von Er, the
gods of fertility as they are known in the poetic Eta and Nerthus may have been the Latin
rendition of the feminine version of the later God Njort in Old Norse so that we get very
good reports, we also have reports on the casting of runes by Tastus and especially
the types of sacrifice, I mentioned that there was a late report that the Kimberich
sacrificed their booty, they captured when they destroyed the two Roman armies in 105
BC, Tastus reports the same, there's a battle actually between two tribes, the Hermendori
E and the Chati, the Hermendori Ewin and they dedicate the defeat by sacrificing them, were
known after the defeat of the Roman legions in 9 AD that Roman prisoners were either put
in wicker boxes and cages and burned or they were hanged, the hanging is a dedication to
Odin the war god who is also regarded as the god of runes, wisdom and merchants and Tastus
points out that Mercury, by which he probably means Odin receives human sacrifices, other
gods do not, there are dedications, ritual burials in probably the 4th and 5th century
AD in Jutland and with their obviously strangled prisoners and destroyed equipment, so there
is something remarkable from the archeological evidence and the very scattered literary sources
about the Germans is that the customs, the material culture, the ancient gods, there's
a very long continuity and belief in these divinities that goes back very very deep into
North Germanic and Scandinavian history and those traditions will endure for a very very
long time and get reinforced and transformed in Scandinavia in the early Middle Ages which
in effect brings on what we would call later on the Viking age or the Viking assaults.
So even in the time of Caesar and Tassus they're describing gods and traditions and rituals
that we can recognize in later literature and seem to go back to very early practices
that we can infer from the archeology. So there's this long continuity of social more
race and cult, there's clearly distinct set of languages and yet there is no sense of
a nation as we would understand it, Natio, a group of people, they are different tribes
and the Romans understood this and really appreciated it because they come to really
fear the Germanic tribes as the empire progresses and just to give you a sense of the Roman
viewpoint of these tribal wars is a marvelous passage from Tassitus writing about some of
these German tribes about 100 AD and it gives you probably a better insight on Tassitus
who I always think is more of a cynic than a historian, he's really a cynic who does
history as a side order but he tells us of one particular tribe, the Bructarii who were
particularly recalcitrant opposing Augustus and later Roman emperors and Tassitus reports
with delight that in his day which is about two generations later that the Bructarii were
defeated and almost annihilated by a coalition of neighboring tribes. Perhaps they, he means
the Bructarii, this German tribe, were hated for their domineering pride or it may have
been the lure of booty or some special favor accorded us the Romans by the gods. We were
even permitted to witness the battle, more than 60,000 were killed not by Roman swords
and javelins but more splendid still, a spectacle before our delighted eyes, you can see Tassitus
gleefully thinking of the fact that Germans are fighting Germans. Long I pray may foreign
nations persist if not in loving us at least in hating one another. For destiny is drawing
our empire upon its appointed plan, this is a stoic notion that comes through in Tassitus,
and fortune can bestow on us no better gift than the discord among our foes. And as will
become clear, once the Romans decide not to conquer Germania, these tribes, the way they
will be controlled is by inciting the tribe to fight among themselves and that will be
a major theme in the relationship between Rome and these barbarians. As I mentioned,
they were clearly prized as warriors even if they weren't very good in siege warfare
and they were not an army as the Romans understood it. And the Romans did adopt a number of practices
from the Germans, particularly from the military traditions. We'll find by the 4th century AD
Roman armies going into battle raising the German war cry, the Barbitus. And another
practice that the Romans acquired from the Germans was the tradition of raising the king
on the shield. This is apparently a very ancient tradition, how far back we don't know, but
there are reports that when the Germans elected one of their kings, and the kings in the earliest
Germanic society seemed to be essentially war leaders who were elected by the community
of warriors, that is all the free men of the community, that the king was put on a shield
and raised up in a claim, the monarch. And we know in late 360 AD the emperor Julian,
who was proclaimed emperor by the western army, and at this point the western army had
many Franks and Alamani, German soldiers in their ranks, that the emperor Julian, the
Roman emperor himself, was raised up on the shield in this dramatic custom, and this dramatic
custom is transmitted to the later Christian kings of medieval Europe. And so it's another
indication of the type of exchange that would go on, that many German practices and attitudes
would be taken over by the Romans, and particularly in warfare. Another tactical innovation may
have been the so-called wedge, the Cuneus, reported as used as a way of attacking in
forest zones. Roman forces are said to have adopted the Cuneus, but we can't be quite
sure whether the Romans are referring to their own traditional tactics, or a new method that's
been taken over by the Germans, a dense column attack, in effect, is what you're describing.
The Germans themselves, at the time that Caesar describes them, and Tacitus describes them,
apparently have a rather limited set of political structures as well. This will change over
the course of time, and in future lectures we'll explain how a type of German kingship
eventually emerges. But at the time of Caesar's writing, and probably at the time of Tacitus,
it seems that most resolutions were done within traditional tribal meetings. These are often
compared to the later thing, that is, the assemblies, the meetings reported in Germanic
and Scandinavian sources of the later Middle Ages. Some would even go so far as call them
parliaments or assemblies. What they are are the armed warriors of the society of that
community who've gotten together to make their judgments. They handle issues of law, peace
and war, whether a king, or as the Romans like to call them, a regulus, which means a little
king. Their only Germans, after all, would be the Roman attitude. They really don't have
a full Rex. That a king would be elected to lead them through a crisis in warfare, whatever.
And so there might be a reason why Caesar and Tacitus seem to make the same remarks,
and that is the Germans don't have the need to consolidate into bigger political structures
until quite late. And a lot of that comes really by imitation of Roman institutions, particularly
the Roman army, and above all because of Roman pressure. Roman attacks on the German tribes
force them to organize better. So the nucleus of dramatic civilization very much was within
family and clan groups. Tacitus goes through some length explaining how these connections
are reckoned. And again, he can only speak for those dramatic tribes that are in close
proximity to the Roman world. And as you get farther out into central and northeastern
Europe, his account becomes increasingly less trustworthy. There is, in Tacitus, remarks
about a comitatus, a body of warriors who attach themselves to a lord. These are armed
retinues, comace and Latin means a comrade. They are the nucleus of any kind of dramatic
army, tribal army. These seem to be groups of professional warriors, warriors, hard to
speak of them professional in the sense of professional soldiers, they're fighters who
attach themselves to a dramatic law, lord, and give their loyalty to their lord in return
for all sorts of gifts and privileges. And this is a tradition that transcends family
and tribal lines. It's a charismatic warrior who attracts around him other warriors. These
bonds are expected to be very close. It is these elements that form probably the best
warriors within a dramatic army. They are often compared to later Scandinavian reports
about the so called Berserkers, where we get the word Berserk, that is professional warriors
going into battle in an absolute rage against their opponents usually compared to bears
and wolves. And there's lots of marvelous later Scandinavian literature about these characters.
The Romans observed that there are such groups, such bodies of warriors who attach themselves
to leaders, and these are probably some of the toughest opponents they face. So based
on these reports that we have from Caesar and from Tacitus and the archeology, between
about 50 B.C., when Caesar is describing these Germans, and 16 B.C., when the Emperor Augustus
comes to Gaul, organizes the Gallic provinces, and begins to open great offensives into central
Europe to bring all of these dramatic tribes under control, that the cultural and linguistic
landscape of central Europe was probably transformed. Many of these areas had been part of the Celtic
world, or at least partially Celtic. By the time Augustus moves across the Rhine to advance
the Roman frontiers, these are dramatic lands. To be sure there's been intermarriage, there's
been assimilation, we know in what is today Bohemia that Germans moved in and intermarried
and mixed with the Celtic population there, but the conquest of Gaul by Caesar had tipped
the balance so that dramatic peoples who had long been coming down such routes as the
Elba, the Vistula, such as the routes that may have been taken by the Kimbray and Tutonais
back in maybe 120 or 113 B.C., that the Germans were able to move in and take over central
Europe, and to some ways the Romans had created their own new barbarian foe by being so successful
against the Gauls. So that in 16 B.C., when the Emperor Augustus arrived to open a new
set of expeditions against these new barbarians of the north to follow in the traditions of
his adoptive father Julius Caesar, to be hailed as the new Caesar, the Emperor Augustus thought
that he was going to push the limits of the Roman Empire deeper into Europe, perhaps find
that mythical eastern ocean that Greek geographers had always been talking about, and instead
of finding new victories in the ends of the earth, he fixed the boundaries of his empire
because he ran into Germans who ultimately defeated and checked these advances and forced
the Romans to mark the limits of their empire.
