In this lecture, I plan to introduce the third of the New Barbarians encountered by
Imperial Rome and these are the Parthians who were ruled by a dynasty. We usually call
them the Arsaka kings that that refers to their ancestor, their progenitor, a fellow
by the name of Arsaques, who was the first king remembered in the Parthian tradition,
and he lived in the mid third century BC. And the Parthians originated from the steplands
just to the north of Iran. This would be the section known as Coruscant and Iran today.
They were dwelling along the eastern shores of the Caspian Sea, and they had moved in
and intermarried with the existing Iranian populations. They were remembered as nomadic
warriors, but by the time the Romans encountered the Parthians, they had already fallen heir
to a bureaucratic Hellenistic kingdom. That is the former Seleucid Empire. And so what
I wish to do in this lecture is to explain how did the Parthians end up becoming the dominant
barbarian power in the Middle East, or more accurately the Near East, and therefore the
great rival of Imperial Rome through almost 300 years. Then we want to look a little bit
at the nature of this Parthian kingdom, and it's difficult to understand the Parthians
because they left very limited literary sources. They always remained a warrior elite.
They put up most of their inscriptions in Greek and Aramaic, that is the two leading commercial
languages of the Near East, and these inscriptions aren't very informative. We have coins.
Much of our information really comes from Latin and Greek authors who were writing about the Parthians
as foes, and I've cautioned before that you always have to temper these sources with the fact that
daily exchange between the Parthian and Roman Empire was much more in the form of trade,
immigration, more peaceful contacts rather than the great wars that fill the histories.
And then the third point is to look at especially the great war of Nero against the Parthians.
We're going a little farther into the Imperial Age than I did in the previous two lectures,
and that is the first clash that the Romans had with the Parthians, or Imperial Rome had
with the Parthians, and the implication that war had for Roman relations with Barbarian
peoples in the East, and that will be a very appropriate point to stop and pick up the
story at Rome with the coming lectures. Well, first, who are these Parthians?
As far as we can tell, they were part of that large confederation is too strong a word,
that large grouping of Iranian-speaking nomads that stretched from Central Asia into Eastern Europe.
They appear on the scene essentially as clients of the Seleucid Kings, those are the successors
of Alexander the Great who ruled Alexander's Asian Empire, which at one point stretched
from the Aegean to India, not quite to the Indus Valley, but certainly to the Hindu Kush.
They were able to assert their position as the dominant power in the Near East largely
because the Seleucid Empire was so badly defeated by the Romans.
In 190 BC, I mentioned that the Seleucid King Antiochus III was decisively defeated at the
Battle of Magnesia, and that battle plus the indemnity and the treaty restrictions the
Romans imposed on the Seleucid Kings really condemned the Seleucids to a second rate status,
and eventually the Seleucid Empire declined to a woeful situation where it was essentially
nothing more than what we would today call Syria, and lost their position as a dominant
state in the Near East. And they were essentially replaced by the Parthians who were these
Iranian newcomers who had previously been just part of a number of dutiful client kings
who had acknowledged the great Macedonian Seleucid King.
In 140 BC, the Parthian king by the name of Mithridates, who he's the one who essentially
made the Parthian Empire, he defeated the Seleucid King Demetrius II and took him prisoner,
and actually King Demetrius was a prisoner down to 129 BC and was later released to
incite a civil war in the Seleucid Empire.
Now Mithridates I, he shouldn't be confused with the famous Mithridates who fought the
Romans. That was the Mithridates in Asia Minor, the king of Pontus. Both men carry the name
that is derived from the Persian god Mithris, who is a very popular god in the Near East,
and is later adopted as a Roman army god, Mithras or Mitha. He's a god that goes back
well into the Bronze Age. He's a god of oaths, a god favored by warriors, and so you get
a number of Parthian kings as well as Iranian and Anatolian dynasts who took on the name
as a way of honoring the god. The god was probably seen as the patron or comrade of the king.
So this Mithridates, and he's a generation earlier than the famous Ponta king, this Mithridates
is responsible for establishing Parthian power in the Near East. His successors nearly lost
that position, and that was because Mithridates, the real Mithridates of Pontus, the sixth, and
his son-in-law Tigranes, Tigranes the great of Armenia, essentially agreed to divide the
Seleucid Empire between them. Mithridates went against Rome and clashed with the Romans down
to 63 BC, and his son-in-law Tigranes at one point controlled most of the Near East and
assumed the title King of Kings, a very ancient title that designated a monarch as the heir
to the great empire of the Persians, the Persian Empire before Alexander the Great, and went
back into really deep into Mesopotamian tradition into the early Bronze Age of a conqueror who
had established his authority over the diverse peoples of the Near East and claimed this
great position. Well, again, the Parthians were helped by Rome because the second time
the Romans intervened in the East, it was to humble King Mithridates and to break the power
of Armenia. Lucullus, the Roman commander sent to defeat Mithridates in the final war, Lucullus
not only drove Mithridates out of the Roman provinces, pursued him into the Pontic kingdom,
but went east into Armenia when Mithridates the great tried to find refuge with his son-in-law
and smashed the Armenian armies and he and his successor Pompey imposed over the Armenians
a Roman hegemony. The Roman insisted that the Armenian king was now a friend and client
of Rome, and this was part of the general settlement that Pompey put in place between
66 and 63 BC when he reorganized the Roman East and brought Syria in as a Roman province,
reorganized the provinces in Asia Minor. Armenia was reduced to her original limits.
The historic kingdom of the Armenians centering on Lake Van and that king was a client of
Rome and all those eastern areas which today would be Iraq and Iran were at that point
a little too far beyond Roman control and the Romans simply ignored him and it allowed the
Parthians once again to move in and take over these areas and so quite ironically in 192,
in 190 BC and then again two generations later with the defeat of King Mithridates
of Pontus the Romans enabled the Parthians to take over this position as the heirs of
the old Empire of Alexander the Great in the eastern sections. Now what the Parthians
succeeded to was a rather composite state. The Parthian kings ruled essentially as a warrior
elite they were not well remembered in the later Iranian tradition. You would think that
because they were not Greek speaking conquerors that the majority of the Iranian population
would welcome them as some kind of I don't know liberators from Greek oppression, Macedonian
oppression and it was just doesn't seem to have been the case. The Parthian kings styled
themselves as Phil Hellenes that is they liked everything Greek. They encouraged the Greek
and the Aramaic speaking populations in what is now Iraq, ancient Mesopotamia especially
the great cities in Babylonia, two cities in particular Ctesiphon and Selukia Artigrum
that is Selukia on the Tigris. These were two great Hellenistic foundations established
by the Selukid kings and they essentially functioned as the twin capitals of the Parthian
kings and these were cities originally established as Greek style cities. They were established
in the third century BC. They also tolerated all of their subjects in different cults and
later Persians saw these Parthians as interlopers. They were not strict Zoroastrians that is
they did not follow the teachings of Zoroaster. The great religious reformer who had preached
the reform of Iranian cults which led to this monotheistic creed Zoroastrianism which still
is today practiced more in India than in Iran. It was eventually supplanted by Islam and
so in these Zoroastrian texts and traditions that come down to us in the third and fourth
century AD and later the Parthians always looked upon as very, very dubious rulers.
The Parthians themselves however proved remarkably adaptable. They ruled Babylonia that would be
the great flood plain of southern Iraq as the fiscal center of their empire. They tolerated
existing institutions. They had a bureaucratic class there that could tax. It was also the
center of important caravan and trade as well as trade coming up from the Persian Gulf.
They turned over power in the Iranian heartland of the empire to the great Persian elites
and the Parthian kings retained their connections with the nomadic tribes of Central Asia. The
Parthian kings probably ruled as rather opulent Greek style monarchs in the great capitals
of Babylonia but they always recalled their connections with the nomadic populations and
throughout the whole of the Parthian history many of the Parthian forces were recruited
from the steppe allies and it's very comparable to what the Ottoman sultans would do in the
16th and 17th century. They ruled as the successors of the caliphs. They were of course the
Muslim rulers in Istanbul but they could call on the Turkish tribes of the steppes of Russia
saying yes we were once nomadic warriors too, that would be Ghazi warriors and therefore
you should fight for us and we seem that the Parthians did essentially the same thing. They ruled
over these great cities of Mesopotamia. They had come to terms with the Iranian elites but they
recruited many of their soldiers from the old nomadic tribes from which they descended and that
was the basis of Parthian power. It meant that the Parthian kings were always doing quite a
juggling act. There were generally several kings who could claim to be king of the Parthians
at the same time and did. There's repeated civil wars. The Parthians ruled largely because
of the cooperation of the existing populations and they never were able to develop the kinds
of provincial administration and fiscal institutions that you would see in the Roman Empire where
they could tax and assimilate their populations far from it. The Parthians remained a warrior elite
propped up by their nomadic allies and they had no intention and no policy of ever trying to
turn this heterogeneous empire into some kind of coherent single state let alone culture.
So the Parthian period was probably a very prosperous period for these people. There was
an enormous amount of contact and movement. You can especially trace that in Jewish sources
where you have Jewish communities both in the Roman and the Parthian Empire. They have complete
ease of communication. Rabbis can correspond with each other. There's no problem on that score.
On the other hand, as an effective state, the Parthians turned out not to be that impressive.
Well, why did they receive so much attention from the Romans? The reason for that is by 63 BC
with the reorganization of the Roman East, Rome now as at this point still a republic, now took
over the guardianship of the Greeks of the East, that is the Greek cities that had been established
in the Near East after the death of Alexander the Great and they now had provinces and friends.
These would be client kings, client tribes in Transcaucasia, that is the Georgians, the Armenians.
They also inherited all sorts of client states in the Levant including the small Jewish kingdom, various Arab tribes
settled along the Assyrian frontier. They had a long eastern border to patrol and the next rival power
on the other side were the Parthians. And the Romans initially took a rather arrogant and typically
Roman view of the Parthians. Back in 92 BC, Sulla, the future dictator of Rome, was governor of
Cilicia in southern Asia Minor. This is one of his earlier positions. This is on the start of his political career.
And he received a group of envoys from the Parthian king and Sulla greeted them as all Roman magistrates
with Greek barbarian envoys. He was seated on a courier chair, that is the chair of office, on top of a huge
tribunal surrounded by his officials and soldiers. These envoys meekly gave gifts to Sulla and Sulla, who was in
everything but name and emperor, simply told the Parthian envoys, well that's very nice and we accept the submission
of the Parthians. When those envoys, by the way, got back to the Parthian king, they were immediately beheaded
for agreeing to such a meeting. And in all meetings running through the imperial age for centuries, the Romans
always liked to stage these meetings with the emperor seated on the tribunal and receiving the envoys. They always
remembered the way they had humiliated the Parthians in their initial meeting. And so Parthian envoys, Armenian kings,
anyone in the east who approached Rome would be subject to one of these diplomatic humiliations to show the primacy of
Rome over the barbarians. And so for the longest time the Romans probably thought, well the Parthians are just another
barbarian group out there and they're going to either surrender or we're going to defeat them. And that attitude
changed rather abruptly in 53 BC. And that was because the Romans suffered a smashing defeat at the hands of the
Parthians, which for a brief moment threw Rome into crisis and committed the Roman political classes for over
a generation to clamors of we must avenge this humiliation. That came about largely because of the complicated
politics of the late republic. Lucius Lysinius Crassus, who was one of the three partners in this triumvirate, he was one
of the associates of Julius Caesar. Actually he had bankrolled Julius Caesar in the 60s BC. Crassus, one of the three
leading contenders to dominate Rome in the 50s BC, Crassus needed a command. In 56 BC he agreed to terms with Pompey and Julius
Caesar, they extended Caesar's command in Gaul and Crassus felt, well I've got to recreate in the east what Caesar did in Gaul
and the Parthians, well I'll defeat the Parthians just as Caesar's defeating the Gauls. In 55 BC Crassus arrived in Syria with
a command to attack the Parthians and given the circumstances of Parthian political organization there was as always a civil war going
on. Parthians had civil wars constantly. Eurydice II was a legitimate king but he was facing several contenders and this gave a
pretext to intervene. Crassus assembled a large army, perhaps as large as 50,000 men. He took over legions already
and he brought in fresh forces from Europe. He allied with the Armenians. This is the first time that a large Armenian force was to
operate in tandem with the Romans. It was the first time that they operated with the Romans but it was not the last time that the
Armenians backed out and didn't support the Romans and do what they were supposed to do. The Armenian nobility was never quite keen on
fighting the war. They were more interested for the plunder. In any case Crassus managed to stumble into a battle near the city of
Karay which is today Haran in southeastern Turkey which is really part of Mesopotamia in its geographic terrain. It's a very, very
arid plain in Plateau and if you've been out on the battlefield at Haran or Karay you wonder what the Roman army was doing there in the
first place. It's at this point that the Romans first encountered the Parthian horsemen. These are the horse archers I've spoken of, the
nomads in Eastern Europe. The Parthians were heirs to the same tradition and in fact Parthian coins always show on their reverse a seated
archer, a man who would be mounted on the cavalry as a reminder that this is the power of the Parthian king who used the title King of Kings as
well. The army that intercepted Crassus was actually an army commanded by a man named Serena, actually that might have been his title rather than his
personal name, that is he was the leading general of the king and he had probably a smaller army. It's just that this Parthian commander Serena
was so good in seizing the water sources and also supplying his men with an inexhaustible supply of arrows. He had a special camel mule train to
bring arrows that the Roman army got lured into a battle on the open plain. The Parthians were wearing them down with constant ambushes,
shooting arrows into them. The Romans kept their discipline for the longest time but they expected these hours to run out and eventually they'd close
and they never did and Crassus could not keep control over his forces. They grew extremely thirsty from the dust, the lack of water
and eventually the Roman army broke up and were told Crassus was killed, 20,000 Romans went down, 10,000 Romans were captured, later settled as Parthian
prisoners out in Central Asia. All the legionary standards were captured. It was an embarrassing defeat. We're told that Crassus, they found Crassus's
body, they cut off his head and they sent it down to Ctesiphon where it played the role of Penthus and the Bacchae,
Euripides play, for the amusement of the Parthian king who then immediately ordered his general executed because he was a possible threat to him
so a Rhodes could rule without a contender. Well this disaster resulted in no major change in the political frontier. I think the Parthian king was absolutely relieved
that a Roman army had not marched down into Babylonian taking his capitals. The Parthian army just didn't have siege trains, they didn't have the logistics of the Roman army.
From the Parthian viewpoint this was unprovoked Roman aggression and they were just thankful that they probably had defeated this Roman army.
For Rome this was a humiliation. It was going to have to be avenged. Mark Antony twice led expeditions in Armenia to bring the Parthians to battle.
These operations turned out to be essentially strategic stalemates that didn't gain them much reputation or PR and the Parthians just refused to fight.
So when the Emperor August consolidated the Roman world after 31 BC he inherited this eastern frontier that hadn't significantly changed in a generation from when it was set up with Pompey
and he also inherited a very angry Roman political classes who said, who are clamoring, these eastern barbarians must be humbled.
And it's remarkable because Caesar had conquered Gaul, the Romans had removed that ancient dreaded Celtic foe that had for 300 years plagued the Romans as the most serious barbarian threat
and the defeat at Karai in 53 made the Parthians by default the new barbarian foe targeted for conquest and humiliation.
Well Augustus, besides being one of the most astute political figures ever to rule at any time, was also a very, very savvy diplomat
and he understood the difficulties of campaigning in the arid climates of the Near East where water sources were all important,
there were only a limited number of routes and that Armenia was the key, the strategic key to invading the Parthian state.
And Augustus preferred to make the Euphrates the limit of effective Roman power and to keep Armenia in this client status
and his idea was to use diplomatic pressure and coercion as a way of keeping the Parthians in line.
He had no intention of waging expensive and difficult wars in the east well beyond the logistical basis of the Roman army.
In fact his interests were all really in northern Europe to emulate his adoptive father Julius Caesar,
that is to conquer Britain, to conquer the Germans, to recreate the tradition of triumphing over the northern barbarians.
So in 20 BC, through some very adroit diplomacy, Augustus pressured the then ruling king of the Parthians for the 18th and 4th to agree to a treaty
and it was done by the threat of invasion.
In 20 BC Augustus went to the east, he mobilized the legions, he was going to invade Babylonia where the Parthian capitals were
and that meant the Parthian king immediately came to terms, he was not going to face the Roman army
and those terms were celebrated in Roman art and literature as the equivalent of a military victory.
The Parthian king actually agreed to much more prestigious issues than any kind of territorial.
He agreed to return the prisoners taken at Karai and these guys were probably all in their 50s and 60s,
most of them must have forgotten their latin, they would need a refresher course.
The standards were returned and so Roman honor was restored
and those standards are depicted on Roman coins and relief works as a victory, Cygnus Receptis, with the standards recovered.
They were eventually housed in the Temple of Mars Ultor in the Forum of Augustus,
which was one of the central places in the city of Rome, it was a masterpiece of Augustan architecture
and again it's celebrated throughout the literature and the visual arts.
Also the Parthian king sent four of his sons to Rome as hostages, that is as privileged guests
who would be trained in the household of Augustus and what Augustus in effect had were
pretenders that he could pull out and use to incite a civil war
and these four sons were raised reading Latin, wearing togas and thinking Roman
and the idea was if any future Parthian king gave us trouble
we could just send one of these pretenders into the Parthian Empire and incite a civil war
and at very little expense the Romans could use that whole old tradition of divide and conquer,
they used it very effectively among the Germanic tribes,
I read a passage to that effect with Tastis referring to the Germans being incited by the Romans
so essentially the same arrangement was made.
It was a very large Roman military presence stationed permanently in the east,
in the time of Augustus there were four Roman legions stationed in the cities of northern Syria
because that was the basis upon which this whole diplomacy was premised.
If you crossed Rome the Romans would move in with military force and sack the Parthian capitals
and bring that monarchy down.
It also was the military force that threatened and kept the Armenian king in line with Roman wishes.
This arrangement by Augustus proved so successful that it lasted through the whole of the Julio-Claudian period
until the reign of Nero where it broke down
and the reason it broke down in the reign of Nero to a large extent had to do with Parthian politics.
The then reigning king of the Parthians, Vologacius I, who as all Parthian kings
his main goal in life was to take the throne and thereafter was to beat off his brothers and his cousins
who were trying to unseat him and Vologacius came upon the brilliant idea
well one way to keep my brother occupied, his name was Tiridates,
to keep my brother occupied and make him in the lie was to create him as king of the Armenians.
Now Armenia was the strategic gateway between the Roman east and the Parthian empire.
The king of the Armenians was supposed to be crowned by Rome.
This went back to the original arrangement of Pompey in the 60s BC
but the Armenian nobility were quite delighted to take on this Parthian prince
because in many ways the Parthian prince was very similar to the Armenian nobles
who really dominated the society of Armenia.
For one he liked hunting, they had common interests in horses,
they had fun palling around and killing opponents
whereas the kings that were sent out from Rome
and there's a succession of these Armenian kings sent from Rome
usually had been trained in Athens and Rome they spoke Greek
they were more interested in reading Plato rather than trying to impress the Armenian nobility
with their martial skills and there's some really embarrassing Armenian kings
unceremoniously killed and assassinated
because the Armenian nobility just found these guys just unfit for rule
you have to be a strong figure to rule in Armenia
so the idea of taking on a Parthian prince as their king
was quite acceptable to most of the Armenian nobility
on the other hand it wasn't acceptable to Rome
and the new emperor Nero
and it resulted in the first formal war between Rome and the Parthians
since the campaigns of Mark Antony and Crassus in the late republic
this wasn't really a Parthian war per se
it was largely a war fought in Armenia
officially over the succession to the Armenian crown
I often call it the war of the Armenian succession
and in 54 AD when Nero came to the throne he, to his credit
and I think it was Nero's choice, sent out a man named Ganias Demisius Corbulo
who was a strict disciplinary and who arrived in Asia Minor
was given two legions from Syria
had to whip these guys in shape
and it literally took Corbulo four years to get these eastern legions up to battle readiness
because they had been stationed in cities
and I've always reminded my students and I have to bring this point out
you put the soldiers in cities because that's where the water was
but the result is the soldiers lose discipline
they're down at the gambling tables
the eastern legions were notoriously ineffective
you wanted legions that were stationed in tents
and fighting in harsh conditions where they were at full battle readiness
so Corbulo had to bring that army up to that position of readiness
furthermore there was no logistical base to support a Roman operation
deep into Armenia and Corbulo had to solve various logistical problems
in 58 AD the legions were ready to go
and in an absolutely brilliant swift summer campaign
Corbulo marched into Armenia, captured the Armenian capital
Taksata sacked it, then moved along the northern shores of Lake Fan
sacked the secondary Armenian capital
well it wasn't sacked, it was received into Grano-Kerta
and then went back over the Euphrates and wintered on Roman territory
the victory brought down the Parthian king
the Romans were able to put in their own king
this fellow, not very important to Grani's
attacked the Parthians, the Parthians came back in
and put Deridates back on the throne
Corbulo had to intervene again
and in 64 AD a deal was arranged
a treaty between Rome and Parthia
where the brother of the Parthian king, Deridates
who had been sufficiently humbled
would remain king of Armenia
and that meant thereafter the king of Armenia was related to the king of Parthia
but he would have to go to Rome and get his crown
and that was the great achievement of Corbulo
was to impose this sort of treaty arrangement
and in 66 AD, Deridates was received in Rome in triumph
and Nero, the one thing Nero had to do, knew well
was to throw a great party
and it impressed Deridates
and it impressed all successive Armenian kings
of the power of Rome
this arrangement worked very well
and it satisfied both competing empires
it did however reveal certain serious weaknesses
one was Corbulo was too powerful
for him to stay out essentially six years
with this kind of extraordinary command
eventually with six legions under his control
this was too dangerous for any emperor
and in the future, in any war against the Parthians
thereafter the emperor would go on campaign
and that would have major implications
it also indicated that there were serious logistical problems in the Roman east
so the Romans were going to have to put in highways and depots
they were going to have to develop the Euphrates frontier
so they could operate again
there were problems to solve in the army
and these would all eventually be solved by the Empress
but henceforth the Romans now saw that their eastern frontier
was going to be one of their major fiscal and military commitments
hereafter
you
