Lecture 18 The Augustan Principate and Imperialism
In this lecture I want to turn our focus back to Rome proper or the Roman world and look
at some of the key developments of the early Roman Empire that will explain the relationship
between Rome and the barbarians.
We've spent three lectures now dealing with the Germans, the various nomadic peoples of
Eastern Europe and the Parthians.
They are the new foes that cross swords with the Romans and the Imperial age.
But at this point we want to look at what was this Roman Empire all about, how did it
come out of the institutions of the Republic, and how did the changed political arrangements
at Rome that is moving from a Republic to a monarchy also changed the nature of Roman
imperialism, expansion, and ultimately the relationship between Rome and these barbarians
because the dealings of Imperial Rome vis-a-vis these barbarians will differ in certain significant
ways.
There is a great deal of continuity, there is still the tradition of the patron and client
except now it's quite clear that these barbarian peoples become the client of the emperor rather
than necessarily the Roman Republic, the Romans.
But there is other features of this relationship we shall see that is quite different.
And there will be another lecture dealing with the changes in the Roman army and that
was another institution profoundly changed by the breakdown of the Republic and created
a new imperial army which also has a lot of continuity with the Republic but again is
different in certain ways and that will change the relationship on the frontiers with the
barbarian peoples we've just discussed.
So our first subject here is the political order at Rome.
How was it changed from a Republic to an Empire?
Well there's really three issues I want to address in this lecture.
The first is the nature of the Republic as it was still called under the first Roman
Emperor Augustus because the Roman Emperor was one of the most peculiar monarchs ever
to rule and I'm really quite hard pressed to give a job description of what the Roman
Emperor was and even the Emperor Augustus would have said to anyone who called him
a king or monarch, I'm not a king, I'm not a monarch, I'm only the leading citizen of
the state.
The term in Latin would be prankeps and that means simply a prince or a leading figure.
It was a term that was hallowed by long usage in the Republic.
He was just the leading man in the Senate.
The title that eventually comes to designate these monarchs, Augustus and his successors,
Emperor, comes from the Roman military title Imperator and I've mentioned that title before
in the late Republic.
Imperator was a title that was awarded to a Roman commander after he had won his first
victory.
Before that he was known as a duke just as a leader.
Once he won a significant victory he was saluted as Imperator Commander.
And so the term Imperator comes to designate this monarch for good reasons because ultimately
his power was military and it was the army that was the ultimate force of the Roman Emperor
but he had to have also constitutional legitimacy.
Well that constitutional legitimacy was extremely important to Augustus and his successors and
those emperors who didn't adhere to the forms of constitutional legitimacy could find themselves
assassinated.
On January 13th, 27 BC, Augustus still at this time using, we designate him as Octavian
but soon to be Augustus, resigned his extraordinary powers to the Senate.
He tells us of this action in his monumental inscription known in Latin as the race guest
I, D.Y. Augusti, that is the deeds of the Divine Augustus which was Augustus' version
of why he ended up taking over the Roman world.
It was an inscription that was put on all the temples to Augustus.
There was a whole imperial cult devoted to the worship of the emperor's spirit.
And that long inscription which is often known as the Queen of Latin Inscriptions is a very
very detailed and impressive document.
The best copy survives today in the Temple of Augustus at Ankara in Turkey.
He states quite simply, in the 67th consul ships after I had extinguished civil wars
and at a time when with the universal consent I was in control of affairs, meaning affairs
of state, I transferred the Republic, the race publicum, that is the Commonwealth, from
my power to the dominion of the Senate and people of Rome.
That is he laid down all of his extraordinary powers that went back to laws dating from
43 BC, the establishment of the so-called Second Triumvirate and essentially for a brief
moment was a private citizen.
While it was a carefully staged event, immediately the Senate voted new powers to Augustus.
He held the consul ship that year, 27 BC, and consul ships were reserved for him for
every year thereafter.
He was given tribunation power.
That is the power of one of the ten tribunes with the legislative officials of the republic.
And he was also given proconsular imperium, that is the imperium of a governor.
He could exercise this power to command armies.
In a province that was defined Gaul, a Lyricum, that is the Balkans, and the East.
Very vaguely defined, which meant Augustus had under his authority all of the legions
and the power to extend the frontiers of the empire.
I should note that Egypt was Augustus' personal property, so Egypt didn't enter into the deal.
And that's a whole subject quite separate.
So what Augustus in effect had were the legitimate powers of a Roman magistrate to run the provinces
and the armies in the provinces to operate and legislate in Rome, but without the limitations
of office.
He had power without the limitations of office, a point to stress, because republican offices
were annual, there were always colleagues, there was always a veto principle.
There were often periods of, you held the consulship for ten years, you couldn't renew
it for another ten years.
These were no longer necessary.
Augustus had therefore established a constitutional basis for being effectively a military dictator.
This arrangement in 27 BC is usually marked as the birth of the Roman Empire.
Augustus also received his name Augustus, which was a religious title, it means the
August one, the hallowed one.
There were thoughts of taking on the name Romulus, the founder of Rome, but that wasn't
so good because Romulus was a king, and while Romulus was taken up to the sky as a god in
some accounts, there's also an account that said he was killed by irate senators, so Augustus
tended to stay away from that image of Romulus.
The importance of this arrangement is it gave Augustus the legitimate authority to run the
Roman Empire with these powers.
The Roman Senate still officially, and the people of Rome still officially ran many of
the provinces of the Roman world, they just happened to be the unarmed civilized provinces.
So the Roman governors were still the consuls, the praetors, the annually elected magistrates
that had existed under the Republic.
These offices had not been abolished.
Essentially what you had was a super princaps, a special figure above the traditional offices
of state.
And so all Roman senatorial families could still hold the traditional offices near and
dear to them, could still get the honors and put on the family Amogonis, that is the images
in their atrium, the fort court of their household, the first room you go into, the death mask
images of the family who had held consulships, praetorships, they knew that theirs would
be hanging when they passed away as consul, as praetors, as queester, all of these traditional
offices were still held.
In the provinces run by Augustus, Augustus ruled those as through lieutenants, men known
as a legate, or legatus, legati in Latin.
These men were also senators, they just happened to be acting as Augustus's deputies, and again
there were plenty of good republican precedents for this arrangement.
Augustus had so many provinces, so much power that he couldn't be everywhere so he could
simply designated it to legati.
The distinction was for the benefit of the upper classes.
It meant that the senatorial families, the great 30 families that had run Rome since
the beginning of the republic, could either go to the provinces as the traditional officials
of the republic run these civilian provinces, or they could serve as one of the lieutenants
of Augustus on the frontier, command armies, they represented Augustus's imperium not their
own so that if there was a victory it was Augustus who would celebrate it, but nonetheless
they could perform all the military and political achievements and offices associated with the
old republic.
The difference was that while on the surface it looked like they were still political figures,
they were really being turned into an administrative class.
And what Augustus did, and this is one of the great pieces of genius of the whole arrangement
is he kept the old political forms in place and subtly transformed them into administrative
grades.
And that's essentially the history of the Roman Empire for the next 300 years.
How did these original offices of state ultimately turn out to become nothing more than administrative
posts of a service aristocracy to an imperial family?
Now Augustus in 23 BC carried out a new settlement that came after a serious illness.
If the settlement of 27 gave Augustus the right to run the Roman Empire, the settlement
of 23 BC essentially set up the constitutional means of appointing a successor.
Augustus became aware in 23 BC when he had suffered a serious illness.
His nephew, who was probably to be his heir, a fellow named Marcus Claudius Marcellus, his
nephew who was married to his only daughter, only child Julia, actually died in the same
year from a fever.
But in 23 BC Augustus realized if he died, it would be Civil War all over again.
Because his position was an extraordinary position.
He was a charismatic figure.
All of these powers were extraordinary.
They had to be voted by the Senate and the Assemblies of Rome.
And he was not a monarch in law.
And in his death, that would be an invitation to any strong man who could get part of the
army on his side to renew the Civil Wars.
Neither he nor the political classes at Rome wanted this.
So in 23 BC Augustus ceased to hold the consulship.
He kept only the proconsular imperium, that is the right to command the armies in the
provinces, and the tribunition power, that is the traditional powers without the limitations
of office.
But now he could also associate with him a colleague in those powers.
A colleague who would be understood by everyone would be the fellow to follow Augustus.
And so in effect Augustus defined the succession in the 23 settlement, 23 BC settlement.
That is henceforth the man who was intended to follow Augustus would be that male relative
or close associate who shared these extraordinary powers with him.
Now that put a limitation in this monarchy that could prove very, very dangerous.
Because if the emperor died without designating such a successor, or there was no successor,
then there was the possibility of civil war.
So built into this constitutional arrangement where the legitimacy was all important to
get the ruling classes to cooperate with you, if there was any way that the succession
has not been prepared, as was the case when the emperor Caligula was murdered, as was
in the case when Nero committed suicide, the Roman world hovered on the brink of civil
war.
And so there was a constitutional weakness in the arrangement which would come back
to plague Rome, particularly in the third century AD.
Well that's the constitutional arrangement and it worked brilliantly.
Augustus wrote the script for the next 300 years that Roman emperors would follow.
And essentially you could measure Roman emperors in their success by how well did they play
this game, this political, diplomatic and social game that Augustus laid out.
The second part of this arrangement, besides the constitutional arrangement, was shamelessly
dynastic in many ways.
If in 23 BC someone was to follow Augustus, was to get all of these powers voted and sanctified
by the senate, that meant Augustus had to point out a successor, an heir, someone to
follow in that extraordinary position as emperor.
And here Augustus was plagued by several facts.
He only had one child, his daughter Julia by his first marriage.
He had two step-sons by his second marriage, the Empress Olivia.
This would be the future emperor Tiberius and Tiberius' brother Drusus.
And Augustus essentially came up with five plans and five heirs in the course of his
career and I always put it this way, it's heir three plan five that ends up working
in the end.
The reason Augustus had to revise his dynastic plan so frequently is that he outlived everyone.
He died on August 19th, 14 AD in the city of Nola and Bay of Naples.
At the age of 77, to everyone's surprise, he had been a frail youth.
He didn't travel well, particularly when it came to sea travel.
Most people certainly back in 23 BC thought he was going to die of a fever at any point
and yet this man managed to outlive almost all of his grandsons.
One of his step-sons, well his daughter was murdered actually, executed at his bond Tiberius'
orders.
But most of his, the second and third generation, Augustus just outlived to everyone's surprise.
The initial arrangement in 23 BC was that Augustus' nephew was to marry his daughter
Julia, they were married in 25 BC, unfortunately that nephew died in 23 and it's a very complicated
set of dynastic arrangements we need not get into in this particular lecture but there
were two principles that were operating here.
The heir to the Roman Empire had to be someone with Julian blood, that is he came from Augustus
and ultimately by adoption to Julius Caesar and there are only two ways to get it.
You either descended from Augustus' only daughter Julia or you were descended from
the children of Octavia, the sister of Augustus.
And Octavia and Augustus were very, very close, Octavia was probably the senior female advisor
in the household, she's a really noble woman, she dies in 11 BC and it's at that point that
Augustus' second wife, Livia, takes over as the dominant female in the household and I
think as brother and sister she was a couple of years younger than older than Augustus,
they really did understand each other and she was really charged with the education
and the arrangements in the household and he trusted her advice a great deal.
So you had to come through the children of Octavia, particularly Octavia had married Mark
Antony, Augustus' rival, there were two daughters, each of them called Antonia after their father
Mark Antony, which is an irony, so the Imperial family is not only Augustus but Mark Antony
of famous fame of Antion Cleopatra, that is you have these two Julian branches and the
objective of Augustus was to marry these two branches of the Julian family together and
then to marry into this family the favored members of the Imperial household of the Claudian
family, that is the children of his second wife, Livia, Livia Drusilla, she had married
a fellow named Tiberius Claudius Nero who was preter in 42 BC and not a very impressive
guy, Livia actually decided to get rid of him, divorce him so she could marry Augustus
and Livia brought into the household of Augustus two children of her own, Tiberius who was
I think about six or seven at the time and Drusus, the second son of Livia, Augustus,
she was already with child when she married Augustus so Drusus, the second one, was actually
born in the household of Augustus, never knew his father, in fact Tiberius probably didn't
know his father either, so Augustus had these two step sons, Tiberius and Drusus, as well
as his daughter Julia and the various nieces from his sister and the idea was to marry
the two Julian branches and then to arrange a marriage of the two favorite step sons in
there and to produce an heir who represented the Julian and Claudian families, we're now
going to become the Imperial families and there were a lot of complicated marriages
and divorces and remarriages and deaths along the way and ultimately the final heir that
was produced by all of this was the Emperor Caligula which is kind of a dubious prize
when you think about that.
In any case, the first plan was the grandsons of Augustus to follow, in Julia was married
to a second husband, Agrippa who was the great general of Augustus, the man who won the battle
of action and from that marriage, she was in his fifties and she was in her twenties,
she had five children, three grandsons, two daughters, the two oldest grandsons, Gaius
and Lucius Caesar were designated as the heirs, they were going to succeed, unfortunately
they both pre-deceased Augustus as did Agrippa and so the original plan was that Julia and
Agrippa would outlive Augustus, they would be the Imperial couple and they would see
that the two grandsons would succeed as emperor and these would be the grandsons of Augustus,
that plan never came to fruition because everyone essentially pre-deceased Augustus.
Agrippa died from difficult campaigns in the Balkans in 12 BC, Julia was left widowed and
the third dynastic plan was with the nephew dead, my comrade and arms dead was to marry
Julia to Tiberius, the oldest stepson.
That marriage never worked out, Tiberius is one of the most morose and difficult emperors
to understand, I think few people had as much self-hate as Tiberius did and he ended up
living a very, very weird life in Capri and descending into decadence and literally designated
Caligula as his successor with the idea that well my reputation will not be as bad as it
could be because Caligula will follow and I'll actually look better than my mad nephew
who will come after me.
Well Tiberius and Julia never got along, there were no children from that marriage, Tiberius
actually went into private life for ten years much to the anger of Augustus because he couldn't
stand his wife, Julia ends up getting caught in a scandal, she sleeps around with a lot
of Roman senators and eventually banished from court and Tiberius is then willing to
come back but in any case Tiberius the stepson was supposed to step into the role of Agrippa
and act as the guardian for these two grandsons, unfortunately those grandsons died off and
Augustus was left with no heir in the end, ultimately Tiberius was the only male adult
heir left and in 6 AD the final plan was to put Tiberius in charge even though Tiberius
was now essentially divorced from Julia who was languishing in a small island for her
indiscretions, the grandsons except for one was mentally incompetent but the grandsons
were now deceased, Tiberius was the only adult male who could take over, he was at that point
in his fifties, he was about 55 when he came to the throne and he would then take over
this immense position and it's a point that has to be stressed in these dynastic arrangements
with Marcellus, with Agrippa, with Tiberius, they were associated with the powers of Augustus,
they had to be adult males, you couldn't transmit the power to a child, this was not officially
a hereditary monarchy, so Augustus was very limited in his options, he had no sons and
he had to seek out those male relatives who were closest to him and give them the legitimate
republican power so they could step into power once he had died, Tiberius however who had
a son by his first marriage, the wife that he really truly loved, Tiberius however was
told by Augustus to adopt as his heir his nephew, this was the son of Tiberius' brother
Drusus, this was the other stepson of Augustus and it was the stepson of Augustus that the
emperor Augustus had always favored, Drusus was about six or seven years younger than
his brother, he was an absolutely charming figure, he had been married to one of Augustus'
nieces, Antonia, that is the daughter of Augustus' sister, they had a number of children, the
three that survived to be adults were Germanicus and Claudius' sons and a daughter, Julia
Livia, the oldest of the sons, Germanicus, was just as dashing as the father and in
the later years of Augustus was clearly the favored great nephew, the favored male relative
of Augustus with his grandsons done, Germanicus filled the role of the new dashing young
prince and when the dynastic plans were made in 6 AD it was understood that Tiberius would
follow Augustus but Germanicus would follow Tiberius, Augustus officially adopted Tiberius
as his son, gave him the tribunation power, the proconsular imperium, Tiberius was told
to adopt Germanicus even though Tiberius had his own son by his first marriage, the succession
was to go to Germanicus, why? Well he was married to one of Augustus' nieces, Germanicus
I'm sorry, Germanus was the son of one of Augustus' nieces, Antonia, so he had half
Julian blood, he was one of the step sons of Drusus so his mom was Augustus' wife but
Germanicus was also married to one of Augustus' granddaughters, a woman named Agrippina, one
of the children of Julia and Agrippa, so that in that marriage the children that Germanicus
and Agrippina would have were the great grandchildren of Augustus, they tied in the two lines of
the Julian family, the Claudian family were all going to be in the children there and
so Augustus was very, very certain that that future heir, the man who was to follow him,
would have the Julian and the Claudian blood. Now why was that important if all of these
constitutional powers, why not just choose any leading aristocrat and give him the constitutional
powers and that gets us back to the whole patron and client arrangement in Rome? It
would only be a member of Augustus' household that would inherit all of that instinctive
loyalty that went with ties of patron and client and by the time Augustus died in 14AD
he was the patron of the Roman world. The urban plebeians, that is the dispossessed
and the sometimes affectionately called by some historians the mob in Rome were on a
grain doll, paid by Augustus. The Roman army swore its oath of allegiance to the emperor
Augustus and his family which we'll get into in the next lecture. Many of the provincials,
especially the provincial elites, owed their loyalty directly to Augustus, not to the Roman
Senate. So anyone following Augustus' emperor would have to be a member of that family and
ergo inherit all of those social and traditional bonds which were the cement that kept the
Roman Empire running. The constitutional gain, that is it was a restored republic, was for
the benefit of those political classes. They were not unimportant. They were a small group
of the Roman Empire. They're not even 1% of the population of the Roman Empire. Nonetheless,
they were the people who could get things done. They were the great families. They knew how
to command armies. They had their own households of clients and slaves. So when they went into
the provinces, they ran these provinces at their own expense. They were the class that
was necessary to staff that small imperial bureaucracy and the high echelons of the
military command. And the only way they could be won over would be to allow these people
to have that image that the republic was still operating, to grant them their social rank
and prestige, to protect their property, to give them ordered legal government, not to
arrest them arbitrarily, not to treat them as the servants of a ruler, but to pass as
social equals with these senators. And that's what the emperor was expected to do. But that
was for only that class. The rest of the Roman Empire saw in Augustus and his family a dynasty.
And therefore, these complicated marriage alliances had to be pursued in order to establish
a heir. That meant adoptions and marriages to link the closest male relative into the
imperial household who would follow. And that explains a great deal, the nature of Augustan
imperialism. From 25 BC on, it is clear if you go through the military expansion of the
frontiers, the wars against the barbarians, and we'll discuss some of these in the coming
lectures, the only commanders of any merit were members of the household of Augustus.
All of the key commands of Augustus's campaigns and wars of pacification were waged by those
members of the imperial family who at that time happened to be favored. Agrippa, the
closest of associates with Augustus, they will go back to the very point of the civil
wars. Agrippa was the man who carried out the final pacification of Spain in 25 to 19 BC.
He was married to Julia and it was his grandchildren, his children who were Augustus's grandchildren.
Agrippa was also brought in when it got tough in the Balkans. He was given enormous military
forces to crush the resistance in the Balkans during the critical campaigns there. Whenever
there was a major mission in the east early in Augustus's reign, it was Agrippa who was
there. That is someone in the imperial household who had every incentive to be loyal, who was
associated with Augustus in the constitutional powers and married to Augustus's daughter.
When Agrippa is gone, the commands then devolve upon the two steppesons, Drusus and Tiberius.
They are the men who are responsible for the great expansion in northern Europe. Drusus
and Tiberius will carry out the pacification of the lower Danube. They'll be involved in
the conquest of Germany east of the Rhine. Drusus dies because of an accident. He suffered
when his horse stumbled in Germany in 9 BC. He's injured, the leg goes gangrene, he eventually
dies of fever and that's how he's taken out of the running as a possible heir. But again,
it was the steppesons that carried out these very important operations where large military
forces would be entrusted to him. Even when you get to subordinate commanders, men who
didn't command as powerful as armies as these, the famous one, Publius Quintilius Varus,
the man who lost three legions in the Tuttenburgerwald in 9 AD to the German insurgents, even he
was linked to Augustus by marriage. He was married to one of Augustus's grand nieces,
a Claudia Marcella, and was essentially owed his position in that command in part to the
family connections. He was very closely associated with the imperial dynasty. So was a man named
Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbis, distended from the first Ahenobarbis who had organized the
province in Gaul and would be the grandfather of the emperor Nero. He was married into the
imperial family. He was married to one of Augustus's nieces, Antonia. So all of the
key commanders were from the imperial family. And that had some other important implications
for the ruling classes and it caused some of the resentment that would build up over
the first century AD from the senators. As more and more of the commands were held by
members of the imperial household, that meant expansion was put under a certain amount of
control. That is, you couldn't go out to the provinces as a governor and win the kind of
glory and victory that Julius Caesar did or Pompey did or Crassus. Because as a senator
in the imperial age, that would bring you to the attention of the emperor. He would
see you as very, very dangerous. And those senators who did achieve such distinction
usually ended up being implicated or more likely framed in a conspiracy and executed.
That's what happened to Nero's great general Corbulo, who was actually unceremoniously
forced to commit suicide in 67 a year after the settlement with Parthia. Another important
point is even in the symbols of triumph and glory and bravery so important and dear to
the Roman upper classes, those became increasingly monopolized by the imperial family. Triumphs
were no longer awarded to anyone except members of the imperial household. The only exception
in the early imperial age was Corbulo. He got a triumph. You saw what he got. Otherwise,
it's members of the imperial family. The best you could get as a senator is if you'd distinguish
yourself on the frontier as a governor, you would get triumphal honors, ornamenta in Latin,
ornaments. That is, well, if you were in the republic, you'd have a real triumph, but we're
going to give you a little certificate. Congratulations, it's like a triumph. You didn't get the kind
of display and reputation that you would have had in the republic. Instead, it would
be the imperial family that would direct expansion, and for Augustus, this was all important.
Because I would close with that great monumental inscription, the race guest idea Augusti,
that is the deeds of the Divine Augustus. Most of that inscription is devoted to listing
the great achievements of Augustus in defeating the barbarians, and that was now going to
be increasingly reserved as a right and a province and the job of the Roman emperor.
