Lecture 20 The Varian Disaster
In this lecture I plan to deal with the expansion of Roman power into central Europe, primarily
Germany, but also the Balkan regions, and it is an important lecture because it opens
up a set of related lectures.
I believe in the next five lectures we're going to be discussing different relationships
between Romans and the various barbarian foes on the imperial frontiers.
And this is the follow-up to the last set of lectures that dealt with the various new
opponents the Romans face, as well as the changes in Roman institutions to cope with
those opponents.
And so what we're picking up here is the history of the Romans and the barbarians in the first
and second century as a day.
That is the height of Roman power, often known in textbooks as the Pax Romana, the period
of the Roman peace.
And in this lecture we'll start with the Emperor Augustus and see what his goals and ambitions
were in expanding the empire, especially the northern frontiers.
As I mentioned in a previous lecture, Augustus deliberately halted the expansion on the east
against the Parthians because he saw northern Europe as a far more inviting prospect.
He had to follow in the traditions of his adoptive father Julius Caesar.
He had to triumph over northern barbarians.
They happened to be Germans instead of Gauls.
He also believed that it was extremely important to secure the Balkan regions, that is the
lands between the Adriatic and the Danube, which had several important strategic roots
that linked Italy overland with Greece and the provinces of the east.
And strategically, even though the Romans had a rather distorted idea of the world as we
would think of it, their cartography is by no means similar to modern cartography.
They had what are known as itineraries or a peripluse.
Peripluse was a way of traveling by land.
A peripluse means sailing around in Greek.
It's a way of understanding the coasts.
The Romans did know, however, the roots through the Balkans and the importance of those roots.
And if you look at an itinerary or a peripluse and follow it the way the Romans mark it out,
it may not give you a modern map, but it certainly will get you to where you want to go.
And they're fully aware that these Balkan provinces have very important strategic value
in linking Italy and Greece.
So these areas had to be brought under control by Augustus.
And that's why he reformed that imperial army, created that imperial army.
Their first main task was to secure the western half of the Roman Empire and extend imperial
power and also the power and prestige of Augustus and his family into Europe.
Well, that leads us to discuss several frontiers, and I think the best thing to do is to break
it down into three components.
I mentioned briefly that Augustus inherited a number of unresolved frontiers from the
Republic, especially in North Africa and in Spain.
These were very handily and quickly put in order.
Massive forces were moved into Spain to crush the final resistance in the northwest.
This army was entrusted to Agrippa, and by 19 BC, the northwestern zones of Spain were
now brought under Roman control.
Three legions were left as garrisons in Spain for the next generation.
And slowly, as the peninsula became increasingly Romanized, the military forces were scaled
back.
And by the second century AD, there were no legions in Spain.
Spain did not require any kind of garrison.
In North Africa, the Romans eventually ended up gestationing a single legion, the Third
Augusta.
It came to be established at a base called Lambisus in Algeria.
That legion was sufficient force, diplomatic force of a threat, to back up the various
auxiliary patrols and the client kings among the Gaetulians, the Moors, the Libyan population,
the Berber speaking population, who pretty much patrolled the desert frontiers at the
behest of Rome.
This allowed Augustus to concentrate his main efforts into Europe.
And the first zone that really attracted his attention was not so much Germany as those
Balkan provinces.
These regions were very, very difficult to pacify.
Some of the area was really rather inviting to Romans.
Someone who's traveled in, for instance, Western Hungary today, the region the Romans
called Pannonia.
Today it is rather rolling landscapes of arable.
There's a lot of grain and you can grow vineyards there.
To many Roman soldiers coming from areas like Umbria and Atria, that part of Hungary would
be attractive.
But also large portions of the Balkans are very tough and mountainous zones, similar
to the types of terrain the Romans encountered in Spain.
These were the regions known to the Romans as Dalmatia.
Today that would be equivalent to parts of Serbia and Bosnia.
There are heavy forest zones, there's mountainous territory.
The coast along the Adriatic, a rather damp coast by Roman standards, there were a string
of Greek cities and local cities that were starting to speak Latin, that thin coastal
line, which is now part of the Croatian Republic.
That area was somewhat familiar to the Romans.
But the vast majority of the interior of the Balkans were really new territory.
The key to all of these operations conducted by Augustus and especially by Augustus' heirs,
Agrippa and Tiberius, really made their careers of fighting these different people, Pannonians
and Dalmatians.
The key were two important highways that ran through what used to be Yugoslavia.
These were highways that came from the Julian Alps, that is the eastern arm of the Alps
from the old colony of Aquilaia, they crossed the Alps and they ran down the two rivers
today known as the Sov and the Drav, intersecting at Singedunum, which is the Roman word for
Belgrade today, followed along the Danube for short piece and then cut inland up the
Margus River, which is a tributary of the lower Danube that took them deep into Serbia
today and they would follow the Margus or Moravia today to the northern reaches of the
Oxius, the modern Vardar, which would then lead them into Macedonia and Greece.
And so there was this parallel highway that ran down those two major tributaries of the
Danube to intersect at modern Belgrade, which then in turn intersect the river flowed into
the Danube and then to follow the tributaries into Greece.
This had been a traditional invasion route.
This is how the Galatians in the third century BC entered the Greek world.
There was constant movement of different peoples, some were Celtic and the regions of Pannonia
in the areas that are ideal for cattle and for grain, Celts had settled there.
In the Dalmatian hinterland and the mountain zones were Illyrian speaking peoples.
These are people who spoke a Indo-European language, which is today represented by the
language of Albania, very, very tough mountain people.
On the lower Danube, where the Danube flows into the Black Sea, everything from the Roman
colony of Viminacum and Viminacum was the lynchpin.
It was at that key point where the Danube and the Margos flowed together so that you
could either go south into Macedonia or head east over to the Black Sea.
That riverbank, the southern sections of the riverbank and the valley of the Margos was
known to the Romans as Moesia after the native people, a people who were of Thracian origin,
they're related to the Thracians, the people of Bulgaria.
That region was strategic because it controlled the lower Danube and therefore access to the
many Greek cities on the Uksine shore, that is the western shore of the Black Sea.
The key was securing those two river systems, the Sov and the Drav, the middle and lower
Danube and then the river systems that led you into Greece.
Much of the effort of the Roman army was not so much in pacifying the various tribes but
building the roads.
This wasn't a daunting task, it occupied not only the Roman army in the Balkans through
most of Augustus's reign but it also occupied the Roman armies for almost a generation after
Augustus before the whole highway system was completed and these cities were put in.
Now the benefits of controlling this region were not only just strategic, henceforth once
these Balkan provinces were brought under control, the Romans could march large numbers
of forces from Italy and their western provinces to Greece and to points east.
Then all military expeditions in the later Roman Empire went by those land routes.
The emperor would travel in comfort by sea, some forces would arrive from Italy by sea
but the vast majority of Roman expeditions in the east to fight the Parthians and later
the Persians went over those highway systems I just described.
There was an extension from Nisus, the modern city of Nish and Serbia as you're going
towards Greece you can hook a turn east and go through Sertica, the Roman name for Sofia
and head for Byzantium, modern Istanbul and then take the highways across Asia Minor to
get to Syria, the city of Antioch where the main bases were.
So the construction of these military highways were absolutely essential not only to securing
the frontiers of Italy and Greece but also defending the frontiers on the Syrian desert
and the Euphrates and these areas had to be controlled.
The other benefits was once these regions were brought under control just as in Spain
the Romans happened to discover gold mines especially in Bosnia and there was an enormous
gold rush into these Balkan provinces in the first century AD.
The native peoples once they were conquered and subjective the Pannonians, Dalmatians,
the Moisians, the three principal groups the Romans identified and organized eventually
into provinces, these men were ideal fighting material for the auxiliary army.
The Thracians were particularly prized, Thrace was a client kingdom of what Bulgaria was
it was eventually organized as a province in 46.
The Thracians were prized as cavalry, we have the tombstones of many Thracian Auxiliaries
from the Rhineland, likewise the Pannonians were formed into infantry units, they served
throughout the empire so that one of the way the regions could be pacified was to recruit
significant numbers of the men into the auxiliary units and to use their energies to defend
Rome.
And some districts, this would be similar to what I discussed of those Germans, the Batavians
from Holland and some districts of Pannonia and Dalmatia, half of the men of military
age were probably being recruited into these Roman auxiliary units and stationed.
We know there was a mutiny in Thrace, there was a rumor that was set out that the Thracian
units were all going to be posted to a remote province and so they revolted in protest of
this.
It was probably misinformation, the Romans came in, crushed the revolt in 46, organized
the province and then recruited all these men into auxiliary units and sent them to
Britain so that was sort of a self-fulfilling prophecy.
So this was one of the policies devised by Augustus and was applied very successfully
in the Balkans.
There was a very dangerous revolt.
It broke out in 6 AD, it broke out among the Dalmatian tribes in what is now Bosnia
and Serbia, it spread to Pannonia.
The head of the rebel forces each had the same name, Bato, or anyway that's the Roman
rendition of the native name and this rebellion which broke out at a very critical time when
Augustus was planning the conquest of Germany forced Augustus to take an extended time out
and to move vast numbers of forces to bring these regions back under control.
The rebels themselves were organized and led by men who had served in the Roman Auxiliary
Army and this rebellion is very typical of other imperial rebellions and especially what's
going to happen in Germany under Arminius in a moment in that the leaders of the native
revolts in the imperial age usually were men who had had Roman military service and
even enjoyed Roman citizenship in several instances.
They were familiar with Roman techniques and arms and they could appeal to their fellow
tribesmen and kinsmen to the old traditions that were fast disappearing as the Roman recruiting
officers came in and took many of their young men for service on distant frontiers as the
Romans moved in and exploited mines or set up these camps and the civilian settlements
which attracted natives there, local women, all of these objections are articulated time
and time again in the Latin literature.
Very often the Romans, especially the Roman historian Cornelius Tacitus writing at the
end of the first century AD attributes speeches, he creates these speeches to rubble opponents
of Rome and these same themes keep coming through and it's not just a rhetorical device
of trying to show the despotism of Rome on these native people, they probably articulate
grievances that frequently fed into these rebellions and it took Augustus four years
to put this down between six and nine AD, 70,000 men were massed into the Balkans to
suppress and bring these regions under control and it took another generation and a half
before the Balkans were secure but it was an impressive conquest and it proved absolutely
strategically vital for the future of the Roman world and these barbarians usually lumped
together as Illyrians or sometimes called just Dalmatians but really they represent
a very mixed group of different people were slowly assimilated and incorporated into the
Roman provincial system.
However it was purchased at a cost and one could argue that the success on the Balkans
was purchased at the cost of Germany and when I say Germany I must again note that I'm speaking
in the Roman sense of the term Germania which refers to the lands east of the Rhine and
north of the Danube and it would today involve include most of Scandinavia or southern Scandinavia
that was inhabited by dramatic speaking peoples much of what is now Germany, Poland, the Czech
Republic, Slovakia and it faded out into the lands of the Sarmatians when you got out
to the Eastern steppe so it's a term that's applied to a vast area in which dramatic speaking
peoples dominated but were not necessarily the only people dwelling there, there were
still Celtic populations, there were Iranian speaking nomads in areas, no one has any idea
when the Slavic languages appeared in Merge but the Romans just classified it all as Germania.
Augustus had made the decision to move into central Europe into Germania once Spain had
been brought under control and also with the initial successes on the Balkans that revolt
in 6 AD was certainly not scheduled by Augustus by 12 BC he thought he had the Balkans in
hand.
In 16 BC the Emperor Augustus went to Gaul and took the census that was a real turning
point in the history of the western provinces.
A Roman census is a very frightening prospect especially for provincials and barbarian
peoples.
This is the first systematic counting of the population resources in Gaul and the fact
that the Gauls didn't rebel at it was cited a generation later as a testimony to the loyalty
of the Gauls and Julius Caesar had not really left much of an administration in Gaul as
far as we can tell he was too busy fighting civil wars and becoming dictator in Rome.
So 16 BC when Augustus arrived he not only opened campaigns to conquer Germany but carried
out very important administrative reforms in the Gallic provinces or as they're sometimes
called the three provinces.
In the far southwest was the province of Aquitaine, Aquitania in Latin, the modern Aquitaine,
the south of France.
Central Gaul centering on the Loire and the upper reaches of the Seon was organized in
a province called Lugdenensis centered at the city of Lugdunum, modern Lyon where there
was a vast altar complex constructed in honor of the imperial family and to the genius the
spirit of Augustus which was believed would be deified and joined the company of the gods
upon his death.
And there was a whole religious organization put in place there to co-opt the Gallic nobility
to serve as high priest to the cult of Augustus.
And then the northern sections were incorporated as the province of Belgica named after the
Belgi surviving in the modern country of Belgium.
It was all of this northeastern area, the toughest area to bring under control.
And the Rhineland, the regions of the Rhineland were organized into two military districts
upper and lower Germany.
Lower Germany is the north, the lower part of the Rhine, Germania inferior.
The southern part is Germania superior upper Germany and there Augustus massed his legions.
In 12 BC major offenses were launched from the bases along the Rhine.
These were commanded by Tiberius and Drusus, the two step sons of Augustus who at this
point were increasingly becoming the favored members of the imperial household.
The tribes submitted.
But as I mentioned in the earlier lecture on the Germans, the Romans found among the
German tribes a very, very different social and economic pattern than they had encountered
in Gaul.
For one, there were nothing like cities or towns.
The archeology bears this out and this would be true of the whole period of our relations
between the Romans and the Germans, cities, even incipient towns never really emerged.
The Germans lived in scattered villages in Hamlets.
The Germans always had a higher priority on stock raising, especially cattle over agriculture.
As far as we can tell, agriculture was looked down upon by many of the German warrior caste.
Cattle was a noble profession.
Agriculture was done by women slaves and was necessary and they grew wheat and barley
and millet and the like.
But nonetheless, they didn't prize the peasant soldier by any means.
So that the Romans got submissions from these tribes, they submit it.
Many times they ran into the forest and bogs, let the Roman army move through.
But they were not in any way conquered.
And it was quite deceptive when Augustus in 9 BC at the modern city of Cologne at the
time called Apidum Ubiorum after the Celtic German tribe that settled there when they
set up an imperial altar very similar to what you had at Lugdunum Leon, which was to
be the focus of the provincial worship of the Emperor Augustus.
And this was to be the provincial worship of all these tribes between the Rhine and
the Elba and beyond.
Most of these tribes had simply surrendered.
The Roman army could not stay in Germany over the winter.
The agricultural and economic base was too weak to support those forces.
So a Roman army might move through in the summer, usually following the Lippa or the
mine river from the Rhine to chastise the tribes.
It would pull back winter on the Rhine.
There was no permanent settlement in Germany by Roman forces.
There was no way of putting roads in the kind of infrastructure you would see in the Balkans
and Gaul that would result in just some kind of, if not Romanization, economic development
to sustain a professional army.
So none of this was put in place by Augustus, and it wasn't likely that even if Augustus
understood all the implications of his conquest there were the Romans could ever have done
it.
Nonetheless, by 9 BC Augustus could declare a victory.
There was now a huge German province stretching deep into central Europe.
Of all the German tribes, the one that was seen as the most dangerous was dwelling in
what is now the Czech Republic.
These were a group of people known as the Marco Moni, and they had been led there by
their king Maro Bodois around 20 BC or so.
He came to the throne as a kind of a war leader, and as the Roman armies had pushed east of
the Rhine, Maro Bodois had made the decision that the best thing for him and for his tribe
was to move away from Roman power.
He was the king of a tribe, the Marco Moni, and their related tribe, the Quati, who apparently,
as far as we can tell from the Roman sources, was related to the Suebe, the Sueves, the
tribe of Ariovistus, the Germans who had crossed Gaul in 58 BC and were defeated by
Julius Caesar.
In any case, Maro Bodois and his people respected Roman arms and knew the danger, and they migrated
into the area of Bohemia, the heartland of the modern Czech Republic, where they subjected
a Celtic population, fell heir to the mining system in the towns there, and built up a
very impressive kingdom.
In fact, of all the German tribes, Maro Bodois' kingdom looked like the most serious arrival.
They had an army reputedly 70,000 strong, there's evidence that already there were the beginning
of towns.
By the 2nd century AD, many of the Marco Moni were actually building Roman-style villas.
It was close to the Roman border, and this area would be very, very heavily influenced
by Roman material culture.
So Augustus put his main target on Maro Bodois, and that was the German kingdom slated for
conquest when the rebellions broke out in the Balkans.
And then once those rebellions were put down, Maro Bodois again became top number priority
for the Imperial Army.
Unfortunately for the Romans, and fortunately for Maro Bodois, that operation never came
off because of a disaster in Germany, the famous destruction of the legions in the
Tutan-Bergevold.
Well, what was this?
How did this happen?
And this gets us to one of the most dramatic events of Roman imperial history on the frontiers.
Sometime in 9 AD, the then governor of the German province between the Rhine and the
Elba, the great river that bisects Germany today, the eastern limit of the Roman frontier
at the time, a man named Publius Quintillus Varis, who was married to a grand niece of
Augustus, took over the administration of the province, the new German province.
He had at his disposal five legions, particularly legions 1718 and 19, which were his main
field force, and they were based in a camp on the Lipa, which is a northern tributary
of the Rhine, at Aliso, which is a summer camp where the Romans would move in, and his
job was essentially to bring the province under control.
He had proved his expertise in Syria as a fiscal genius, he was very good at taxation,
monetary reforms and the like, and his appointment was indicative that Augustus probably thought
this area was now coming under control.
That the Germans had submitted, there was now an imperial cult statue at Cologne, there
was an imperial cult, that the Germans were submissively paying their tribute, Germans
were beginning to be recruited in the Roman auxiliary army.
What happened is that a leader emerged among the Cherusci, one of the major tribes dwelling
between the Vesa and the Elba, the middle Vesa and Elba, by the name of Arminius, Arminius
is probably a Latin rendition of the German name Hermon, and he decided to lure Varys,
he actually lured Varys off his main route into a zone, it's near Ernest Brook, just
to the northeast of it, it's the Calcresa today, it's to the south or a series of hills
to the north or bogs, they found the site where the army was slaughtered in 1997 after
years of research, he had lured Varys into this trap claiming that the tribes were restive,
that there was a possibility of a rebellion, that he, Arminius, could help Varys put down
the rebellion, and Varys had some reason to believe this because Arminius himself was
a Roman citizen, his brother was serving in the auxiliary army, his father-in-law at the
time, Cegestes, was actually the High Priest of the Cult of Augustus, and most of Arminius'
family remained loyal to Rome, so Varys believed Arminius, he moved his forces into Germany,
then cut northeast into a trackless zone where the Romans had not been, and all of a sudden
found himself under heavy attack, Arminius had massed the tribes together and had prepared
the battlefield very well, what has recently been found is an earth wall that was built
along the southern flank, this would have been the Roman left flank as they were trying
to retreat and make it back to their camps to the Rhine, many of the axiliaries in the
Roman army defected, they were attacked, it was complicated by thunderstorms, the Roman
soldiers lost their cohesion in the forest, under repeated attacks, they lost cohesion,
Varys committed suicide, the 15,000 Roman legionaries were slaughtered, those that had
the misfortune of being captured were put in wicker baskets and burned alive, or they
were sacrificed by hanging or having their throats cut, these were probably dedications
to some version of the war god Odin, it was a complete military catastrophe, three standards
were lost, in fact this defeat in the Tutun Bergenwald, that is the German forest, was
regarded as even greater than Karaj, the last defeat the Romans had suffered like this from
a barbarians was back in 105 BC, from the hands of the Kimbrie and the two Tonnes, and
it really changed Roman perceptions, the destruction of those three legions in 9 AD were such that
never after were those three numbers ever used for new legions, those numbers were off limits,
1718, 19, in addition Augustus massed enormous forces on the Rhine, eight legions were sent
there to try to protect the Gaelic provinces from the German attack that never came, because
Arminius once he won his victory, the Germans did what they usually did, they had a great
party, slaughtered their visitors, their prisoners and fell into a drunken stupor, and actually
the Roman forces that were left east of the Rhine were able to evacuate the civilian populations,
seized the bridges and defend against a possible invasion, Arminius himself was later driven
to exile for becoming too tyrannical among his own tribesmen, the concentration of so much
military force, a third of the empire's military power on the Rhine would prove very dangerous
politically, Augustus' successor Tiberius faced immediately a mutiny on the Rhine, but the
Rhine land, the Romans almost overreacted to the destruction of that imperial army in Germany,
furthermore Augustus decided that was it, he called a limit, Roman forces were not going to
retrieve that lost province, and in many ways Arminius' success was essentially the one and
only successful revolt in the whole of the Roman imperial age, the Romans decided they were not
going to revive that project, there were several efforts later but never from the direction of
the emperor, they were done by Prince Dramaticus, well Caligula we don't know what he was doing up
in Germany, we'll get to that at a later point, this was a momentous decision because henceforth
the Germans more than any other barbarian people emerged as the most dreaded of barbarian foes
in the eyes of the Romans, the Germans took over the position that the Parthians had had
from 53 BC, and you can catch that in the closing words of Tacitus' Germania, the historian
Tacitus wrote that tract about the German tribe, where he concluded that the valor and freedom
of the Germans is a far more dangerous foe than the power of the despot of the Parthian king,
that is the Germans had come to replace the other barbarian people as that primeval barbarian,
there are stories told of the Augustus himself in 9 AD, a weeping in Rome yelling Varys Varys
give me back my legions, at this point Augustus is in his 70s, and this military defeat, this check
by a group of successful German insurgents turned out to have permanent and long term
consequences for the Roman world, because henceforth the Roman emperors and the imperial
government had to organize frontiers in northwestern Europe and come to terms with the fact that
on the other side were these various barbarian tribes who would never be brought directly
under Roman authority and some sort of accommodation, some type of defense would have to be worked
out and this was to become the main theme in imperial history for the next 400 years.
