In this lecture, I plan to look at the civil wars and rebellions that ripped apart the
Roman Empire in 6870 AD.
These civil wars are extremely well-documented by the historian Cornelius Tacitus, whose
account survives in full, unfortunately the later parts of the 1st century AD do not survive,
but for this period we have the full record from Tacitus who talked to many of the participants
and knew about the events.
And these events are important for two reasons.
One, they bring out the institutional weaknesses I had mentioned earlier in the arrangements
that Augustus had made, both constitutional and military.
When the last representative of Augustus's family, the emperor Nero, committed suicide
on June 9th, 68AD, there was no heir in place.
As I noted, this was not a strictly hereditary monarchy in law.
There had to be an adult male heir with all the proper constitutional powers ready to
take over, and Nero had not done that.
In fact, Nero had done quite the reverse.
Nero had removed any potential rival to the throne, anyone with a dynastic connection
during his reign.
The military weakness is that once there was no longer a Julio-Claudian heir or recognized
emperor in Rome, then as Tacitus put it, the Akrani Imperii, the secret of the empire,
was revealed, because the three great regional armies that had been created to defend and
advance the frontiers became the arbiters of power.
This was the Western army that included the legions of the Rhine, which in 68AD were seven
in number with one in Gaul, and the four legions at that moment in Britain, those legions tended
to group together as an army of about twelve legions.
There were the legions along the Danube, mostly the middle and lower Danube, and eight legions
deployed in the east, many of them engaged in putting down the great Jewish rebellion
at the time of Nero's suicide.
So there were three potential great regional armies, and the key was for one man to emerge
who could at least command the loyalty of two of the three, put himself on the throne
by beating any rival, and then once in Rome gaining the legitimacy that only the Senate
could give.
And this pattern would reappear after 235AD when the empire was rocked with civil war
after civil war.
This is the first time this imperial civil war took place in 6970.
And furthermore, it's important to note that this is the first civil war that the Romans
had endured in over a century.
The other important point that's brought out in these civil wars is the relationship of
Rome with the various provincials and frontier peoples, which is the major theme of this
course.
In fighting among themselves, the legions marched off to distant battlefields in Italy,
and the legions of the Rhine and the legions of the Danube within one year in April and
November of 69 essentially fought the same battle, almost at the same location twice,
we call it sometimes the first and second battle of Bedriacum or Cremona.
It's on the Via Postum of that important highway built in the middle second century BC to link
northern Italy, essentially running from Venice to Genoa, and midway between Cremona and
Bedriacum twice these great regional armies clashed.
The first time the Rhine legions won in the second battle, which was a two day battle that
started in the afternoon, went through the evening and was only concluded the next morning,
largely because the Rhine legions panicked when members of the Danube army greeted the
rising sun in the Syrian fashion, as it was said, and the Rhine legions thought the fresh
army had arrived from the Balkans and panicked and broke ranks.
But both of those battles pitted these two veteran forces against each other, and as
I noted in the methods that the Romans use in warfare, the casualties must have been
horrendous on both occasions.
And civil wars become a way of bloodletting among the Roman army and therefore gives the
opportunity to provincial peoples and barbarians to exploit this Roman weakness, to strive
for independence, to attack the frontiers, to rape.
There will be a major rebellion that breaks out in the Rhine land.
It starts among the Batavians, the 10 military units commanded by a man by the name of Gaius
Julius Cavillus, a Batavian chief in his own right who was a Roman officer.
He raises the revolt initially on behalf of one of the candidates of the Civil War of
Espion, and eventually makes a bid for independence.
And this rebellion draws in various Celtic tribes in Gaul.
It also results in allies being summoned across the Rhine, and it is a very, very dangerous
lesson learned by Rome, and the emperor who succeeds, the emperor of Espion, he and his
sons will take many measures to prevent the reoccurrence of any kind of disturbance like
this on the frontiers.
So let's look for a moment at the Civil War, the crisis itself.
Nero had alienated the imperial aristocracy and provincial elites vital to the imperial
administration.
He also made a mistake in not campaigning on the frontiers, especially in the Rhine
land.
In 14 AD, the emperor Augustus had called a halt into Germany.
Now that wasn't quite as dramatic as it sounds, and as I mentioned that these Roman frontiers
are not a Maginot line in a modern sense, they're not to inhibit alt contact.
Roman economic and political power still extended deep among the Germanic tribes.
But the emperor Tiberius who followed Augustus was not interested in reviving the conquest
of Germany.
His nephew and heir, Germanicus was, and Germanicus waged three campaigns in 14 through 16 AD
attempting to draw the rebellious German tribes into a battle under the notion that he would
win a great victory and revive the Augustan project.
What he gained were, well, he recovered two of the lost eagles of Varus, the last one
was regained by Corbulo in 47, I think.
And he also got a lecture from his uncle Tiberius after winning a battle in 16 AD that diplomacy
is the better part of valor here, and Tiberius calculated correctly because once Roman punitive
expeditions in Germany halted, Arminius, the great leader of the German rebellion, eventually
was driven out by his tribe as a tyrant, and there was no possibility of the tribes organizing
as a coalition to threaten the Roman positions on the Rhine.
And so for the next generation or so, there were no major military activities in Rhine,
instead Claudius invaded Britain, and Nero neglected the frontiers even though he was
a Julian prince, he was very popular as his accession, and in not paying attention to
frontier policy and not styling himself as a conquering emperor, he lost credibility
in the eyes of the legions, and that was one of the major reasons where he fell from power.
There are so many ways that Nero fell from power, and to put it this way, his creative
decadence was on a scale that really is quite amazing, as I've loved to tell my students.
The largest number that survives in antiquity, 400 billion cisterci, that's the largest
number in any ancient text, are the debts that the Roman state owed after the downfall
of Nero.
What Nero did know how to do was throw a good party and bankrupt the government in the process.
Nero was opposed initially by the Roman elites in Spain.
Most appropriately, one of the governors in Spain, a senior man, Servus Sulpusius Galba
was declared emperor by the legion station there as well as the provincials, and by the
time Galba reached Rome, Nero had long committed suicide because the various armies on the
frontier had renounced their loyalty to Nero.
Nero died a despised exile, his famous last words, a qualius artifacts perio, what an
artist dies in me, always remarkable to the last.
As one historian of the time noted, it was dangerous to criticize Nero's theatrical performances
in his lifetime and dangerous to praise them after his death.
Galba secured Rome in all the images and powers necessary.
The senate vote these powers in block, and this was the first instance that power was
transferred from one dynasty to another, constitutionally that was worked out.
Galba however was in his 80s, he was parsimonious by nature, he was an embittered man, he had
no children, he had owed his career to some extent to the empress Olivia, he was one of
the few people around who still remembered Augustus and Olivia's famous second wife.
The man who had helped engineer the revolt in Spain was a fellow named Otho, of a relatively
new aristocratic family, who had got his career first as a buddy of Nero, they used to carouse
together, and he provided Nero little boys, women, eventually his wife, and Nero banished
Otho to Lusutenia, that is western Spain as governor, so Otho bowed Galba in a play
to get himself back to Rome, and when Otho found out that Galba was not going to adopt
him as his son in heir, Otho carried out a very clever coup where he bribed the Praetorian
guard, the garrison of Rome, in their camp, which I think today is the University of Rome,
rather strange transformation of the Praetorian camp, but anyway bribed the Praetorian guard
to riot and kill Galba, and had himself declared emperor.
Now this change of power in Rome was largely unnoticed by the great regional armies.
The armies of the Rhine, which had mutinied back in 14 AD and had resented Nero's escapades,
had been subject to very poor discipline, Nero had been sending out officers who did
not keep strict discipline, did not keep these soldiers up to standard, and as I noted they
were about a third of the military force of the empire, and they were only about less
than three months march from Rome.
These forces mutiny, and at the time the Rhine was defended by legionary camps along the
river, and again matter of supply, the Rhine was in effect a highway to support these legions
which were being supplied from northern Italy.
There were two major double camps, one of them is at Castra Vettara, the modern city
of Exantum today, facing the Lippa River so they could move into northern Germany, and
the other was at Mogantiacum Mainz today, which was positioned so the Romans could move
up the main mine into central Germany.
These were bases for keeping the German tribes odd, and then there were lesser bases at such
cities as Nois and today Strasbourg, Cologne, which meant Colonia, I mean Colony and Latin
Cologne today in German.
These legions decided to revolt.
The men really behind the revolt were not the governors but junior officers, legates,
a fellow named Chaiquina Elianus who was a commander of the legion at Mainz, the 4th
Macedonica, and Fabius Valens who was commander of the 1st Germanica at Cologne.
These two legates instigated the rebellion, it started first on January 1st when the legions
refused to give the oath of loyalty at Mainz, they threw stones at the image of Galba, and
they saluted Lucius Vitelius, the governor of lower Germany, that's the northern province,
as emperor, and then marched on Italy to put their men on the throne.
On the way they found out that Galba had been murdered and replaced, but they weren't particularly
interested in Galba although the party was on.
They were going to invade Italy, and in the spring, in mid-April of 69 AD, some 70,000
or 75,000 men from the Rhineland had poured into northern Italy.
The first column of these forces engaged Otto who hastily improvised forces.
I think they even, they brought out 2,000 gladiators from Rome, they created a legion
out of freedmen and marines, I mean Otto was desperate.
The majority of the legions in the empire obeyed Otto, they were in the Danube in the
east, but they were much too far away to do anything, it was the Rhine army that was
in position to seize the initiative.
And so the armies clashed on the 13th of April, there was fighting on that at Bedriacum,
and Otto, one of the strangest men to hold the throne, about as depraved as they come
in his individual life, decided after his initial defeat to commit suicide, burn all
the incriminating letters of the senators who supported him, and just remove himself
from the scene, lest the empire be condemned to civil war.
A noble act indeed, Vitelius, who's claimed to fame as emperor, was that he ate more
food than any other emperor on the throne in, I don't know, about eight or nine months.
He was a gourmand, and by all reports, and a rather sluggish and weak figure, deliberately
chosen as a puppet by these junior officers in the army, Vitelius entered Rome with the
vast army from the Rhine land, and immediately these veterans from the Rhine had an incredible
Roman holiday in the summer of 69 and 88, none of them was interested in going back to the
Rhine land once they got to the city of Rome, it was just too much fun.
That would cause difficulties that almost did end the Northwestern provinces.
Meanwhile, there was another prominent commander in the east, a man named Titus Flavius Vespasianus,
we call him Vespasian in English, he was in command of the war against the Jews, who had
revolted in 66.
He had built up a very careful coalition of leading senators and equestrians, high officials
of state, he secured loyalty within the army in Syria, and also loyalty among the Danube
legions.
This was assisted by the fact that the Danube legions and the Eastern legions that fought
the Parthians, there was an awful lot of transfer of units that went on in these campaigns,
officers were rotated between the two armies, there were many men with common service, especially
among the junior officer corps, one legion, Third Gallica, had served in Syria and was
then posted over to the Danube, and so Vespasian very carefully worked through these networks
and built up a coalition, and on July 1st, 69 AD, the two Egyptian legions in Alexandria
saluted Vespasian emperor.
This was a very carefully staged coup, it was not a military mutiny looking for a figurehead
at all, Vespasian kept close control over his military forces and sent an army from the
east to contest the decision of April 69.
It was really, Vespasian was a no-nonsense dissent from an equestrian family in the old
Sabine country, a stocky guy, no-nonsense, very careful, methodical, turned out to be
a remarkable administrator once she was on the throne, and an emperor that any common
soldier could love, and he also at the time had two sons, which was another important
point to his credit, little did they know that this dynasty would only last two generations,
produces three emperors, but only lasts two generations.
As in the case of the Mutiny on the Rhine in January, junior officers in the Danube
legion seized the initiative, a fellow by the name of Antonius Primus, a legate, a number
of junior officers decided to invade Italy rather than to wait for the forces from the
east sent by Vespasian, and they, there are a lot of careers made in this, I mean, a lot
of those junior officers did really well under Vespasian and later to mission, including
Cornelius Fuscus who ended up being Pretorium Prefect, but all these guys led the Danube
legions into Italy, and these legions were spoiling to settle scores with the defeat
several months earlier, and so a second battle is fought by the Rhine legions, which had
had a great time for three or four months in Rome, who moved north and collided with
these legions from the Danube in a second battle in November, which essentially went
over two days, it was a battle that was largely fought at night, there was a new moon, Tacitus
gives us a very vivid description of the carnage that went on, as two armies with the same
types of tactics, passwords, discipline went at it for most of the evening fighting and
inflicting heavy casualties, the Flavian forces, the force lines of Vespasian won in the early
morning, the Rhine legions broke and ran when they thought that a relief army was on the
way. Well, the Danube legions eventually forced their way into Italy, that battle proved
decisive, they were still fighting in Rome on December 21, 22, the mob rioted and tore
Vitellius to pieces, and the Rhine and Danube legions actually fought it out in the streets
of Rome, there was actually fighting in the capital, the capital line temples were burned
in the process, it looked like a great conflagration was going to sweep up the empire, Tacitus
tells us that the urban mob in Rome actually cheered on the two legions as they were fighting
in the streets, sometimes throwing tiles and pots from above to encourage the fighting,
and they thought probably it was just a strange gladiatorial game for themselves. But by December
22, 69 AD, the Civil War had been decided, Vespasian would arrive in the next year to
take the throne and establish himself as emperor and associate both his sons and power and
take over the awesome role of Roman emperor which Augustus had created. But the Civil
War had repercussions on the frontiers and immediately, in some instances it was just
minor disturbances. As in Britain I alluded to earlier, Queen Cartamanda's husband,
Winutius overthrew her and she fled to the Romans, there were rivalries among client
rulers or even cities, we can trace this in Gaul where the cities of Vien, today Vienna
and Latin, and Lugdunum, Lyon, they backed rival candidates so they were inciting soldiers
to sack the other city, and so rival tribes in Gaul or cities sometimes align themselves
as a way of settling old local scores with rivals. But the real danger was on the Rhine,
and there the lack of discipline for over generation and also the tendency that had developed
to keep the German and Gallic forces recruited in the auxiliary army in the Rhine land almost
did in Roman authority in the Northwestern provinces. And this is the first time, and
really the first and only time in a period of over 200 years that Roman rule was seriously
threatened, compromised by rebels and barbarians. Arminus simply threw the Romans out of Germany,
this rebellion on the Rhine threatened to unravel all of the Roman work in Northwestern
Europe. The head of this outfit, the man who really was responsible for organizing it was
Gaius Julius Cavillus. He was a Batavian, by all descriptions, he had a massive red
hair and wore the traditional long mustache, we're told he had one eye, I'm sure that went
over well with the Germans, he looked like some sort of Odin figure. He summoned his
tribesmen into an oak grove and applaud at the revolt, these are Germans dwelling on
in the lower reaches of the Rhine in the islands and marshes, they had lived under treaty with
the Romans and provided military forces. There were 10 units, nine cohorts of infantry, one
of cavalry, serving under Roman officers like Cavillus, Gaius Julius Cavillus, obviously
his family had gotten citizenship from Augustus, he was probably a second generation German.
Perhaps 15,000 men served from the Batavian tribe in the Roman army and this was a good
proportion of all adult males in that particular tribe as far as we can tell. They also staffed
the flotilla of the Rhine and Cavillus incited a rebellion initially acting as if he were
the agent of Vespasian. Cavillus is typical of these capable tribal leaders, he was in
part assimilated to the Roman system, he spoke Latin, he had Roman citizenship, yet he retained
all of those traditional tribal affiliations, he appealed to ancient Germanic symbols, he
could summon and did various tribes from across the Rhine including the Chati, the Chiruski,
all of those fearsome tribes who had slaughtered Varys' army back in 9 AD and they're all being
incited by some strange virgin prophetess, Valeda, whom Cavillus propitiates by sending
Roman captives for her to slaughter in the groves, that's part of Germanic religion.
He also had contacts with the auxiliary units among the Gaelic tribes, especially Belcik
tribes, the Treviri, the Menopani and others who served in the Roman auxiliary units. So
in the summer of 69, why the legions are battling out succession in northern Italy, Cavillus
launches his revolt and the reaction in the Rhine land is mixed. For one, most of the best
forces are in Italy, the only forces left in the Rhine land are vexillations, this is
a Latin word for detachment, vexillatio, vexillationes and plural, that meant the best fighting
forces were withdrawn for the military expeditions in Italy, but the older guys, the new recruits
were left to defend the camps. That northern camp, the lynchpin to the defense of the lower
Rhine, which was to keep the Batavians and others tribes of Gaul in order, Castravetara,
was a double legionary camp which was supposed to be defended by over 10,000 men. The commanding
officer Lupus had at his disposal maybe 2,500. The governor left in charge of the Rhine land,
Flockus was actually sympathetic to Vespasian and didn't at first understand that this rebellion
was assuming nationalists and separatist tendencies, so he didn't take any action, so there was
no organized response to this rebellion in 69. The Batavians with their Gaelic and German
allies, that is the free Germans across the Rhine, besieged Castravetara, it's very instructive
as to the differences already developing between those provincials now under Roman rule and
partially assimilated after two or three generations as opposed to those tribes east of the Rhine.
Cavillus's German allies have no idea how to do Syriza warfare, neither the Batavians.
These 2,500 starving Roman legionaries are eventually slaughtered, but they beat back
attack-attack against their camp, and at one night the German allies of Cavillus thought
it would be a great idea to throw the traditional German drinking party, and they got very very
drunk and then lit these huge bonfires and then decided to surge against the walls of
the camp and attack it, and the garrison was alerted and these Roman professionals set
up their Belistai and just mowed down these Germans being silhouetted against the bonfires
they had lit. Cavillus eventually had to put out the fires, recall his drunken allies,
and there must have been times when Cavillus just thought it was impossible to get this
revolt going, given the allies he was working with.
To a large extent, Cavillus enjoyed this initial success because there was no organized Roman
government in the Rhineland to oppose them, no military forces. The senior officers were
either loyal to Vespasian or inept, and in addition there was no organized military force
able to move in and take on these insurgents. They were all in Italy, and so Cavillus' forces
could roam freely.
Celtic tribes rebelled, the Traveri, a very important tribe in the Mosul Valley, long
allies to roam. They set up one of their boy kings, a fellow named Valentinus, backed
by the Druids. Cavillus the only way he could get any kind of unity in this group was by
appealing to Roman symbols. He eventually lured four legions into defecting, these were
just the remnants of legions by taking oaths to an Imperium Galliarum, that is an empire
of the Gauls, and it is significant that this separatist revolt among all of these military
forces in Gaul and in Roman Germany could only express itself in Roman terms. The only
hierarchy in political institutions they understood were Roman military institutions, and that's
how Cavillus got many of his men mobilized by that type of appeal.
This group could only have succeeded if the emperor Vespasian decided that we're just
going to ride off the Northwestern provinces. In 70 AD, in the spring, Vespasian was still
en route from the east, but his very talented cousin, Quintus Patellius Siriales, who had
served in Britain, who was to be the first Flavian governor in Britain who would suppress
the Welsh, he put together a massive force, crossed the Alps, and swept down the Rhine.
The majority of Celtic tribes welcomed the Romans. All the Romanized towns in the Rhine
land threw their doors open. The city of Cologne, which had a German population that had intermixed
with Roman veterans, had refused to join Cavillus and the insurgents they had given the name.
We have intermarried and intermixed so much among the Romans, they are now our kinsmen
and friends, we cannot kill them and join these rebels. These Romanized cities, as well
as the various Celtic tribes, fearful of what a collapse of Roman power might mean for them,
that made the Roman conquest so easy. The Roman forces rolled over the insurgents in
Traveria, there was no problem. Cavillus had to retreat into the marshes of his homeland.
All the free German barbarians who'd come over for the loot and drinking checked out
immediately, they were not going to stand in front of a real Roman legion, they just
bolted. Cavillus eventually arranged terms for the surrender of his tribe, they came
back under Roman control, and Cyrillus ordered the Rhine land in the summer of 70 AD and
put the military garrisons back in place. The Flavian emperors were going to reform
the military system, they were going to reform the arrangements in the auxiliary armies,
they would reform the legions, they were going to make sure that the frontiers were
never going to be compromised like this again. And that determination to restore Roman integrity
along the northern frontiers really explains not only Flavian frontiers, but the expeditions
of the Empertrasian, when a threat seemed to appear from the Dacians in the east on
the lower Danube, that was taken out by conquest. There was never going to be a case again
where the Romans would be compromised by some kind of great rebellion among their
provincials and barbarian allies. What the civil wars also revealed were the weaknesses
of the imperial system, and I want to stress that the barbarian assault that would come
after 235 AD would be a result of Roman civil wars, just as the ones I've described that
would expose the frontiers to a barbarian attack, to be sure these barbarians were
better organized and disciplined in the third and later fourth centuries. But it can't
be stressed enough that far more damage was committed among the Romans by their own armies
in civil war than any barbarian rebellion. Roman armies seized enormous amount of provisions,
cities tried to settle scores with each other by supporting one faction over the other.
And above all, it has to be stressed that these civil wars were extremely destructive
to the morale and the number of trained veterans in the Roman army. And I want to close with
a point about that made by Tacitus in describing the second battle of Bedriacum between the
Danube and Rhine legions, that night battle that took place in November of 69 AD. And
Tacitus noted, an event which made the slaughter more dreadful was the death of a father at
the hands of his son. I record the incident and the names on the authority of Vipstania
Misala. A recruit from the hurricane legion, that is the 21st Ropox, one Julius Mansuetis
from Spain, had left a young lad at home. Soon after the boy came of age and having
been called up by Galba for service in the seventh legion, the seventh Galbiana, chance
to encounter his father in the battle and wounded him seriously. The son was fighting
for the Danube, the father was fighting for the Rhine army. As he was searching the prostrate
and semi-conscious figure, father and son recognized each other. Embracing the dying
man, the son prayed in words choked by sobs that his father's spirit would be appeased
and not bear him ill will as a parasite. The act was not a personal one, and one single
soldier was merely an infinitesimal fraction of the forces engaged in the Civil War. With
these words, he took up the body, dug a grave, and discharged the duty, the last duty to
his father. Some nearby soldiers noticed this, then more and more, and so throughout
the lines ran a current of wonder and complaint, and men cursed this cruelest of wars, but
this did not stop them killing and robbing relatives, kinsmen, and brothers. They said
to each other that a crime had been done, and in the same breath, they did it themselves.
