In this lecture and the next one, I want to conclude with the creation of the last sections
of the Roman Frontier and these two lectures, this one on the Flavian Emperors and the New
Frontiers they constructed after the Civil War and the Conquest of Trajan, enable us
to see the Roman Empire with its classic frontier systems in place.
And then I will deal with, oh I think in three or four lectures, the type of frontier civilization
that emerged in these regions and how these regions were very important in tying the barbarians
across the frontier with the Roman Empire.
And once we conclude that issue, we can then turn and look at the very complicated story
between Roman and these barbarians in the later Empire, especially after 235 AD and
so address the third great theme and that is why did the Roman Empire fall, what role
did the barbarians play, they've always been recognized since given as one of the two leading
participants in undermining the Roman Empire, for given it was the barbarians from without
and then the Christians from within.
That second group can be very much questioned now and we'll deal with that, the question
of the barbarians and Rome's fall in the later lectures.
So in this particular lecture, we want to see how the Romans repaired their military system
and their frontiers after that very dramatic rebellion in 69-70.
No better pragmatic emperor ever came to the throne than Vespasian.
He was a man of no nonsense, he was very much appreciated by many members of the Roman
Senate who at this point comprised families that had risen in imperial service.
By 70 AD, when Vespasian arrived at Rome, most of the old republican senatorial families
had died away, some of them had lost their fortunes, had declined to relative obscurity,
others had been killed, large numbers of them had been killed by Nero, anyone related to
the imperial family was done away with by Nero and a whole new group of men descended
from equestrians and eventually even from provincials, rose through imperial service
and were elected, that is they were added to the Roman Senate, they were enrolled in
that highest social political order and Vespasian came from the ranks of these men and in many
ways Vespasian was representative of an important social change going on in the Roman ruling
classes.
He also had two sons, in 70 AD there was Titus who was 31-32 years old, who would triumph
over the Jews who were in rebellion since 66 and a younger son he was about 10-11 years
younger than Titus the Emperor Domitian, Domitian proved to be a very troubled man who really
wasn't fit to play the role of emperor in a number of ways, but Titus was extremely
popular although as one author, Suetonius the biographer noted that Titus was so popular
because his reign was so short and he tends to always equate popularity of an emperor
with shortness of reign, but Suetonius is writing in the tradition of Tacitus being
very cynical about the imperial system.
In any case Vespasian reorganized the military system immediately, four legions that had
defected during the rebellion were cashier, that is their eagles were taken away from
them and this is a remarkable step to take, these were the legions that had taken the
oath to this crazy Gaelic empire that had been created by Cavillus.
Now many of the fit men in these legions were then reformed with other units to create
new legions and there were several new legions created with the name Flavia indicating that
they were loyal to the Flavian throne.
Furthermore the legions were reorganized and posted to the frontiers and Vespasian was
very careful about this without getting into the details, he made sure that the provincial
armies in Britain, the Rhineland, the Danube and a new frontier along the Euphrates comprised
of garrisons of a mixture of soldiers, soldiers who had fought both for the Flavians as well
as for the other side and made a real effort to appoint Abel and aggressive governors on
the frontiers who would lead these forces in operations to build up a sense of a law
to cast away those old rivalries that had been fought out in 6970.
The auxiliary units too were reformed and in this case the imperial government for a
very long time, about 160 years, pursued a policy of posting these auxiliary units away
from the homeland.
There had always been this notion before, for instance large numbers of Spaniards had
been posted to the Rhineland but the Flavians reimposed this policy and so if you recruited
Syrians from the desert conditions you would then post them to North Africa where they
could patrol Berber tribes or if you had Britons you would move them to Thrace, you
would take Thracians you would put them in Britain and there was a conscious policy to
start rotating these auxiliary units so that you would never have a situation as you did
in 6970 where native officers who held Roman command and knew Roman drill and institutions
could lead their tribes, many of them armed and trained by the Romans into a Grand Rebellion
that could threaten Rome's provinces.
The Flavians were very conscious that this was not going to happen again and the shift
to local recruitment that occurred in the 2nd century AD and I'll discuss in a later
lecture, that shift did not result in recruiting ethnic units, tribally based or ethnic units
and keeping them in their locale, when they started local recruiting this would be from
veterans and sons of veterans from discharged soldiers and that would be quite different
from going in and creating these ethnic units you had seen before 70 AD.
I noted that the Flavians took very aggressive action on the frontiers to restore the majesty
and image of Rome, in part the Flavians were desperate for military reputation, the only
victory of real note to the entire dynasty was the suppression of the rebellion of the
Jews which was treated as a very serious war but they never gained the kind of victories
Augustus did or later the Emperor Trajan and so this dynasty, the 2nd dynasty of Rome
was never quite of the same magnitude both in its reputation and its money as the Julio
Claudian dynasty was or the dynasty that Trajan forged, the so called Antonine dynasty or the
dynasty of the 5 good emperors that would follow the Flavians.
There were actions taken in Britain to conquer the island, I think in 71 AD when Quintus Patellius
Cerealis arrived as the first Flavian governor and started the pacification of Wales the
intention was to conquer the entire island, this was halted in either 84 or 85 AD there's
a dispute on the date when the 3rd Flavian emperor, Domitian just thought it wasn't worth
the effort to go into the Caledonian highlands and polled the Roman forces back, retired
the governor Agricola and eventually the Romans decided on that frontier along the line of
Hadrian's wall.
However there were other important moves especially against the Germans, this was important because
that humiliation of the Varian disaster was never forgotten and many German tribes had
come across the Rhine when the rebellion had broken out in 70 and therefore punitive expeditions
were waged against the German tribes and if you are looking at the situation from the
German tribes viewpoint these were massive retaliatory strikes or aggression on the part
of the Romans often aimed at tribes when only small portions of those tribes usually soldiers
associated or warriors associated with a war king of some sort had crossed over in the
hopes of booty and plunder, captives and now the Romans took out these strikes, furthermore
as I mentioned the Rhine frontier as well as the Danube frontier to some extent was
a highway, it provided river transport that allowed for the provisioning of a huge army
in northern Europe, that armies base was deep in Italy, Milan and the cities of the
Po Valley fed the legions on the Rhine and as we shall see much of Gaul would feed the
legions on the Rhine and the camps on the Rhine were spring boards for operations beyond
the Rhine into the free German zone to impose Roman majesty or to spread Roman political
influence or in the case of the Flavians to incorporate more of Germany into imperial
control. Vespasian initiated an advance and it wasn't included until the mid second century
into southern Germany. Germans today point very proudly to the survival of this limace
as it's called, limace means limit, it originally meant a highway and from highway it came to
mean the highway along the imperial boundary and then it came to mean the boundary itself.
That is the Romans pushed out from what is today mines on the mine river, a series of
block houses, signal towers, eventually a whole palestine structure that encompassed
much of southern Germany along the mine and then cut down to the upper Danube to about
where Regensburg is today or as the Romans called it, Castra Regina that is the royal
camp, a legionary base. These fortresses, well not fortresses, forts really, Castellum
and Latin meaning a little fort, were manned by auxiliary units, also by German irregular
formations that were hired to patrol it. It enclosed the vast Hercunian forest described
by Julius Caesar, today the black forest, the Schwarzfalt, included some very important
mining districts. The whole region in Latin was often known as the Agre de Cumates. Some
have seen this as a great strategic salient into Germany and we're not sure the Romans
understood it that way. What it did do is bring some very important troublesome areas
under control. This was backed up by repeated strikes into the rest of Germany. The emperor
of Domitian, very conscious of his unpopularity, he is notorious for seducing married women,
he was very ill at ease talking to senators in some ways. It was similar to the second
emperor Tiberius in his ineptness and handling the ruling classes and saw plots everywhere
by 93, the last three years of his reign, he was just a total paranoia before they got
rid of him in a major plot. But the emperor of Domitian carried out a war against the
Chati, a tribe I've mentioned before. These are the ancestors of the Hessens and actually
Chati is a Latin version of a Germanic word that eventually would evolve into Hessens.
They were seen as the most disciplined and effective of tribes. To some extent these
people were created by Roman actions. That is, Roman preemptive strikes, as you would
call it today, into the German districts forced the Chati to organize, a task that says that
other tribes go to battle, the Chati march out on campaign. That is, they have the kind
of discipline and drill they've learned from the Romans. Domitian waged a war against them,
celebrated a major triumph. His detractors said that it was all invented, was not really
a triumph in any way. All those Germans that marched in the triumph were really Gauls wearing
blonde wigs. There's a lot of, you know, Domitian never got good press on this. But
in any case, it was part of this policy of the Flavians in advancing the frontiers. Another
important frontier that was organized by the Flavians was the Euphrates. And that was a
frontier in the eastern section of Anatolia. I mentioned in an earlier lecture, this was
the entrance for the nomadic tribes of southern Russia coming over the Caucasus to enter
the provinces of Asia Minor and attack the Greek cities there. And the Euphrates frontier,
which had been revealed as without proper logistical support, without highways, without
roads, when Nero went to war with the Parthians back in 54, this frontier was now reorganized.
Eventually, three legions were stationed on the upper Euphrates. The army was reorganized
in Syria. The frontier was the frontier provinces of Galatia and Cappadocia behind this frontier
were organized along more normal administrative lines. They become developed as the economic
base to feed all of this military force on the Euphrates. A major highway was pushed
from the city of Trapezis on the Black Sea today, Trabzon, across the Pontic Alps through
a legionary base at Satala, down to the upper Euphrates to Melitene, Melatia today, which
then cut across another set of mountains, the Taurus, to the crossings at Samosata.
And from that highway, you could cross into Mesopotamia, cross the Euphrates, or go into
Syria. Anyone who's traveled this area and especially has compared it to the Rhine and
the Danube, this is awesome. The Rhine and Danube by comparison pale to the difficulty
of terrain on the Euphrates and the legionary bases that were set there. Just in one fashion,
these bases were to create the harsh conditions in northern Europe, so the Eastern legions
would be trained to the same level of proficiency. The highway construction and the fortresses
that went in there were daunting and must have intimidated the local population. Particularly
the highway from Melitene today, Melatia to Samosata, it cut across a mountain range
just to the west of this big bulge in the Euphrates. It was constructed largely by soldiers
of the 16th Flavia, a reformed Flavian legion, and the most spectacular element of it is
a bridge over 100 feet long across a torrent, the Cendresuyu today, which is a tributary
of a tributary of the Euphrates, this remarkable bridge that was put in and then repaired in
the Severin Age over a gorge. And that bridge, which is still in use today, actually you'll
find Turkish soldiers still patrolling it out there, it's a certain type of continuity
of the use of this. That bridge is just one of a number of impressive monuments to this
Flavian frontier. The legionary fortress of Santali in some ways is even more awesome,
it's up in a mountain area between the Black Sea and the upper Euphrates. And what the Flavians
created then was the base for a Roman army to move into Armenia, impose Roman hegemony
in Armenia, and if necessary, attack into either Mesopotamia, today Iraq, or farther
east in Iran, and so pressure the Parthian king to negotiate. So the Flavians built the
logistical and highway system of the Roman east, which would be absolutely essential
for Trajan's wars in 113 to 117. So in Britain, in the Rhineland, in Asia Minor, the Flavians
reorganized and expanded the frontier system of Rome. Part of this construction was parallel
to other construction going on in the Roman world. From 70 AD to 235 AD, the Romans essentially
constructed the tourist industry of the Mediterranean world today. Most of the great building programs
and surges in the Roman provinces occurred in this period, it's a period of great prosperity,
so that the military architecture to some extent parallels all the civilian architecture.
The population of the Roman Empire clearly rose, taxes rose, the provinces will become
more and more civilized, or Romanized however you want to state the term, and the provincial
elites there also expected better protection, and hence the construction of these fortifications
are in part a response to Rome's success in the provinces as well as the prosperity of
the empire, in addition to all the military considerations and the diplomatic considerations
of impressing the barbarians. And these roads, the bridge, such as the one I described near
the Euphrates, these were impressive structures, especially to all barbarians on the other
side, even to the Parthian king. And I can only think of a comment made by the historian
Cassius Dio writing in the early 3rd century AD that the reason the Romans build these
monuments is to strike terror into the hearts of our foes and inspire awe in the hearts
of our allies. And this is a deliberate Roman policy. Why construct just a minimal fortification
when you can have an impressive river bridge or a major fortress, which would not only
control the area, but awe the population as well. And so this is part of Flavian policy.
The Flavian emperors therefore achieved a great deal of success. Domitian, unfortunately,
had to face a new threat along that 1,000 mile frontier that stretched from essentially
Switzerland today all the way down to the mouths of the Danube in what is Tete Romanium.
That region had been conquered and incorporated by Augustus and especially by Augustus' steps
on Tiberius. And as I noted earlier, those Balkan provinces, regions of Pannonia today
Hungary, Dalmatia, Moisia, these would be areas of the former Yugoslavia and Bulgaria today.
These regions were important for the strategic highways that linked Italy to the Greek world.
They were the key highway in moving military forces across the Roman Empire. They had also
become by the Flavian age very important for the mining activities, the mineral wealth,
the great gold rushes in Dalmatia and the reign of Nero, incipient cities were growing
up around the legionary bases and furthermore increasingly more and more auxiliary soldiers
and later legionaries were being recruited from the Danubian or Balkan provinces. An indication
of the importance of these provinces can easily be measured in the way military force was
shifted between the 1st and 2nd century AD. By the time, say, take 70 AD, the time of
the end of the rebellion and 125 AD, between 70 and 125 AD the whole focus of Roman military
power shifted to the Danube in the east and that would be a very important shift in the
locus of imperial power thereafter. The Rhine garrison, previously eight legions, was reduced
to four. Part of this was the success of the Flavian reorganization and that drive into Germany.
The British garrison was reduced from four to three legions. Spain was no longer garrisoned at
all. One point had three, then one. No legionary forces required the peninsula of Spain. On the
other hand, the garrison in the Danube rose to 9, 11 and finally 13 legions by 165. By 125 it was
up to about 11 legions. And in the east, ultimately some 10 legions were stationed on the Euphrates
and Syria, some military force in Egypt as well. So the locus of imperial power and strength moved
to the Euphrates and the Danube. Germany, Britain could be handled by a much smaller garrison.
Now part of that was a response to the fact that the Northwest had been so successfully
pacified. But the other problem was the emergence of a new barbarian threat. And as I mentioned,
this threat, these people, the Dacians posed a threat that eventually would be handled by
conquest. Now in 85 AD, there was a fellow, the king by the name of Decebalus, came to the throne
of the Dacians. And this was a race of people, a group of tribes, related to the people living
under the Roman control in the Balkans. They're often called a Thracian or a Getic Thracian
population. They spoke a language related to the languages spoken in the Balkans. The Dacians,
as an ethnic group, probably date from as early as the fifth century BC. Since the second century
BC, these people were in close association with the Hellenistic world. They controlled the Carpathian
mountain range. And that is the great range that today bisects Romania. Some of them were
agriculturalists dwelling on the great Transylvanian plain, exploiting the arable land. And others
were miners and the Carpathians. They also lived in the regions of Moldavia and Wallatia today,
which would be Eastern Romania. And they had far-flung trade connections among the Iranian nomads
in Eastern Europe. They were also in close contact with Celtic and Germanic peoples.
As a group, they had a conscious identity, at least since the second century BC,
when they had learned to exploit their iron and especially their gold mines and export these
commodities into the Greek world and import silver and all the commodities of the Mediterranean world.
From that trade, which came through the river systems of the Balkans or from the Greek cities on
the Black Sea, the Dacians increasingly moved towards an urban-based culture on their own.
By the time the Romans show up in Trajan's reign in 101 AD, when the wars opened,
the Dacians had been living in towns for a number of generations. They had learned to use coins from
the Mediterranean world and actually were striking their own versions of coins based on Roman prototypes.
They had acquired a great deal of knowledge and technology from the classical world,
which they married with their own traditions to create some really spectacular pieces of art,
pottery ware, ceramics, no doubt textiles. Above all, by certainly the end of the first century BC,
the Dacians were already prized as warriors. Some of them served as mercenaries in the armies of
the Roman Civil War. At one point, Julius Caesar contemplated a war against the Dacians, especially
against a king called Buribbistos, who around 60 BC welded the Dacian towns and populations
into a confederation and raided into Thrace, which is today Bulgaria, the Roman province of Thrace,
raided into the regions of Moisia and Dalmatia, and ultimately threatened Macedonia, that is
the Greek land, the Aegean world. Caesar thought that he could just mop up the Dacians en route
to fight the Parthians. This was his grand plan in 44 that got cut short, quite literally, at the
Ides of March when he was knifed by all those irate senators. This Dacian confederation broke up
soon afterwards with the death of the king. On the other hand, the Roman conquest of the Balkans,
and this is still a subject that's under consideration as these lands are now again open to
intensive archaeology and interpretation, especially region Hungary, Romania, and Bulgaria.
The Roman conquest and development of the Balkan provinces probably altered the patterns of trade
and immigration between the Dacian populations on one side of the Danube and their kinsmen and
neighbors on the other side. That is, the Romans again, as they did in Germany, moved in and started
to set up a political boundary along the middle and lower Danube, which ran through a line of
communication and cut two zones that in many ways were culturally related. That is, the river was
really more of a means of transportation tying together an area rather than a clear political
boundary. The Romans understood this. The Romans didn't attempt to build a Maginot line along the
Danube to cut out the Dacians. Far from it, trade continued, apparently on a diminished level,
because the fines are not as rich from the first century AD as they were earlier. That is, the
fines of Mediterranean goods in Dacia were not in the same order. There were controlled migrations.
One I read earlier of the governor Pláotius Silvanus, who's related to the first governor
in Britain, Alius Silvanus, Alius Pláotius. He brought in numerous Dacians and other people.
He claims 100,000 of them settled them in the provinces. That is, you could take select barbarians
from the Dacians, move them in, and settle them to relieve population pressure. The Romans always
saw this as a matter of regulation. What the Romans didn't expect, that by 85 AD, the Dacians again
coalesced around this very, very powerful King Decebelus and began to pose a military threat
on the Danube River. Again, this is a case just as the Chati on a much wider scale,
the Romans creating their rival. The Dacians, through trade and contact, had learned to equip
themselves more effectively. They made this really nasty, sickle-looking sword that you see
on Trajan's column. They were able to equip themselves with body armor and they also,
because they had such great mineral wet, the gold mines of Dacia were already legendary,
they were able to hire large numbers of Germans and Sirmation Nomads
to fight in the ranks of their army. Decebelus attacked the Roman frontiers and gained some
significant victories. The initial attacks were treated as operations that could be handled
by a single legion. The governors on the spot, on three occasions, tried to repel the invaders and
carry out a preemptive strike, the type of strikes that were used in Germany. They didn't work.
At least two different legions got annihilated. One was the second of Eutricks, the other was
the 21st Rappachs. In the second catastrophe, the Victorian prefect Cornelius Fuscus himself
was killed, either in 87 or 88. It was an embarrassing defeat. The regime was compromised
and the Dacians raided Roman territory and Demetian discovered that these were not just
tribes. These were disciplined forces led by a very effective king. The success of the Dacian
attacks on the middle and lower Danube, then inside it German and Iranian nomads, Iranian nomads in
the German, notably the Quodian Marco Moni, the people living in Bohemia today, to attack along
the upper Danube. Demetian found the later years of his reign desperately fighting against these
different barbarian incursions. He eventually came to terms with Decebelus in 90, we think around
92 AD. The date's a little uncertain. Our count is not as good as it could be. He bought a piece
from Decebelus by agreeing to pay a subsidy by lending Decebelus Roman engineers and technical
support, and this was probably very important in fortifying Dacian towns that Trajan later had
to capture, and making Decebelus a friend and ally of Rome. That is, this king for the first time
imposed, forced the Romans or forced a Roman emperor to make concessions that no Roman emperor had
previously made. The problems in Demetian's reign, he had a number of reasons why there was strong
senatorial objection, but this treaty in particular was looked upon as disgraceful, and was one of
the reasons why Demetian was undermined and eventually assassinated by a senatorial clique.
It enabled Decebelus to consolidate his position in Dacia, and he learned that by challenging Rome,
concessions could be gained, victories could be gained. Two Roman legions had been destroyed,
two eagles graced his capital, and so Decebelus' intention was not to stop but to continue to
press the advantage, and that meant that the Romans would have to come to terms with this new power,
which to a large extent was their own creation. I mean, their own aggression had
caused the Dacians to consolidate, and for the Romans, that brought forth the greatest of
their emperors, Trajan, the best of emperors, optimus prinkeps, to carry out the first significant
conquest since the operations in Britain, and that will be the subject of the next lecture.
Thank you.
