Lecture 24, Trajan, the Dacians and the Parthians
In this lecture I plan to conclude the Wars of Conquest by Imperial Rome against her assorted
barbarian foes. And this lecture will concentrate particularly on the career of the Emperor
Trajan who ruled from 98 to 117 AD, his full name in Latin is Marcus Ulpius Trajanus. He
was the son and namesake of a very, very famous senator who came from Italica, that is in
Baitica in southern Spain, and his father, the elder Marcus Ulpius Trajanus, had distinguished
himself as a cavalry officer in the Jewish Wars, had been elected to the Senate that
is added to the Roman Senate. And it's very fitting in a way that Trajan should be the
first provincial or man of provincial origins to become emperor. He came from Spain, the
oldest of the great provinces, one in the Republic, and he came from a city that claimed
to have been found by Scipio-Africanus, the conqueror of Hannibal. For our purposes Trajan
concluded Roman expansion. With his death in 117 AD, Roman frontiers had attained their
maximum limit, and in fact his conquests beyond the Euphrates were relinquished by his adoptive
son and heir, the Emperor Hadrian, who polled Roman forces out of Mesopotamia and out of
Armenia and returned to the frontier of the upper Euphrates in the Syrian desert, that
is the frontier that had been created by the Flavian Emperors. In addition, these wars
of expansion by Trajan, which are often censured by modern historians as expensive, unnecessary,
some even see it as an atavistic throwback to the imperialism of the Republic, these
wars were immensely popular among the Romans themselves. And furthermore, the wars paid,
certainly the Dacian War paid. By the reports from the literary sources, we get numbers
such as 50,000 Dacian captives were taken, 1.5 billion denarii, most of it in the form
of gold, bullion and speci rather than actual coin. The denarius is the basic Roman silver
coin issued in payrolls, and a Roman legionary would receive in Trajan's day a 300 of them
as an annual pay, so 1.5 billion denarii worth of hard currency was captured. The victories
over the Dacians, which were two wars, wage in 101, 102, and then again in 105, 106, were
celebrated by 123 days of Thanksgiving. 10,000 pairs of gladiators were matched against each
other and something like 13,000 animals were destroyed in the Colosseum in the Great Flavian
Amphitheater in Rome in celebration of the victories. Clearly, there was a lot of money
because the Dacian Wars funded an enormous building program in Rome and in Italy. Trajan
was followed by the so-called adoptive emperors or the later emperors of the five good emperors.
He had been adopted by an elderly senator, Nerva, who had been selected to succeed the
mission after he was assassinated. So Nerva was followed by Trajan, who was then followed
by his relatives, Hadrian, Antoninus Pius, and Marcus Aurelius. The five emperors of
the 2nd century AD were often seen as the apex of Roman power and the Roman peace. That
dynasty was made by imperialism, just as Augustus had funded the great Julio-Claudian dynasty
by successful conquests over the foreign barbarians. So it's easy to underestimate the importance
and impact of these wars on imperial Rome. Trajan, as we shall see, also set the strategy
for defeating the Parthian foe in the east. And that strategy was worked out in defeating
the Dacians. That remarkable people, the very creative people of what is now Romania, Trajan
conquered Dacia through a strategy of double-envelopment that was then later applied against the Parthian
king. Well, let's first look at Trajan's Dacian wars, and then his Parthian wars, and
then conclude with the implications of these wars for later Rome. Trajan inherited a major
problem of dealing with the Dacians from Domitian. As I mentioned in the past lecture, Domitian
had in effect compromised imperial defense, or certainly was perceived by the Roman political
elite as compromising imperial defense along the lower and middle Danube. And this was
intolerable. That led to the massing of large numbers of forces on the Danube frontier and
the development of the highways in the Balkan provinces. And in 101 AD, Trajan decided to
humble Decebalus, or the king of the Dacians. He massed over 100,000 men. There were nine
legions from the immediate area, but he took detachments from all over the empire, numerous
auxiliary units, and these forces were to operate in two columns, one coming from the
west and one coming from the south. The southern column was actually commanded by the emperor
Trajan himself. There was a very impressive bridge built across the Danube, a bridge of
ships, by his architect Apollodotus of Damascus, who was the court architect of Trajan, probably
responsible for Trajan's column, as well as all the magnificent buildings later erected
in Rome. The objective of this war was to bring the Dacians to the negotiating table.
In 101, the two columns converged in western Dacia, ravaging the agricultural heartland
of the Dacian kingdom and threatening to advance against the Dacian capital, Samar Zegathusa,
which is in Transylvania today. The Roman army retired, wintered on the Roman side,
and then returned in the next year, 102, and this time the southern column didn't come
directly across into western Dacia, but crossed farther down the Danube and came into Dacia
from the east, and took Decebalus completely by surprise strategically. He negotiated,
he surrendered, and the terms of these surrender probably included the return of all those
Roman engineers and captives, any skilled people who knew how to make metals or even
potters who could regulate temperature, air go, they could make weapons, metal weapons.
These people were to be returned to all Roman deserters. There was an indemnity find on
the Dacians. They were expected to pay for the cost of the war, and in effect the king
of the Dacians became a friend and client of Rome. The Roman forces pulled out south
of the Danube once again. Now Decebalus was not really defeated. He had been humbled,
and as soon as the Roman forces withdrew, he reopened the war. At least the Roman sources
claimed this, and that caused Trajan to react promptly, and it is a testimony to Trajan's
logistical organization that within a matter of two years, he assembled another comparable
force of 100,000 men, employed a similar strategy, and this time the party was on. The two columns
converged on the Dacian capital in 105, stormed into it and sacked it. The later Roman colony
built on, was actually built some 23 miles away from the original Dacian capital as the
new center of the Dacian province. Part of that was assigned to show that Rome had humbled
the old power. Decebalus eventually committed suicide, and by 106 resistance had collapsed,
and Trajan decided to organize the former kingdom into a province. Just as Julius Caesar
unwittingly became the father of French civilization, Trajan sowed for the Romanians, because the
nature of the Roman conquest in Dacia led to a very rapid Romanization. There were large
numbers of captives, at least 50,000 reported in the Second War. There were numerous Dacians
who killed themselves in mass suicides rather than to fall into Roman hands. There were
all the casualties resulting from war, many more from attrition, from starvation, from
disease that accompanied war, than the actual fighting itself. This war was hailed as a
great triumph. Dacian, Trajan himself is recorded to append a commentary, or commentaries, commentary
in Latin, that is in the in imitation of Julius Caesar. Just as Caesar had recorded the Gaelic
war, so Trajan recorded the Dacian wars, and his victory was no less spectacular in terms
of speed and area involved in these campaigns. Unfortunately, this work doesn't survive.
We have very fragmentary literary tradition on it. What we do have is a remarkable artistic
work that gives us a window into, well, at least official attitudes towards barbarians
in the high empire, now that this last great conquest has been made. And this is Trajan's
column, which today stands in Rome. It was the centerpiece of the Forum of Trajan, an
enormous complex completed in 113 AD from the prophets of the war. It's still there,
it stands 100 Roman feet high. Today is a statue of St. Peter, but originally it was
Trajan's statue that was at the top. It's on a square cube in which the ashes of Trajan
and his wife Plotina were later deposited in a golden urn, which no longer survives.
The column is a remarkable marble column constructed of 17 marble drums, and then faced with the
best marble possible, some 400 slabs, that goes in a spiral, 23 spirals to the top to
that 100 foot top, or 100 Roman feet top. Roman foot slightly less than an English foot.
It's like 97, 98 feet English style. And these spirals have reliefs, which are about
three feet wide, covering the entire column that narrate the war in pictures. The only
thing missing are captions. In a Roman relief arc, I always think is a beautifully done
comic strip art in three dimensions. There are some 2,500 figures that survive and significantly
enough, the only Romans shown, no Romans are shown killed, and there are two of them
shown injured who are being attended to by Roman physicians. It is the most detailed record
we have in pictures of the Roman army on campaign, building fortresses. The bridge ships across
the Danube is depicted. These reliefs were also inspired directly, in my opinion, the
coin images found on the reverses of Trajan's coins and medallions, medallions handed out
as gifts of state. For instance, the bridge ships appears not only on the reef, but it's
also very common on the coins of Trajan celebrating the war. The river god Danube is depicted
in his standard guise. There are scenes of official rituals. There are scenes of the
Dacians in great detail, the storming of Walt's cities, the taking of prisoners. And the column
about midway up has a figure of victory which marks the conclusion of the first Dacian war
and then picks up with the second Dacian war to its conclusion. It's important for a variety
of reasons. The emperor of Trajan appears as a Serene Augustus directing the armies
of Rome with the same kind of calm and resolve that would come through with Julius Caesar
in his commentaries. He's shown often according clemency, clementia, mercy. The barbarian
foe is treated with a certain amount of sympathy. This is true even on the imperial coins. The
Dacian women and children have to endure slavery. There is nobility in their resistance to
Rome in the way they prefer suicide to capture. There are also little incidents in the column
that are reported in the literary traditions that apparently go back to Trajan's original
commentary including a Roman auxiliary soldier, a cavalryman who finds a enormous mushroom
and in great excitement brings it to the emperor Trajan to show it to him and then
tumbles off his horse. That's there as well. And the narrative really is a beautiful case
of Roman naturalistic art and the use of sculpture to decorate a major monument. It's a quintessential
Roman building. It is a great monumental trophy to the victory and yet at the same time the
barbarians are accorded a certain amount of respect as the defeated foe. And some have
gone so far as to argue that the column is really in many ways the epitody of the confidence
and success of the high empire. And that is fitting for Trajan. One of the rare emperors
who came to the throne very popular when he was adopted by Nerva. He was then the governor
of Lower Germany, I'm sorry Upper Germany when he received the news and was received
with great popularity and by his death was even more popular and was remembered affectionately
as the best of emperors and later Christian writers always associated Trajan with Augustus
as the two greatest pagan emperors in their classical past. Well the victory in Dacia allowed
Trajan to protect the logistics and strategy necessary to take on the Parthian king. And
I mentioned that part of Trajan's success depended on all of those Flavian measures.
The Flavians had reorganized the upper Euphrates frontier. Trajan himself contributed to the
strengthening of the eastern frontier. He is responsible for the annexation of the Roman
province of Arabia which would today be the kingdom of Jordan and large sections of eastern
Syria. That is he brought these client Arab tribes and they are speaking Arabian dialect
into the Roman Empire and commenced the organization of a desert frontier. But this desert frontier
for a very long time was probably not very significant. It was regarded as a low priority.
In fact one later emperor, an emperor called Philip the Arab, Philip I, is reputed to have
considered importing more lions into the Syrian desert to keep the raiders down. He didn't
think it worthwhile posting auxiliary units. It's an apocryphal story but it goes to show
that it was a low priority. The real effort was on the Euphrates, in Armenia, in Mesopotamia
against the Arsacid king of Parthia. Now Trajan could have settled with the Parthian
king pretty much along the same lines that Augustus and Nero did, that is by a diplomatic
agreement. Sometime in either 112 or 113 the then reigning Parthian king, Oroces put his
brother on the throne of Armenia. Parthian kings always do this. They dump a relative
on the Armenian nobility to keep him out of Parthia so he's not revolting against the
great king himself. Without any reference to Rome, hoped to increase Parthian diplomatic
leverage in the strategic area and Trajan decided to wage war. He moved east with large
numbers of forces. As I noted the lesson learned from the war waged by Nero was that you do
not wage an eastern war by proxy. The emperor goes on campaign himself. The Parthian envoys
according to one account showed up in Athens in 113 and were ready to give in to all of
Trajan's demands. Anything Trajan would demand. They had a blank check. Trajan, no way. The
party is on. We are going to deal with Parthia just as we dealt with the Dacians. Trajan
was very impatient. He gave Decebelus his first choice, a chance and then he blew it. He
was not going to accord a first chance to the Parthian king. By 114 Roman armies are
on the Euphrates. Trajan is at Satala. He overruns Armenia within a year. The next year
two huge Roman columns march down into Mesopotamia, one following the Tigris, the other the Euphrates.
They converge on the Parthian capital of Ctesiphon which is in the great Babylonian flood plain.
It's an ancient Greek city originally founded by the Seleucid kings. The city is stormed,
captured, sacked. Roman armies move down to the Persian Gulf. The Parthian kingdom goes
into civil war. Trajan at one point is thought to have seen himself. He's in his 50s now
as possibly a new Alexander the Great. He could march to India. There were all these
fabulous tales. But the reports coming back from the forces in the east to the Senate
in Rome must have been spectacular. Title after title was voted to Trajan. He was conqueror
of the Parthians, Parthicus, conqueror of the Arabs, Arapicus, title of Arminicus. Imperial
coinage and relief, well the relief work doesn't survive but I'm sure was commissioned to celebrate
the news of this victory and yet it resulted in no permanent annexations. Trajan was forced
to pull back in part because of rebellions among the Jewish populations in Mesopotamia
and Serenica. The Parthians regrouped and attacked in Dharminia and on August 4th, 117
A.D. Trajan unexpectedly died of a fever in southern Asia Minor and Hadrian, his successor,
well he was always intended to be the successor. But Hadrian we think might have actually arrived
at the emperor's tent after the emperor had passed away and the emperor's platina, Trajan's
wife and she had always seen Hadrian as Trajan's favorite closest male relative. He was married
to a relative of Trajan, the emperor Sabina. Hadrian was proclaimed emperor and many in
Rome thought that Trajan had never gone the full route and adopted officially Hadrian
that this was all arranged after the emperor was deceased. There was opposition in the
officer corps, Hadrian had to carry out some executions, he had to secure his constitutional
position and Hadrian had no taste for this eastern war and he called a halt. He negotiated
with the Parthian king the withdrawal of Roman forces back to their positions on the Euphrates.
Hadrian ever after had to live that down among the Roman ruling classes, he did that by constantly
inspecting the frontiers carrying out lots of building activities such as the Hadrian's
wall and while to many a modern scholar he has been hailed as a man who understood the
Roman Empire was overextended, that was not the way he was greeted by the Roman literary
tradition. He has actually looked upon with a great deal of suspicion that these withdrawals
were for his own reasons. In any case, the successes of Trajan over the Parthians and
over the Dacians gave later Roman emperors the means to a winning strategy over the eastern
foe, at least for the next up until about 230 AD for when the situation changes with
the arrival of the Persians. There are several later Parthian wars. There is one in 166, when
the emperor Marcus Aurelius sends his colleague Lucius Varys, who is a very weak emperor
married to Marcus Aurelius' daughter. The real operation is run by a very talented general
called Avidius of Syrian background, who led the armies to Saccates upon an effect.
Avidius Cassius, the commander, follows the same strategy in logistics that Trajan did.
There is another war waged by the emperor Septimius Severus, two Parthian wars. The second
one in 198-200 AD. Again, the same strategy moved down into Mesopotamia, sacked the capitals,
forced the Parthian to the negotiating table. In the case of Septimius Severus, he went
so far as to mass his forces outside of Ctesiphon and wait for the very day, in fact the very
hour, from when Trajan sacked the city and then ordered his men over the top to sack
it, just to rub it into the Parthian king that the Romans could do what they want on
the eastern frontier. Trajan had come up with the winning military-legistical combination.
Septimius Severus also organized a province in what is now Northern Iraq, capturing important
cities, constructing highways and bases. That fortification of Upper Mesopotamia, which
was not in terms of territory very large, but strategically gave the Romans the basis
to attack the Parthian political heartland ever after. It also enabled the Romans to
awe the Armenian king into submission. So Trajan, in many ways, rectified the situation
in the east. If Augustus had come up with the diplomatic solution that had lasted for
a number of generations, Trajan now came up with the military solution that ensured Roman
primacy in the east. There was no foe in the east that could challenge Rome in any serious
way until the arrival of the Persians in the 220s and 230s AD. And then the rules would
change, and the change would be very serious for Rome indeed. On the other hand, the Northern
frontiers were not as quiescent. And the last of the five good emperors, Marcus Aurelius,
who had to wage a Parthian war of his own, also faced the first serious Germanic incursions
into the empire since, well, since those Germans surged over in the rebellion of 70 AD, a hundred
years earlier. Marcus Aurelius, who ruled from 161 to 180, was probably the noblest man ever
to sit on the throne of Rome. By inclination, he was a stoic philosopher in his upbringing.
And he wrote for us a remarkable count called the Meditations in Greek, in which he upholds
Roman traditions and values. He was devoted to his wife, Faustina II, who accompanied him
on all these campaigns. And for those familiar with Hollywood's version of the Roman world,
that relatively recent film Gladiator actually opens with one of the final campaigns of Marcus
Aurelius in his German Wars. And it is a very good recreation. In fact, the best I've seen
in film production of a Roman battle on the frontier, which is done in that production.
Someone actually paid attention to the columns and the literary sources when they did the
costuming. The political understanding of the Roman Empire is another matter in that film.
In any case, Marcus Aurelius had waged a Parthian war with great success. The unfortunate aspect
about Marcus Aurelius' wars is that these frontier wars no longer brought in the great
profits and slaves that previous expansion had done. The Parthian war brought a plague
back. We're not sure how damaging the plague was. It's generally been overrated in the
literary tradition that comes down to us, especially from the physician Galen. He gives
us the symptoms. It did, however, kill members of the army. One argument is that maybe 15%
of the number of men in the army were killed by that plague that ravaged the empire from
about 166 to 169. It did not, by any means, lean to a demographic collapse, but it was
certainly not appreciated that all these veterans had been carried off. Also, this Parthian war
and then almost immediately, within a year of the victory over Parthia, a war against
German invaders into the Balkans had to be paid for by debasing the Kurds. And it was
a technique the Romans had used in the past. On a short-term notice, when they needed lots
of extra cash, the Romans would debase their silver coin. This was the principle coin handed
out in military payrolls to contractors. So the idea is you take a completely pure silver
coin, 95% pure, issue it at 80% pure. You add in copper as an alloy, and therefore you
take your taxes in the older pure coins and pay them out in the more debased money, and
that will allow you to meet your payrolls. The understanding always was that once the
crisis has been surmounted, you would restore the currency. And without getting into too
much details, the last 200 years of Roman monetary history since Augustus had been debasements
with restorations, and that's when the imperial government came into these shortfalls. There
was no borrowing on the future. There were no senses of self-liquidating bonds or debts,
or the type of banking you would have had in 17th and 18th century Britain to fund these
types of wars. The money had to be paid up front, and if it wasn't there, you'd debased.
And the Parthian and then the German wars of Marcus Aurelius led to these rapid debasements
of the currency. There's even reports at one point that the very austere Marcus Aurelius
was auctioning off his imperial furniture in order to make his bills, and telling his
soldiers to not take their pay. They were paid four times a year to extend the payment
schedule. The soldiers don't like this. The soldiers want to be paid immediately.
Well, what caused these invasions of Germans? We're not sure. Some have tried to see this
as the beginning of the great folk migrations that brought down the Roman Empire. It seems
to be much more local in nature. They might have been tribes moving up the Oder Valley
into Bohemia. Some of them are called Longobardi, the possible ancestors of the later Lombards.
They may have been coming in from the Baltic area. These groups poured over. The reports
seem to indicate they're people on the move. They're migrating. And in 167 to 170, these
tribes moved into the Balkan possessions. Some of them ended up in Italy, around the
city of Aquila, others plundered into Greece. The tribes already settled along the Danube
in long association with Rome, the Quati of the Marcomane, who collectively were known
as the Suevich peoples. They too apparently started to raid Roman territory. There's also
evidence that Marcus Aurelius had been equipping legions, building the highways, and had intended
to carry out maybe a punitive strike against these German tribes. So it may have been just
a matter of timing. That is, the Germans struck first. Marcus Aurelius was tied down with
his Parthian War, the problems of plague and finances. What is clear is that by 171 A.D.,
Marcus Aurelius took the offensive and for nine years waged a long-term war north of
the Danube. And when he died in 180 A.D., the Romans were ready to incorporate these regions
into the Roman Empire, just as Trajan had done. Unfortunately, as with Trajan, Marcus
Aurelius' son, the Emperor Commodus, he had a mental breakdown and thought he was Hercules
189. He was another one of these rather spoiled, demented rulers. He called off the war and
had more important things to do with fighting as Hercules or a Gladiator in the arena. So
a change of rule or cause a change of policy yet again. But the wars did secure those northern
frontiers. There was no serious Roman threat again, a barbarian threat again from northern
Europe until the 240s, when the Romans were having difficulty on their eastern frontier.
The wars of Marcus Aurelius, the details of those German wars, are not so important as
perhaps the official perceptions. And this can be documented in a number of different
types of sources that come down to us, particularly in relief sculpture and coins. Marcus Aurelius
too commissioned a great column to celebrate his German wars. It's not as clear the chronology
of this column as it is on Trajan's column. It still stands in Rome. It was 100 Roman
feet high. It is a marble column with similar types of reliefs. It stood near a temple of
Marcus Aurelius today, and it's now on that great Corso that was built by Mussolini that
you would see. It's in the center of a modern square in Rome today. However, the time that
the tone of the reliefs is extremely different from that of Trajan's column. For one, the
style is far more wooden or stylized than the very naturalistic figures you see on Trajan's
column. And furthermore, the barbarians are not accorded either mercy or sympathy in their
treatment. The reliefs show the barbarians as dreaded foes. They are shown being beheaded,
executed for daring to attack the Roman world. And their whole attack is called in the Roman
literary tradition a conspiracy. And above all, the reliefs stress the importance of
divine intervention and help in beating back these opponents of civilization. And that
comes through in the literary reports. There are reports of two miracles. The most famous
one is when Marcus Aurelius' wizard magician fellow, a guy from Egypt, Arnufis summons
up the Egyptian god Hermes or Toth in Egypt and brings a great storm into the eyes of
the Quati and allows the Romans to rally and win the battle. That is depicted on the relief
with this weird, in menacing looking storm god in what is known as the battle of the
rain miracle, casting down the barbarians and rallying the Romans. The perceptions are
perhaps more important than the triumph because it's these perceptions at the end of the second
century A.D. which will become the official images henceforth given out by the imperial
government about these barbarians along the frontiers.
