Lecture 26, Commerce Beyond the Imperial Frontiers
In this lecture, I want to continue the discussion of economic and social change brought on by
the Imperial Rome between the 1st and 3rd centuries AD, but with a focus on the impact
on the barbarian peoples who are living on the other side of the Roman frontier.
This is a very important issue because the contact between Rome and barbarians was primarily
through trade, through exchange of goods, also people, you have to think of the slave
trade, the immigration, the military recruitment that went on among barbarians.
This was far more common than the wars and the fighting that I've discussed in some of
the earlier lectures as Rome was expanding, that especially from the, well from the early
2nd century AD, there was far more contact between Rome and barbarians through the avenues
of trade rather than through warfare, so that the exchanges were on a far less intensive
level than Romans trying to slay barbarians or the opposite.
This question of trade and its role in the Roman economy is one that now engages many
economic historians of the Roman world, and I guess as a warning, I should note that I
do stand on one side of the issue, and so this lecture will reflect my own research
and my own proclivities on this issue.
Therefore there are three issues we want to look at in this particular lecture, and one
is the whole role of trade in the Roman economy, and that includes the local and regional
trade within the Roman world, and I've discussed that at some length in the last lecture, and
also the long distance trade that crossed the Roman political frontiers to the barbarian
lands in the north and farther east, and in understanding the role of trade and its importance
in reshaping social institutions and even creating identities among the barbarian peoples,
it's important to then look at the actual trade itself as we can understand it from
literary sources and archaeology, coin finds with the northern barbarians who've been
such a large part of this course, and then quickly look at the trade to the east and
to the south across the Sahara and in the Indian Ocean in the caravan, routes to the
east to get some idea of how trade was affecting these zones as well.
Now the imperial piece of Rome transformed not necessarily the avenues of trade, but certainly
the volume of goods and the scale of trade on all frontiers, and it's an aspect of Roman
economic life that has often puzzled historians looking at this question, particularly earlier
in the 20th century, and that is the Romans themselves are not responsible for any kind
of major breakthroughs in the manufacturing economic area.
You cannot look to Rome for innovation, you often find these innovations go back to Greek
originals or in some instances to the pre-Roman peoples, I mentioned for instance that carts
and harnessing equipment that the Romans used seems largely to be drawn from the Celtic
peoples of central Europe who had become expert in this area, Latin loan words are all taken
from Celtic to describe carts and harnesses and the like, but what is important about
the Romans is the scale in which better carts and harnessing iron tools or management of
land were made available, and so that you shouldn't be looking at innovation so much
as the imperial piece that imposes predictability, the imposition of imperial law which gives
you a common standard for carrying out transactions within the empire, a common currency, a measure
of unit, all of these that create the social and legal conditions that facilitate trade.
In addition, those great cities I discussed in the last lecture were not just consumers
and parasites on the countryside, they were markets, and those markets stimulated trade
not only within the empire, but also beyond the empire into the barbarian lands, and
they stimulated a lot of important trade contacts that will persist through the whole of the
Roman period. These trade contacts will be disrupted in the fighting of the third century
AD, but what is remarkable and can be demonstrated now with ever more sophisticated ways of studying
archaeology and coin hordes is that once imperial stability is reimposed in the fourth
century AD, that these trade routes resume into the fourth, fifth, and really into the
middle ages, well into the eighth, ninth centuries, these routes are still being followed.
Now, it should be noted that the Romans did contribute in one way, and some economic historians,
and I tend to side with this position of the argument, that the Romans literally carried out
a revolution in transportation, that they made available on a large scale all these carts and
harnessing of which I spoke, that they put in all weather roads to be sure for military purposes
or for supplying the army, but these roads then became arteries of communication,
they put in bridges, canal systems, river transport was developed to about a sophisticated level
and an extent as would be seen, and at least as we can see in northern Europe,
as you'd have in the 17th and 18th centuries, that is before the advent of railways.
So, shipbuilding, another area where the Romans excelled, the number of ships that could be
constructed in what is often called the shell construction, these are very finely built ships,
labor intensive, ships of this sort could be built and last for 100 or 200 years,
they were very expensive, but once the capital investment was made, those ships could be used,
and given the imperial peace, you just keep adding to the capital worth of all these
sea and even ocean going ships, as we'll see in the Eastern trade.
There were also a depth to the newer techniques, the so-called skeleton technique,
pioneered by Celtic and Germanic peoples, which would lead to a revolution in shipbuilding
in the early Middle Ages, these are ships where you essentially build the ribs
first and then you slap on the boards and you do a lot of caulking, it's a faster method of
construction and leads to a different style of shipbuilding.
So, the Romans had both the reasons to engage in this long-distance trade and the means to
carry it out on a hitherto unknown scale. In the middle of the first century AD, trade between
the Romans and the Germanic tribes increased considerably, and when I say the Germans or
Germania, the Roman sense, this involves not only what is today western Germany, Germany,
east of the Rhine, north of the Danube, but also Scandinavia, the lands around the Baltic and
eastern Europe, and in addition, somewhere in eastern Europe, Germania fades out and the
Sarmatians, the Iranian nomads, come in. All of these zones, both the primarily
Germanic and the Iranian nomadic areas, all of these zones came into closer economic contact
with the Romans. Much of the trade was being carried out not by Romans themselves, but by
provincial merchants. These would be men of Celtic origin, especially in the Rhine land,
we have a number of inscriptions. The city of Treviri, which I spoke of earlier, the modern
city of Treer, was a center not only for producing wine for the Roman army, but merchants from that
city went down the Rhine into the North Sea and followed traditional routes into the Baltic,
and Treer was also prospering on the increased trade going on with the Germanic world.
The British towns, once Roman Britain was brought under control and secured by the
end of the first century AD, merchants from the British town were also following their Gaelic
counterparts into the North Sea and the Baltic. They were in part following traditional Celtic
routes. There had been trade in the Celtic age. The finds in Scandinavia, that very important
period of early Germanic civilization, show large numbers of Celtic goods. The Gundistrup
cauldron is the most famous found in Denmark. It's a beautiful Celtic cauldron used for
religious purposes, which was clearly made in a Gaelic workshop and ended up in a find in Denmark.
And the Roman historians and the historian Tastus, the geographers who are mostly Greeks,
such as Strabo, can give us remarkably detailed information on the tribes dwelling in Newtland,
in the Danish islands, and in southern Sweden, this area which is vaguely now being called
Skania, from which we get the name Scandinavia. There are also important river routes. Again,
they were pioneered by the Roman army in its attempt to conquer Germany after 16 BC.
These were the routes leading up the Lippa and the mine into western Germany,
and then picking up the river's Vessa or Elba leading into the North Sea. There was an important
route starting at Cernonton. That was the Roman legionary camp just to the east of Vienna today
on the Danube. This is an ancient, it's so-called amber route. It followed the Elba,
could cut over to the Vistula or Odor, the eastern rivers, which are now largely in Poland,
and would take you into the Baltic zone. Those routes had been exploited since probably the
late Bronze Age, in which amber was a highly prized in the Mediterranean world as virtually a gem
it was used in jewelry. Those routes go back to much earlier patterns of trade, but now the level
of trade increased substantially. Cernonton became a major market town as well as a legionary base
in the transshipment of goods that went across southern Germany into the Baltic,
and there are reports already from the 1st century AD of Roman equestrians. Those are men
of the imperial aristocracy just below the senatorial rank of equestrians financing trips up
there or going themselves and making small fortunes on the amber trade and other products that were
being brought in. Farther east, especially along the shores of the Black Sea, the northern shores,
you have the city of Olbia, an ancient Greek colony which is at the mouth of the Bug River,
and you have Pentecapium, which is the principal Greek city on the Crimean shore. These cities
had long contacts with the peoples of the steppes, and you can follow routes from the Neestor or the
Bug, these are the rivers flowing into the northwest of the Black Sea, to the Vistula,
and therefore connect the Black Sea to the Baltic. So there were trade routes coming that way,
and these cross zones occupied by the nomadic peoples, the Sarmatians,
Roxalini, the various Iranian-speaking nomads, and the trade enriched and transformed their
societies as well. Well, all these trade routes, which now became extremely important and developed
by provincials along those vital frontier provinces whose ancestors had long connections
with the lands and barbarians on the other side of now the imperial frontier, these trade routes,
well, what went across the frontiers and how did they change these societies?
We have two different sources. One is archaeology and the other the literary reports, and both of
them give us an incomplete record of the exchange of goods. We have nothing like a ledger of the
custom duties the Roman government collected, although we know they collected a lot of custom
duties on this stuff. So we're really dealing with qualitative evidence, and what we can give
is an impression of the extent and range of this trade. To a large extent, Scandinavia and
Germania were exporting very important raw materials. Timber, amber, iron ore, flax, honey,
walrus ivory, all sorts of furs. They become the rage for the privileged elite classes in the
Roman world. Many of the bulk products are also needed for the developing provincial
cities along that frontier zone. Another important commodity is human cargo, and that is slaves,
laborers, recruits for the Roman army. There is probably a very extensive movement of people
out of the barbarian lands into the Roman Empire, and probably the main source of slaves other than
people who were born into servitude in the Roman Empire were going to be coming from
these various northern trade routes, and the slave trade would be a very, very important
part of the European economy, well, still being practiced to a great extent at the time of the
Crusades. In turn, the Romans were exporting a host of Finnish goods. This archaeology verifies
in the form of glass, pottery, and jewelry. What archaeology doesn't verify are the perishable
goods, and there we have to use to some extent of our imagination in comparison to later
trade connections. One is textiles, probably the most common commodity exchanged in pre-industrial
economies. The Romans were extremely good in manufacturing a variety of textiles, including
silks, and they were getting a lot of raw silk from the Eastern trade, but this could be woolens,
linens, cottons, all of these finely spun clothing, which is being sent out to the
dramatic world. The Romans are able to manufacture this in a host of different varieties of types
of cut of garment, colors, dyes, which absolutely were attractive to the barbarian people who
did not have the specialized economy to sustain this, and so textiles was one of the biggest
commodities going out there. Wine and olive oil, but particularly wine, the notion of wine as a
prestige drink is already being popularized in the 1st and 2nd century AD. Tacitus, in his very
stylized account, the Germania informs us that the Germans just found wine was a raid, and the
Germans are willing to gamble their freedom away in order to get a good vintage from Italy,
probably overstating the case. There were also weapons, arms, furniture, all sorts of goods that
could not be made in what remained in Germania, still a largely village society even after the
collapse of the Roman Empire. There were never really cities in Germany. We also find a remarkable
number of Roman coins showing up in the barbarian world to the north. These are primarily silver
coins, the denarius, the principal coin used in Roman payrolls to the army, and the use of these
coins is debated considerably among scholars. Some see them simply more, it's bullion, it's simply
another prestige good that's come in. Others seem to indicate, and the literary sources support
that, that by 100 AD, if you lived about 120 miles from the Roman frontier in northern Europe,
or you were in southern Scandinavia, which was easily reached by ship,
you were probably accustomed to buying Roman goods, Roman ordinary commodities for your daily life
on a pretty regular basis, and you became used to using coins to settle up these exchanges.
Now if you were in the zones that were beyond that 120-mile frontier, or you weren't on the
North Sea Baltic trade route, well then coins were a curiosity that was something that was
brought in with other types of prestige goods. And so the markets weren't really monetized to the
same level as they were in the Roman world, but Tacitus tells us the Germans, and he's speaking
of the Germans near his, near the frontier, he makes that very clear in his Latin tech,
those Germans are used to using these, these objects to buy goods that their society can't produce.
And, and this is an important point to stress that these barbarian peoples by the second century AD
living along these routes and near the frontier are economically and socially tied to the Roman world.
The, I can't stress enough the exchange going on in terms of immigration and slave trade.
This was very, very important to both sides of the frontier. The Romans needed the labor.
The construction of the cities in the Rhineland, the development of all those Roman cities from
the end of the first century well into the third century AD, was in part being built by labor
brought in from the barbarian world. It wasn't all slave. A lot of it was hired hands. There's been
some very clever study of Gothic loan words. Gothic is a dramatic language that was written
in a Greek style alphabet in the fourth century AD to, for translation of the Bible by Arian
missionaries. And it's our earliest dramatic language we have any extensive information on.
And in that Bible, we're able to detect large numbers of loan words which have been taking
from Latin sometimes from Greek through vulgar Latin that came into the Gothic language probably
in the third and fourth century AD. And large numbers of these loan words are not what you
would think. Well there's some that are military but political. They're instead menial tasks,
specialized goods and items unknown in Gothic society. And what it suggests is that most
of the Latin words being carried over into Gothic at this time, and this is before the Goths
really invade and enter the Roman Empire, indicate that the Goths were showing up as
servants and hired hands or they were being accustomed to all sorts of Roman goods which
they otherwise didn't have. And that's probably very indicative of the nature of exchanges that
went along those frontiers through the whole of the Roman imperial age among all the barbarian
peoples. It's just the Gothic Bible gives us a rare window into testing how that happened.
The trade therefore brought in all these diversified goods and advantages. It also
acted as an advantage that the Germanic tribes could export in a peaceful manner the excess
population. This is a position still being debated among archaeologists because it's extremely
difficult to know the extent of immigration or even trade. We just don't have the statistics
that a modern historian would have. But the archaeology suggests that many of the areas
where town villages have been excavated show a fairly, a fair amount of continuity in population
size and ways of life from the 1st century AD into the 4th century AD. And it suggests,
and it's only a suggestion, that the excess population was exported to the Roman world
in the form of slaves, immigrants, labor, later, auxiliaries of soldiers in the Roman army,
and that the success of the Germanic tribes in part rested on that trade connection where
they could export the population and get the means to bring all these goods in to enrich
their own society. The Roman imperial government did try to regulate this trade and it probably
only had limited success. There are reports of Roman emperors attempting to ban the export of
weapons, sometimes salt, which was also an important commodity, but well wrought Roman swords and
armor. There were also treaties, one of them concluded with the Germans in the 170s by Marcus
Aurelius, where craftsmen and Roman soldiers who were deserters or captives had to be returned
by the German tribes. These were men who were skilled in regulating temperatures. If you could
do ceramics, you could do weapons, they could set up a whole manufacturing system in a German area.
The same problem came up with the Dacians when Domitian gave that technical assistance to
Decebelus, and so the Roman government did attempt to regulate the export of iron and
weapon technology. Its success however was probably mixed and by the time we get to the
fourth century those laws really didn't apply since so many of the Germans are being armed
and brought into the Roman world, which is a different story. So the prosperity that the
barbarian peoples enjoyed from this trade and this Roman contact transformed their own societies.
It enabled Teutonic chieftains or nomadic Khagans to use the medieval term for the Iranians
to elevate themselves as rulers, to acquire prestige goods. In certain parts of the dramatic
world it's clear that certain Roman products such as silver bowls, perhaps coins, glass,
were really intended for gift exchange rather than commerce in daily activity. That is these
great figures were going to hand out the items to their warriors, attendants, raise their own
position. It accounts for the ability of these kings eventually by the end of the second beginning
of the third century AD to start to preside over larger political organizations, confederations,
which will come to plague the Romans by the end of the third century and into the fourth century.
So to some extent the success in political organization changing social patterns in the
German world very much depended on the prosperity of the Roman Empire and the trade between the
two worlds and that resulted in different German identities, the beginning of more tribal identities
so that by the time we get to the fourth century and we look at the arrival of these Germans they
are profoundly transformed from the literary descriptions we have of Julius Caesar and Tastus
back in the first century BC and the first century AD. At the same time the Romans were engaging in
really impressive long-distance trade to the east and to the south. The trade across the Sahara
is still, the history of that is still to be written. We have only limited archaeological
evidence but the cities that the Romans established in North Africa and the security of Roman Egypt
stimulated trade contacts fairly deep into Africa especially for exotic animals for the arena and
gold and there is some evidence that again the Roman security of the frontiers and entrusting
the trans-Saharan trade to in effect to the tribes, the Moors who were patrolling the frontier
increased trade activity and that the trade routes that the Arabs inherited in the eighth and
ninth century AD go back to Roman predecessors. The best documented trade is to the east where
we have a Periplus that is a document written for the sailing. We have several that's sailing
around it means in Greek it's the sailing in in what the Romans call the Erythian Sea which is
today the Indian Ocean in the Red Sea. We also have several itineraries that explain the trade
routes in the caravan routes that start in the Roman world and go east one from Palmyra in Syria
another from Trapezis in on the on the Black Sea. Caravan routes cross over into Mesopotamia
and either go through Iran to the cities of Central Asia where they then are picked up by
Sognean merchants who then take it across the Talaran basin to Lo Yan the capital of the Han
Empire there's that whole caravan network and then some of those routes go south into Babylonia
and take the sea route on the Persian Gulf to the Indian ports and Chinese goods and spices from
Southeast Asia are often bought in the Chinese in the Indian ports these are goods that have been
brought in again by Sogneans these are the very civilized Iranian people of Central Asia who
are in charge of the trade routes out there and finally we have the spectacular trade routes going
in the Indian Ocean all three of these routes again owed a great deal to Roman organization
the Roman ships those durable capital vessels they could build with the shell construction
and above all the stimulus of Roman markets we are told in the time of Augustus that the trade
down the Red Sea across to the Indian ports probably increased fivefold and I always put it this way
that the long-distance trade again with precedents going back for centuries the Romans found
turned from voyages of discovery and curiosity to long-term consistent commercial development
and exploitation the trade is often dismissed it's not important it was exchange of exotic goods
some of the moralizing historians report how oh we lose so much golden species that there's a
specie flow and there have been efforts to tie the fiscal and monetary problems of the later
Roman Empire to the flow of specie out to China and India and I don't believe that at all the
the archaeological and numismatic evidence doesn't support it and what those flows of gold and silver
were was was rather limited and used to settle up certain transactions and most have actually ended
going back to the Roman side and most of the profits from the near eastern trade the far eastern
trade went to Roman manufacturers and distributors rather than to the peoples beyond the frontier
because silk would be rewoven into specialized garments and sold at great profit in Rome
many of the spices and commodities coming in would then be used to spice up different products and
and then sold for high prices so a lot of the profits in the far eastern trade were made in Rome
furthermore and and this is especially so on the Indian trade the profits that were made
in these transactions went to reinforce the imperial government in its customs duties
they charged a 25 odd valorem tax on certain spices and specialized commodities or to the
great senatorial and equestrian families that backed these trading ventures they themselves
were not involved but they used their freedmen and slaves who then went out and acted as their agents
so the bulk of the profits actually went back to supporting the traditional elite classes within
the Roman Empire and that's an important point to stress you did not get the emergence of an
independent bourgeoisie or commercial elite involved in trade what happened is the profits
for the long-distance trade were put back into land but above all to the spectacular building
programs the social developments the festivals everything that made classical civilizations
this is success that it was and so in a rather ironic way these these trade connections to the east
which were the benefits of roman imperialism ultimately went back to reinforcing that very
same society and as i noted the routes are disrupted in the wars of the third century but
resumed perfectly fine again in the fourth and fifth centuries and most of these far distance
far long distance trade routes in the indian ocean are then taken over by the arab caliphs
and simply redirected to Baghdad or to the holy cities of arabia and play the same role in that
traditional economy that they had played in the roman empire and so the success of roman trade
very much reflected the success of the roman economy and society you know as i say this
is a point still very much under debate because there are very respected scholars who see this
trade as largely a very minor role on what is essentially a subsistence economy nonetheless
the profits were lucrative the imports and luxury goods were taxed very successfully
by the roman imperial government and it was extremely well known at least in the literary
tradition and i always like to close on the ubiquitousness of this trade in an anecdote told
of the sage apollonius of tayana who's a great holy man who's going to go out to indian study
with the brahmins and he's going to follow the traditional trade routes and he gets to the roman
customs post at zeugma on the euphrates and the custom official wakes up and immediately asks them
well do you have anything to declare because goods going out would be taxed and we know one of the
these goods included expensive wines and especially courtesans who were sent to the courts the roman
equivalent of a geyser girl who was going to the indian or eventually maybe even the chinese court to
as a prestige item and the sage simply says to the customs official i have only to declare my
fortitude my honor my virtue all words in greek arete which were commonly used for courtesans
and the custom official is madly writing these down and when he's finished and the sage just
looks you know it's just myself and my virtue the custom official says that's great now where the
girls because as i calculated he's looking for 20 gold pieces for these non-existent courtesans
um a story like that could only be funny and told in a society that was engaged very extensively
in this long-distance trade and that was the point of the anecdote
