Lecture 27 Frontier Settlement and Assimilation
In this lecture I plan to look at questions of social change to a certain extent demographics
between Rome and Rome's frontier provinces and the northern barbarians in central and
northern Europe. This is a lecture that's going to build on the economic issues that we raised
in the last lecture, the great trade routes, the feeding of Roman provincial cities with
raw materials from Germania and from the Iranian nomads, but what we're going to zero in on
in this lecture is how did that movement of barbarians along those frontier zones, how did it take
place, what was the resulting exchange that went on, not just the material goods that we could
measure with some degree of accuracy with archaeology and literary sources, but the
intermarriage, the intermixing, how barbarians might be assimilated, how barbarians assumed
identities, new identities in the Roman world or created their own identities on the other
side of the frontier. I left the last lecture with the thought that the Limes, the frontier, in
many ways by 200 AD had become a political and cultural border. It marked the extent of Roman
political power and success in assimilating provincial peoples. At the same time I keep
stressing it's not a modern frontier with the kind of customs, regulations, passports and
certainly nothing like the kind of military barrier that the French attempted to construct
with the Maginot Line, that the frontier at many points was unguarded. You have over a
thousand miles of the Danube, about 500 miles of the Rhine. You have a very, very difficult
desert frontier in the east and the south. This could be crossed at many points and the
Romans even bothered to guard many points of the frontier, so there's always a flow of
people across this frontier in both directions. And what our theme here is to look at what
that flow was like and what were the results socially and culturally for both the barbarians
and the Romans. Well, I mentioned that one of the major sources of flow were of course military
recruits. As an example, the Batavians, people living in the marshlands of the lower Rhine
in modern Holland, this dramatic tribe had a tradition of furnishing soldiers into the
Roman army. By best count, at least 5,000 men at any one time were serving in Roman military
units. That could have been one-third of the tribe's adult male population. These men would
sign on for 25 years, they would acquire Roman citizenship on discharge, hard cash, many of
them retired to their tribe, including that remarkable figure Gaius Julius Cavilius who
led the revolt back in 6970. There were other tribes so affected and you could trace this
with the Frisians, you could trace it with tribes in the Agrae de Cumates, that's in
southern Germany, the region brought in in the Flavin and Antonine area. The nomadic peoples
of Eastern Europe were similarly subject to this type of recruitment. 7,200 Sarmatian
horsemen were recruited by the Emperor Marcus Aurelius in 175. If those numbers are all
accurate, you're essentially talking about the effective fighting force of a major nomadic
tribe. They were now to serve in Roman units. So the movement of barbarians across the
frontier into Roman military units was constant and significant. The barbarians in these units
learned Latin, that was the language of command, at least up to 300 AD. They were issued
Roman style weapons. They could be moved around the Roman Empire in different areas. Many of
them settled down as discharged veterans in Roman territory and became in effect provincial
Romans, intermarrying with the local population there and then their sons were eligible for
legionary service. And units that were originally ethnic units recruited among certain
certain Germanic tribes or Sarmatians would then be transferred to Britain, to Syria. Those
tribal ethnic units are still kept on the army military roles 100 years later, but clearly
they're not receiving recruits from the original tribe, they're recruiting locally from this
mixed Roman provincial population. And so what you have is a case of assimilation. Now
up until the 4th century, the Germans served in these auxiliary units, the German Sarmatians,
Syrians, barbarian peoples. They were not allowed to use their own language and none of them ever
raised rows as far as we can see to any kind of major position at court or even high within the
Roman military structure. They remained essentially soldiers, discharged as veterans. Their
children, their grandchildren if they chose to stay in the Roman world would be assimilated
into the general Roman population. But the Romans were very much restricting the social
mobility of these recruits that were brought into the Roman army in significant numbers,
but nonetheless they were kept within certain bounds. The same was true with immigration
coming in the Roman Empire. The Romans never attempted to stop the flow of immigrants. They
sought to regulate it. Some of the military systems were to inhibit a barbarian raiders,
guys coming into cattle rustle, I described that on Hadron's Wall or in North Africa. But
the Romans were realistic about this. You were not going to be able to simply build walls and
turn back vast hordes of people. That was not at all envisioned by any of these Roman frontier
defenses. Instead the Romans just were very intent in taking in populations that they would
find useful. Roman political institutions, social attitudes, the use of the client and
patron system, all of those Roman social institutions were very much at work here. And
as I noted the Romans saw this barbarian term as a cultural sense rather than a racial sense.
These were people outside the political and cultural boundaries of the Roman world, but
they could potentially be assimilated. That meant immigration was regulated and very often
the immigrants were dispersed once they got to the Roman side. We have some very good
insight on this from the early Roman period. Two important kings of the Marco Mani, the tribe
living in Bohemia, the Czech Republic today, which absorbed so much from its contact with
the Romans. Mauro Bodois, who was the objective of Augustus's armies, and one of his successors,
Vanius, who ruled as king among the Marco Mani, both of them got driven out by their
kinsmen and their tribesmen as tyrants. Probably they were ruling too much like Roman
emperors. They, along with their retinas, probably numbering in the hundreds, received asylum
within the Roman frontier. And they were given lands, they were dispersed through the Balkan
provinces. Probably members of the upper class were quickly intermarried and assimilated into
the local elites. The same was probably true of Plautius Sylvanus, the legate on the Lower
Danube. I mentioned earlier in connection with the Iranian nomads. He brought in, he
claims, 100,000 barbarians. Number is probably, well, it's conventional. Could well be quite
exaggerated. It probably means a lot of barbarians were brought from across the frontier into
the Balkan provinces. These people too were dispersed into smaller communities. They were
not settled as ethnic groups. They were not settled as big tribal groups. And this was a
policy that endures through Roman imperial history well into the 4th century. It will
change in the 4th century and it changes in the 4th century due to a number of important
reasons that we'll get to later on. We know as late as 269 AD, the Emperor Claudius II
Gothicus, who defeated a huge barbarian host, or horde, moving in the Balkans, took the
defeated in, and the defeated were didectically, that is, people who had surrendered, and settled
them as coloni, colonists, a tenant on provincial lands through the Balkans. That is, the very
people who were trying to muscle their way in, once defeated and surrendered, were now
allowed to stay as tenants under various terms, granted by the Emperor. And so the settlement
of barbarians, whether they came in as military recruits or they came in as immigrants who
were settled on imperial territory, were done under very, very specific arrangements.
And Tacitus gives us a very, very telling case of this, where on the lower grind, one
German tribe, the Ampsi Warii, decide to simply move in to vacant land in what is now probably
Belgium. The Romans get wind of this and immediately move them out, drive them out. On the other
hand, at the same time, tribes such as the Frisians who are suffering over population
decide that they want to move into certain Roman territory, they ask for permission,
an arrangement is made, and they're allowed to settle. And the legal difference was very
important in the Roman mind. You have permission, you are allowed to come in under these arrangements,
you have muscled your way in, no, the Majesty of Rome will not permit that. And the lesson
was pretty well learned. So there is this constant settling of barbarian immigrants into the
frontier zones. One of my favorite coins in the late Roman Empire is a coin issued in
348, 352 AD, which celebrated this long tradition. The coin inscription on the reverse runs
the restoration of blessed times, and the image is of the Roman emperor, suitably large
and impressive looking, taking out of the hut two little barbarians, probably Germans
from the look of their clothing, out of a hut with a tree behind it. And these are barbarians
settled for the destined for settlement in the Roman Empire, and it's a marvelous little
pictorial image that was put out to circulate a long term Roman policy. I often wonder what
the increasingly barbarian Roman soldiers in the Imperial Army ever made of these images,
but this is an image on a very long tradition. We do not have numbers, as I said, it's very
difficult to get accurate immigration numbers, but we can make some good guesses on the size
of what this immigration might have involved. The most reliable account of numbers of any
barbarian group we have is, or we think we have, is in 429 AD, this comes after the limits
of our period, when King Giseric of the Vandals decided to cross from Spain into Africa. He
took with him his own Vandal tribe and a number of people from the Sueves and Allens, and the
number is said to be 80,000. Apparently total population, they claim that this is, we think
it might be accurate because you have to count how many people are going to go in the boats.
This is very unlike the numbers we often get in literary text of 300,000 barbarians, 100,000,
250,000, these very, very large conventional numbers that keep reappearing. If this number is
at all accurate, it means that that dramatic three tribes, two dramatic and one Iranian,
had maybe at most 15,000 men. And so in the accounts, when barbarians raid or attack,
you're talking of a barbarian army more on the order of 3,000 men, maybe 5,000 on a good
day, or less, and that many of the barbarian movements, even of a large population such
as that tribe that tried to muscle in on its own, you have to think in terms of thousands
or hundreds. They still identify themselves largely by clan, by family associations. And
for all of their contact with Roman trade, the Germanic and Iranian barbarians in northern
Europe never learned to live in cities. They never developed the kind of agricultural base
in institutions to live in cities. They certainly don't engage in the kind of sophisticated
mining that the Romans show in Dacia and the Balkans. Most of the silver mines in Germany
are unknown in the antiquity. They're only exploited in the Middle Ages. And so the populations
are relatively small. Nonetheless, they're significant. They're significant because they're
being moved into those frontier zones. And one of the main themes of the late Roman
world is the increasing importance of those frontier zones as sources of recruits, where
the Roman Empire puts its military effort, its governmental effort, all of the trade
pouring into those frontier zones, which can very easily be demonstrated that the two cities
I mentioned in the trade routes in the last lecture, Milan and Triere, city in Germany
and city in northern Italy, they become in effect the capitals of the Western Roman Empire
in the fourth and fifth centuries, not Rome. Those become the economic political capital.
So these barbarians are being settled in a very important zone. By one reckoning, and it's
a reckoning that's a guess, an educated guess, but it's certainly of the order of right magnitude.
By 300 AD, as a result of the exchange of the settlement of immigrants, the military service,
whatever the slave trade enters, probably one out of five provincials on the frontier
of northern Europe was of recent barbarian origin, himself or maybe his parents. And then
within the provincial population itself, many of those people have to count barbarian
ancestors, in some cases five, six, seven generations going back, but that the Roman
provincial society there that was emerging, yes, there's a legal and cultural boundary
by 200 between Rome and the barbarian world, the Ghente's Externi, the foreign people.
On the other hand, that provincial boundary has been accepting large numbers of barbarians
and assimilating them, so that the identity and composition of that Roman frontier society
has to be qualified. Furthermore, the assimilation doesn't go just one way. I mean, the barbarians
to some extent who come in as slaves are probably assimilated and lost, and even those in military
service. But the Romans, especially the Roman army, the administrative class, the Roman elites
to the immediate west or south of the military frontier also acquire a great deal from the
barbarian immigrants who are coming in and settling among them or near them. This can
be traced in, for instance, in clothing. The Roman army by the end of the first century
AD in northern Europe is beginning to don on leather jackets, distinctive leather hooded
jackets, which were common among the Celtic and Germanic peoples. You cannot wear Mediterranean
style clothing on the Rhine, especially in the winter. They begin to wear leggings and
boots, which are characteristic of the area. There is the gradual adoption of trousers,
which occurs first among the provincial Roman zones, which are getting this barbarian immigration
and have this contact, and that can be documented by the adoption of belts as a way of holding
up trousers, the appearance of belts in archaeological context, and to go, well, people are wearing
trousers, not wearing togas or Greek style clothing anymore, and that will spread from
the frontier zones into the interior of the empire so that by the middle of the fourth
century AD, 350 AD, belts are clearly being worn by everyone in the Roman world. They
appear in North Africa and Asia Minor, and they are as well beyond the military barbarian
contact. That's just a fashion that gets acquired. Certain types of cloaks, which were
found very useful by the army. The most famous is a Celtic cloak that gave rise to the name
of the emperor Caracola, the second emperor of the Severan dynasty. His official name is
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus. He's known as Caracola because he donned on this Celtic military
cloak, which he liked, and he popularized. So grave goods indicate certain jewelry styles
become common in the provincial zones, and that is jewelry being brought in from
dramatic settlers. And that results also even in provincials recalling their own traditions.
In Gaul and in Britain, starting from 200 and running to 300 AD, there are local relief
works, there's jewelry, and we suspect also such objects as textiles and the like that
reflect the resurgence of old Celtic traditions. Some historians have gone so far as to argue
that the third century was almost a Celtic renaissance, that there was a delight among
these Roman provincial populations of going back to their pre-Roman origins and picking
up material goods and items that were distinctly not classical. Well, I suspect they had never
disappeared, but just our record gets better, and there is a certain fashion going on there.
And so this assimilating of the barbarians into the Roman provincial order also transforms
the Romans themselves, and certainly that Roman provincial society. And what will come out of
this mix, and I often think of the frontier zone as not just that cultural and military
frontier, political frontier the Roman government is trying to establish, but by 200 AD into
400 AD, it becomes this great demographic mixing bowl, where you're constantly adding
infusion after fusion of different barbarian peoples who are interacting with all of these
Romanized provincial populations, and what happens is a distinctly composite frontier
culture emerges in this zone, which is partly Roman, but also partly barbarian. And one
feature that will characterize this culture by the fourth century is that it is very heavily
military and martial in its ethos, that Roman civilization was initially brought in by Roman
soldiers who intermarried with populations, especially with populations with warrior traditions,
that the Romans took in barbarians who were particularly good as soldiers and warriors,
and that both of these peoples tended to interact and fuse with each other to create this tradition.
And that is an extremely important point to stress, because when Roman political power finally
breaks up in the western empire in the late fourth and fifth century AD, that political
breakup occurred so rapidly, because provincial society on the frontiers, that vital area,
and even deeply beyond those frontiers, had been remarkably transformed from the way it
looked in the second century AD, and that is one of the process of this continuing contact,
this between barbarians and Romans. There were also a great deal of economic exchanges
that helped provide this, and that was the local and regional trade that increased contact
without necessarily leading to settlement, and it goes to show how the frontier could be
crossed just daily without anyone really thinking about it, and this is a result of very, very
clever archaeological work done by British, Dutch and German archaeologists.
I mentioned, for instance, Hadrian's Wall, that the Romans decided on that particular boundary
ultimately because of provisioning the army, and the Roman army got its ceramics and poured it
down in London and from the rest of the empire, but it drew its grains and much of its lentils
and beans and the like, its agricultural produce from the areas immediately to the south of the wall,
and these would be the Romanized populations of the northern part of the province,
but all indications by studying the bones and analysis of animals is that the animal diet
and the Roman soldiers ate a lot of meat, contrary to popular opinion, was coming from the tribes
to the north of the wall that were regularly exporting goats and sheep and cattle
to feed the Roman army. The same kind of provisioning went on in the lower Rhine,
where the Germanic tribes outside of direct Roman control literally provided the hides,
the salted meat, a whole component of the Roman diet to the military forces stationed on the lower Rhine,
and then the Romans drew their wine from the Mosul Valley at Trier, as well as their grains
from what is now Belgium and northeastern France, and so what happened along the frontier is
there was this remarkable economic symbiosis, almost a diversity of labor in supplying the Roman military forces
and that provincial society. It explains to some extent why cities never really developed along the
non-Roman side of the frontier, because those tribes and villages found it so profitable
to develop their traditional stock raising and fishing traditions to feed this market
a hundred miles to the south or west of them, whereas the Roman side of the frontier,
you get the development of cities, intensive agriculture, commercial crops and manufacturing,
because that's what they were good at in supplying the army in so a very strange way.
The Roman military presence and the supplying and equipping of these armies led to the creation
of this unique frontier society, which by 300 AD was no longer restricted to the Roman side,
but now was included a great deep belt of the barbarian tribes on the other side of the frontier.
Well, there were some major implications of what this would mean for the Romans in their later history.
That is, and that's going to in part be the lecture coming up, the barbarian tribes who were now
engaged in these activities and being absorbed into the Roman provincial system became increasingly
important for the Roman army. They also became better armed and had a stronger identity of themselves.
The term gremanii or gamania was a term created by the Romans to designate all these people.
And if we look at the tribal groupings in the first and early 2nd century AD from the literary sources,
it's a maddening and bewildering array of tribes that we encounter.
And it's sometimes very difficult to place them on the map.
As one moves towards the 2nd century and in the early 3rd century AD and we have literary sources of later wars
that will markedly change the Roman world, we find new tribal groupings, we find larger confederations,
and we also find the beginning of at least a few by the end of the 3rd century and particularly in the 4th century
names of kings leading these tribes, leading these confederations in a way that we had never encountered earlier.
The only German we really know of is Arminius, who's a rebel who appears out of nowhere,
helps throw the Romans out of Germany and then disappears as a tyrant.
But when we get to the late 3rd and 4th century beginning to hear of Germanic kings regularly in Latin,
we begin to encounter names such as the Franks, the Alamani, well the Goths represent a new group coming into Scandinavia.
So there are distinct changes going on in barbarian society, in the areas not affected.
The barbarians pick up better military and political organization.
They don't pick up city life, they don't pick up the mining contacts and skills,
but they are being changed into newer units which are beginning to approach real tribes in a way they didn't exist in the 1st and 2nd century AD.
And this is one of the ironies that runs through all of Roman history, the Romans coming into contact with foreign peoples
and fighting them is to some extent the Romans are always giving birth to the very barbarian foes they dread.
That is Roman pressure, military strikes, trade, immigration is causing a change on the other side of the frontier.
This pattern is also detected in the southern and eastern frontiers.
And that is a controversy now raging particularly along the desert frontier of Syria.
There the Romans had similar types of exchange.
I had discussed earlier the Dura Europus outpost where you have these Palmarine settled there,
but the Romans certainly from the early 2nd century AD on are beginning to incorporate Arab nomads,
desert nomads into military units.
By 300 AD they have to start putting in more forts, more military highways to patrol this zone.
And by the opening of the 4th century Arab tribes are beginning to emerge with identities and institutions that they never had before.
In the early Roman imperial age it's very difficult to trace the movement and direction of these groups.
They're very small, some of them move in and become assimilated like the Nabataeans, others of them remain a tribal group,
they're in the literature, they disappear.
By the 4th century we begin to get Arab confederations that will ultimately fuse into literally Arab kingdoms by the end of the 4th and 5th century AD
that in many ways become the training ground for the elites who will lead the expansion of Islam in the 7th century AD.
The Arab armies that fought under the banner of Islam that will topple the East Roman and Persian Empire,
many of them can trace their military traditions and political organization and institutions back to these Arab tribes that turned into confederations
which were promoted by the Romans to patrol their desert frontier.
And so you have another instance of that contact creating identity on the frontier that when political circumstances change did in the Romans.
The same pattern is in North Africa where by the end of the 4th century AD there are distinct Berber tribes often called in the literature Moors.
They too have acquired a sense of identity, a larger political cohesion than they had ever had before,
then we would find in the pages of Salis Tertacitus and these Moors states actually oppose the vandals.
They are the most successful opponents to the dramatic invaders of the 5th century AD.
The vandals are confined to the old Romanized provincial zones.
They are eventually destroyed by a Roman counter offensive in 533-534 and when Roman imperial rule reappears in North Africa in the 6th century AD
these Moors' shakes or princes as they'd be called in the Latin literature have now been running their own effective states for several centuries,
again starting out as Roman clients, starting out in this zone between the Roman frontier and the barbarian world.
They proved far more difficult to bring back under Roman control in the 6th century than any vandal army ever did,
and they will endure and become the main opponents to the Muslims when they move into North Africa in the 7th and 8th centuries.
You can see why this would be the case.
These barbarian tribes came into contact with the merchants and the material culture of Rome, but especially with the Roman army.
The Roman army offered a system of hierarchy, a way of organizing yourself that most of these people didn't possess.
It's only natural that in either serving Rome or opposing Rome, these barbarian peoples would assume some kind of Roman provincial identity through this contact.
The irony is that in some ways these people were brought into the Roman system and yet in many ways these barbarians are acquiring new identities and identities distinct from the Roman world.
There is a question that will come up in the 4th and 5th century and we'll address it in the later lectures,
and that is what happened in 312 AD when the emperor Constantine converted to Christianity and later Roman emperors begin to extend their imperial church and start converting the Roman world to Christianity.
It's been often argued that Christianity then becomes a great agent of assimilating these barbarians in a way that the Romans had used earlier with the legal and political institutions,
and that's a real simplification because Christianity, as it's received by these nascent barbarian societies I've just described, comes in different forms and fashions and like everything else they take from the Roman world,
their version of Christianity becomes adapted very much to a local context.
Eastern Germanic barbarians, Goths and Vandals, will take on the Aryan Confession. The Arabs will often embrace the monophysite or the Nestorian.
These are confessions not favored by the imperial government and so Christianity didn't simplify the situation and didn't revive the old methods of assimilation.
If anything else, it probably sharpened those identities that had emerged over the course of the 3rd and 4th century and that would be a very important problem for later Roman emperors as these barbarians increasingly become the critical military force in the late empire.
