Lecture 28 From Germanic Tribes to Confederation
This lecture is the first of three that's going to deal with the relationship of Rome
with various barbarian peoples during the so-called third century crisis.
That is a period of great importance to Roman imperial history because for historians today
it's seen as the era when Rome moved from its distinctly classical civilization into
what is often called the late antique period, which would be the period approximately from
300 to, well some people take it even as the latest 700 AD, but it is seen as a watershed
that takes us from classical to early medieval civilization.
And the barbarians are seen as major players in this transformation.
The Roman world will be profoundly changed along a variety of lines and barbarian assault
is seen as one of the major agents in propelling that change.
This lecture will also build on what I've been discussing in the last three lectures
and that is the unique changes going on in the Roman provinces on the frontiers and the
distinct provincial society that's emerging due to immigration, trade and military service
by the barbarians.
Perhaps the change that's going to take place, at least from the barbarian's perspective,
can be sketched out by our two primary literary sources of Romans discussing barbarians.
One is by Cornelius Tastus, writing at the very end of the first century, early second
century AD, and the other is a man named Amianus Marcellinus, who's often called the last
great historian of Rome, who lived in the fourth century AD, a man who is pagan in his
religious persuasion in the time of Christian emperors, who was from a Roman military colony
Baraitus, the modern city of Beirut, today, as he was descended from Roman colonists and
local Syrian Phoenician people, and he wrote his account of Roman history in the mid and
late fourth century AD.
And both Amianus Marcellinus and Tastus give us windows into at least what the Roman literate
classes thought about the barbarians, and some way of testing how that relationship
will change.
Tastus wrote his works at a time when Rome was indisputably the superior partner in this
arrangement of Rome in the barbarians.
He published his Germania 98 AD, I've made reference to it in describing early Germanic
society.
Ostensibly, it's an ethnographic treatise on the traditions and laws and life of the
Germans.
He also wrote another work called The Agricola, which again I referred to briefly in the Roman
conquest of Britain, and that is an encomium on his father-in-law, Ganius Julius Agricola,
who was governor in Britain from 77 to 84 or 78 to 85, depending on how you date this
man's career.
These two works together give us Tastus' main views on barbarians, and is seen as reflecting
at least part of the Roman upper class's attitude towards barbarians in the, say, the year
100 AD, where all of these social, economic, and demographic changes were going on that
I've just described.
Tastus' account is very useful.
It can be compared against archaeological evidence, but it's also clear that Tastus represents
the prejudices of a Roman political elite that had a very idealized and unchanging vision
of Germanic society.
In many ways, the Germans, as described in Tastus in 100 AD, are the archetypes of that
noble savage that keeps reappearing in Western literature.
The Germans are morally superior to the decadent Romans.
They haven't been affected by civilization as much.
The Germans understand morality instinctively because of their harsh climate and simple
social conditions, and are therefore far more moral than Romans, despite all the Roman laws
on morality.
So, what the Germans become in Tastus is this moral foil.
They also become a way of Tastus' measuring how the Roman political elites have lost their
virtue and their liberty, their freedom under despotic rulers.
Latin word would be libertas, where we would get the word liberty, and that means the traditional
freedom, the ancestral rights of the senatorial class to high office under the old republic.
What Tastus really tells us is a lot more about his vision of the Roman imperial monarchy
than necessarily the barbarians themselves.
The barbarians are there just as a useful foil.
But he does end with a statement in his Germania that's very significant.
He states that the Germans in their liberty, in their freedom, the term again is Latin
as libertas, pose a far greater threat to Rome than the organized armies, the despotism
of the Parthians.
That is the great kings to the east.
And so, in Tastus' mind, the barbarians are best tamed by the assimilation, bringing
them into the Roman system.
That's where Tastus' father-in-law, Gricola, gets so much praise.
He's so clever at turning the Britons from barbarians into Roman provincials.
And that he makes these remarks repeatedly through the Germania with the hopes that these
people would somehow be tamed.
When we get to Amianus Marcellinus, a man who served in the late Roman Empire in the
army under a number of Christian emperors and was by a profession of pagan, the emperor
Julian who brought the old gods back as the hero of Amianus' account.
Amianus significantly started his history from where the time of Tastus and took it
to the battle of Adrianople in 378.
So Amianus, born about 330 AD, died close to the year 400.
He gives us a wealth of information about the Germanic tribes, the Huns, the barbarians
of his age, and there's a different perspective.
To some extent, he draws on the ethnographic traditions going back to Greek historians.
But in Amianus' account, it's simply accepted that German barbarians move freely through
the military high commands.
That many of the key officers in Julian's expeditions against the Persians are Germans
or barbarians by origin.
There are constant references to careers in which barbarians cross the frontier, sometimes
serving in Roman armies, sometimes doubling as Frankish kings.
And that changed attitude that comes through the litters is just an assumption that there's
this easy intermixing of Romans and barbarians on the frontier by Amianus' day is now being
accepted by the highest ranks of Roman society.
And that is a very, very significant change which comes out of that crisis of the third
century.
And it's an important point to stress before we go into the actual political, military,
economic, well, fiscal, really, details of the third century.
So in this lecture, I want us to approach how did this balance change?
What caused it?
Why was warfare after 235 AD such an important component in changing this relationship?
And that forces us to look again at changes in the Roman army in the third century, as
well as changes in German society and warfare, and then to zero in and look at especially
the crisis of the third century on the northern frontiers in Britain and Gaul and the upper
Danube, that is in the northwestern provinces.
To some extent, these are the most, these are really the tertiary frontier.
I mean, the real threats are going to be from Persia and the Goths coming in from the east.
But it's useful to start this by looking at these people because they have provided so
much of the information in the earlier lectures on the exchange of Romans and barbarians.
And so in the interest of continuity with the last several lectures, we're going to really
look at what did the third century mean to Gaul, to Britain, to the upper Danube and
to the barbarians living on the other side.
Well, first let's look at what's happening to the Roman army.
The Roman army has been subject to very intense study by archaeologists, and we know an enormous
amount about the daily life of Roman soldiers, how forts are constructed, depots, we know
the names of governors, and we know the movements of specific legions.
It is ironic with the amount of assiduous activity on the Roman army that it really
took a non-specialist, a man not at all, a classicist by training, to write the first
and still, really, the only book describing how did the Romans defend their empires.
So a fellow by the name of Lutwak, who wrote a work on grand strategy of the Roman Empire,
which was published, I believe, in 1976.
He is by training a political scientist and a person who looks at systems analysis, diplomatic
relationships in the modern world.
The book has stirred a great deal of controversy, it's led to a whole new wave of scholarship
on the Roman army, the frontiers and the barbarians, and yet at the same time, no classical historian
has sat down and really addressed Lutwak's basic question is, how did the Romans defend
their empire?
How did they defend their frontier?
Because for all of the exchange that went on, the demographics, the economics, all the
themes I discussed in the last several lectures, ultimately that Roman imperial army was there
not to provide information for archaeologists and Roman social and economic historians,
such as myself, but rather to defend a frontier and defeat foes.
Soldiers are trained to break things and kill people.
And the value of Lutwak's book was to remove, to move that back into the debate.
It is clear that by the 2nd century AD, there are significant changes in the way the Roman
army is positioned and what the Romans seem to be attempting to achieve.
Now Lutwak probably attributes a great deal more policy and conscious decisions than was
ever made by the imperial government, and there tends to be a fair amount of anachronism
in the work, but nonetheless it is clear that by the 2nd century AD, the legions on the
frontier are no longer being recruited primarily from Romans and Italians, as I had mentioned
in an earlier lecture.
By the reign of Hadrian, the vast majority of legionaries are coming from people in
that vicinity of where the legion is stationed.
They are the descendants of veterans, including many, many men who probably are by origin
axiliaries and ergo-provincials or barbarians.
Furthermore, there are important changes in the way the Roman army functions.
With the Emperor Hadrian's stone construction begins to substitute for wooden construction.
There are more permanent buildings.
I mentioned in part, this probably reflects changes in prosperity in the building trade
in general, but fortified camps begin to emerge.
There is also a tendency, and this was probably done for political reasons, the danger of
anyone governor having too many powerful armies in a single camp.
There is a decision made by the end of the 1st century that you no longer have big camps
of two and three legions that is a huge force concentrated that can move in for major operation.
Each legion is to receive a separate camp.
Major units increasingly receive separate camps.
There is still a road network and system for legions to be moved together so they can carry
out larger operations, but increasingly the forces are tied to specific bases, specific
fortifications, and it can be argued they lose a certain amount of their mobility.
By the end of the 2nd century AD, the emperor Septimius Severus, who ruled from 193 to 11AD,
carried out a number of important laws which are also seen as affecting the ability of
the Roman army to wage the kind of wars of conquest that you saw in the time of Trajan
or earlier under Augustus.
He removes the laws prohibiting soldiers to marry.
Now perhaps no more than half the Roman army was ever married in a legal sense, but it
is now possible for soldiers to marry and to have their families legitimate from the
start.
Something that comes after discharge.
There is an important element of each legion and auxiliary unit that has a married family
in the vicinity.
Now in some ways, this increases the ability and willingness of these men to fight and
defend a frontier, a frontier that is now their home, and one they identify with the
people that they're living among.
On the other hand, it makes some of these soldiers lucked in to engage in more wide
flung expeditions, and this will have an effect on morale and professionalism in the
army as you go into the 3rd and 4th century.
There is already a tradition in Roman military policy to take detachments of units, a vexillation,
part of a legion.
That's how Trajan built up his great expeditionary force against Daeshia, that is you take a
detachment of 1500-2000 men.
These are probably the youngest men, the unmarried men, men who are not as tied to the locale.
They are marched to the offensive operation, either against Persia, against the Daetians,
later against the Goths, and then you leave the older men, the more settled men, back
in the garrison to hold the fort, hold the position, maintain the presence on the frontier.
This policy, already evident in the 2nd century AD, becomes very, very prominent in the 3rd
and what happens in the Roman legionary units is there is a certain detachment between the
mobile forces field army, is better to call it, moving with the emperor, moving with primarily
the emperor, sometimes the governor, as opposed to the forces staying on the frontier.
This change in the Roman army, already evident in the 2nd century, will become even more
marked as we go into the military and political crisis in the 3rd century, because as wars
increase, the army has to be increased, the pay has increased, logistics prices go up,
the imperial government to get the taxes and the means to support these wars will increasingly
hire more and more officials, as you hire more officials increase the demands of the
imperial government on the taxpayers, taxpayers respond naturally as all taxpayers to, they
don't want to pay, they evade.
And so to collect what is necessary to wage the wars of the 3rd century, emperors will
start adding more and more military force in tax collection in civilian government.
And slowly over the course of the 3rd and 4th century AD, the Roman civil administration
becomes militarized, increasing number of soldiers become detached, these are often known in Latin
as beneficiary, detached from military service and are now being used in tax collection eventually
in the administration of justice and in areas that had previously been reserved for a civil
magistrate, civil administration.
And an argument can very, very easily be made that what happens to the Roman army, one of
the ways it loses this professional edge is it gets too involved in the business of civilian
government.
The soldiers increasingly take over in tax collection, now you can understand why this
was done initially, you need the taxes, Roman tax collectors, and I've studied Roman tax
registers a great deal, Roman tax collectors did not meet an orderly group of citizens
willing to pay, even in the high empire when the army wasn't being used, there was an awful
lot of force to compel reluctant peasants and townsmen to pay up their taxes, and taxes
were always behind, and at least 15% of the tax was never collected.
But after 235 AD is the demands go up and the problems multiply, military forces is
used with ever more frequency to get the taxes out of an ever more reluctant citizenry and
that's just a fact that a portion of the army is being increasingly used in that area and
that will affect discipline, morale and attitudes.
So the Roman army in that regard is changing, we can trace changes in tactics, the adoption
of more cavalry, other types of training and drill, we can do that from the weapons,
but what's really important in changing the Roman army over the third century are these
long term changes, these social changes in who's going into the army, how the army is
being used, and this will eventually lead to the demise of the traditional Roman army
by 300 AD and new ways of defending the Roman empire after 300 AD, which is to depend increasingly
on these barbarians.
At the same time that the Roman army is changing, as I mentioned in the last lecture, the barbarians
themselves are changing.
I pointed to the fact that we start to begin, we start to hear of kings in the late third
and especially in the fourth and fifth century AD, and that's understandable.
And here again, and I only touched on this briefly, the emergence of dramatic kingship
was probably a result of the pressure and contact of the Romans themselves.
The Romans as all imperial people, and that's why I stress so much the idealized picture
of Tacitus, had a preconceived notion of what the less civilized people were supposed to
be like.
The Romans thought in terms of cities, and if you didn't have cities and you were uncivilized,
you had tribes, and if you had tribes, there's got to be a tribal prince or chieftain would
be the English word, that's what the Romans are looking for, and even though there are
reports by Tacitus and other accounts, the Germans really don't have kings at first.
The Iranian nomads really don't have kings.
They are essentially organized in villages and hamlets, very much based on kinship groups,
as anthropologists would study them in traditional societies, and the Romans want kings so they
can deal with them.
In fact they can come to an agreement with a specific group of Germans, whether it's
as immigration, they're going to be accepted in the empire, receive lands, whether a whole
group of them are going to be enrolled in an auxiliary unit, or what is even more important
for the Romans, for those tribes that are outside of direct Roman political power will
now be incorporated through the ties of patron and clientage to act as Roman allies, to patrol
vital areas.
And so what the Romans do is force these people to come up with kings, that is they give gifts,
they exchange envoys, this is being done already in the time of Augustus, the emperor Tiberius
brings back his rambunctious nephew, Germanicus, and one of his lectures to him in 16 AD is
don't bother attacking the Germans, we just find pro-Roman kings, we have friends, support
them with money, we don't need military support, we don't need to get involved there, we'll
just find kings who will act as our friends and our clients, that is to extend the Roman
social network of patron and client to these various barbarian kings.
Now the kings who emerged in this regard probably came from an aristocratic group in which they
had a number of competitors, someone like Arminius, who briefly was the prince of the
Cherusci opposing the Romans.
They could obtain gifts, some of the prestige goods that I discussed in the trade exchange,
that is they might get special weapons, silver bowls, they could hand it out to their warriors,
to their retainers, the so called Kamitates who followed them, they could also, through
their influence, affect the decisions of tribal assemblies.
It seems that the main decision was in the hands of the free armed men who would get
together periodically and base their decisions on customary law, as many a society does,
and a king who had a Roman backing money goods armed warriors with superior weapons could
start pressuring that assembly to behave the way he wishes it.
Again, your best example is Julius Cavillus, the Roman auxiliary officer who led the revolt,
who came into the traditional meeting of his countrymen, the Batavians, and convinced them
to revolt from Rome.
He used a special authority which in effect made him, for a short time, a king of the
Batavians.
There was always a danger in doing this, and something the Romans never really understood,
and the problem was that ultimately any one of these kings or princes who was identified
with Rome, could easily be overthrown by rivals, and rivals who could conjure up a hatred
for Rome, a dislike of Roman oppression, and there is a depressingly long story of these
client kings being chased out by their own tribesmen, that they eventually become compromised
in the eyes of their kinsmen.
I mentioned Vanius, the king of the Marco Mani, around 50 AD, he had to hightail it out of
his kingdom, get into Rome with his family, and receive asylum in Roman lands, and eventually
just passes out of the record of history.
So for well over 150 years, the Roman diplomatic efforts to create these kings usually failed,
but it slowly accustomed these barbarians to what they better get, a superior organization.
So in time, kings began to emerge, and the third century would be a turning point in
this relationship, because the third century would enable some of these dramatic war leaders,
princes or kings, to gain victories, to come back with booty and captives, and show the
immediate benefits of this more superior organization, and that will dictate events in the later
Roman world.
Well with this changing dramatic society, the gradual emergence of kings by 200 AD, the
changing Roman methods of defense, when this crisis broke in 235 AD, we shouldn't think
of it as if for 50 years, everyone thought in terms of crisis, there was a great deal
of continuity, but the level of fighting did increase significantly, and efforts to dismiss
the barbarian attacks, invasions, migrations, whatever they call, is nothing more than large
scale brigandage, or overly exaggerated, not that important that the literary sources
have exaggerated their numbers, in part the Roman army was responding because provincials
were clamoring, we need to be protected, that will only go so far, there's enough evidence
to suggest that these were serious wars, it comes out simply in the fact that the imperial
government couldn't pay for these wars, that they had to debase their silver currency to
the point that it compromised their fiscal institutions and led to inflation, and forced
emperors to reform the coinage starting in the late third century and running into the
fifth century AD, that financially the Roman imperial government found itself in grave
difficulty paying for the wars, not only the soldiers, but the logistics, the supplies,
the equipment, the replacing of soldiers killed in civil wars and barbarian assaults, because
we'll see in a moment that there's this constant civil war, and that played very, very heavily
against the imperial government's ability to defend its frontiers, so the fiscal and
monetary record alone indicates these wars are quite different from what we've encountered
before, there is also a significant change that comes in the Roman army, in 235 AD when
the fighting starts to intensify on the frontiers, and civil wars come to plague the Roman empire,
the traditional legions do respond to the crisis. Remarkably, all the legions we know
of with their distinct names and banners in 235 AD are still on the rolls in 297 AD when
there's an accounting under dioclesion, there's some other legions that have been incorporated
and raised in the period, and that is the military units do carry Rome through that
crisis, and no legion loses its eagle and disappears as in some of the older wars, but the Roman
army that comes out of the 3rd century into the 4th century is not at all the Roman army
that we had at the start of that crisis, and the fighting in the civil wars and frontier
wars of the 3rd century AD will dramatically change the way the Roman army will function
in the late empire, and that is a very significant change, these threats cannot simply be dismissed
as more traditional, you know, just more barbarian rates, and that gets us back to the fact that
in 235 AD, the emperor Severus Alexander was murdered by one, a group of his army officers
on the Rhine frontier near the city of Mainz when he was involved in carrying out a German
expedition. That put in power a man called Maximus I, the Thracian, a tough man who had
risen from the ranks who was neither a senator nor an equestrian who waged some very ferocious
wars against the Germans on the Rhine and the Danube, and eventually was toppled from
a revolt within the Roman senate, within Italy and Africa, where he was opposed by the landed
classes of the interior of the empire because of his ruthless exactions in taxes. His army
death and murder in 238 led to a succession of emperors from the high aristocracy who
by 268 AD had blown it, had failed to contain the attacks in the east and the north, who
were discredited, the last of this group of emperors is a man named Galleanus who in 268
AD was murdered, and following Galleanus in 268 AD are a series of tough soldier emperors,
men who come from that provincial society I've described in the last several lectures,
who are not from the old senatorial equestrian elite, and it is they, particularly the emperors
Claudius II, Aurelian, Probus, and ultimately Dioclesian, who will halt the attacks, restore
Roman imperial authority on the frontiers, and carry out a monetary and administrative
reform that transforms the whole nature of the monarchy. The northern provinces, Galle,
the upper Danube, Britain, the provinces which I've stressed in this economic and social
change, they get hit very hard in this crisis starting from the mid third century. It is
at this point we believe that new coalitions of Germans appear. They are not temporary
outfits just to carry out a raid, they seem to last for more than just a season's campaign,
they have the Saxons in northern Germany along the North Sea and Newtland, they begin
to raid the island of Britain. The raids intensify, the imperial government fails to protect
these coasts, and the British navy based in northern Gaul and Britain, and military forces
in Britain, raise a rebellion in 288 and put their own man on the throne, a man named Corousius,
and there's literally an independent Roman government in Britain that is set up down
to 296 to stop these raids. The same appears in Gaul and the upper Danube regions, where
in 260 AD the Rhine army rebelled, because the Emperor Galleanus, the fellow I talked
about earlier, he and his family had failed to contain the barbarian attacks, primarily
the Franks and the Alamani, two new confederations that appear in our sources, both of them are
groupings of earlier tribes, they've got kings, they've got better armor and equipment,
and they are attacking the Agri De Comates, they're moving into the Danube, they're
raiding into the Rhine, and in the 280s these attacks become very, very dangerous, from
260 down to 274 there is effectively a Gala Roman emperor, operating in the city of Trier,
Travere, and at the time he ruled Britain and Gaul and parts of Spain, that government
appeared as a way of countering these attacks, so the barbarian assaults resulted in essentially
political fragmentation, the setting up of Roman style governments to oppose these attacks,
and they were principally coming by West Germanic tribes, people long in contact with the Romans
and who have acquired better organization, better discipline, some kind of sense of leadership
under their kings, and they are crossing over, some of these migrations seem to be efforts
to move into Roman territory, others are raided, but the balance of power has significantly
changed on the Rhine and upper Danube, and the Romans now have a serious threat.
They were, as I mentioned at the start of this lecture, only the third of serious threats,
there were more serious threats on the Danube and to the East, and those would be the Sasaninid
Shaws of Persia and the Goths who are the main players, and it's now time to turn to
the type of threats they posed in this assault on the Roman Empire.
