Lecture 30, Eastern Rivals, Susannid Persia
In this lecture I plan to look at Rome's new Eastern Rival and those are the Susannid
or Susannian Shaws of Persia.
And I mentioned in the last two lectures that the Persians ended up, perhaps without much
doubt, posing a much more dangerous threat to the Roman Empire than either the Germanic
tribes of Western Europe or the new arrivals from Scandinavia, the Goths.
And it's time to look at why the Persians were such a formidable threat and why the
Romans massed so much of their military forces in the east to oppose this threat.
And by doing so, exposed the Danube and Rhine frontiers to far more intensive attacks by
Goths and West Germanic tribes, which plagued the Roman Empire by the 240s and 250s and
forced a whole new breed of emperors, the so-called soldier emperors, to seize power and to beat
back the invaders and restore imperial unity.
The Susannid state is the creation of two great shaws, one named Ardisher, who seized
power as King of Kings, the ancient title of Near Eastern Monarchs in 227 AD, and died
either in 241 or 240 AD to be followed by his son Shapur.
And Shapur had a very long reign, dying perhaps in 272, although there's a bit of debate on
Susannid chronology.
These two kings together were the true foes of the Roman emperors of the third century.
And both of them should get credit for building a very effective bureaucratic state in the
Near East, the Susannid Empire, and they based it on the traditions of the Hellenistic
world and also drew on the earlier Persian and Near Eastern traditions that go back
into earliest history in that region, the Great Persian Empire, the so-called Achaemenid
Empire of the 6th through 4th century BC, and the earlier empires of Babylonia, Assyria,
and the like.
The Persian shaws to some extent owed their success to the Romans, especially to the Emperor
Trajan.
I mentioned that Trajan came up with a logistical and strategic system to beat the Parthian
kings, the Arsaka kings of Parthia, that the use of double-envelopment, these grand columns
of Roman armies inexorably moving down the Euphrates and Tigris against the capital cities
of Babylonia, Ctesahthon, and Selukia, that the Romans could always force the Parthian
kings to come to terms.
And that Roman expeditions thereafter, some would go so far as to say they were really
just training exercises for the Eastern legions, the Parthians increasingly could not deal
with Roman armies.
And so the Parthian kings were discredited and weakened, and that enabled the Persian
shaws to overthrow them.
And there's a fair amount of truth to that.
There were also other difficulties with the Parthian state.
The last of these Roman expeditions in 217 to 18 AD discredited the Parthian king, Artabani,
the 5th, and he went down in defeat before the Persians, who had been ruling southwestern
Iran as a client of the Parthian kings for many generations.
The success of the Sassanidid kings rested on their organization, but above all on the
legitimacy they had in the eyes of the majority of Iranians.
The Sassanidid kings based their position on claims of continuity with the earlier Persian
monarchs, going back to Cyrus the Great, who had built the first Persian empire in the
6th century BC, the empire that was overthrown by Alexander the Great.
These shaws adopted the traditions, the symbols that linked them to those earlier Persian
kings, even though they were not actually related to them.
They also built their state on sponsoring a monotheistic creed, Zoroastrianism, still
an important religion, primarily located in India today.
But the Zoroastrian monotheistic creed, as it was reformed in the 3rd century by the
great teacher Qatir, became one of the pillars of the Sassanidid power.
It was eventually organized into what we would think as a state religion.
And that faith bolstered the position of the shaw, the king of kings, who represented the
light of the world, the guardian of true traditions of the god Ahura Mazda, that is the supreme
god in this war between good and evil.
So the Sassanidid shaws always had this very powerful religious symbolism from which they
could draw great strength and legitimacy.
Unlike the Parthians, the Sassanidids were undoubtedly Iranians, and their power was based
on the Iranian landed elites.
The cities in Mesopotamia, while important, were not vital.
And so from the Roman viewpoint, this political change turned out to also be a significant
military change for them, because the Sassanidid shaws' powers really rested to the east of
the Zagros Mountains on the Iranian plateau.
And when Roman armies threatened, used the old strategy against the Parthians, they threatened
those cities in Babylonia.
While they were losses, they could not bring the Sassanidid shaws to the negotiating table
the same way that they could have done with the Parthian kings, who depended on those
cities far more.
And that's an important point.
Mesopotamia becomes, from the Sassanidid viewpoint, something of a frontier province.
And when the emperor Julian attempts to launch his great expedition against him in 363, he
encounters a Mesopotamia just bristling with fortifications and a shaw willing to trade
space for strategic advantage, and that, in effect, that changes the strategic ground
rules of eastern wars.
The shaws were also very successful in building a bureaucratic state.
And it replaced the loose hegemony that the Parthian kings had exercised over the various
peoples of Iran.
They based their armies on the traditional horse archers recruited from the steppes and
added to that army a large number of cataphracti, that is heavily armed lancers, the types of
cavalry the Romans encountered in Eastern Europe among the Sarmatian nomads.
But the shaws fielded disciplined infantry.
They clearly have a siege train.
They have a supply system.
And they also obtained war elephants from India because the Sassanidid shaws not only
overthrew the Parthian overlord, but they went on to conquer the so-called Kushan empire
in Central Asia and in Northwestern India.
So the Sassanidid state, in its territorial extent, was twice the size of the Parthian
empire, and the Sassanidid shaws had the gold fields of India, the very lucrative caravan
trade coming into the Central Asian cities such as Maraconda, which is the predecessor
of the later fabled Samarkand.
So the shaws of Persia had much greater financial and military resources than any Parthian king.
And that's an important point to stress.
And legitimacy in the eyes of the Iranian elite was all-important.
The shaws could draw on the great power of Iran, and that Zoroastrian faith that the
shaws came to embrace and promote as the religion of the Iranians proved a very important pillar
to their monarchy.
That Zoroastrianism is summed up in the great works of the Avesta.
These are Middle Persian texts in which the traditions of Zoroastrianism was written down.
It should be noted that we know very little about the Zoroastrian faith before the Sassanidid
shaws.
To some extent, the Sassanidids created something of a political mythology that the earlier
Persian kings were strict monotheistic Zoroastrians.
We have reasons not to believe that, which we need not go into.
They dismissed the Parthian kings as Phil Hellenes and interlopers, you know, no better
than Alexander and the Macedonians, and instead bolstered this ethnic monotheism, which while
universal in its message and in its theme of universal redemption, was very, very largely
Iranian in its social and linguistic and literary traditions.
So it was a monotheism that was deeply rooted in Iranian traditions because the shaws depended
on that landed aristocratic class in Iran that provided the military forces for the
Sassanidid armies.
And the Zoroastrian traditions are well seen on Sassanidid coins, the silver dirhams, these
are very wide silver coins in which the very stylized portrait of the shaw is shown in
the middle, wearing a ceremonial crown, later Sassanidid coins have the circles around them
with the various quadrants of the universe, and the crown essentially breaks that orb.
And what the coin represents is the shaw in the middle of the cosmos, a ruling as the
guardian of the Hora Mazda, and laying claim to the title King of Kings, Lord of all the
universe, a title that goes all the way back to the earliest Decadian emperors, Sargon and
Naram Singh.
So this religious ideology is extremely important to the Persian shaws, and it also explains
why they're so determined to go to war with Rome.
Artisher I, the first of the Sassanidid shaw, sent a message to the then reigning emperor
Severus Alexander, the last of the Severan emperors, a really very, very courteous and
deferential emperor to the Senate, who was largely dominated by his mother Julia Maima,
and an emperor that was remembered very fondly in the later literary tradition, but an emperor
who probably didn't meet the standard of a conqueror, at least for the imperial army.
Artisher's message was quite simple if we believe the literary sources, and that is,
the Romans can have peace with Persia if they withdraw from Asia, that is, if they relinquish
control of Asia Minor, the Syrian provinces, Armenia, which is their client, Egypt.
In effect, giving over the part of the Roman world I mentioned earlier was where all the
economic and financial strength of the Roman Empire, well, this is just unacceptable.
The Persian shaw had visions of restoring the empire of Cyrus the Great back in the 6th
century BC, and they were determined to enforce these claims.
When Severus Alexander refused, there was no negotiation on this, a war erupted immediately.
That meant the emperor had to take the field, and the Persian expeditions were extremely
expensive and difficult to wage.
The emperor had to march from Rome to the eastern frontier.
Unlike the defense of the Danube, or the Rhine, where the emperor could leave Rome and get
to those frontiers within two to three months, the imperial court going east would take at
least three to six months to get everyone to Antioch, the capital city of Syria, and
once in Antioch, it would be 300 miles farther over the Euphrates to the bases in Roman Mesopotamia
to launch the expedition against the Persian cities.
So when Persian armies attacked imperial territory, and this was in 230 AD, it wasn't until three
years later that Severus Alexander was in a position to wage his counter-offensive.
And this is an important point to stress in these wars.
They were very difficult to wage and to time.
It also meant the Roman armies had to get involved in supporting the Armenian king.
If you recall, the Armenian kings were descended from the Parthian kings.
They were no friends of the Sasaninids, and they particularly resented the Sasaninid Shahs
later on when they tried to impose their Zoroastrianism on the Armenians, who increasingly became
Christian.
Nonetheless, the Romans had to get involved in the difficult problem of waging war in
Armenia, backing up the fellow Roman king, and getting involved in the vortex of Armenian
politics, which is sometimes would be quite hopeless.
The result of this first Persian war is that Severus Alexander gained a really disappointing
success.
And in 232, he had to negotiate with the Shah, call an armistice, and break off action to
hurry west to face dramatic attacks on the Rhine.
And as I stress, this is the first time a Roman emperor had to call off operations in
the east to deal with Germans on one of the northern frontiers.
And that was a significant change.
It pointed out the stress that these simultaneous wars, or nearly simultaneous wars, could have
on the Roman military system, which was premised on an earlier situation in the second century,
where the Romans had overwhelming military superiority, and there was no danger of them
waging a war on one frontier.
And even withdrawing some forces from some of the quiet frontiers, there just wasn't
any threat that could could exploit this temporary Roman weakness or preoccupation.
But this, this is, this is the whole story of the third century that the, the system
first breaks down.
Severus Alexander, as I mentioned, was murdered.
There was a civil war in 238, and the succession difficulties and the frontier wars in the
north allowed the new shore, Shapur, to reopen the offensive of his father in an effort to
conquer those Roman eastern provinces.
And he waged three different great campaigns, as he calls it.
And these are recorded on a remarkable, remarkable monumental inscription at, at Naxi Hustam
in southern Persia, where he, he erects this trilingual inscription telling us of his great
campaigns.
It's in, it's in Iranian, Aramaic, and Greek.
It's a traditional way of announcing the great master of, of the Near East by using several
languages to report your victories.
And there are important reliefs in which nempers are shown as suppliants or captives.
Philip the Arab and the unfortunate Valyrian who got captured by Shapur.
So Shapur opens the war in an effort to capture the Roman fortresses of Mesopotamia, which
had been organized into a network of, and fortresses and highways back in 198 and 200.
Those fortresses, fortresses do slow down Persian assaults because they have to stop
and capture them.
The fortresses defend the key water sources.
And ultimately those Severan fortresses act as the shield that, that it, it ultimately
breaks the Sasanidid efforts to capture Syria and, and, and Asia Minor.
Nonetheless, these attacks are serious.
The young Gordian III in 242 had to take the field.
He is murdered before the army can actually go into action in 244 by his Praetorian Prefect
Philip the Arab.
Philip actually stages a food shortage to get the soldiers to riot and to lynch Gordian.
And then Philip arranges a truce with Shapur and agrees to pay Shapur, we're told, half
a million gold pieces to break off the operation.
Why always got problems with those goths on the Danube, I mentioned in the last lecture.
This is the second significant difference from in Roman Eastern Wars.
The first time a Roman emperor pays off an Eastern potentate with what turns out to be
the largest sum of money that ever exchanged hands between a Roman emperor and a Persian
shawl.
For just any in the sixth century AD, never quite paid that much to his Sasanid, Sasanid
opponent.
Once again, Roman Civil War in 253, I'd mentioned in the last lecture where there's competition
between the Rhine and Danube legions opens up the opportunity for Shapur to break the
truce and to invade in his so-called second campaign.
According to his inscription, he actually sacked the city of Antioch, the capital of
Syria.
He may have sacked it a second time in 260, that's a debate that preoccupies historians
of this period, but whatever happened, that threat to Roman Syria, Persian army penetrating
the fortresses of Mesopotamia and getting into Roman Syria, meant that the successful candidates
of the Civil War in 253 had to take the field and deal with this threat.
Attack was in 253, the emperor who goes east, Falyrian, is not in position to fight the
Persians until two years later.
All of the logistics and difficulties of marching those armies east, he wages an inconclusive
Persian war, he has to retire to Rome, Shapur comes back in his so-called third campaign
in 258, Valyrian takes the field again, and in 260 AD, Valyrian, somewhere near the city
of Karai, apparently agreed to a negotiation with Shapur, and according to the Roman sources,
Shapur treacherously seized the emperor and his court, and as a result, the demoralized
eastern army was in no position to counter the Persians who spent most of the summer
of 260 AD sacking cities in Syria and in Asia Minor, and as I mentioned earlier, the Persians
can capture cities.
The Persians are eventually driven out by an eastern army rallied by the officers who
set up two young rulers, Queytus and Macriannus, who were declared emperors of the east, and
then the eastern army marches off and fights a war against Galleonians, you have another
civil war, but the Persian army retires, apparently with a great deal of its plunder
and its booty, and Shapur boasts of the Roman captives he takes, he actually uses the Roman
soldiers to build an important dam project on the lower Euphrates Tigris area, and that
victory of Shapur is celebrated in the reliefs, and the Roman sources tell us that the unfortunate
emperor Valyrian spent the remainder of his days acting as essentially Shapur's footstool
whenever he got on his horse, that is, it's very useful to show, there's the emperor Valyrian
of Rome, and you know, just bend down as I mount my horse, and then you know, take
him back to the palace, trot him out next time when I'm ready to ride.
This was, if it's true, we don't know if it's true or not, but we do know on the reliefs
that Valyrian is groveling before Shapur, if it's true, it marked the degradation of
Roman power, it was a humiliation, and Valyrian's son Galleonians could do nothing about this,
I mean, it was, the emperor died in captivity at some unknown date.
So by 260, the Roman Eastern frontier looked very, very disorganized, and the only reason
why the Persians didn't exploit this frontier weakness and move in and capture large sections
of the Roman East is because the institutions in the Roman East were such that even though
the Romans had lost their emperor, even though there were civil wars raging in the Balkans,
there was enough institutional support among the landed and elite classes of the eastern
cities to give their loyalty, money, and support to any figure who would represent the legitimacy
of Rome in battling the Persians.
The Persians were not an option.
Based on the reports from their own sources, the ruthless sacks of cities, the Persians
discredit themselves in the eyes of many of these elites, they were particularly ruthless
and sacking pagan sanctuaries.
And the Persians, while they were monotheists and universalists in their appeals, their
Zoroastrianism was essentially a national religion.
And to them, the cults of the Roman world looked like, you know, heresy, even such a
cult as Mithras that eventually, that originally went back to Persian prototypes.
And there's good argument to be made that even if the Persians had moved in and attempted
to organize provinces in these regions, they would have faced a great deal of resistance
as they later would when they took over Armenia when Armenia had gone Christian.
And so the Persians in that regard did not help themselves, not only because of the depredations
of the army, but if they had moved in, they would have brought this state religious apparatus
with them in taxation.
And most of the Roman elites in the east at this point were part of that Greco-Roman tradition
and gave their support to Rome and expected a Roman emperor to come and rescue them.
And that's a very important point to make.
It's a significant difference from what those, many of those cities did in the 7th century
when the Arabs showed up.
In the 3rd century, the elites in the east, not just in Asia Minor, but in Syria and Egypt,
they were looking for a Roman emperor.
Well, such a figure did emerge.
In 260, at the time of the disorganization of the Roman army in the east, a fellow by
the name of Odinathus, emerged as the savior of the Roman east.
Odinathus is a puzzling figure.
He was a merchant prince from the city of Palmyra.
I've mentioned it several times before.
Palmyra was a city in northern Syria on the key caravan routes, and the Palmyrines had
traditionally dominated the caravan trade running into the Sasanidid Empire.
And they had connections and communities stretching all the way to Central Asia.
They were extremely adept merchants.
They were of the Roman empire, but not in the Roman empire.
The Palmyrines, by the middle of the 2nd century AD, had begun to adopt the Greek civic-style
institutions.
They put up buildings that looked like Greek buildings.
They also started to use Greek as their official language.
Their own language was probably a form of Arabic, although they generally used Aramaic,
the common Semitic language in the Near East.
And you get these remarkable composite portraits of a man and a woman, or their funerary monuments.
They combine Greek and local artistic styles.
The figure is often shown with both a Roman and an Aramaic name.
They're in Greek and Aramaic.
Many of the men sport togas, they have Roman citizenship.
The women are decked out in the traditional garb of East Syria.
And it shows the kind of composite provincial society that emerged in Palmyra and was very
similar to that society described at the fortress of Duryuropus, which was actually garrisoned
by a group of Palmyrines.
Odinathus, therefore, collected a group of different types of titles and took over the
military operations against the Persians.
The Eastern Roman army cooperated with them.
He was able to field at least 10,000 Palmyrene horse archers who were regarded as some of
the best soldiers in the Roman auxiliary army.
He also had contacts with the various Arabic tribes and recruited Arab-like cavalry.
And he launched a defensive against the Persians that ended up taking the Roman army deep into
the Persian territory to Ctesiphon and driving Shapur out.
Now Odinathus, who died in 267, and then his wife, who took over Zinobia, who styled herself
as an empress in Augusta, as an empress is often known as Queen Zinobia, but she really
aspired to be a Roman ruler.
Both of these figures were in a rather ambiguous position.
They did not officially oppose the regime in Rome, the legitimate emperor in Rome whose
support was based on the Danube armies.
On the other hand, they aspired to rule as independent Roman-style emperors.
Zinobia actually advanced her son, Vabilathus, rather than herself.
She understood that she should have an emperor and she was actually running the whole outfit.
But they could not make themselves legitimate in the eyes of the elite classes of the Roman
East.
And in 270 AD, when the emperor Aurelian came to the throne, and the emperor Aurelian essentially
marks a turning point, I mean, he's the fellow who re-establishes the frontiers on the Danube
and he's ready to deal with Palmyra, Aurelian's in no mood to accept an informal partition
of the Roman world.
And he marches the Danube army east and he's a brilliant general and he just sweeps the
Palmyrene resistance aside, takes the city of Palmyra, captures Zinobia, he marches back
to Rome, there's a rebellion in Palmyra, he pounces back on the city and sacks it.
So the monuments that we see in Palmyra today are very much the monuments as would be at
this time because Palmyra's declines to relatively minor importance.
So what you're looking at when you see that site today in Syria is the way the city looked
just before the great sack by Aurelian.
And therefore he ends this informal eastern empire.
Aurelian and the emperors who follow him, however, down to Dioclesion, have to reorganize
the eastern frontier.
There is significant repairs to the fortresses of Mesopotamia.
Aurelian starts the construction of a set of fortifications along the desert frontier.
It's later known as the Strata diocliziana, it's completed by Dioclesion.
This is the military highway that links essentially Egypt to Mesopotamia.
The Romans are now going to patrol that desert frontier very seriously.
They fear that the Sasaninid shaw will try to resume the war by fighting through Arab
proxies, that's what happens in the later fourth century.
The Romans also are forced to launch several more expeditions against the Sasaninid shaw.
There's one launched by the emperor Charis in 282 or 283, he's emperor.
It's a successful expedition, but not for Charis.
Charis is killed in one of the rather strange ways of the third century, almost all emperors
in the third century either killed in civil war, killed in battle, well I guess Valyrian
dies in captivity.
Charis apparently was struck by lightning and killed just at the point that the Roman
army won its victory over Ctesiphon, a most strange way of suffering a demise.
There's another operation waged in 298, 300, that last war of the third century done, that's
conducted by the emperor Galerius who's at the time junior emperor Caesar, that war
draws to a close the fighting of the third century with the Sasaninid shaw and it essentially
marks the Roman victory.
That last Persian war, the then reigning shaw and Narciss, agrees to surrender strategic
provinces in Mesopotamia on the upper Tigris, recognizes Roman authority in Armenia and really
the Romans come out of this struggle with some territorial advantages and with the acknowledgment
of their position in Armenia which is quite different from what happened on the northern
frontiers, that is the victory in the east was bought at a certain amount of sacrifice
on those northern frontiers.
This is the great victory that's celebrated on the arch of Thessalonica today in northern
Greece, Galerius was the Caesar, that is the junior emperor of the east, we'll discuss
this position precisely in the next lecture and the treaty really marked a major triumph
for Rome.
The Romans had faced perhaps their most dangerous opponent in the whole third century and certainly
they're the most dangerous opponent in the east and they had triumphed.
It was a testimony to the logistics, the training, the discipline of the Roman army, the tenacity
of the Romans to continue the fight despite some really serious defeats and losses.
It also depended very heavily on the foresight of Septimius Severus to construct those fortresses
in Mesopotamia which tended to dilute the full force of these Iranian invasions into
the east, that is the descendants were always delayed by attacking these fortresses, it
gave the Romans the necessary time to mobilize those expeditions which would take two years
to take the field.
It proved the importance of having a loyal Armenia but above all it also depended very
heavily on the civic institutions and loyalty of the civic elites in the Roman east who
paid for these wars and paid very heavily for these wars and who came to perceive these
struggles against the Persians as their struggle.
This can be documented in local coin types, coins issued by the Greek cities in the Roman
east during the third century which increasingly shift from local themes on their money, that
is the ancestral gods, the festivals, to the emperor in combat against the Persians, the
victory of the emperor, the emperor as the comrade and associate of the local gods and
it's the institutional loyalty of the cities of the Roman east that also are behind this
victory because they provide the recruits, the logistics to back those Roman expeditions
and furthermore on the rare occasions the Persians break into Syria and Asia Minor those cities
universally oppose the Sasaninids, most of them suffer a sack or at least the devastation
of their hinterland as a reward.
So the imperial victory depended on a number of important factors but ironically that very
victory eroded the civic institutions, it battered the Roman army and compromised some
of those key institutions that gave the Romans their victory in the third century and that
will be the story of the fourth century and the restoration under Dioclesian.
