In this lecture, I wish to explain the changes that occurred in the Roman world as a result
of the wars and invasions of the 3rd century.
And we'll look at the changes, particularly within the Roman Empire, but also to some
extent with the various barbarian peoples living along the frontiers.
Two emperors in particular are fundamental to these changes.
One is the last of the great pagan emperors, Dioclesian, who came to the throne in a Civil
War in 284 and retired from Imperial office on the 1st of May 305, a really remarkable
achievement that a Roman emperor could actually retire as opposed to being deposed or assassinated
or murdered, which was the usual method of removal in the 3rd century.
The other emperor is the first Christian emperor, Constantine, who took power in 306.
He was saluted by the Western army, reunited the Roman world in 324 and died in 337.
And Constantine is often associated with Dioclesian as pursuing essentially the same
administrative and political policies, although Constantine was a Christian emperor.
And that Dioclesian and Constantine are often seen together as creating the late Roman government
or the style of late Roman government known as the Dominate.
That is a government based on the notion that the emperor is now an autocrat.
He is Dominus Nostair, our lord, hence the word Dominate, Dominus means lord in Latin.
The institutionalization of all the ceremonies, the exaltation of imperial power, the association
of the emperor overtly with religious symbols, whether it be pagan under Dioclesian or Christian
under Constantine, the construction of a new bureaucracy of civil officials, the reorganization
of the army, and even new policies vis-a-vis the barbarian peoples.
To some extent, Constantine did build on the traditions of Dioclesian.
But in my opinion, they were fundamentally different.
Dioclesian looked back to Augustus as his model.
Dioclesian came from a generation of soldier emperors born in the Balkans, many of them
from families who had probably received their citizenship in 212 under the edict of the
Emperor Caracalla.
And he understood the chaotic wars, the inflation, and the difficulties of the third century.
And there are certain policies pursued by Dioclesian that reflects his background very
strongly, that military background.
And Constantine, on the other hand, came from the generation after Dioclesian.
He did convert to Christianity.
In my opinion, he had a conversion in 312.
And when he became sole emperor in 324, he promoted his new faith, created in effect
an imperial church.
And that marks him as quite different from Dioclesian.
And in many ways, Constantine is the author of the Dominate.
And I always think of Dioclesian as the last great pagan Roman emperor looking backward,
whereas Constantine does create a new order.
He even creates a new Rome, the city of Constantinople, which we'll get to.
Well, with that proviso, let's take a look at Dioclesian first, a tough Balkan soldier.
He understood from the chaotic wars of the third century and the short period where you
had these regional empires in effect, the Gallo Roman, the central empire, and then
this strange hegemony of Palmyra in the east, that the number of threats on the frontiers
required that there be an imperial presence on each of the key frontiers.
And he arranged a system that was finished in 293, which is known as the tetrarchy of
joint emperorship.
In 285 AD, Dioclesian elevated his comrade in arms, a man named Maximianus of similar
background.
He was to become the Augustus, or senior emperor of the west.
He resided at the city of Milan, the great capital of northern Italy that had prospered
so much on the development of the northwestern provinces.
Dioclesian resided in the city of Nicomedia, today Istinet in Turkey, which is right on
the sea of Marmara and close proximity to the Danube, the lower Danube frontier.
And Asia Minor provided much of the wealth and provisions to support the armies on the
Danube.
In 293, Dioclesian made a virtue out of a shortcoming.
He only had one daughter, he had no sons.
So he arranged that both he and his colleague Maximianus adopt and train two junior emperor's
seniors, again in the Augustan tradition, of men who could step in as Augusti when Dioclesian
decided to retire.
He abdicated, as I said, on May 1st, 305.
And these men would be mature men with all the symbols of legitimacy and experience.
They would be styled as Caesars, a man named Galerius was appointed Caesar in the east.
He was married to Dioclesian's only daughter, Galeria Valeria.
And the other man was a man named Constantius I, or Constantius Chlorus.
He had a rather green polar to his look.
Another tough Balkan soldier who happened to be the father of the emperor Constantine
the Great, Constantine I.
And Constantius ruled as emperor Caesar, junior emperor in the west.
Constantius resided at Trier, Travere, the great Gaelic capital in Roman Germany, again
a product of all of that frontier development.
Galerius took up his residence at Antioch.
The imperial capitals, as well as the origins of these emperors, underscore the importance
of the frontier provinces to the imperial government.
And the theme that I had raised earlier in this lecture series, that increasingly from
the 2nd century Aedion, the emperors are investing more and more of their government
money and manpower, military manpower, in the vital frontier provinces.
This system worked extremely well.
Dioclesion in classic Roman tradition, as if going back to the earliest days of the
republic, had the superior Alctoritas, the influence his three colleagues deferred to
him.
He acted as the informal senior emperor in this college of four emperors, the so-called
tetrarchy.
The arrangement enabled for the suppression of rebellions, meeting attacks on the frontiers,
and furthermore assisted in the collection of taxes throughout the empire.
And it gave a measure of stability for 20 years that Dioclesion could conduct a number
of important monetary and fiscal reforms that put the Roman government on a sound fiscal
and monetary footing.
Contrary to what is often repeated in textbooks, Dioclesion was a never debased currency.
He came out of that tradition of chaotic debasement.
He actually reformed the currency.
The method of tax collection, while heavy, was at least fair, and a system of taxation
was arranged, a method of calculating taxes so that the emperor could actually estimate
what his budget would be.
These were very important innovations that persisted for the next 200 years.
There were going to be important army reforms, we'll mention later on.
There was also a concerted effort to rebuild cities, especially frontier fortifications,
to sponsor the revival of the ancient gods, who were the protectors of these tetrarchs,
these four emperors.
Unfortunately, for Dioclesion, this arrangement of imperial succession did not last about
a little more than a year after his retirement.
On May 1st, 305, he and a very reluctant Maximianus retired and surrendered power to
the two Caesars, Galerius and Constantius, who in turn appointed two junior emperors,
Maximinus II in the east and a man by the name of Severus, or Severus II in the west.
The appointments were Galerius's appointments.
Maximinus in the east was actually Galerius's nephew, Severus was an old buddy of Galerius,
and Constantius, who was the Augustus in the west, had a son, Constantine, about the
time pretty close to 30 years of age, who was passed over.
And Constantine is the man who essentially challenges this arrangement, which cut him
out of his dynastic heritage, as Constantine saw it.
His father, Constantius, campaigned in Britain against one of the rare attacks of the Picts.
The people of Scotland, in areas of Caledonia, the Highlands, Constantius campaigned far
north of the Wall, won a great victory, and then died at the city of York in July of 306,
and the western army promptly declared Constantine emperor.
Now under the arrangements of the tetrarchy, Constantine wasn't supposed to be emperor,
should be this guy Severus II, the Caesar, he was not there, the western army knew Constantine's
father, they knew Constantine, and Constantine accepted this position, and in so doing, condemned
the Roman world to another round of civil wars.
And the details of the civil war need not detain us, it ended up, it ended in 324 when
Constantine defeated his rivals and reunited the Roman Empire under his sole authority.
But these civil wars in 306, 324 differed from those during the third century.
Number one, the Empire was not assaulted by the same barbarian threats.
To some extent, that could be simply a case that the Roman armies in the third century
had taught the barbarians a lesson, and that Dioclesion had fortified and strengthened
the frontiers.
It also was in part a result that many of those barbarians who would have attacked were
recruited in very large numbers to fight in these Roman civil wars, especially Franks
and Olamani in the western army, and in the eastern armies Goths and Sarmatians.
Another important point about these civil wars is they were not similar to the third
century wars where two regional armies would declare an emperor, they would march to a
battlefield, fight a battle, and win or take all.
What happened is the Roman Empire broke up into something like three or four regional
states in which the emperors warred for many years.
Roman's capital was Trier, Travere, from the time he was declared emperor by the western
army in 306 until, well, until 324 and even later, it wasn't until 330 when he assumed
his residence at the city of Constantinople.
In these wars, also, Rome was no longer important to the legitimacy of the emperor.
That is what mattered was having a powerful regional army behind you and knocking off your
rivals.
And unlike the third century, where an emperor who was successful in a civil war had to march
to the senate and get that legitimacy, in the world of the dominate as created by Dioclesion
and Constantine, which you needed was victory, favor of the gods, and the senate was just
a sideshow.
It would be nice if you showed up.
And over the course of most of the fourth century, most Roman emperors didn't even bother
going to the senate.
Very very few emperors even took time for an extended visit, and we'll see when the emperors
become Christian, there's even less of a reason to go to the senate because the Roman senate
remained powerfully pagan.
And these changes were extremely important in transforming the nature of the Roman monarchy.
And there are changes that occurred without even getting into the religious issue of the
fact that the emperor after 324 is now overtly Christian and is sponsoring an imperial church.
In addition to these changes in the nature of the monarchy, Constantine especially overhauled
civil and military administration of the Roman Empire.
And that civil and military administration, which already had some of these features under
Dioclesion, had very powerful consequences for the relationship between Rome and the
barbarians.
I mentioned that the senate was no longer important to the central administration.
That is the tradition of drawing on the talent of the imperial aristocracy that was domiciled
in Italy, of the great senatorial families and the equestrians, who went out and served
in the provinces as part of their responsibility and loyalty of Rome.
That was no longer needed.
In fact, that was not even desirable in the world of the dominate.
What the emperor needed were servants who could collect taxes, who could enforce as
well in the provinces, and who did not offer a challenge to him.
Because the Roman emperors of the late empire were from military and humble backgrounds.
They probably felt very ill at ease in the presence of the various Roman senators who
are a very articulate, virtually Mandarin class.
And the way these later Roman emperors dealt with this Mandarin elite was to force this
elite to approach the emperor by ceremonial arrangements.
That is, they had to come to the god-like emperor and the ceremony simplified the relationship
between the emperor and the elite classes of the empire because they would make the request.
The emperor may or may not grant it, and the emperor did not have to play the game of Augustus
or earlier Roman emperors of acting as the social equals of these elite, which they clearly
were not.
They were divided by class, by language and background, and therefore probably suffered
a very strong inferiority complex and suspected that ambitious senators could unseat them and
gain the symbols of legitimacy and make themselves emperor.
Instead, they built a new administrative and military caste.
In this regard, Constantine really is responsible for constructing this new imperial aristocracy.
The administration was greatly increased since you no longer depended on the senators.
By one count, in the year 200 AD, before the third century crisis, there may have been
something like 3,000 top officials in the Roman imperial government.
By the time of Constantine, say around 320 AD, there were at least 35,000.
In addition, most of those senior officials in the early empire were served by their own
slaves and freedmen.
In the later Roman empire, these staffs now had to be paid as salary officials, so the
size of the civil bureaucracy increased greatly, still under governed by our standards, but
it's considerable.
There was a whole new palace administration that was created around the person of the
emperor.
Many of the key positions were staffed by eunuchs who would not pose a threat to the
emperor because of their disfigurement.
They were often men of low and humble origin and despised and acted as a shield in a way
to protect the emperor from dealing with the senatorial elite.
Furthermore, the civil administration and the administration of the provinces were broken
down into a three-tiered structure, so the number of offices increased greatly.
Instead of 35 provinces, you now had something like 120 provinces.
The provinces were grouped into regional districts known as diocese, you can see where
the Catholic Church later got its organization.
The diocese were grouped into four prefectorates of the west of Italy, of Aliricum in the east,
and all of these positions had to be staffed, and most of them came from the civic elites
of cities, men who left their traditional homes to take service in the imperial government,
and many of these men came while well educated, did not have the prestige, the education,
and money of the old senatorial class that they were going to gain by imperial service
along with exemptions from taxation.
And so what happened with Constantine is the whole direction of client and patronage, the
whole sense of honor was inverted.
In the early empire, you had to have high status and high honor to serve the state.
Now under Constantine and later emperors, you got that as your reward, and that accounts
a great deal for the mismanagement, the corruption, and the mal-administration that plagued the
later imperial government as opposed to the earlier imperial government.
Furthermore, with Constantine, it behooved officials to convert to Christianity because
the court was openly Christian after 324, and while Christians were a tiny minority
in the Roman Empire, they now had the control of the court, and with the court, the administration
and the army, and Constantine starting in 325 AD defined Christianity, the great council
of Nicaea, and effectively created an imperial Christian Roman church, which was also going
to be staffed by bishops who were to be in association with the imperial government.
The army, another important area of imperial power that was reforged by Constantine.
Here our sources are not as we would like them.
We have very good information on the Roman imperial army running into the mid-3rd century
AD, and it really doesn't get illuminated again until the 350s when we begin to get
the account of Amianus Marcellinus and later works of the 4th and 5th century.
But there are significant changes by the time we see the Roman army in action in 350, and
there is some indication that many of these reforms go back to the Civil Wars of 306-324
and are institutionalized by Constantine.
It is often argued that the late Roman army was a case of buying more and getting less,
that is the army ballooned to something like 600,000 from 400,000 over the course of the
3rd century.
It is possible the army rose to 600,000, but I think Dioclesion immediately cashiered
many of the excess soldiers and brought the army back to its original size before the
crisis, because there's only so many men that the Roman imperial government could afford
to pay.
What was more important than size was the organization, that is the types of military
units that were in the imperial army, the discipline that was imposed, and the recruits
that were going into the army and how these men were being drilled and indoctrinated as
imperial professional soldiers.
As best as we can tell, Dioclesion, ever the conservative in so many ways, apparently premised
his army on the traditions of the legions.
I mentioned in an earlier lecture in 297 when we have a rare document that tells us of all
the legions of the Roman Empire, all the legions back in the Severin Age are still there.
There is, however, a change in practice.
That is, this division of a legion into a garrison unit and a vexillation or a battle
unit that the legions are often divided even geographically, that this part of the legion
is always on campaign, the other part is staying in garrison.
This is the origin of the field armies in the 4th century, that is probably true.
There is the recruitment of cavalry, although again that is overplayed about how cavalry
came to dominate the battlefield.
Roman imperial armies, at least until the 6th century AD, were primarily infantry armies.
The classic ratio is usually 7 infantrymen to every one cavalryman.
There was the recruitment, especially of light cavalry, the Romans always appreciated light
cavalry more than heavy cavalry.
There are some cataphracti and other heavily mailed cavalry patterned after the Persian
forces, but the Romans really appreciated cavalry, light cavalry for ambush, for flanking
movements and for reconnaissance.
The army was still primarily an infantry army.
What had changed though is the mission of the army as well as its doctrines and its ethos.
In the 4th century I put it this way.
As a result of those civil wars after 306, initiated by Constantine himself, the prime
mission of the Roman army shifted from defending the frontiers to defending the emperor, which
is a logical change given the position that the emperor now occupied in the dominate.
Loyalty to Rome was increasingly defined as closeness to the emperor.
You can see this both for the civil and the military administration, where the titles
you received represented your closeness to the emperor rather than any kind of social
status or rank or any kind of legal status.
That is imperial service brought with it honor, privileges, and you went into imperial service
for that.
That also explains how the army got divided into this distinction of a field army and
a frontier army.
Or as the sources call it in the mid 4th century, the committa tenses, that is the comrades,
the army that follows the emperor as opposed to the limitanii, the forces on the frontier,
the limace.
This distinction is in place by the mid 4th century and it can be very well studied in
a document known as the notitia dignitatum, which are the army roles of the imperial army
in the early 5th century, compiled somewhere between 406 and 423 AD for both the western
and eastern armies.
This division probably comes out of those civil wars, where you have these powerful
regional states fighting and what the emperor needed was a very effective field army to
battle rivals and to defend himself.
And increasingly, the forces on the frontiers were garrisoned in these fortified cities
and these makeshift defenses.
And so the evolution of the army into these two distinct branches was not so much a result
of some kind of grand strategy as the political realities of the early 4th century.
That is civil wars, the position of the emperor necessitated these powerful field armies.
In addition, those field armies and those frontier armies were increasingly being staffed
by barbarians.
Now in the early 4th century, the emperors had not yet gone to the point where they're
massively recruiting barbarians whole tribes and simply saying, well now you're a Roman
unit.
There are very few ethnic units from the titles that we can trace in the 4th century.
There are some, but most of these barbarians are coming in as individual recruits.
They're being put in military units alongside provincial Romans, frontier peoples who have
the same martial ethos, and they are being trained to fight as Roman soldiers in particular
formations.
However, it is noticeable, and especially the account of Amianus Marcellinus, the greatest
story in the 4th century, that many in the officer corps carry Germanic names, especially
Frankish and Alemonic names, that is West Germanic names, there are Goths, Sermatians,
and that the army was now a route for social mobility for barbarians in a way it had not
been in the 4th century, in the 3rd century.
In the 3rd century, we don't hear of German officers commanding Roman units as we do
from the 4th century on, and that was a result of several reasons.
First and foremost, and a point I really must stress, is the bloodletting that went on in
the 3rd century, especially in the Civil Wars.
Those wars were won by the traditional legions, and if you recollect the fighting that went
on in 69, which is reported by Tacitus, that fighting was multiplied many times over in
the 3rd century.
Many veteran soldiers and officers were killed in the fighting, legionary training required
two years of tough drill and experience to fight with a sword, by the time of Constantine
when you had a new wave of Civil Wars in 306-324, you just didn't have the time to train the
men, and you didn't have enough experienced men probably to do it, to impose that drill.
So increasingly, as a result of these Civil Wars, the army itself has lost, I think,
the requisite number of veterans and centurions and experienced junior officers to drill the
men to the standard they should be.
And we don't have records to record this, but this is an impression game from looking
at the losses of the 3rd century, and it explains various changes in Roman arms and tactics.
Part of it is in response to the foes, but it's clear that the armor and helmets are
simplified for manufacture, that you get rid of the legionary helmet, you go to the
simple conical helmet, which becomes very common in the Middle Ages, you go with leather
jackets.
The infantry are trained to fight as a pikeman with a long spear and a large shield.
The expensive articulated Roman body armor, the so-called lorica segmentato, the legionary
is discarded.
Increasingly the infantry is trained to fight with simpler tactics as a dense column, not
in open order formations, and that is because you can bring in barbarian recruits or provincial
Romans who have a good warrior tradition, but you don't have the time to take two, three,
four years to get them to the level of those legions of the principate.
The gladius and the scutum are discarded.
As a result, you go to this type of infantry.
There's an increasing stress on cavalry, in part because cavalry is impressive.
It's great to have household forces of cavalry, especially large German recruits riding around
to intimidate your provincials and would-be rivals.
The cavalry is exalted in the imperial army largely because they have this political function,
they follow the emperor.
These changes also are accompanied by changes in the way the army is organized.
There are new units created, and the units by their title indicate their closeness to
the emperor.
If you're in the field army, you're one of the emperor's comrades.
If you're on the frontier, you're the part of the Limitani.
The dissolution of the old Roman military units that disappear in the fourth century,
and with it the eagles, the traditions, the discipline, the regimental histories in effect
that go back into the late republic, that was all gone.
With it went that morale and professionalism so important for the old imperial army, and
the armies of the fourth century did not have that tradition.
This is a change that has certainly occurred by the mid-fourth century, and after 375 when
the Romans shift to recruiting these federal German tribes, it's an easy shift for them
because most of their military units don't have that old tradition.
Most of them are relatively small units, they're either household forces, they're in garrisons.
Many of the frontier forces by the mid-fourth century cannot operate in large-scale operations.
They're not trained to do that.
They're trained to hold fixed positions, and if there's any serious invasion, the emperor
in his field army is supposed to show up and handle the invaders.
That leads to a steady erosion of these frontier territories over the course of the fourth
century because increasingly the fighting is on imperial territory.
The imperial armies by the mid-fourth century are not launching deep strikes into the barbarian
lands, the fighting is on imperial territory, places on the frontier are being fortified,
there are movements of Roman provincials into the interior, and so the economic basis of
these frontier provinces is being eroded.
The very economic basis that supported that professional army on the frontiers as more
and more provincials move out, as cities are fortified, and in these vacant lands, starting
from the mid-fourth century, we get the settlement of whole tribes in these regions to defend
the frontier.
So there is a major social and economic change going on those frontiers, so that what you
get is a society that probably couldn't have sustained the old imperial army even if you
had wished.
And this is an important change that comes out of that fighting of the fourth century.
There's another question that could be raised and is still to be studied, and that is what
is the impact of Christianity on the fighting abilities of the army?
And most scholars at this point have simply said, well, there wasn't any, that the soldiers
simply accepted the god of the emperor and fought under his standard.
In the fourth century, the emperors tended to fight under the lbarum, the Christian emperors,
that is the standard that was devised by Constantine when he converted at the time of the Battle
of the Milvian Bridge, it's the Christogram, the name of Christ, the first two letters
are the name of Christ in Greek, and this was probably seen as a military talisman.
But one wonders about this, that the dissolution of the old military units and with it the
rituals and the protective gods of the unit, the creation of new units, the filling up
of these units with Germans and provincials from the frontier, and the changes of religious
loyalty that went on as you had emperors of the Nicene faith, the Arian faith, the pagan
emperor Julian, that the Roman army didn't have a certainty in their divine protectors
as they had back in the High Principate, and it was part of that whole loss of the tradition
of the eagles, the standards, the regimental histories, and as far as we can tell, imperial
armies don't start fighting under the cross until the early fifth century, and the emergence
of the military saints, so important in motivating Byzantine armies is probably a phenomenon
of the sixth and seventh century, and so the question of Christianity may be caught up
with this whole larger question of the loss of that old professional army and its replacement
by a new imperial army which doesn't have its loyalties quite yet defined, and essentially
what is missing in the late Roman army is the discipline, the traditions of the camp
of Hadrian. Those old legionary camps are now gone, and with it everything associated
with those camps, and it results in the late fourth century of literary figures, members
of the literate class such as Vigatius and Senezius of Cyrene, pleading with the later
Roman emperors restore the old legion, the Antiqua legio, and go back to the old discipline,
this is the tested method that will give us victory over the barbarians. Those appeals
fail for various reasons, and we'll discuss that in the coming lectures.
