Lecture 32 From Foes to Federates
In this lecture, I plan to deal with the relationships between the barbarians, the foes of Rome,
and this new imperial order that's been created by the emperor Constantine in the early 4th century.
And it's a question of, in the case of the northern barbarians, taking these foes and turning them eventually into what are known as
Federates, or allies, and that's a very specific term in late Latin, foiterate in Latin.
It means that German tribes as ethnic groups who are recruited as military units to fight under contract for the Roman emperor.
In part, you're drawing on a very old Roman tradition of using patron and client.
That is, the emperor is the patron to these allies, they're his clients, and the kings of these tribes then become officers and clients to the emperor
and are beholden to him, so there's that powerful personal element.
But also it is a shift of recruiting Germans or provincial Romans into Roman military units and then drilling them in these units.
Now you're going to be taking tribes as a group, as an ethnic group, and commissioning them as units, so ultimately their identity is that tribe.
And to some extent the Romans are going to reinforce those tribal identities, promote those tribal identities.
And that is a change that takes place in the second half of the 4th century, and especially after the decisive battle at Adrianople in 378,
where the Goths pull off a second victory over a Roman army and kill a second Roman emperor.
And that battle is very important for a number of reasons and is remembered for a number of mistaken reasons as well.
And that battle acts as the conclusion to this particular lecture on the relationship between Rome and the barbarians.
Now, what I plan to study in this lecture is how well did this dominate, this late Roman state, cope with barbarians both in the east,
the Persians, the Sasaninid Chaus who are still there, and the northern barbarians who are now organized into better confederations,
who have kings who are no longer just temporary figures who emerge for a particular raid,
but are kings who are beginning to establish a position of authority and are apparently able to transmit their position to successors.
They're also confederations that are better armed.
And in that dramatic group, we also include the Goths who are now settled in Eastern Europe and are a dominant power in the barbarian world.
Well, I think we should first look at the Persians because the late Roman army as reformed by Constantine really is tested in a war against Persia in the generation after his death,
and it is found seriously wanting.
And that defeat against the Persian army in 363, defeat and retreat by the Emperor Julian,
it leads to the death of a Roman emperor in a retreat before a Persian army,
pointed out some very serious weaknesses in the Roman imperial army, Roman strategy and logistics,
and is part of the reason behind why the Romans are shifting over to the use of these federal tribes.
There are other reasons.
One of them I suspect is simply fiscal and economic.
It becomes less expensive to hire these tribes under contract rather than reinstituting the traditional professional army of Rome,
which had its high salaries, its severance pay, its benefits.
You had to issue them the equipment, and given all the high costs of fighting warfare,
the higher ceremonial administrative costs of the late empire, to some extent the decision is just fiscal at times,
that it's easier to hire barbarian tribes, turn the enemies, turn the foes into our federates,
rather than recruiting from scratch more Roman professional soldiers,
as is often clamored in the, there's clamors for doing this in the sources,
but while these may be reforms that could change the situation,
generally the emperors are not a position to implement them because of manpower and financial reasons.
Well, the Persians attempt to challenge that decision of the third century under a shaw, shawp or the second,
carrying the same name as the famous shaw of the third century, who had a very long reign from 309 to 379.
And it's only after the death of Constantine that shawp or the second dares to challenge Roman power,
and the emperor is Constantius II, who is the youngest of Constantine's sons, who succeeds to power,
later the emperor Julian, who was a cousin of Constantius, and the emperor Valens,
the man who will give us the disaster to Adrianople.
These three emperors of the fourth century are put on the defense of fighting the resurgence of Susannandid power.
And they oppose Susannandid power with this new imperial army I had described in the previous lecture,
an army that may have problems with morale and what symbols it should be fighting under,
an army that is in transition in its tactics and its drill,
an army increasingly depending on recruits from barbarians from across the frontier,
or barbarians settled within the empire, these barbarians are often called laity,
that is, they're barbarians who've surrendered and been given lands in the Roman Empire,
and it is this army that is tested in Persia and is ultimately found really wanting.
Constantius II, who was unpopular for several reasons, not the least of which, he was an Arian Christian.
He subscribed to the confession that Christ was a generated creature and was somehow lesser than the father,
and so was opposed to the majority opinion at Nicaea in 325, the so-called Nicene Confession,
which ultimately becomes the basis of most Christian faith today.
And Constantius also inherited a very delicate situation in the east,
and Shapur in the 350s decided to reopen the wars of conquest against Rome.
And he methodically besieged the cities of Mesopotamia, and it climaxed in 359
with the capture of the fortress of Amida, which is now in southeastern Turkey,
and these successes by Shapur forced Constantius to take the field himself.
This required the mounting of a major eastern expedition,
and there had been no such operation like this for almost 60 years.
Again, as in the third century, such a campaign required the withdrawal of large numbers of forces from Europe.
It was a very heavy financial burden, and as Constantius was engaged in fighting his war against the Persians,
the Western army rebelled.
The army of the Rhine put up as emperor the cousin of Constantius, a man named Julian,
often known in the literature as Julian the Apostate, the one who stands aside.
Julian had been reared as a Christian, he had been baptized as a Christian,
but later converted to paganism secretly, went back to the worship of the old gods,
and in late 360 when he was proclaimed, in a Germanic custom, by the way,
he's the emperor who's raised on the shield at Lutetia in Paris by a Western Roman army
that comprised very largely of Franks and Alamani, that is Germans.
This army, to some extent, revolted against Constantius because not only were forces being transferred to the east,
but I suspect there were also religious issues involved, many of the soldiers in the Western army were still pagans.
The civil war that could have erupted between Julian and Constantius did not,
Constantius died of natural causes before the war was fought,
and Julian then inherited the problem of dealing with the Persians.
Julian, ironically, withdrew many of the forces from the west to fight his Persian campaign,
which was one of the reasons why the army had revolted in the first place,
a case of not getting what you wish, you may be blessed with it,
and Julian mobilized a very large army in 362, and in the spring of 363,
he followed the traditional Roman strategy, the two supporting columns that are to march down into Mesopotamia,
capture Ctesiphon, and the campaign failed miserably.
We have a very detailed account from Amiens Marcellinus, everything went wrong,
and to some extent it was Julian's own failure in leadership.
Julian timed the campaign improperly, he should have started later in the year,
his army arrives in the flood plain of Babylonia at the height of the summer in June and July,
it suffers from losses of provisions and problems of water and dysentery,
and all the difficulties of besieging large cities.
He's forced to withdraw prematurely, he's harassed by the Persian army,
and during the retreat Julian tries to show inspired generalship,
and personally, Julian is very brave,
but he's killed in a skirmish in June of 363 during the retreat,
and the army becomes demoralized, and the only way to get the army out of Mesopotamia,
back into Roman territory, is for the emperor Jovian,
who's elected that very night, June 26, 363, the officers get together in the tent,
and they elect Jovian as emperor,
and Jovian arranges a truce with Shapur and gives up the provinces of Mesopotamia,
the key provinces that had been the bastion to defending the Roman east,
this is a significant loss strategically,
and it explains why the Eastern Roman Empire and the later early Byzantine Empire
are strategically behind the eight ball because of this treaty concluded by Jovian
to get the army out of Persia and back into Roman territory.
Jovian himself was a Christian,
and the whole scene is marvelously described by Amianus Marcellinus,
the officers actually go to a senior pagan officer first and offer him the command,
and he says, I'm too old for it, he's too smart to take it,
because whoever's going to take this army is going to have to negotiate the treaty,
and they then go to Jovian who immediately protests,
well, I'm a Christian, and most of the army is pagan because the emperor was pagan,
and the officers say, tonight in this tent everyone's a Christian,
just get us out of Persia, and Jovian accepts the command.
He later dies under mysterious circumstances and replaced by some other army officers,
Valentini in the 1st and Valance in 364.
However, the defeat in the east is significant,
the Roman imperial army, the eastern field army had suffered a serious defeat,
this is the first time since Valyrian,
and even with Valyrian the emperor had been treacherously captured,
the army hadn't been really defeated,
this is the first time a Roman army since Cara had been defeated by an eastern opponent.
Furthermore, some very important areas have been relinquished,
and in 385, 386 the Romans agree to a partition in which most of Armenia is given directly over to Persia,
which proves a rather dubious gift for the Persian Shah,
but the Romans are clearly on the retreat on the eastern frontier.
They are fortunate that the Persians don't press their advantage,
and the reason for that is the Persians have so much trouble trying to bring the Armenians to heal,
they're constantly rebelling, and the Persians inherit by the conquest and annexation of Armenia
the problem of all those nomadic barbarians coming over the Caucasus into the Near East,
as well as more vicious barbarians moving in from Central Asia,
a group very often known in the literature as the White Huns.
And Persia from 400 A.D. on is having more than its fair share of difficulties
dealing with nomadic barbarians on her own frontiers that Persia cannot prosecute any war against the Romans.
And as I mentioned earlier, in effect the Romans and Persians fight through Arab proxies
for most of the fourth and fifth centuries,
that is building up Arab confederations to raid Persian territory and vice versa,
rather than waging a serious war.
This proved to be decisive for the Eastern Roman Empire in the fifth century,
the fact that there was no Persian crisis,
and in the fifth century A.D. when the Western Empire collapses under the barbarian migrations,
the Eastern Empire in large part survives because they do not have to wage any kind of major war against the Persian foe.
Now, the defeat in Persia had repercussions across the entire empire,
and it did affect very seriously the northern frontiers for several reasons.
I mentioned by 300 A.D. the Germans have gained a great deal more confidence from their fighting in the third century.
To some extent, the Romans had helped arm and organize them,
in part because the Romans' attacks on the Germans had forced them to move into confederations.
The fighting with the Germans in the third century enabled the dramatic tribes to learn better organization and discipline.
And as the Roman army was reorganized in the reign of Constantine and later,
ever more Germans were being recruited into the Roman army.
And furthermore, these Germans were not kept in some kind of auxiliary unit,
as in the Principate where they would learn Latin, they were under Roman officers,
on discharge they became Roman citizens.
They were being recruited into the elite units, into the palace guards, into the household forces.
They were generally part of the Comatensis, or if they took service in the frontier armies,
they were very often settled in garrisons close to where their tribes were,
on the other side of the frontier, or sometimes their clan had been actually settled in the Roman Empire on depopulated lands.
And so they retained their identity as far more strongly than they did in the old imperial army.
And I mentioned that Amianus Marcellinus, a Roman, actually a Roman from the modern city of Beirut,
who was dissented from probably an old Roman military colony,
who wrote a history of Rome starting from the reign of, probably around the reign of Trajan or Hadrian,
down to the Battle of Adrianople in 378.
We only have his history from 354 on, the earlier sections are missing and we really would like to have it.
But when you start reading Amianus Marcellinus, you're struck immediately by the number of officers,
who are moving in high Roman command and at the court, who have dramatic names.
And most of these names are scarcely even Latinized.
They're essentially a dramatic name with a Latin ending.
You sometimes get a fellow like the Frank Silvanus or Silvanus in high Latin pronunciation,
who took a Roman name, but many of them are retaining their tribal names.
There is an alarming tendency for these officers to operate on both sides of the frontiers,
that they start off in the Roman army, they move up in rank,
they then, I think a fellow by the name of Malo Baudes, a Frank,
he ends up becoming a high officer in the elite cavalry,
and then crosses back over and becomes a king of the Frankish Confederation.
That is, your job description becomes that of both dramatic king as well as Roman officer.
And that in the 4th century becomes one of the main reasons why these kings become increasingly powerful,
maybe not so much because they can lead effective raids into the Roman Empire,
but they have the connections in the patronage within the Roman civil and military hierarchy
and access to the emperor, that they can obtain very lucrative military contracts for their soldiers,
their warriors, who will then be commissioned as federates, as soldiers within the Roman Empire.
And so the Romans are really helping to promote the development of more effective dramatic kingships
and more tribal cohesion, because they want these people to fight as military units for them.
And this becomes a policy probably from the time of the 350s when Amiana starts writing,
it might have occurred earlier, we just can't document it,
but there's very good reasons, including certain fiscal and monetary reforms,
why the reasons to believe that the Roman emperors were increasingly shifting over to these federate soldiers.
Now, I think that's part of what's wrong with the expedition of Julian.
Not only was Julian's generalship in question in certain ways,
but the soldiers he's taking with him, which is supposed to be the field army,
that is the better quality men, not the frontier forces, just don't perform to standard.
They don't seem to carry out the same effective siege warfare.
They panic when Shahpour brings elephants on the battlefield.
Well, the old Republican armies and even the armies of the high empire knew exactly how to operate with elephant charges,
but apparently the late Roman army doesn't. It panics in front of it. Julian has to rally them.
Julian's killed actually encouraging his men in an action which shouldn't have required his presence.
So the defeat in the east was a combination not only of generalship,
but also a combination of the less professional quality of that imperial field army.
These changes going on in the army and the defeat in Persia, as I said, compromised also the northern defenses.
And there were reasons to be concerned about the northern defenses in the mid-fourth century.
In 350 AD, the western army rebelled.
In part, it may have been because the sons of Constantine, who were ruling at that time,
Constantius II and his brother Constance, who was his co-emperor in the west,
had passed a series of laws banning the sacrifices.
And there's a good argument to be made that the western army, which carries out a number of important revolts,
not only in 350, but later with Julian, later with Arbaugost in 392,
were responding to imperial policy of halting the sacrifices and clamping down on pagan practices.
In any event, this western rebellion under the general by the name of Magnentius
really proves the point of what's going on with the imperial army.
Magnentius was by origin a barbarian.
He was one of those fellows that would be classified as a lightess.
His family had been settled in Roman territory.
Legally, in Roman law, he was a Roman, because he was born on Roman territory.
But in many ways, he still retained a lot of ties with his Germanic heritage.
And in 350, when the western army went in rebellion,
Magnentius made an effort to recruit large numbers of men,
and there was very heavy recruitment among the Franks and Alemani on the other side of the frontier.
This rebellion forced Constantius to put his eastern affairs on hold.
He had to march west. It was a very bloody civil war.
It was put down in 353.
Even before the civil war was concluded, Constantius had to return to the east.
And with the departure of Constantius after the defeat of this western rebellion,
the western frontiers essentially collapsed.
From 355 on, the barbarians surged over.
Franks, Alemani, Saxons attacked all through Gaul.
The city of Cologne was actually captured.
We're not sure how, whether it was by treachery or siege warfare.
And the German tribes penetrated very deep into Gaul.
This is probably the deepest penetration of a German attack since the 280s.
The situation really got out of hand.
And it forced Constantius to send an imperial representative to the west,
and that meant he elevated his cousin, Julian, a nephew of Constantine,
one of the few relatives left in the imperial household.
Constantius did a very good job of removing all of his kinsmen, who could be a possible rival.
He sent his cousin, Julian West, for Julian to repair the situation.
Julian, by all accounts, was a very bookish and enthusiastic scholarly type.
Probably many did not take him seriously.
He'd been reared in Cappadocia, in Central Asia Minor, under tutors where
I always think he read too much Homer, and he was constantly looking up at Mount Argeus,
where the mother goddess Ma lived.
And after a while, he decided to go back to the Old Gods.
He made a private conversion while he was studying in Athens.
And when he went to take charge of the Western armies in 357,
he had already committed himself to the Old Gods, but publicly retained his Christian faith,
because that could get him in serious jeopardy with his cousin, the Emperor Constantius.
In any case, Julian arrived, boned up by reading his Julius Caesar,
and won a smashing victory over the Alamani near Strasbourg.
It's significant because he claims he defeated 35,000 Germans,
assuming that number is even remotely close to true, even if it's just a tenth of the size.
It's a very effective army.
He also reports by name seven kings, and these seem to be men who are now holding dynastic positions,
ruling sections of that coalition.
So the account gives us some insight into the level of organization
that these Germanic tribes have now achieved.
There was also another interesting incident that's reported in this campaign.
The news of the victory is actually reported to the Roman city of Strasbourg,
and they send cavalry forces to the city,
and the citizens at first do not admit the cavalry because they're afraid they're Germans,
trying to pass themselves off as Romans.
Eventually the emperor shows up and says, no, it's really true, we won.
Which is a rather telling incident, and there's many of these in Amiens,
which makes you wonder after a while whether the Roman provincial,
especially in cities, could tell the difference between a barbarian force and a Roman force
when you have incidents like this, just report it casually,
that, oh, by the way, they really are our guys, they really are on our side.
They're just Germans who are fighting for us.
Julian reorganized the defenses of Gaul,
and he did so by settling Franks on the lower Rhine as Federates.
This is the report of giving them land in return for military service,
and this arrangement is done along various sections of the Rhine by Julian,
and then later by the western emperor Valentinian I, who ruled from 364 to 375.
So when one looks at the Roman frontier in western Europe,
along the Rhine in the upper Danube,
modern textbooks will color it in all Roman territory,
but it must be remembered by the mid-fourth century and slightly later,
large sections of that frontier are being settled by tribal groups
who are retaining many of their institutions,
who have a sense of martial ethos,
who are fighting under kings,
who are getting their tribes the contracts to fight for the Roman Empire,
but that relationship is a personal relationship of the king and the tribe
to their patron, the emperor.
It also explains when and why tribes convert to Christianity.
They convert to Christianity because the emperors are Christian,
and they usually take the emperor's confession,
they take the emperor's god, that god clearly works,
otherwise the guy wouldn't be Roman emperor,
and so one could wonder exactly how deep most of these conversions went.
I think in the case of the Gothic Bible,
the Goths probably really liked some of the Old Testament passages of the Israelites,
and I suspect they were pretty weak when they got to the Gospels.
They liked the idea of killing Canaanites, and they could get into that.
In addition, the frontier of the Danube,
while these developments were going on in the west and in the east,
the frontier of the Danube also showed the same changes that we can document in the Rhineland.
This can be done by archaeology, the increasing number of graves
that reveal dramatic goods and trousers, jewelry, all sorts of items,
burials with weapons, and the Danube frontier
changed as a result of a decision made by the emperor Valance in 375 AD.
Valance was the brother of Valentinian I, the man ruling in the west.
Valance and Valentinian had been elected jointly by the army in 364.
Valance was an emperor of mediocre ability at best,
and he took charge of repairing the mistakes made in the east.
He also inherited the defense of the lower Danube,
and his reign and his decisions do mark a turning point.
There were several key decisions made by Valance that ultimately ended up being blunders.
The first was the admission of, we are told,
100,000 Visigoths or Goths who sought refuge within the Roman Empire and petitioned the emperor.
These were Goths settled in Eastern Europe.
They were the descendants of the Goths of the 3rd century,
and as I mentioned, the Goths had settled from Dacia all the way over into the south Russian steppes
and had welded together a very effective confederation.
They had been recruited as federates in the Roman army at least since the mid 4th century.
Many Goths that served in the Roman army, certainly the eastern army,
at least since the reign of Constantine.
There were very close trade connections.
Gothic society in the homeland was quite diverse and fairly sophisticated,
even though they didn't dwell in cities.
But somewhere between 370 and 375 AD,
Amianus Marcellius records that the Gothic king at the time,
a man called Hermonaric, who will be remembered in Scandinavian legend,
actually is the earliest hero remembered in Norse Epic,
that he and the Gothic army was essentially annihilated,
the king committed suicide afterwards, by an attack of two nomadic people.
One were the Alans, long known to the Romans,
and the other were these dreaded people known as the Huns,
who were a new barbarian race that Amianus describes in detail.
They seemed to be Turkish speakers,
and they were certainly viewed by Germans and Romans alike
as very, very different from their previous experience.
The Huns were terrifying.
They're clearly steppe nomads.
Many of the Goths fled before the Huns,
and some 100,000 we are told turned up on the banks of the Danube
and petition for admission in the Roman Empire.
Now Valence was facing a problem of rebuilding the Eastern army.
He had inadequate forces to continue fighting a desultory war with Persian Armenia,
a war eventually the Romans just gave up on,
and so he accepted these Goths into the Roman Empire
and settled them on the Roman side in the old province of Moisia.
The numbers were so great that there was no way
the imperial government could feed, house, and close these people.
There were immediately the usual corruption, lack of provisions.
The Goths were abused by officials.
They were forced to sell their children into slavery in order to get food,
and as a result of all of these outrages and mismanagement in 377,
the Goths revolted, and they were really pretty desperate.
They were just hungry.
However, it's significant that they were also armed,
that the Roman imperial government had accepted a huge tribal population
with their weapons, with their customs, had not broken them up
and distributed them through the provinces as had been previous Roman policy.
They were trying to apply on even a grander scale this notion of settling a huge
federal army, which would then be a reservoir of trained warriors
who could be drafted into the imperial field armies in these tribal units.
The Goths began to plunder the Balkans,
and the emperor Valens really had no choice but to call off his eastern war
and march back and deal with it.
Valens could have waited for his nephew to come with sufficient forces from the west.
He did not.
He chose to fight a battle and make an example of these Goths.
And on August 9th, 378, he cornered the Goths near the city of Adrianople in Thrace,
which is now on the Bulgarian Turkish frontier,
and engaged the Gothic army.
And from the start, there were problems.
And this is again a case of bad generalship and probably lack of discipline.
The Roman army attacked the Gothic army.
They thought they had the full Gothic force.
What they did is engage the Gothic infantry and drive them back on the log air,
that is the wagon train of the Goths.
And the Roman army got entangled in a very messy infantry battle,
fighting not only the Goths, but also probably the Gothic women
who were on these wagon shooting arrows at them and throwing nasty objects.
And while the Romans were so engaged, one wonders about the recon of Valens's army,
the Gothic cavalry shows up in the rear in attacks and the Roman army just collapses.
It's lost its cohesion in the confusion of battle.
Many of the soldiers panic.
We're told 20,000 Romans fall.
The emperor Valens is killed.
There's varying reports.
One is the Goths found him in a farmhouse and just lit the house and let the emperor burn to death.
But a second Roman emperor has been killed by the Goths.
And furthermore, the Goths, to some extent, were dismayed by their own success.
They didn't know what to do next.
They probably didn't think they could defeat the Roman army,
and they just pulled off a remarkable victory.
Well, what happens from this defeat is no grand partition of Roman territory.
Gratian, the surviving Western emperor, the nephew of Valens,
appoints a new emperor in the east, a man named Theodosus I.
He comes to terms with the Federates.
He takes them back to their territory.
And by 382, a deal is cut the way it should have been back in 375.
They're given land.
They're given terms.
They are enrolled into the Eastern army.
But the Goths have now learned a very powerful lesson.
Rebellion and defiance of Rome works.
You can extort concessions, land, commands,
ultimately by defying the Roman emperor.
And those arrangements in the Battle of Adrianople is a crucial turning point
because it proves that maybe the German or Germanic tribes can't topple Rome yet,
but Rome can no longer conquer or assimilate the barbarians.
And so what's going to happen is the German Federate armies will go into business for themselves.
