Lecture 33 – Imperial Crisis and Decline
In this lecture, I plan to pick up with the implications of the Battle of Adrianople
in 378, the gothic defeat of the Eastern Roman Field Army, in which the Emperor Valance
fell, that is the second emperor to be slain by Goths, and the previous one was a hundred
years earlier.
Now, that defeat at Adrianople, in many ways, proved decisive in retrospect.
Not because of any major changes in technologies, as sometimes claim, that is cavalry won the
day.
The cavalry forces that took the Romans in the rear were probably traditional cavalry
without stirrups.
It's just that Valance's army had failed to locate them, and they showed up unexpectedly
and attacked the Roman army at its most vulnerable point.
Instead, the battle was significant for the arrangements that followed immediately after.
And those arrangements, while traditional in many ways, did alter the character of the
late Roman army as far as we can tell.
In 379, months after the colossal defeat, the Emperor Theodosus was commissioned by
his colleague, the Emperor Gratian, to take charge of the Eastern provinces and somehow
come to terms with the rebel Goths.
And I mentioned that Theodosus's solution, he was not a member of the Imperial family,
was married into the Imperial family, was descended from a very famous military family
from Spain, Theodosus's solution was to renegotiate the contracts of the Goths, settle them back
in their quarters along the Danube.
And this time to make sure that sufficient provisions and money were provided to these
Federits, so they wouldn't be reduced to selling their children to slavery for dog meat and
all the kinds of abuses that occurred back in 375-377.
On the other hand, the Goths had learned that by rebellion they could gain concessions,
by revolt, they could actually defeat an Emperor, and this was a lesson that was not lost.
After Theodosus, the Goths turned out to be one of the major elements of the Roman Imperial
field army.
And these Goths are apparently recruited in tribal regiments, that is they are fighting
under their own kings who are usually given Roman military titles, the usual title would
be a count, sometimes a dux.
The highest title that an officer could aspire to would be Magistar Militum, that is master
of the soldiers.
There was one for the Eastern armies, the Eastern field armies, and the other would
be the Western field armies.
And a good translation for a title like that would be Generalissimo actually.
In any case, we are told that in 394 AD, when the Western army had staged yet another revolt,
this is the third of the revolts of the Rhine army, which broke out in 392, and again was
in response to the Christian legislation of Theodosus.
The Pagans in the army, as well as the Pagan senators at Rome decided to revolt.
This is extraordinary, the Pagan senators in Rome were Mandarin elite, they had been
arguing with the Christian emperors in Constantinople for two generations, and they functioned very
much as well academicians would today, that is they wrote letters of protest to the emperor
over his policy rather than doing anything.
They sat around and wrote a lot of nice debates in the senate, but the senate itself backed
the Western army who put up a counter-emperor, a man named Eugenius.
The real brains behind it was a Frankish commander called Arbogost, who had the Western
field armies behind him, and Theodosus marched west, and it's claimed that 20,000 Goths served
in that army, and were actually thrown in the initial attack, it was fought in the Julian
Alps in an important pass, it's called the Battle of the Frigatus, and that battle ended
in a total victory for Theodosus, the Pagan resistance collapsed, the senate was humiliated,
within a generation the Roman Pagan senate would be converted over to Catholic Christianity
and eventually reinvent itself as the papal families of the late antique age.
The victory was seen as a vindication not only of Theodosus but of the Christian god,
and was probably pretty much put on par with the battle of the Milvian bridge when Constantine
had his vision and was convinced that his victory in a civil war was the gift of the
Christian god.
Well, the Goths apparently were a very important element in that army, they later claimed they
were thrown in the front ranks and suffered grievously for it, but Alaric, the man who
would end up sacking Rome, was one of the talented Gothic princes, serving also as a
Roman commander at that battle, so was a fellow named Staliccio, who in origin was vandal
and Roman provincial, he was born in the Balkan provinces, and would end up rising to the
post of Magista Militum under Theodosus and would be a major player in the crisis between
395 and 410 that would reveal the implications of Adrianope.
What needs to be remembered as part of the results of the decisions made by Theodosus
in handling the federal armies, that Theodosus himself was a charismatic soldier-emperor,
he could act as a patron and he could act as a commander to the various Germanic kings
and officers, he could command their loyalty, he had the auctoritas, the influence to do
so.
And so the use of these tribal armies, who were being armed and trained by the Romans
and to some extent being encouraged to keep their identity as distinct political groups
as tribes, settled on Roman territory, depended on an emperor who was capable of commanding
that loyalty, and if you did not have such an emperor, well that loyalty could break
down, and that's part of what happened in 395.
It is also important to stress that the arrangements of the administration of the late Roman state
that goes back to Constantine also encouraged a feature in rebellions in the late fourth
and fifth century which would give the Germans their chance to create their own kingdoms
in effect, and that is the bureaucratic elite in the Roman Empire had effectively been disarmed.
These were used in the civil administration, there was a very complicated civil administration
I discussed, and any Roman in a provincial area, a powerful governor who wished to rebel
against the central government, whether it be the western court at the city of Milan
later Ravenna or at Constantinople, the only way such a governor could carry out a rebellion
was to summon in tribal armies, that is to make an alliance with Germans.
This is how the Vandals got in North Africa.
This is how to some extent the Visigoths took over sections of Spain, the Burgundians
of parts of central Gaul, effectively they were moving in as mobile Roman armies, essentially
tribal regiments, at the behest of a Roman governor.
And so in the western provinces, this became a major problem when essentially all armed
forces were tribal armies, it was pretty hard to tell what was a Roman army loyal to the
central government or was the Roman army loyal to the rebellious governor or the usurper,
the armies were all ultimately German tribal units.
So those are two important pieces of information to keep in mind.
So in 395, in January of 395, when the Emperor Theodosus I died, and he had only ruled over
a unified empire for a couple of months, he was succeeded by two sons, and the succession
of those two sons and the political crisis that ensued revealed all of the weaknesses,
the institutional weaknesses in the late Roman state, the problem of succession, the problem
of controlling German tribal armies, as well as the development of these tribal armies,
which in 395 had gotten to the point where the Romans were not so much arming allies
as they were arming essentially potential foes.
In the way the crisis is held, handled from 395 to 410, a large part of the responsibility
falls on both imperial governments, the Eastern Court at Constantinople, the Western Court
at Milan and later Ravenna, as well as the man who perhaps could have solved the problem,
Staliccio, the Magistar Militum, the supreme commander of the Roman armies in 395 when Theodosus
died.
And so what I wish to do is spend some time looking at the actual crisis and why it ended
up this way, why a political crisis in 395, within 15 years, led to the settlement of
the Visigoths and Gaul, and the effective collapse of the Iberian and Northwestern provinces
of the Roman Empire, by 423 AD, by the death of the first Western emperor, Honorius, the
imperial government in the West controlled very little other than Italy and part of the
Mediterranean shore, and within 20 years it essentially only controlled Italy and was
now a figurehead. So how could this happen so rapidly? And in less than a century from
the disaster at Adrianople, the whole Western Empire was gone, it was carved up into dramatic
kingdoms. It's an extraordinary event when one considers it, and for all the continuity
between late Roman society and early medieval society, it is still a dramatic fact that
the Roman political order in the West collapsed, and with it all the institutions associated
with Roman success.
When 395, Theodosus did the Roman world no great advantage by bequeathing two worthless
sons. Arcadius at the time was about 17 years of age, the elder. He ruled in Constantinople.
He did have the advantage that by ruling in Constantinople he had the wealthier half
of the Roman Empire, and also had a very powerful bureaucratic elite ministers who could direct
affairs of state, even though Arcadius himself was never up to the job. And it was that civil
elite in Constantinople, and particularly Arcadius's wife who came to dominate the court
after 400, who get the credit for any of the successes the Eastern government enjoyed.
The Western government got the younger son, Honorius, about 11 years old at the time,
probably not a particularly bright man, and would have bursts of obstinate behavior which
he thought he was being decisive. Probably the only decisive action he took was to order
Staliccio's execution, and that proved to be a mistake. And so both young emperors were
really in the hands of ministers. The Eastern court was divided into a variety of factions
we don't need to get into, but in the West, at the time of the death of Theodosus, Staliccio
had at his command virtually all the field armies of the Roman world, because they had
just fought that civil war. Most of the field armies for the East were located in Italy
and Gaul. Staliccio also claimed that Theodosus on his death pad had told his officer, and
Staliccio owed his position, was married to a niece of the emperor Theodosus, told the
civil elite at Le Mans that he was named by Theodosus as the regent for the two brothers.
Well he could make a stick in the West because he was there with all the armies, but the
Eastern court was not at all interested in being dominated by this provincial in the
eyes of many of the Eastern aristocracy, a veritable barbarian, who had his own interests
which was to marry himself into the imperial family. Honorius twice got wives who were
daughters of Staliccio and make himself linked to the imperial family to make sure that his
son and his heirs essentially would take over. And that's probably the long-term plan of
Staliccio. If he had pulled it off, perhaps he would have given the empire a better dynasty
but we'll never know. He is primarily driven by personal ambitions. He has an opportunity
to intervene in the East and impose that control over the East because the Eastern government,
which as I said consisted of a group of court factions, had blundered into alienating one
of the talented Gothic officers, Alaric, who was residing in the lower Danube, who was
a loyal officer under Theodosus, and in many ways was quite similar to Staliccio, but would
probably have been satisfied with high command of the Eastern armies. He also happened to
be king of the Goths, the Visigoths as they're later called, the Goths who came to settle
in Gaul and in Spain. And he was rebuffed in part because the senior military commander
was a Frankish general, Bato, who had married his daughter to the emperor Arcadius. And
Alaric, you know, drew the logical lesson from Adrian Opel decided, well, if you're
going not give me command, I'll extort it. And Alaric invaded the Balkans, attacked
Thrace, Macedonia, Greece, began to plunder towns, thinking that this would pressure
the government to give him his command. And what the Eastern government instead did was
to summon Staliccio and the Western armies to their salvation. Staliccio, in handling
this crisis, showed that he was primarily interested in his own ambitions. He, for instance,
put one of his officers in charge of the palace forces, the forces in the city of Constantinople,
a Goth, by the way, a phone man, Ghan Enos, who later got executed in a riot in 400, not
in a, he was an ex, his Goths were executed, Ghan Enos ran to the Huns and had his head
cut off by the Hun King, you know, so we get to that. And the, and that meant he could
control the Eastern court through his agents. He also chased after Alaric and the Balkans
could have destroyed the Goths several times, and instead decided to negotiate and eventually
came to terms and gave Alaric a title as Dukes, commander of a regional army in Epirus, which
is now Northwestern Greece and parts of Albania, and settled his people there in the empire,
not on a frontier, but deep in the empire. And they stayed, settled there for the next,
oh, about five or six years, when they, when they then decided to migrate to Italy around
400 or 401. That, that arrangement was just absolute proof, if you want a position for
your tribe, revolt, and eventually the government would come to terms. Staliccio's attitude
to the Goths were, well, they're a chess piece. They're a field army. We're just going to
maneuver them around in a complicated game, game, which will get me to be emperor. It
is very different from the attitudes we saw in the third century with soldier emperors.
If a group of barbarians of that, of that number came into the empire, they would be
defeated. They might be then taken on as settlers and immigrants dispersed in the provinces.
They would not be given a treaty settled in an area where they got only not only provisions
and taxes, but also apparently Alaric rearmed his tribe with very good weapons and horses.
So when they moved in 400 AD, and they moved through the Balkan provinces heading to northern
Italy, they knew what they were doing and they were well armed. And that gets us into
the second act of, of, of the political drama here. In 400 AD, two events occurred. One
is the civil aristocracy in Constantinople reasserted itself. There was a riot, popular
riot against the Gothic soldiers, a quartered in the city by Staliccio. And as I said,
Guainas escaped the city, but his soldiers were butchered. Guainas went and found refuge
with the king of the Huns, Uldun. And Uldun just cut the head of, of the Goth off and
sent it to Arcadius, which for the Huns was, you know, was, was a high privilege because
the Huns are well known for, you know, head taking. And, you know, that could have been
part of the tableware of Uldun. So it was, you know, you know, they turned these skulls
into drinking cup. So there was, you know, a way of him saying that thanks Arcadius for
making the year ally. Meanwhile, the Eastern government also encouraged the Goths, the
Visigoths of Alaric to move west as a way of embarrassing Staliccio in the Western government.
And in 402, the Goths enter Italy through the Julian Alps. Staliccio again fights a
complicated war of maneuvers with the Goths in northern Italy. Several times he could
destroy them. He chooses not to because he still wants to negotiate with them. It's a
useful tribe to bring over. He's hoping that he can make them his own soldiers. And in
order to counter this Gothic threat, he withdraws large numbers of field forces from the Rhine
and Upper Danube. And again, most of these are dramatic soldiers into Italy to counter
the Goths. And it has two consequences. First is it opens the northern provinces to German
migration. On New Year's Eve, 406, the Rhine freezes. And everyone, and I mean everyone
comes over the Rhine. It's a who's who of the barbarian world. Franks move in Burgundians,
Alans, Sueves, you name it. They cross into Gaul, Alans and Vandals end up in Spain by
the spring of 407. The frontier defenses collapse. And that discredits Staliccio with the ruling
classes at Rome. I mean, he's responsible because he made this decision. The second important
consequence of the fighting going on is Honorius decides to remove the Western court from
Milan to Ravenna on the east coast of Italy. The city is protected by swamps and marshes.
In fact, malaria is going to do far more damage to any army besieging it than the ability
of Honorius's household soldiers. And the cravenly moved to Ravenna defensive move to
protect this corrupt and inept court is almost a symbol of the fact that the Western government
is in no position to defend its vital frontier provinces. An emperor of any kind of determination
would have taken command himself. And if you really wanted to succeed, you would have either
stayed at Milan or moved the court to Trier on the Mosul and tried to restore order in
the Northwestern provinces. You know, that was totally beyond Honorius's comprehension
or any of his courtiers as well. And so what happens is the Western provinces are sacrificed
for this defense of Italy. And by 408, Staliccio, who's suspected of aspiring to the imperial
throne is lured into a meeting with Honorius and cut down. Well, this is a blunder because
most of the field armies at this point are various dramatic and other barbarian groups
who owe their loyalty to Staliccio, who's their generalissimo, and very few of them
have any sort of feeling towards Honorius. So what happens is the imperial field army
in Italy just dissolved. Some of them go over the Goths, join up with Alaric. Others of them
just go home or disappear into the population. We just really don't have any idea what happened
to the army. And Alaric at this point is the only military force in Italy. Honorius is in
Ravenna, and he decides to pressure the imperial government by attacking Rome. From 408 to
410, there are three different sieges and sieges is a fancy word. It's more of a blockade. And
you have to think that this gothic tribe that has been moving since 400 AD is growing. It's
taking on runaway slaves, Roman provincials, craftsmen, captives, part of the defecting
field armies of Staliccio. I mean, it is a complete roadshow of enormous size and Alaric
is constantly on the move. And his biggest concern is feeding this outfit. And so much
of his effort is just to get provisions as well as a contract from the imperial government
and a command so that he can legitimize his tribal regiments into a Roman army and give
his reward, his followers with money or land or taxes, some sort of tangible reward so
he can remain king of the Goths. This honorius won't deal and it results in the very peculiar
sack of Rome on August 24th, 410. It's a three day sack. It's essentially Rome's surrenders.
And the Goths find the city of Rome. It's a really very respectful sack as sacks go.
I mean, churches are not destroyed. There isn't the usual, you know, rape and pillage
associated with the barbarians. Alaric is after all a Christian, an Aryan Christian.
He's a Roman citizen. And anyway, this wasn't supposed to happen. He was supposed to get
a contract from Honorius, not the idea of sacking Rome. And they take an enormous amount
of loot. And then Alaric is frustrated because he didn't know what to do next. His army moves
down into Camp Campania, Southern Italy, probably because it's in search of food. And
Alaric dies there in late 410, which actually assists the situation for his trot. We're
told in later accounts that the great Gothic conqueror was buried in a river in Southern
Italy, the Basentius, by what they did is they had Roman captives divert the river.
And then in the riverbed, they built this grave and put Alaric in there with all of
his booty, then covered it over and diverted the river back to its original course. And
of course, all the Roman slaves ended up getting, or captives ended up getting executed so that
no one would find where it is. Which is a very strange end to this Gothic hero. He had
still not found any sort of position for his people. And his death actually eased the
ability of the Western government to come to terms with the Visigoths because he was
responsible for the sack of Rome. And Honorius could deal with Alaric's brother-in-law and
successor, Otholf, which is essentially the Gothic version of Otholf in modern German.
And what happened is Honorius commissioned the Visigoths to leave Italy and to seek out
and destroy the various barbarians who had crossed over into Gaul back in 406, 407, who
were now disrupting the Roman provincial structure in Western Europe. The Franks had moved into
northern Gaul, the Burgundians in central Gaul. I mentioned that Vandals, Sueves, Alans
are in Spain. And as imperial power broke down, cities reacted in various ways. Some
of them just bought off the Germans with food. There are several instances, again, of governors
inviting some of these German tribes in, in local rivalries. They were opposing another
governor. There's efforts of some of these guys to become emperors. The only effective
field army in the Western Empire after 406 was the army in Britain. And for some reason
in 407, the British army decided it was time to have rebellion and declared its commander,
Emperor Constantine III, a rather memorable as character, and Constantine, taking it
seriously, took the British field army in 410 over to Gaul in order to assert his claim.
He was eventually destroyed by forces loyal to Honorius, whatever that means. And the
British field army never went back to Britain. So the whole province of Britain was stripped
of its effective field forces. And the Roman administration in that island begins to break
down over the next generation. And by the mid fifth century is being attacked by Saxons,
Angles, dramatic people settling on the eastern and southern shores. And the Romans simply
give up the island. The last report we have is in 441 when British notables from the city's
appeal to the then generalissimo in the west, Aetius, and they have this pathetic letter,
oh, the barbarians, the Saxons, the pagans, they throw us into the sea, the sea throws
us back into the Saxon, but between the two we perish. And Aetius' response to them is
essentially, you know, life is tough, we love you, hang on, love Aetius. At this point the
imperial government has enough trouble even defending Italy, let alone to worry about
the remote province of Britain. The Visigoths do extremely well in this. Between 411 and
418 they do restore some measure of order in Gaul and in Spain. They are rewarded with
territory in southern Gaul, which would today be the Aquitaine. And they are given a treaty,
a foetus. They are technically Federits, Foyderati, they're under treaty obligation
to the western government. And that treaty is extremely important. It's still a question
of what happened, but the best interpretation at the moment is that effectively the Visigoths
retain their identity under their king, they settled in this area, and the Roman officials
in the provinces in southern Gaul were instructed to turn over about a third of the tax revenue,
in either rations or money or food, to support what was now officially a field army quartered
in their area. We do not think there was a massive dispossession, dispossessing of the
Roman landed class and the giving out of land. In the initial stages, they were simply
given the rations and the money to sustain themselves, because they were still supposed
to be the field army of the Romans. Now, in time, what would happen to these arrangements?
The Burgundians get a similar one in central Gaul in 443. In time, the Germanic accounts,
the warlords who were answering to a king would take over districts within that kingdom,
and they would essentially come to treat these taxes as rents and privatize the arrangement
over the course of the fifth and sixth century. You see this very clearly in Gaul under the
Franks, but the process is probably common in other places as well. And so in time,
that Roman official administration would fall away, and instead of just taking rations,
they would start taking land, you'd start handing out land to supporters. But the initial
settlement was within the Roman administrative apparatus, and technically, certainly the
Visigoths, the Burgundians, we suspect several other tribes, the Ostrogoths later on in
Pannonia, are all being settled as essentially a Roman field army. Now, those Roman field
armies happen to be Germans, speaking a dramatic language, happen also to be people who've
undertaken a long migration. And for anyone who's ever traveled, especially as I have
done on occasions with students for a long time, the act of travel creates an identity.
Not only the Visigoths, but all the people they picked up along the way have been fused
into an armed nation. There is a sense of identity there. They may not be capable of
toppling Rome alone, but they're also not able to be assimilated into Rome either. So
the Visigoths who settled in Southern Gaul settled as a coherent tribal group and effectively
got the basis to create a territorial kingdom. And that's that's essentially what happens
in the Roman West over the fifth century AD. These groups move from being tribes who are
officially parts of the Roman army into the basis of territorial kingdoms ruled by dramatic
kings who increasingly no longer need to pretend that they're just officers, but by the fifth
and sixth centuries are all ruling as kings in their own right. So by the time the Emperor
Honorius dies in 423, he dies of dropsy of illness, essentially the Western government
has lost everything outside of the Mediterranean court, has lost most of Spain, Britain, Gaul,
the upper Danube to a large extent, it's outside of its area. That is all the regions
beyond the limits of Mediterranean civilization, the regions that have been brought in, conquered
and assimilated by Republican Rome. From the time of Scipio, Africanus through Julius Caesar,
these areas were all lost. They were no longer under the effective control of the imperial
government. And the Romanized classes in these areas had to come to terms with the fact that
their lives now depended on dramatic kings who had the armed force in their region. The
imperial government still held on to Italy, Africa at this point, the islands, the coastal
sections of Spain and France that were so heavily Romanized, that is what we would take today
called Provence or Andalusia in Spain, those areas still were under effective Roman control,
but essentially the regions beyond the Mediterranean zone were not there. In 425 AD, after a brief
civil war, the nephew of Honorius, since Honorius died without issue, is the emperor Valentinian
the third, the son of Honorius's half sister, Gala Plachidia, succeeds to the Western throne.
He was put on the throne by a new Magister Militum, a very tough soldier who came from
the Balkan provinces in origin of Roman ancestry, or at least in law, we don't know what his
ancestors were, his name is Aetius, he has a Roman name, he comes from the region of
Pannonia, but a man who has a new policy of holding these Western provinces in order and
keeping the Germans in line, and that is, in order to maintain the control of German
Federits now resident in the Western Roman Empire, the way to do that was to deploy
a new frightening barbarian ally living outside the empire, who were probably responsible
for pushing some of these tribes in the Western Empire in the first place, and those newcomers
are the Huns. Aetius himself had been reared among the Huns, he had been at the Hun court,
he spoke the Hunnic language, and he was able to arrange the contracts to bring in thousands
of Huns where they're subject to lies, to terrorize the Germans into obedience to Rome.
It was a dubious policy at best, and it brought into Western Europe the most famous and ferocious
of all the barbarians of the late Roman age, the Huns and their leader Attila, the Scourge
of God.
