Lecture 34, The Tilla and the Huns
In this lecture I plan to deal with the Huns and particularly their most famous king, Attila,
later known as the Scourge of God, and the role that the Huns came to play in the breakup
of the Roman Empire. Ironically the Huns themselves never succeeded in conquering the Roman Empire
but they did play a very important role in shaping the political and cultural landscape
of the world that would follow immediately after the breakup of the Western Empire.
Furthermore, they were seen at the time by Romans and I suspect by Germans alike,
although we only have the Roman reports on this, as a new people, a distinct barbarian
who somehow were outside the norms and conventions and stereotypes of barbarians
that the Romans had inherited for centuries. And they are first mentioned in the account
of Amianus Marcellinus, the last great imperial historian, writing in Latin probably some time
in the 380s and 390s, and I think it's worthwhile to take some selections from his description
of the Huns because it is the most detailed account we have about the Huns.
And this literary description is the basis for identifying the Huns with other references
as well as trying to make sense of a very difficult archaeological record of the late 4th and 5th century
to trace the movements and settlement of these peoples.
And I quote this passage which is introduced by Amianus just at the point where the Huns
make their entry into Europe when in alliance with the Alhans they destroy the Ostrogothic Kingdom.
And this is what Amianus has to say.
The people of the Huns who are mentioned only cursorily in ancient writers and who dwell
beyond the Meortis Marshes, that would today be the Sea of Ozov in just north of the Black Sea.
It's north of the Crimea. Near the frozen ocean are quite abnormally savage.
From the moment of birth they make deep gashes in their children's cheeks so that when in due course
hair appears its growth is checked by the wrinkled scars.
As they grow older this gives them the unlovely appearance of beardless eunuchs,
which for Amianus is a really insulting criticism because the eunuch ministers were used to
staff the close positions near the emperor and they were usually hated by the elite aristocratic classes.
They, the Huns, have squat body, strong limbs, thick necks and are prodigiously ugly
and bent that they might be two-legged animals or figures crudely carved from stumps
which are seen on the parapets of bridges.
And this description corresponds with a very brief description of King Attila we get
from a Roman envoy to his court in 447-448.
Still their shape, however disagreeable, is human, a concession by Amianus,
but their way of life is so rough that they have no use for fires or seasoned food
but live on the roots of wild plants and half raw flesh of any sort of animal
which they warm a little by placing it between the thighs and backs of their horses.
We're not sure where Amianus is getting this information.
It's a rather interesting color to throw to his Roman audience.
They, the Huns, have no buildings to shelter them but avoid anything of the kind
as carefully as we avoid living in the neighborhood of tombs.
Not such much as a hut, fatched with reeds, is to be found among them.
They roam at large over mountains and forests and are enured from the cradle
to cold hunger and thirst.
On foreign soil only extreme necessity can persuade them to come under a roof
since they believe that is not safe to do so.
And he goes into great detail about their clothing and the like.
Buying, selling, and eating, and drinking are all done by day or night on horseback.
And they even bow forward over their horses' narrow necks to enjoy a deep and dreamy sleep.
When they need to debate some important matter, they conduct their conference
in the same posture that is mounted.
And they are not subject to the authority of any king
but break through any obstacle in their path under improvised command of their chief men.
This is apparently describing a nomadic society at this point in 370.
And then there's some Roman stereotyping that comes here at the end of the passage.
You cannot make a truce with them because they are quite unreliable
and easily swayed by any breath of rumor which promises advantage.
Like unreasoning beasts, they are entirely at the mercy of their mad impulses.
They are totally ignorant of distinctions between right and wrong.
Their speech is shifty and obscure.
And they are under no restraint from religion or superstition.
Their greed for gold is prodigious and they are so fickle and prone to anger
that often in a single day they will quarrel with their allies without provocation
and then make it up again without anyone attempting to reconcile them.
It's an interesting mix of stereotyping as well as some new information about these people.
And I've only read selections.
But based on this account and what we can identify as Hun objects
as well as the personal names we have of Hun leaders, they seem to be a Turkic people.
That is, they are probably the first Turkmen that is nomadic Turkish speakers
who have entered Eastern Europe.
And if so, the Huns are seen as the vanguard of what will become
one of the major ethnic transformations of the Central Asian steppes
that marks the difference between late antiquity and the Middle Ages
and that is the slow movement of Turkish-speaking nomadic peoples over the steppes
displacing Iranians and other linguistic groups
so that by certainly the 6th and 7th century the Turkish speakers
are the nomadic peoples dwelling from essentially the lower Danube
all the way to the northern borders of the Chinese Empire.
And I think there's good reason to accept this identification
that the Huns are Turkic speakers.
They certainly struck Amianus Marcellinus, even when you read through the stereotyping
as unusually barbarian people.
He says they haven't been mentioned in previous accounts.
He can identify them with Scythians, Sarmatians, any kind of nomads
the Romans had had experience with before.
As a result, a number of modern scholars have attempted to identify the Huns
with a group of people known in Chinese sources as the Sui Suang Nu.
There's really no evidence for this identification other than the similarity in names
and the fact that apparently both were Turkish speakers
because the Suang Nu come into Chinese accounts from the 2nd century BC
through the 2nd century AD.
This is at the time of the great Han dynasty of China
which was roughly contemporary with the late Roman Republic and early imperial Rome
and the image that's often given is that the Han emperors built the Great Wall of China
well actually Qin Shu Wan Di, the first Qin emperor commissioned it
and the construction of this vast wall caused the Suang Nu and other peoples to migrate west
and Rome fell because China built a wall as the usual adage that's given.
Well, there's a first, as I mentioned before, there's a couple of provisos here.
First, the Great Wall of China is not what is seen today by tourists.
Most of that is construction of the 17th and 18th century and then failed to keep the Manjus out
so see how good that was.
And what you would see as a Great Wall, quote-unquote,
would really be a set of palisades and ditches and fortifications
comparable to what the Romans are constructing in Britain, in Germany or in Dacia.
The Han emperors of China were regulating the flow of certain barbarian peoples,
they were taxing them, but they made no attempt to build a Maginot line.
More important to the Chinese were the use of military colonies,
alliances with the Turkish tribes, particularly getting Turkish and Mongolian princes
to marry Chinese wives.
This is one of the ways of assimilating them into the Chinese political structure
and the Chinese wife would be a high member of court
and that would link them to the imperial court.
And above all, the Chinese got extremely good in handling these nomads
by mounting cavalry, usually recruited from their Turkmen or later Mongolian allies,
in combination with infantry armed with crossbows.
And those military formations were far more effective in defeating nomadic warriors than any wall was.
Certainly by 150 AD, the Swang knew as a coalition disintegrated.
Some of the tribes have come under Chinese authority, others of them disappear from the record.
But the notion that the Chinese efforts to push into the Tarum Basin,
and we know that Chinese armies penetrated as far west as the Aral Sea at one point in the 1st century BC,
that the Chinese efforts to control at least half of that great Silk Road caravan trade
probably did assist in this ethnic transformation of Central Asia.
Turkmen tribes moved westward, they may not have identified themselves
in any way with the Chinese tribes mentioned in the Chinese records.
But by 375, the Huns were probably comparatively recent arrivals,
probably within the last generation or two, on the eastern steps between the Don and the Volga,
and decided to go into alliance with neighbors, the Iranian Alans,
and crush the Goths.
These Huns are likely to be related with other Turkmen groups that we get reports on from the Persians,
the so-called White Huns, the Heffelites who attack into Central Asia,
the hitting Persian possessions actually in 469 AD,
a group of White Huns capture the Shaw of Persia,
who has to be ransomed, it's really very embarrassing,
actually the Roman Emperor at the time in Constantinople, Leo I,
lends the Persian government money, because as much as the Romans fight the Shaw,
it really isn't dignified for the Shaw to be captured by a group of barbarians,
they don't want the Sasanian Empire to collapse, and you have no one to negotiate with.
So the Huns are, by guest, best analysis, the first of these Turkmen tribes
who will come to dominate the history of the Middle Ages.
From the Huns right through the Mongolian conquests of the 12th and 13th century,
the step-nomadic peoples will play decisive roles in shaping the civilizations of Christendom,
of Islam, of India, and of China.
So in 375, the Huns had smashed into the Goths, had killed their king,
and sent the first big wave of Goths to settle in the Balkan provinces,
which led us to the Battle of Idrinopal.
By 395, the Huns have subjected the Alans, the Iranian peoples of the South Russian steppes,
they poured over the Caucasus and attacked into the Near East.
There's a report from Saint Jerome, who's at this time at Bethlehem,
who's working on his famous Vulgate Bible, and the reports come of descriptions of who these people are like,
and he, just as Amianus Marcellinus, is just as surprised by these barbarians,
and he's the one who starts the notion that they're the Four Horsemen, the Apocalypse,
and this generates the medieval tradition that these nomadic warriors are the creatures of Gog and Magog,
the two figures chained by Alexander the Great in the Caucasus Mountains,
who are just hammering away and producing these barbarians,
releasing them on cue at regular intervals to plague civilized society and punish Christians for their sins.
And from Jerome's description, the Christians undoubtedly had an awful lot of sins to be punished
based on the destruction the Huns wrought.
It's clear, even in Amianus, that these are people just devoted to horsemanship,
and they are apparently mounted on tough Mongolian ponies, the type of horses that can endure the steps,
and the type of horses the Chinese want at the so-called heavenly steeds that sweat blood.
The Chinese are constantly trying to get horses from these Turkmen and Mongolian tribes,
because they can't breed the horses in China.
The horses just die on the rice in the millet, and they can only get them from the grasslands.
And so the Roman authors are quite precise about the fact that this is a nomadic group,
horsemen who come in using the traditional tactics of skirmish and stealth,
and very much in the tradition of the earlier Scythians, I mentioned back in one of the earlier lectures.
Now, to the Romans at first, these Huns were used as a way of pressuring the German tribes.
I mentioned the Hun king who cut off the head of Ghaninas and sent it to the Emperor Arcadius.
And as I mentioned, that was a real symbol of friendship from the Huns to send a severed head of the opponent,
especially a Goth. I mean, that's what Huns do with Goths, like generally cut their heads off.
In any event, by that point in 400 AD, the Huns have settled probably from the lower Danube
and subjected the peoples of what are now Transylvania and the Tice Valley,
Eastern Hungary, and have expanded the range of their attacks.
Now, that meant subjecting large numbers of other barbarian peoples.
And the Huns very comfortably succeeded to that position that the Scythians and at one point the Sarmacians had.
They were the nomadic warrior elite who exacted tribute from the agriculturalists from the people in the Russian forest zones
who paid them in furs. Undoubtedly, they got access to the mining operations and the Carpathians
from the Romanized descendants of the Dacians who would be paying tribute.
And they also subjected a number of Germanic tribes, including a number of Goths.
The Ostrogoths, who later come to settle in Italy, apparently were those Goths
who accepted the tutelage of the Huns back in 375 and remained as Hun allies
and eventually ended up settling in Pannonia, that is in Roman Hungary in the early 6th century.
And they were in the early 5th century and they were in effect subjects of the Huns.
And as the Huns pushed west, they incorporated more and more of the various Germanic peoples
who had given the Romans so much trouble and pushed others of them into the Roman Empire.
We know little about the earliest kings, but we do know that in 422, the then reigning king,
he goes under a number of names, Ruga or Ruga-la, Rua.
All of these names appear in different accounts, both Latin and Greek.
He crossed the Danube, devastated Thrace, and exacted 350 pounds of gold from the imperial government.
And that is the first serious attack we hear of the Huns into imperial territory, 422,
just at the time that the western government is going into severe collapse.
They've essentially lost the western provinces.
And the eastern government at this time is under the rule of the successor of Arcadius,
an emperor by the name of Theodosus II, sometimes known as Theodosus the calligrapher.
Certainly was better looking than his father, but was an incredibly lazy and inept ruler.
Ruga, that is, he was succeeded by two of his nephews, one of them called Attila and the other one, Bleda.
And they were to share joint power of the Huns, and this had been a power sharing arrangement on various occasions.
Amianus notes that their leaders emerge in time of war, that they don't have a kingship.
But what happened was Attila seized the kingship.
He would be called a Khan in the medieval terminology of these Turkmen peoples.
He was the one who would weld the tribes together and impose his authority and turn the Huns into the ferocious warriors they were
that they threatened to topple the Roman Empire.
Up until that point, the Huns did attack on occasion the Roman Empire, but they were interested in blackmail.
They also hired themselves out to contract as allies to the Romans.
Atheists from 425 on used the Huns as federates.
He hired one batch of them to destroy the Burgundians in 436 or 437 because the Burgundians annoyed him.
He used them in operations against the Visigoths to keep them in power.
In fact, the entire military force of the western imperial government from 425 down to 450, as for 25 years, was premised on this alliance with the Huns.
And many of the people serving in the Hun armies were probably Germans or subjects of the Huns anyway, but that was the way the western government propped itself up.
This changed when Attila seized power, murdered his brother, and took power in his own name alone.
Attila didn't seek to conquer the Roman Empire as far as we can tell.
Sometimes it's been described as he wished to extend the sway of his domains.
One could think of creating the Roman Empire into a huge hunting ground where he could raid at will, plunder, seize captives, reward his tribal armies.
And in this sense, he doesn't have the same kind of state-building skills of Genghis Khan, who is the other great nomadic warrior of the steppes, remembered from the Middle Ages.
And by the less-than-scientific method of asking successive classes in my survey courses, whether Attila the Hun or Genghis Khan has higher barbarian ferocity recognition, Genghis Khan wins every time, at least 60-40.
But Attila is second.
Scourge of God is a good title.
A third is Tamerlane with Prince of Destruction, which I think is the best title, but Tamerlane just doesn't make it compared to Attila and Genghis.
In speed and surprise, though, Attila was certainly the equal of the great Mongol Khan.
And he also, because he ruled a nomadic people, he also was very, very good in gathering intelligence from merchants and diplomats and envoys, finding out what the situation was at the Eastern Court, the Western Roman Court.
He timed his invasions very carefully.
Generally, the Imperial Field Army was preoccupied fighting elsewhere.
The attacks into the Eastern Empire in the 440s.
Usually, the Key Field Army was hopelessly battling the vandals or on some other type of operation, so he was free to attack.
It is also clear, unlike our Gothic barbarians that we discussed in the last lecture, that the Huns learned siege warfare.
In 441, 443, and in 447, Attila commanded devastating raids into the Roman Balkans, and there are reports of cities being captured by siege equipment.
These were undoubtedly constructed by Roman provincials and captives.
And again, like the great Mongol Khan Genghis Khan, he was able to augment his army with the skills of his opponents and of his subject peoples.
Much of his army may well have been infantry.
And there's even been an argument to the point that the Hun army became all infantry because Attila located his capital very close to the Roman city of Aquinqua, modern Budapest today.
It was in Roman territory, in Pannonia, and that he didn't have the grasslands in the immediate area to mount the cavalry.
That might be true, but as the great Lord of the Huns, he probably could summon vast numbers of cavalry from the Eastern steppes.
And so we suspect his army was well equipped with cavalry.
There used to be the indication from the very fragmentary accounts that the Mongol army had great swiftness and stealth, and the cavalry struck fear.
Attila, in effect, milked the Roman government of the east of gold.
By my count, from 442 to 450 AD, he probably got 1.5 million gold solid iron ransom payments from the Emperor Theodosus II.
And he loved to send letters to Theodosus II, the Eastern Roman Emperor, calling him my slave.
Actually, that's not a bad designation for Theodosus because Theodosus's government was really run by his sister, Ilya Polkaria, the great Virgin Empress, who was seen as the proxy of the Virgin Mary,
and very, very astute ministers, including the minister Anthemius, the Praetorian Prefect of the East, responsible for constructing the Theodosian walls.
And this was the great defensive system that protected Constantinople from the Huns.
And it was constructed, oh, about, you know, 20 years before Attila became the great scourge of God.
If you were a Hun army attacking Constantinople, the first obstacle you would run into would be a deep trench of foes about 60 feet wide, 25 feet deep.
It could be flooded. If you managed to get over that barrier, you immediately hit a broad walkway.
And before you were these outer walls, which were about 25 feet high, 10 feet thick, and raced, resting on a huge base so that you even couldn't tunnel under it.
I mean, they went down very, very deep to set the foundations.
And so you were subject to all this fire from these 25-foot walls with towers of 40 feet.
Assuming you got your cavalry over those walls, a big assumption, you then hit the inner walls.
And those walls were 40 feet high with towers at regular intervals of 60 feet in height and equipped to mount Belistai, Catapult.
And this was a system of four miles of walls that cut off the city of Constantinople, its landside, and turned that triangular peninsula of Constantinople into a veritable island.
And so what Attila discovered, as subsequent barbarians were to discover, you would be able to extort blackmail from the imperial government.
You might be able to ravage the provinces in Greece and in the Balkans, but you could not take the capital, and you were not going to be able to cross into Asia Minor and attack the wealthy eastern provinces.
Theodosis's ministers had given the strategic advantage to the eastern government.
And an eastern government that kept control over its military forces and didn't fall in the hands of barbarian kingmakers or generalismos.
When Theodosis died in 450 AD, he was succeeded by his sister Ilya Polkaria, who immediately married a tough general from the Balkans in his 50s, a man named Martian.
And that imperial couple, which were hailed as the Orthodox imperial couple, just refused to deal. Martian's attitude to Attila was no more money.
Attila was going to wage war against Rome, and probably at this point was very little he could do against the east.
He devastated the Balkans. He was not about to attack Constantinople.
And to Attila's great good luck, he gets an appeal from the sister of the western emperor, Valentinian III, that feckless nephew of Honorius.
And Valentinian's sister Honoria, who was about 28, 29 at the time, and afraid that she was going to be married off to some boring elderly senator,
decided to send an appeal to Attila. You know, she'd do a great deal about him from Aetius, the commander, and sent him a ring, asking him to come and rescue her.
Exactly what went on in this mission we don't know, or what Honoria had in mind.
But Attila, you can see this great Turkmen Khan receiving this message immediately, interpreted as an offer of marriage.
You know, Attila's very liberal about this. He has a huge harem. He could certainly add a Roman empress to that.
And said that this was a marriage offer, and that the dowry should be at least half the Roman Empire immediately.
Now, even Valentinian III can't agree to such terms.
And what is more shocking is that Aetius now found himself in the position of no military forces, because the whole arrangement depended on Attila providing him lots of homosidal maniacs to keep his Gothic and other German federates in line.
And as a result, Attila invades Gaul with a who's who, the barbarian world at the time.
And the only way Aetius is to oppose this is to go to the Visigoths in southern Gaul, who had been giving the imperial government trouble, and had been conquering areas of Spain,
and appealed to their King Theodoric, an elderly king, to provide a Visigothic army, and then prevail upon other federates as Burgundians to support him.
And at, in northern France, near, between the city of Trois-Chelon, it's usually called the Battle of Chelon, in 451 the two armies collide.
There's a two-day battle. Later medieval legends says the battle so ferocious the warriors continued to fight in the sky.
Attila's comments to his hordes were ignore the Romans and go after the Goths.
Assuming at this point you could tell the difference between the Goths and the Romans and the Imperial army.
The Hun army is checked. The King Theodoric falls. The Goths want to pursue.
Aetius says no. He does not pursue the Huns. He's still thinking in terms of, well, you never know, we can still negotiate with them.
And by the way, we may have won this victory, but we still have all these Germans still in Gaul and places like that, and they now have vandals in North Africa.
Attila falls back to his capital and in the next year invades Italy.
He crosses the Julian Alps. He takes Aquila, presses to the Po with a huge army.
There's no field army of any consequence in Italy. The Visigoths are certainly not going to defend Italy.
They're more than willing to defend their own realm, but they're not going to come to the aid of Aetius.
What does the Imperial government do? Valentini in the third? What it usually does?
It stands in Ravenna, does nothing in hopes that the marshes and the mosquitoes will keep the Huns away.
It's at this point that two senior senators and the Pope in Rome, Leo I, are sent as emissaries to Attila and meet Attila on the banks of the Po.
And we don't know what happened in that meeting.
Attila had reasons to pull back. His army was probably suffering dysentery, supply problems.
They had ravaged Northern Italy. He wasn't sure whether capturing Rome would get him any advantage anyway.
But nonetheless, he was impressed by the Pope.
We're not sure what the Pope would have told him, would have been through translators, most likely.
But Leo, who was the first of the great Roman popes, and he is a real Roman and aristocrat,
and the first serious theologian in the papal line, was credited with persuading Attila to retire.
And this was a legend that would really bolster papal authority in the West ever after,
especially in comparison to what Valentinian was not doing.
Attila, however, retired, vowing to come back and settle with the Romans.
He retired to his capital near Budapest, married another wife. He's always marrying wives for political reasons.
And her name and the tradition is Ildeco. She may have been a German.
And in the process of celebrating this great marriage, he drank to excess, which was very uncharacteristic of him.
He apparently was very sparing in his food and his drink.
He was essentially a warrior, burst a blood vessel, and died in his own blood that evening.
And when his nobles and officers found him the next day, they assumed that the wife had done him in.
They killed her immediately.
And that woman lived on in legend in both Norse and Scandinavian legend as Guthrum in the Scandinavian tradition of Krimhild
and got swept up with the whole legend of the Nibelunga League or the Nifflungs that survives today even in Wagnerian opera.
With his death, Attila's death, the Hun Empire collapsed very quickly.
The sons, he had many sons fought among themselves.
And the Emperor Martian and Constantinople paid money so the German tribes would revolt and the structure collapsed.
And this was a great barbarian state held together by a charismatic ruler, but it had no institutional basis once he was gone and the conquest ceased.
Yet that experience of Attila proved decisive.
It confirmed that the Germanic territorial kingdoms that were now emerging at the death of Honorius would succeed to the Western Roman world.
There was no serious imperial army in the West anywhere by the time Attila died.
In 454, Aetius was executed by Valentinian III.
Just as Staliccio had been executed by Honorius, that did very little good.
Valentinian III was murdered in a plot.
And with his death, the legitimate Western emperors came to an end.
There was no dynastic unity, no figure for what was left of the Roman administration to give its loyalty.
The last of the Western emperors was deposed in 476, but essentially from 455 to 476, with one exception.
The Western emperors are nothing more than figureheads of the master of the soldiers, the Magister Militum, who were Germans, the most famous Rickmere, and the fiction was just ended in 476.
So Attila, even though he failed to construct his own enduring empire, nonetheless determined what the political and cultural map of the early medieval world would be.
He was also the first of the great conquerors to come out of the Eurasian steppes, and in this sense, he was a preview of what would come for the next thousand years.
