In this lecture, I plan to cover two related subjects.
One is the political and cultural situation that emerges in the former Western Empire
at the very end of the 5th century beginning of the 6th century AD.
That is the results of the Hun attacks and the breakup of the Western Empire and the
collapse of an imperial government in Italy.
And that led to the creation of a number of dramatic successor kingdoms.
The other subject is to deal with the emperor Justinian, who is really a figure who dominates
the 6th century.
He is emperor of the Eastern half of the Roman Empire, the Eastern Roman Empire with its capital
Constantinople.
And Justinian, who reigned from 527 to 565, dominates the 6th century.
He also, you could actually say he's directing affairs in the East, at least since 519, because
he's taken on as the co-emperor of his uncle Justin.
And Justinian had a profound effect on the shaping of the political and cultural landscape
of the early Middle Ages, and he really honestly can be seen as the last great Roman emperor.
His efforts to reverse the political and military decisions of the 5th century AD, that is the
destruction of the Western Roman Empire, to retake those provinces and bring them back
under Roman authority, that is the authority of the emperor residing in Constantinople,
ultimately proved a failure.
But in so doing, he forever transformed the political and cultural landscape of the Mediterranean
world in Northwestern Europe.
And he acts as a crucial figure in the transition from the classical to the medieval world,
and with Justinian's career and his failure to restore the Roman Empire of Augustus, or
at least of Constantine, the Christian emperor, the whole notion of an imperial Rome will
depart very soon after Justinian's death in 565, in fact, in less than a century.
His empire contracts dramatically to just the Anatolian and the Greek core, centered
on Constantinople.
It becomes a different political order, we often call it the Byzantine Empire.
New barbarians move into the Balkans, effectively overrun the North African provinces and the
Syrian provinces, those would be the Arabs, and the central focus of Rome as the major
intermediary with barbarian peoples departs forever.
The successor kingdoms will be on their own, and that will be the subject of the last lecture.
So I think in order to understand why these unusual events occurred, why the East Roman
Empire came back to the West and attempted to restore the old imperial order, it's necessary
to look at what immediately followed that symbolic date of 476, that is the end of the last
Western emperor in Rome, a man named Romulus Augustus, actually he was a boy, he was only
about 13 at the time.
He's deposed very politely, he just retires to his villa in Campania, and the master
of the soldiers, a German named Otto Acker, assumes the position as king of Italy.
He rules a mix of different German federate tribes and soldiers, and acts as the consul
and patrician, that is, as a Roman magistrate and military figure, representing the then
reigning emperor in Constantinople, Zeno, and 476 at the time was represented as nothing
more than the reunification of the Roman Empire under a single emperor in Constantinople,
even though the western provinces were effectively out of the hands of any kind of Roman imperial
administration.
Well first, if we take it from Justinian's viewpoint in 527, we look at the view from
the throne in Constantinople, perhaps the world hadn't changed as much as we would
see it today, looking centuries later at the results of the breakup of the western empire.
For one, with the exception of Britain, the Germanic tribes that had moved into the former
western provinces, as well as took over Italy and Rome, had come in essentially legally.
Britain was the exception, and we'll discuss Britain first, but you have to keep in mind
almost all of these tribes could point to some kind of treaty or arrangement, not only
with the local Roman aristocrats on the spot, but with an imperial government, whether it
be the government in Ravenna, or even later the government in Constantinople after 476,
there's still new groups moving in.
They could all point to the fact that they were representing a legitimate Roman authority,
and that's an important point to keep in mind in this particular period.
Now I mentioned Britain was the exception, and there are several reasons for that.
One is it was always a remote island, it was brought in island province, it was brought
in late into the Roman political and cultural order, and yet as I stated in an earlier lecture,
the Romans were quite successful in maintaining their British province, and Britain really
suffered no major damage from dramatic attacks until quite late in the third century, and
through much of the fourth century, with the exception of an attack in 367, the attacks
had largely been coastal raids along the east shore of England today, or in the southeastern
shore around Kent, maybe the Isle of Wight, those areas were attacked, and the Romans had
set up a very sophisticated system of naval defenses with signal towers.
There was the Count of the Saxon Shore, it's a lovely title in the late Roman administration,
he was in charge of directing the naval defense of the British province.
And so Britain was in many ways a quite successful province through the fourth and early fifth
century and didn't experience the turmoil of the Goths, the Franks, Adrian Opel was
a very distant event for those provincials.
Yet in 410, as a result of that usurpation by Constantine III, the island was left without
effective military, Roman military presence, and essentially the Roman administration just
disappeared within 20 years.
We have reports of the Bishops, a Gaelic Bishop, Germanus, visiting Britain and reporting
in about 430 that there are still cities, Kiwitattes, functioning, that bishops are
holding conferences, and that there's a certain amount of security in the island.
But increasingly, in the 420s and 430s, without a Roman army, Romano Celtic warlords begin
to assert themselves as dinas and impose order in the island, and by 450, dramatic tribes
are arriving in considerable numbers in the province, probably first on invitation by
these Celtic Roman warlords who were in effect following an imperial policy, bringing them
in as mercenaries and allies, and then coming in large scale immigrants.
And the immigration to Britain of Germanic peoples from northwestern Germany and the
Danish Peninsula was considerable, and it is still under debate, but the core of the
old Belgic Britain and later the urban core of the Roman province of Britain, that area
will be conquered in the course of a century from a roughly 450 to 550 AD, and will be
transformed into England, and that is a major linguistic and ethnic change that occurs in
the early Middle Ages.
And those Saxons and Utes, Angles, Frisians, a whole group of people, they have no official
contract with Rome, and they're coming in as pagans, and they're coming in from the
areas least affected by Roman trade.
On the other hand, in Gaul, in Spain, in Italy, and in North Africa, the principal dramatic
states that succeeded immediately in the west all could point to these treaties.
Now Gaul was divided for a long time between the Visigoths in the south, ruling over the
more Romanized areas in the Aquitaine and the old region that the Romans would have called
Narbonensis or Provincia Provence, at least the western part of that, the city of Narbon.
They controlled southern Gaul, and they had a treaty going back to 411, which allowed
them to be settled as federates.
They however had to compete with Burgundians, settled in what now is called Burgundy, that
is in central France, and the Franks, who were a coalition of Germanic tribes that had
fused in the third century, and the Franks didn't so much as migrate as expand.
They expanded across the Rhine, they always retained control of their Germanic homeland,
and then imposed their authority over northern and central Gaul, and eventually subjected
the Burgundians and drove the Visigoths into Spain, and after 507, and this is a result
of the activities of King Clovis, the first king we know anything about of the Merovingian
family, the family that ruled the Franks, Clovis, who ruled from 482 to 511, conquered
a vast area, drove the Visigoths into Spain, subjected the Burgundians, subjected various
Germanic tribes in southern Germany, such as the Bavarians, Thuringians, and forged
a Frankish kingdom, a very loose confederation of different tribes, and Clovis passed on
this heritage to his sons, and that Frankish state would ultimately, well in that Frankish
state would rest the destinies of medieval Europe.
Clovis inherited a fair amount of the old Roman administration by taking over the church
and by converting to Catholic Christianity, so that he gained the cooperation of a Roman
upper class.
He also sought out symbols of legitimacy from Constantinople, he was eager to be called
a consul, a patrician, by this point these were symbolic titles, but there are exchanges
of embassies, and Clovis was very conscious as all these dramatic kings on the continent
that they had some sort of authority from the emperor in Constantinople.
Likewise the Visigoths in Spain, their kin, the Ostrogoths in Italy, and the Vandals in
North Africa.
Those three dramatic tribes were all descended from East dramatic peoples who had migrated
from Scandinavia in the second century AD, who had converted to Arian Christianity, that
is that sectarian Christianity associated with certain Eastern emperors in the late
4th century, they were therefore divided by their faith from the majority of Romans over
whom they ruled, and all three of these peoples were very conscious that they owed their position
to original arrangements with the Roman authorities.
The Visigoths who eventually took over and created a territorial kingdom in Spain would
convert to Catholicism.
They would issue Romans law, that is they issued codes based on Roman vulgar law, common
law, and if they had not been overthrown by an Arabic conquest in 711, 713 when the Muslims
moved in and took over the peninsula, one is very curious what type of composite society
would have emerged from that Visigothic Roman mix in the former Spanish provinces.
But that was not to be.
The Vandals crossed over to North Africa in 429 as the western government was losing
its grip over the empire, they too had been invited, they had been invited by a rebellious
governor, quickly overran the provinces of North Africa, there was very little military
resistance from the Romans, the Berber tribes remained independent, those tribes patrolling
the desert, but the Roman cities fell to them within a decade.
By 439 they were entrenched at Carthage, a city now much larger than Rome that had declined
precipitously over the 5th century, and they could actually claim to be a naval power because
they inherited the cities and the seaborne commerce of those cities of North Africa,
and so in many ways vandal North Africa, which is being elucidated by international excavations
at Carthage, shows a great deal of continuity with its Roman past.
Very similar to Visigothic Spain, and fresh excavations now in Spain will probably point
out the same, that to Justinian looking at certainly Spain and North Africa, and we'll
see in a moment Italy, not much had seemed to change, that it was still essentially a
Roman society that happened to have these German field armies that have taken over the
government, and it would be a matter of substituting direct imperial power administration with
those German kings and commanders who essentially were running their kingdoms through a Roman
apparatus.
Furthermore, Spain, Italy and North Africa would present a very impressive Episcopal
organization of the Western Church, which also could be used to administer these former
Western provinces.
Perhaps the most imaginative people and successful people of all the Germanic immigrants into
the invaders, depends on one's point of view really, of the late Roman state are the Ostrogoths.
These were federates of the Roman Empire after the death of Attila, in 454 they were
settled in Roman Pannonia, their king Theodoric, in 489 he was given a federal status, he was
paid a subsidy by the Eastern government, and on the orders of the Eastern government
entered Italy and substituted himself as the ruler of Italy, defeating and slaying Otto
Walker, that German general who had deposed the last Western emperor.
And so Theodoric, the Ostrogothic king in Rome, parts of the upper Danube and Pannonia,
was an absolutely legitimate ruler, sanctioned by Constantinople, and he died in 526 and
it's clear from what we know that the Roman senate continued to function, that the great
senatorial families were still there, now they were increasingly becoming an Italian
aristocracy, they were losing their empire wide connections, they were becoming increasingly
provincial in their economic and political focus, but they maintained the cultural traditions
of late classical Christian Rome, the Ostrogothic kings respected the papacy, even though they
were Aryan rulers, and most of the Ostrogoths were settled in this traditional arrangement
in northern Italy in the Po Valley, receiving rations and taxes, and as far as we can tell
the Roman ruling classes, aristocratic classes, were not dispossessed of their states.
So Ostrogothic Italy has sometimes been described as a late Roman state, defended by Gothic
steel, that's certainly an image that would appeal to Theodoric.
So the successor states that came after the fall of the Roman Empire didn't look so barbarian
at all, essentially what happened is that peculiar martial society that had been created
on the Roman frontiers from the 2nd century to the 4th century AD had simply migrated into
the interior of the empire and taken over as the political elites in these various chugs
of the Roman Empire, and again the one exception is Britain which fell to a barbarian assault
in the sense of a barbarian assault, if our records are at all accurate at what's going
on there.
In 527 Justinian assumed the throne in his own right after the death of his uncle and
he was determined to reverse this political decision and as I've argued, to him it was
fairly logical.
Justinian had private reasons, he was not a popular emperor, his wife Theodora by profession
a prostitute, Justinian had to change the law to have her available for marriage, he
violated the law of Augustus of all things, she proved to be a great confident in support
for the early part of the reign, she died later on in probably a form of cancer, she's
maybe half the age of her husband, her husband came to the throne at age 42 or 43, she was
looked upon as just a disgrace to the aristocracy and compromised Justinian in the eyes of the
traditional elite of Constantinople.
He also surrounded himself with very talented new men, men of humble origin, these included
his generals, particularly his general Belisarius who was responsible for the military reconquest
and of the western provinces, his great law giver Trebonian, his jurist, his financial
ministers, all of these men who rose through ability and therefore were despised as the
emperor's creatures.
So military victories would gain him a great deal of prestige with the army and intimidate
the ruling classes and that would be one reason for conducting these wars of reconquest.
But the other reason is very seriously Justinian thought that this was a matter of restoring
an immutable Roman order, an immutable Roman Christian order and it was his goal and his
commission from God to do so.
One can try to get a ledger of what was gained financially by these wars and the best gain
guess is that if he had taken out these kingdoms quickly, North Africa, Spain, Italy, possibly
Gaul and moved in his administrators very quickly and taxed these areas, the wars would have
at least paid for themselves or may have netted a profit, certainly Africa eventually nets
a profit for the imperial government.
But in the initial stages, these wars are going to cost a great deal of money, Justinian
has it, it's certainly going to tax the imperial army, fortunately Justinian has a very effective
army, a professional army rebuilt in the 5th century as a result of the hum threats.
And so he hopes that with this great reserve of money, reputedly 28 million gold solidi
and the solidest nine of them, these gold coins are given as the annual salary of a
cavalryman, so this is an enormous amount of money, this great reserve, his taxes coming
in each year, his professional army or at least his field army, some 15 to 20,000 effective
men and his able generals should gain him the victories he desired.
And initially it went that way.
He was able to bribe the Persian Shah not to attack, a man named Kostrowi is the first,
he literally just compromised the security of the eastern frontier and the Persian Shah
was willing to agree to any kind of payoff because he had his own problems with barbarians
from Central Asia.
And this allowed him to transfer his major expeditionary forces against the west.
In 533, 534 he exploited a civil wars too strong a word, a succession crisis in the
vandal kingdom.
The then reigning king named Hilderic who had come to the throne in 523 had actually
converted to Catholic Christianity.
His mother was the daughter of the last legitimate western emperor Valentinian III.
She had been carried off in a vandal sack in 455, again a rather respectable German sack.
The main reason that the vandal king Geiserex sacked Rome was because the imperial government
had not delivered on certain promises and so he simply went to Rome and collected along
with the number of imperial princesses and senatorial princesses who got married into
the vandal nobility.
And that decision to convert to Catholic Christianity did in the king.
His cousin Gelimir overthrew him.
He was an Aryan and he was acceptable to the vandal nobility and that change of kingship
allowed Justinian to intervene diplomatically claiming that he was intervening on behalf
of the royal family, the legitimate family.
It was just a pretense.
I mean the easiest thing to do was fortunately Gelimir murders his rival so there's no need
to put the legitimate family back in power.
In 533 the imperial fleet set sail.
Belisarius wins a brilliant victory.
In two major battles the vandal kingdom essentially disappears.
The city of Carthage is reoccupied, imperial administrators follow and the victory certainly
lowered Justinian to the idea well the Goths are next, the Goths in Italy.
Unfortunately Africa proved much more difficult to administer and control than to conquer.
The vandals as a people disappear.
A number of them fell in the two decisive battles.
The survivors were enrolled into military units and as far as we can tell were sent
on patrol in Armenia and get lost from the sources.
Well a lot of people get lost in Roman Armenia, one of the occupational hazards when you're
posted to that frontier.
Many of the vandal women who remain behind married the professional soldiers that came
in with Belisarius and these were a mix of men.
They included not only Romans but also Huns and other Germanic peoples but they were men
who had been drilled in professional regiments under extremely good officers and so the army
that came in in 533 was an excellent professional army.
It had some of the old standards in drill, it certainly had unit integrity, they did
however base their shock action on heavy cavalry, the cataphracti, these armies of Belisarius
or commanded by Belisarius armies of Justinian are decidedly cavalry in their decisive arm
although infantry is still an important role and they are backed up by a very impressive
imperial fleet and the conquest of Vandal Africa led Justinian to believe well Bostrogothic
Italy next.
And once again there was a pretense, Justinian had an ally in the Gothic Queen Alamasuntha
who was the daughter of Theodoric who could not rule on her own right, she had ruled as
a regent for her son who died by drinking himself to death I think at age 18, I think
it was just sexually, mentally, physically exhausted by all the good times he had, mom
was left without any air to direct, she was forced to marry a cousin of hers, a fellow
named Theodoha to rather cravenly and sneaky character who murdered Amalasuntha in her
bath or had Hitman murder in the bath, it was also a story that Theodora, Justinian's
wife sent out the Hitman but it ought to be true but I don't believe it in any event.
Justinian decided to seize on this pretext and intervene on behalf of the dead queen,
initially the war goes well.
He's taken with no trouble in 536 Imperial armies land in southern Italy, they sweep
up the Italian coast, reoccupy Rome and it, Justinian's already making plans, well Gothic
Italy goes, Franks are next.
Unfortunately in the process of this campaign the Goths got their act together, they immediately
deposed the ineffective Theodoha and raised on the shield of good warrior Vitticus, Vitticus
who refused to fight a decisive battle and wage a war of sieges and did the unexpected,
he besieged Belisarius and Rome from 537 to 536 through the winter into 537.
Well Vitticus who's only captured, he's forced into surrender in 540, extends the war and
that war drags on this Gothic war down to little, it's not until 552 that the Goths
are finally defeated.
It is a, the Goths lose Vitticus in 540, within a year they have another powerful and effective
king Totilla who wages a war of sieges and attrition and the Gothic war that lasts at
about 17 years, this war devastates Italy.
It destroys towns, Rome changes hands five times, it's sacked three times for 40 days
at one point, in 549 the city is completely abandoned.
Italy enters the Middle Ages in the 6th century as a result of this war of reconquest and
for much of the Italian population at a certain point there was very little difference between
Justinian's army and the Austro-Goths as the battle raged on, furthermore the empire
was hit by a absolutely destructive plague in 542, 543, there's descriptions of it in
Constantinople and this is the first of a series of pandemics that destroys population
through the Near Eastern Europe and literally leads to a demographic collapse over the next
150 years, there are fewer people in say 600 AD than there were in 500 AD because so much
of the population is killed and there's not enough children born to replace the losses
and the figures are hideous and this plague has been subject to quite a bit of analysis
and compared to that other famous pandemic, the Black Death and its associated plagues
at the end of the Middle Ages.
That plague as well as Justinian's financial difficulties prolonged the wars, there's rebellions
in Africa, the Goths revived in Italy, the idea of conquering the rest of the west can
never be implemented and by the end of these wars, by the time Justinian dies in 565,
he has recovered the western provinces.
Imperial authority is restored in Italy, in Africa, the islands of the western Mediterranean,
they even intervene in a Visigothic civil war and take over southern Spain, Bytica, that
most Romanized of areas and so in a way Justinian can look at the beginnings of a restored Roman
empire, at least the Mediterranean in the west is now incorporated into this Roman world.
But in no way are these provinces in a position to pay for the restored imperial government.
What Justinian could not see is that while these dramatic states looked like, there were
merely continuations of the Roman order, all of these areas to different degrees were increasingly
evolving into local distinct societies and that to bring in the old imperial administration,
well it just wasn't possible.
In Africa the mutiny that broke out with his army, the so called Eastern Mutiny in 535,
18 months after the reoccupation of the province was because the soldiers hadn't been paid
because no one knew how to collect taxes anymore, there had been no tax collection for 80 years.
In Italy once the war is completed with the Goths the same problem, Justinian has to
issue special laws, the so called pragmatic sanction, he has to work through bishops and
landlords to assume the roles that once were taken on by imperial officials, there's no
senate of any worth to run anything, there's no essential administration and this meant
that the restoration was doomed to be ephemeral in most of his domains.
It furthermore had seriously sapped the military and financial resources of the Eastern Empire,
not only the wars but the financial cost of supporting those wars, by the time Justinian
died that professional army that had gone into those wars and owed its success largely
to the genius of Belisarius had taken enormous losses in the wars of attrition in Italy,
the Justinian had to go back to recruiting dramatic federates, he had to use bribes to
keep barbarians out of the Balkans, he compromised the security of the Eastern Frontier by his
treaties and subsidies with the Shoah, at that point a man named Kostrow is the first
and so the Empire's security had been severely compromised, the Eastern Empire's security
and that meant at his death that new groups of barbarians were able to muscle in not only
into Italy which had suffered so much but also into the Balkans and for the Persians
to resume the wars that had once been waged in the 3rd and early 4th century with the
hope of conquering Constantinople and the Empire within a decade of Justinian's death
is fighting for its life and the wars and migrations that followed Justinian would
shatter the traditional Roman state, it would transfer what was left of the Roman legacy
from Italy to Constantinople, it would see the arrival of new barbarian people who would
determine the destinies of Western Europe, what would become Eastern Europe and ultimately
the Islamic world because the Arabs themselves owe a great deal to the political and military
conditions obtaining after the death of Justinian and it is with that we close this lecture
and we will conclude with the implications of Justinian's failure and what the whole
Roman experience with these barbarians people would have for the Middle Ages.
