In business, and in sports, and in politics, there is a pervasive language of war and of
conflict.
We talk of market penetration, of invading new markets.
We outflank our opponents.
We get ambushed in office meetings.
We form alliances, and we engage in battle against alliances.
We conduct hasty retreats when facing a superior foe.
We arrange a truce, or we make peace with our rivals.
Perhaps it's only natural that we should speak this way.
There is a reason.
Ours is a world of conflict and cooperation, and sometimes the cooperation seems only a
prelude to conflict.
Rather than simply adopting the maquismo of war words, we can go beyond the surface similarities.
We can study and learn something about strategy from the actual techniques of martial combat.
Here we look at some of the tactical techniques utilized by the military and codified in military
manuals worldwide.
Successful strategic implementation means following through with crisp execution.
It means knitting together your tactical engagements in the service of your master
plan.
Let's revisit a terminology issue right at the start.
The difference between strategy and tactics.
The difference between strategy and tactics has always seemed slippery to many people.
Sometimes the terms seem to be used interchangeably, and there's a very good reason for this confusion.
In simplest terms, a strategy is the overall plan, while tactics are the actions you take
to execute the plan.
This distinction has a long tradition in strategic planning that goes back to the military.
This leads to an unfortunate conclusion that strategy refers to the big things and tactics
to the details.
But as we embark upon our strategic journey into a future that is unsure, there is no
way for us to know in advance which details are insignificant and which may loom large
as an important strategic milestone for us.
Our intended strategy merges imperceptibly into our emergent strategy through the process
of strong and crisp execution and responses to what our competitors do.
Perspective also plays a major role.
Strategic theorist Richard Rumelt put it this way.
One person's strategy is another's tactics.
That is, what is strategic depends on where you sit.
For instance, from the overall perspective of corporate strategy, business units are
expected to execute tactics.
But from the perspective of a single unit within the business, these tactics for the
overall company are likely part of the strategy for the business unit.
There may be subunits to execute the tactics of that unit strategy, what from the top level
might be regarded as logistics or operations.
Now the important point to remember is this.
Action is the neglected child of strategy and that follow through in our execution,
our tactics is a more important part of strategy than the publication of our strategy in a
handsome binder.
So let's call these techniques strategic maneuvers.
As we employ them, let's keep our eyes open for opportunities to change directions, to
abandon plans that are gone awry, to follow up victories with more victories, and to allow
our realized strategy to emerge from the flurry of actions and responses that play out in
the real world.
Generals use a variety of strategic maneuvers on the battlefield to engage the enemy.
Many of these maneuvers have a long history, some thousands of years old, which suggests
their conceptual durability as well as the constancy of human nature.
Maneuvers effective in the first century BC can be just as effective in the 21st century
because the challenges at bottom remain the same, dealing with human nature in conflict.
These principles of maneuver can be applied at the level of the army with its thousands
of armed combatants down to the level of the individual swordsmen.
Moreover, these maneuvers have their counterparts in other venues such as business and in sports.
In fact, the lines between these separate venues are blurred and are different only in the
level of conflict and the degree of violence.
The maneuvers can be faster than the speed of conscious thought.
Think for a moment of an individual swordsman, today's elegant modern-day sport of fencing
using the tip of a foil to touch a midsection, or the saber to touch anywhere on the upper
body, or the tip of the epa to touch anywhere on the entire body, or all direct descendants
from military training rep year.
As a young college fencer, I found that one learns the same attacks and defensive maneuvers
utilized by warriors in centuries past, warriors who played for the much higher stakes of life
and death.
Let's take a closer look now at some of these maneuvers.
Fencing is an elegant sport, a sport of strength, endurance, speed, and guile.
Now this is a saber, this is a cutting and a thrusting weapon.
We want to score touches on our opponent.
The target area of our opponent is everything above the waist, the torso, the arms, wrists,
and the head.
Protection is essential.
Our basic attacks are the chest or belly cut, the flank cut, and the head cut, straight
on, or to either cheek.
I can also lunge and thrust with the point of the blade.
My opponent attempts to parry these attacks.
He parries the flank cut, he parries the chest cut, he parries the head cut.
Now I want to deceive my opponent, I want him to develop tendencies so that he exposes
himself to my attack, in this case an attack to the wrist.
Flank cut, parried, chest cut, parried, flank cut, parried, chest cut, it was a faint cut
to the wrist.
The same technique for the head cut.
Head cut, parried, head cut, parried, head cut, it was a faint cut to the chest.
These are just a few of the deception techniques we can use.
Saber fencing, of course, is much more than hand movement.
We incorporate mobility, in this case, the lunge.
And finally, we conclude our brief demonstration with a running attack called a flesh attack.
Now in all of this, your opponent's responses combine with learned martial principles to
create a dynamic and fluid combat situation.
It is from this interaction of strategic maneuvering that the final result emerges.
Of course, there is no checklist for successful fencing, much less for actual conflict.
You may go into your conflict with a checklist, always beginning in the on guard position,
but you will surely be left behind when dealing with an experienced opponent.
You must be ready to abandon your line of attack to create and pursue other momentary
advantages that present themselves and to exploit them with follow through.
Fencing and the speed at which it takes place helps us understand a broader fact about conflict
and competition.
After the battle or a series of battles in hindsight, we might identify a strategy pursued
that actually did not exist in your prior intent.
This is an important point to remember in studying the great battles and great business
moves of history.
What actually occurred was often not the result of a carefully wrought strategic plan, but
the consistent, swift and flexible application of martial principles at the place and time
demanded of the situation.
Now with this fact in mind, let us examine some of these martial principles and strategic
maneuvers.
Let us first recognize that not every maneuver or attack is appropriate in every situation.
It must make sense.
It must make sense in the overall plan.
It must make sense in the context of the ongoing battle.
And it must make sense given what has already occurred in our current capabilities.
It must in short have strategic fit.
An example of the elusiveness of victory in the quest for strategic fit comes from the
Vietnam War.
Colonel Harry Summers authored a book about the war, a Clauswitzian analysis of U.S. performance.
After the war, Colonel Summers was in a delegation dispatched to Hanoi.
In the airport, he got into a conversation with a North Vietnamese colonel named Tu who
spoke some English.
They spoke of their recent conflict as warriors might do.
Colonel Summers said this, you know, you never defeated us on the battlefield.
Colonel Tu considered his response and then he replied, that may be so, but it is also
irrelevant.
Colonel Tu's point was not cavalier.
He described how a powerful opponent the United States had pursued a strategy of limited
war against the weaker combatant, pursuing a strategy of total war.
A powerful opponent that had a muddled strategic intent with unclear objectives, battling an
enemy with clear intent and objectives and pursuing tactics designed to exploit weakness.
The weapons, the places and the times may change, but conflict at its most visceral is still
human versus human.
And so it's useful for us to learn about some of the more venerable attacks and to examine
their applicability in venues other than the actual battlefield.
Some techniques of maneuver and attack are familiar to most people, others not so well
known.
The best strategic maneuver of course is one that Sun Tzu recommended more than 2,000 years
ago.
Sun Tzu urged us to consider techniques that would yield bloodless victories.
He said this, to fight and conquer in all your battles is not supreme excellence.
Supreme excellence consists in breaking the enemy's resistance without fighting.
More often than not, we are not blessed with the kind of acumen or situation that allows
us the luxury of winning without battle.
And so here we look at four techniques that can yield victory, if applied judiciously and
at the proper place and time.
First the frontal assault, second the indirect approach, third turning the flank, and fourth
rear area battle.
The frontal assault we've already met when discussing the trench warfare of World War
I and is exactly what it sounds like.
An all out attack on the enemy's front, usually the enemy is well dug in, the opponent has
chosen the location where the battle will take place.
You have tremendous disadvantages when making a frontal assault.
So the natural question arises here is why use this maneuver, this attack?
Is there ever a time when a frontal assault is a good idea?
Perhaps, if it is the last thing a competitor expects and believes you will do, even if
it's fully expected it may be the only option available.
There may be no other way to oust an opponent from a strong point.
In the eight year Iran-Iraq war in the 1980s, the Iranians launched human wave frontal assaults
on the better equipped but outnumbered Iraqis.
If you believe your frontal assault is the only option open to you, then you can act
to mitigate the disadvantages and I commend to you the example of D-Day June 6th, 1944,
the invasion of Adolf Hitler's fortress Europe.
The Allied landings in western France were a frontal assault, the deadliest kind, against
a well prepared and well entrenched enemy across unfriendly terrain.
The Allies chose the French coast as their point of attack as the Germans knew they would.
There was really no other choice.
The Allies still had flexibility as to the time and the exact location.
These were the factors that the Allies desperately needed to shroud from the Germans.
The Allies elected to obfuscate the true landing place and time with an elaborate deception
campaign.
In business, the frontal assault pits one competitor against another.
The manifestation of the frontal assault is the price war, especially when the two businesses
compete on price rather than quality or premium brands or service.
Take for instance the discount retailer Wal-Mart, a fought in one of frontal assault on Kmart
in the 1990s.
How does one attack Wal-Mart or the big cola companies Coca-Cola and Pepsi with a frontal
assault?
Royal Crown Cola actually tried a frontal assault on the big two colas in the late 1960s.
But way back in the 1930s, Royal Crown was the number two soft drink in America ahead
of Pepsi.
RC Cola is in fact a part of Americana, at least in the American South.
A working man's lunch was an RC Cola and a Moon Pie, and it even yielded a popular song
in the 1950s, giving RC Cola and a Moon Pie.
It remains an expression that to this day has traction in the American South.
This kind of word of mouth advertising and embedding in the popular culture is considered
gold in the marketing world.
But RC overreached.
By the late 1960s, Royal Crown was America's number three cola and elected to take on the
big two.
It hired a big city advertising agency, Wells Rich Green, led by one of the highest paid
advertising executives in the country, Mary Wells.
With reckless bravado, Wells made this announcement, we're out to kill Coke and Pepsi.
I hope you'll excuse the word, but we're really out for that jugular.
But RC was really in no position to attack the market leaders in a frontal assault.
At the time, Pepsi alone was selling four times as much as RC Cola.
RC dissipated its resources promoting its mainline cola at a time when it had all the
elements in place for a different and perhaps more successful strategic maneuver.
It's a maneuver we'll talk about in a moment.
Frontal assaults between major corporations can devastate the contenders.
The only winners in such a venture are consumers.
So you and I should be grateful when firms decide to assault each other directly because
the only immediate winners in a price war are consumers.
To take an extreme example, in 1992, airlines engaged in a price war so devastating that
some observers said airlines lost more money than the total profits earned by the industry
since its very beginning.
Unless other mitigating factors can be brought to bear, attacking a strong and well-prepared
enemy is foolhardy.
It goes against every principle of competition we've studied and will study.
This is true in professional conflict on a personal level as well.
A direct frontal assault on a well-entrenched opponent, especially in public, has a good
chance of ending in disaster for the attacker unless the stage is carefully prepared beforehand
and other mitigating factors are on your side such as timing or location, surprise and deception.
Generally speaking, which is to say most of the time, it's much better to pursue another
attack.
The indirect approach is one such technique.
The indirect approach is a technique that thwarts your opponent's expectations.
Your opponent would like nothing better than to have you hurl yourself onto his carefully
prepared position.
Some enemies are just too strong to tackle head-on like Walmart.
The indirect approach is a strategic contribution offered by Sir Basil Liddell Hart, a British
strategist of the early and mid-20th century.
In his book, Strategy, Liddell Hart notes that seven out of eight frontal assaults in
the American Civil War failed.
He also observed that when the art of the indirect approach was used, it demonstrated
great utility both in achieving objectives and in minimizing the damage to the attacker.
It makes no sense to wear ourselves out on an opponent entrenched in a powerful position.
This could be called the Blitzgrinder, which was how the Russians viewed their defensive
preparations at the Battle of Kursk in 1943.
The Soviets had prepared extensive defensive belts over a period of months, and these successive
belts of defenses wore down the massive German offensive so that it never did achieve a breakthrough.
In Mobile Warfare, where maneuver can be used to great effect, a technique of the indirect
approach is to keep an opponent guessing as to your intermediate objectives as you advance.
And in this way, by keeping two equally attractive objectives in the strategic scheme, you impose
indecisiveness on your opponent, and in the best case, you compel him to split his forces
in a futile attempt to defend everything.
William Tecumseh Sherman's 1864 Georgia campaign in the American Civil War offers us an excellent
example of keeping the enemy in suspense as to successive objectives.
Sherman faced retreating Confederate General Joseph Johnston, and southern forces were
never able to fix Sherman's objectives along his route of march.
In business, we can look to Honda Motor Company for an excellent example of the strategy of
indirect approach.
In Japan, Honda is known as a motorcycle manufacturer, but abroad, it's known for its automobiles,
and it is, in fact, the third largest car maker in the United States.
But in the 1950s, Honda developed its expertise as the world's best not in motorcycles, nor
automobiles.
Honda became the world's leading manufacturer of small internal combustion engines, and it
still is.
American car makers saw Honda as a Japanese maker of small motorcycles, and it ignored
Honda's growing expertise in designing the finest small engines in the world, engines
that powered everything from snow blowers to chainsaws to lawn mowers to generators to
outboard motors.
This technological leadership laid a platform for Honda's horizontal expansion, eventually
into automobiles.
Honda's indirect approach caught American car makers napping.
They did not see the immediate threat of a new car maker on the horizon, with new ideas
about smaller auto design, higher gas mileage, and a reasonable price.
Our next strategic maneuver is turning the flank.
Turning the flank is a maneuver that attempts to dislocate the enemy by moving to either
of his flanks.
It is a specific type of indirect approach focused on the opponent's sides.
The flanking movement requires a response from the enemy, which usually disrupts its own
operations.
Napoleon, he crafted much of his reputation by maneuvering against the flanks and into
the rear of the enemy.
In the Korean War, General Douglas MacArthur's amphibious landing at Incheon was an important
example.
In the Civil War, General Sherman maneuvered against the enemy flanks many times in his
1864 campaign against the South in Georgia.
Repeatedly, Sherman maneuvered to turn the flank of Joseph Johnson's army, forcing the
Southern General out of his prepared defensive positions and into successive retreats.
On the other side of that war, Southern Commander-in-Chief General Robert E. Lee achieved his greatest
victory in 1863 at Chancellorsville by means of the flank attack, and he accompanied his
flank attack by the force multiplier of surprise and a bit of deception.
An elite combined a distracting demonstration attack on the Union Front, while his trusted
Lieutenant General Thomas Stonewall Jackson maneuvered quickly and surreptitiously to
the unsuspecting Union right flank.
Sherman attacked and he completely surprised and he routed the Union troops, relaxing in
their bivouac.
In the 2003 motion picture, Gods and Generals, this battle is given a stunning portrayal.
In business, attacking the flank can take many different forms, depending on the product
or service and the various alignments of power relationships.
Attacking the flank can mean, for instance, carving out market space by specializing in
a narrow niche of a major competitor.
Make retail bookselling, for instance.
The specialty bookseller will always outcompete the general interest bookseller within the
narrow parameters defined by the niche market.
Another example is specialty retail clothing stores for the large man.
And finally, going back to our Royal Crown Cola example, we saw how Royal Crown attempted
to take on the big two colas and wore itself out promoting its mainline cola against Coca-Cola
and Pepsi.
But RC could have pursued a different course, one that could have been wildly successful.
In 1962, Royal Crown went nationwide with the first diet soft drink in the United States,
Diet Right Cola.
This flanking move caught the major colas by complete surprise, though Coke responded eventually
with Tab and Pepsi came out with Diet Pepsi.
By the end of the 1960s, Diet Right was the largest selling soft drink in the United States
and accounted for almost half of Royal Crown's earnings.
This was the moment of strategic decision for Royal Crown.
By concentrating its resources on market leader Diet Right, RC could have solidified its position.
RC did not anticipate this development, its market leadership and diet soda.
It did choose to squander the opportunity.
Rather than show flexibility and follow up on a clear winner, it decided to compete on
both fronts and let the market choose for them with disastrous results.
Increased competition appeared in 1982 with the introduction of Diet Coke and without
strategic support, Diet Right faded and eventually slipped to less than 4% of the diet soda market.
Such are the results of choosing the wrong strategic maneuver, in this case, electing
a frontal assault over following up on a successful flanking maneuver.
Similar to the indirect approach and turning the flank is the maneuver called rear area
battle.
Rear area battle is a concept of 20th century warfare whose operative idea is to sow confusion
in the enemy ranks behind the lines by creating the impression that no ground is safe.
It forces an opponent to expend resources defending ground that a thought had already
won.
There is a large psychological opponent to this strategic maneuver.
In warfare at the commencement of hostilities, commandos with various deadly skills infiltrate
into the enemy's rear areas where the enemy maintains its support and supply bases.
These commandos disrupt communications and supply and even assassinate enemy commanders
sowing confusion and suspicion.
I had the chance to interview a Hungarian defector during the Cold War, a member of
an elite commando unit.
Hungary, of course, was a member of the Warsaw Pact.
These commandos were known as Spetsnaz or Spatialna na Zvanie.
This soldier's mission at the commencement of hostilities was to be inserted behind our
lines and to attack critical military installations.
During World War II, the French underground worked tirelessly against occupying German
forces, sabotaging railways and supply lines, aiding downed allied pilots, and providing
the allies with valuable intelligence.
In Russia, too, the partisans took up arms against the German invaders and increased
the defensive burden for the Germans, forcing them to use troops to guard supply depots
and convoys, diverting these badly needed soldiers from the front lines.
Now, just as important as the operational aspects of rear area battle is the psychological
impact on your opponent when he realizes that the enemy has penetrated the lines and
is behind him.
In World War II, the start of the Battle of the Bulge in 1944, the Germans managed to
drop commandos wearing American military police uniforms behind allied lines.
The famed commando auto-scores any spearhead of the operation, which was designed to sow
confusion in the American ranks as the Germans pressed forward in their last major offensive
of the war.
Rear area battle, it can have a powerful impact on an enemy.
Again, one psychological thrust is that the enemy is compelled to deploy forces to defend
or to regain territory he believed he had already won and secured.
The psychological dislocation is tremendous as rear area battle sows insecurity in the
mind of the enemy.
This type of action is used in presidential political campaigns as candidates strike and
counter-strike at each other's home bases with advertising, with personal appearances,
and with surrogate campaigners who represent the candidate on the campaign trail.
We often hear of how one candidate is campaigning his state thought to be solidly in the other
candidate's camp.
This has the intended effect of disrupting the plans of the other campaign to force it
to redirect resources into areas it thought already secure.
Rear area battle, or threat, has been used throughout history to take pressure off other
areas of the front.
In the summer of 1864, the Confederacy launched its famous raid on Washington.
The South was facing a war of attrition against the North, which it could not hope to win.
Ulysses S. Grant was compressing his opposite number at Cold Harbor.
To relieve this pressure, Southern General Robert E. Lee formed the Army of the Valley,
10,000 men under General Jubal Early.
Lee sent early North with orders to attack the Union Capitol, Washington, D.C.
Washington was less strongly held than at other points in the war, and early marched
his troops hard.
If not for a delaying battle by Northern troops at Monocacy, Early's raid might have truly
threatened the Northern Capitol, and as it was, the intent of the raid was to force
Union General Grant to divert troops from his pressure on the South to prevent the
seizure of the Capitol.
To defend new territory, territory that was considered secure, but was now suddenly threatened.
As an interesting historical aside, it was during this raid by Jubal Early that Abraham
Lincoln became the only incumbent U.S. president ever to come under direct fire by an adversary.
As Lincoln watched from the stockade parapets that surrounded Washington, Confederate mini-balls,
whizzed by his head, he was pulled down behind cover by a young captain shouting,
Get down, you fool!
That young captain would later achieve fame in the U.S. judiciary.
He was captain Oliver Wendell Holmes, later Justice of the United States Supreme Court.
Rear area battle is used in business quite often, especially in international operations.
If we conceive of companies having a home base or a home market, then the analogy becomes
clear.
For example, in the 1980s, Kodak found itself under assault by Fujifilm in its home market.
Fujifilm attacked Kodak in the United States, slowly winning market share at Kodak's expense,
and igniting a price war.
This was a combination frontal assault combined with attacking Kodak's secure U.S. bases.
Kodak responded.
Kodak responded with a counterattack in Japan, forcing Fujifilm to relook its operations
in its home base.
Kodak compounded its attack with lawsuits and complaints to the GATT and later the World
Trade Organization, charging unfair and illegal Japanese trade practices.
Kodak was quite explicit in its aggressive attitude towards Fujifilm.
In 1998, Eric L. Steenberg, Kodak's assistant chief operating officer, he offered this belligerent
statement of Kodak's strategic intent toward challenger Fujifilm.
Smack them until they figure it out.
So which strategic maneuver should you use?
Smack them until they figure it out?
Or some technique that has a chance of winning the day without a fight?
Frontal assault, indirect approach, attack the flank, or take the fight to the rear area
of the battle?
Now, that depends.
It depends on your position vis-a-vis your opponent, on your resources, on your capabilities,
on your ability to accept risk, on your own strategic intent, and in the implementation
of your strategy.
It depends on how your opponent responds to your initial and subsequent moves.
It also depends on your boldness, on your analytical acumen, and on your ability to
see through the fog of conflict in a detached and objective manner.
Keep your long-term strategic objectives front and center.
Now, strategic successful strategic implementation means knitting together your tactical engagements
into a coherent whole.
Tactics without an overarching strategy means aimless conflict, perhaps even a string of
meaningless tactical victories that weaken you and do not advance your agenda.
Even if you know you likely would win such an encounter, shrewd strategic decision making
means not fighting battles that do not advance your strategy.
