Why do good generals falter at the crucial moment?
Why do smart companies do stupid things?
You know what I'm referring to.
You see it all the time.
You read in the newspapers about a company launching a new product or taking a new
initiative or announcing a new acquisition, real head scratches, and you wonder to yourself,
do they know something that I don't?
The answer is usually no, they don't know something that you don't.
In fact, your first impression is probably the correct impression.
We know that even in the best laid plans can go awry.
There is in fact a folk law that dictates this.
We call it Murphy's Law.
Something that can go wrong will go wrong.
But this also can serve as an excuse for constructing and executing bad strategy, even in the face
of overwhelming evidence that the chosen course is falling.
In this lecture, we explore some systemic obstacles we face when crafting and executing
strategy both within organizations and in our own personal decision making.
For our first example, let's return to the case of Kodak, smart company, right?
At one time, a powerful multinational dominated not only black and white film throughout much
of the 20th century, but also color film starting in the early 1960s, thanks to a strategy of
focused research and development.
Even secured a patent on the first digital camera in 1975.
But unlike with color film, Kodak chose not to develop digital camera technology.
But why?
Kodak think it was making the best available choice?
The warning signs had started early.
Sony announced a digital camera in 1981 that would allow printing of images onto paper.
But Kodak had spent its entire existence in a relatively slow moving industry, at least
compared to consumer electronic firms like Sony.
Kodak had a set of non-digital core competencies and shifting itself to compete with consumer
electronics firms like Sony would have required especially drastic changes.
Kodak even sensed this and began acquiring a variety of firms in digital sectors, though
never in a way that contributed to an overall change in strategic focus.
Moreover, Kodak had a long history going all the way back to 1900 of supporting cheap cameras
and sometimes even giving them away in order to get more and more customers hooked on using
chemical film.
So when disposable single use cameras appeared in the late 1980s, those throw away cameras
again made it hard for Kodak executives to see anything other than film as the bedrock
for their profits.
So Kodak continued to rely upon its cash cow, chemical film, which had served the company
well for more than 100 years.
But the threats should have been clear.
Now what about the opportunities?
What might Kodak have done?
Was there a way for Kodak to use some of its existing competitive advantage yet also profit
from the shift to digital photography?
Well, even digital photos are printed and Kodak had traditionally been the leader in
finished prints.
Maybe Kodak could have moved far more aggressively to lead in finished prints of all kinds.
The Kodak moment might have been repositioned as a brand on the final output side of the
vast new digital photography industry.
Maybe so.
However, Kodak's actual strategy appeared to be stay the course, even in the face of
overwhelming evidence that the firm's main state product line was on the cusp of extinction.
Now do you need me to tell you that this was a bad decision?
No.
You could tell me beforehand that this was a bonehead decision.
Digital photography was not a nice-to-have whose pursuit might dilute the company's focus.
No!
Digital photography was a strategic inflection point and it put the company's very survival
at risk.
This was a bad strategic move.
So why do smart companies do strategically stupid things and why do smart people sometimes
do strategically stupid things as well?
Why do we seem so susceptible to gaffes and bonehead decisions in business, in politics,
in military conflict, and in sports?
In this lecture, we learn the ways that our environment can deceive and pressure us.
We learn how our own psychological limitations can skew our judgment with regard to crafting
and executing prudent strategy.
We learn how things go wrong strategically and why, in the face of overwhelming evidence,
we still pursue a feudal strategy.
We pursue three main points.
First, we look at what I call the strategic masquerade.
Second, we look at how strategy can be derailed because of misalignment of various types.
And third, we learn to beware the disease of incrementalism or what has been variously
called strategy creep, or strategic dilution, or strategic erosion.
This is how a good strategy can eventually, almost inevitably, go bad.
Here we learn how to recognize the various imposters that masquerade as strategy.
So we can avoid the traps and pitfalls of faux strategic thinking.
First, the strategic masquerade.
In business, the path to crafting good strategy is not an easy road.
It requires courage and it requires sacrifice.
It requires trade-offs.
When we decide to actually take action, it means that we close off our other options.
We can't do all of the other things that tempt us.
It's like choosing a college.
Having all of our options open is great and receiving acceptances to our top three choices
is great as well.
But eventually, we must choose a college, one college, and we must forsake the others.
Strategy is like that.
We have to choose not to do certain things.
To trek down a chosen path, we choose not to take the many other paths that are open
to us.
Kodak was never going to dominate all aspects of digital photography the way it had dominated
chemical photography.
Not even if it had made acquisitions across a bunch of different technologies.
Kodak needed to make a strategic choice about what to pursue and what to forgo.
Moreover, we often find that leaders play a strategic masquerade.
They substitute something else in place of the real-world choices of strategy.
They substitute slogans or they substitute an operational technique and they call it
strategy.
You've probably heard of at least some of these operational techniques, TQM or Total
Quality Management, benchmarking, the search for excellence, best practices, and the best
Six Sigma, re-engineering, business process management.
Strip away these slogans and trendy programs for doing the same old thing just a little
more or just a little better and you come to the heart of strategic management.
The ability to make trade-offs, to decide to do some things and not others, to sacrifice
all other options in favor of the option that you select.
It is an awesome responsibility and it paralyzes some leaders who are unready for the rigors
of setting strategic direction.
For some, especially if times are good, substituting techniques or jargon for strategy is common.
Benchmarking, best practices, TQM, and such like, these are superb techniques they are,
but they do not constitute strategy.
They move the efficiency frontier of an industry outward, but they do not achieve competitive
advantage.
Well, these techniques are all great, but that's all they are, techniques.
They are techniques that any company can and probably should adopt.
They can reduce costs and add to the bottom line, but they are not strategy and they certainly
are not the source of lasting competitive advantage.
When all of the competitors in our industry adopt the programs I just mentioned, then
the entire industry grows more efficient, but no one has more than a momentary advantage.
Strategy is about doing things differently.
It's about assembling your firm's activities in ways that other firms cannot copy.
It's not about the efficiency or cost-cutting program du jour, and it's about the courage
to act, not just conduct a masquerade.
In our personal lives too, we sometimes substitute technique for strategy.
We fool ourselves into thinking that we act strategically or progress along some path
when actually we absorb ourselves in minor tasks.
We spin on the treadmill the procedures.
We dabble in the peripherally significant instead of tackling the centrally important.
One example of this pathology is procrastination.
It's the most common manifestation of the strategic masquerade on a personal level.
Another example is the day-to-day plotting and routinization of our personal lives.
Activity is mistaken for action, and movement is mistaken for progress.
Perhaps you know people of this sort.
People unable to transition from ideas to action.
People who believe that meeting and discussing a subject is tantamount to addressing it and
executing a plan.
There's nothing wrong with this type of behavior, nothing at all.
If you are satisfied with short-term thinking, it's a life of tactics where the tactics
are unconnected with each other in a grand scheme.
We can become absorbed in addressing the demands of the day such that we forget the choices
for tomorrow, and when tomorrow finally comes, we find ourselves unprepared to meet the challenge
or to seize the moment or to grasp the opportunity.
And part of this problem comes with the desire to keep all options open.
The lead leader has this problem, and every person who wants to think strategically has
this problem.
For once a strategic decision is made, all other options are foreclosed, and this can
be a painful thing to accept.
Think of the choice of the college major, or choice of career, or even the choice of a
vacation destination.
Think of deciding between job offers.
Remember the truism that what we want to be five years from now should inform what we
do today.
Now let's look at the second way strategy can be derailed.
This can result because of a misalignment of various types.
What do I mean by misalignment?
Well in business or in sports or in any complex organization that has a mission, its working
parts have to, well they have to mesh, they have to fit together.
They must fit together snugly for the firm to run smoothly.
It's very much like a complex machine.
All the bolts must be tightened, and all the parts must be appropriate to the machine.
The machine's activities must be appropriate to its purpose.
All the elements must align with each other.
For a more exciting analog, think of a team of oarsmen pulling in unison to move a boat
as rapidly as possible across the water.
Pulling in unison in alignment, that's key.
With even one oarsman misaligns, the oars tangle, the ship falters.
In strategy we can have internal misalignment, external misalignment and incremental misalignment.
Internal misalignment can occur among the working parts that constitute the engine of
our firm, resources, capabilities and intentions.
Capabilities can mean the organization structure and operations, the way it gets things done.
Among the organization structure, operations and the strategy itself can occur.
We must have internal consistency.
For instance, we know intuitively that Google is a much different company than the Mexican
cement conglomerate CIMEX.
We sense that the operations of Google are different than CIMEX, and that the type of
person working for each company differs dramatically by company.
We anticipate that the operations and structure of Google would be misaligned to implement
the strategy of CIMEX and vice versa.
In our personal lives, the same principle is at work.
We develop a strategy, or we think we do, only to find ourselves thwarted repeatedly
by systemic obstacles within ourselves.
That's internal misalignment.
This internal misalignment means we have not addressed the coordination of our resources,
our capabilities and our intentions.
You see, strategy is much more than setting worthy goals and then striving mightily to
achieve them.
It means evaluating our resources in light of our strategy and acquiring more resources,
if necessary.
It means developing capabilities as the instrument by which we achieve those goals.
And it means, of course, being honest with ourselves with regard to all of this.
Beware of internal misalignment.
Beware that your resources, your capabilities and your intentions fit together.
Now, external misalignment.
External misalignment can occur without warning over time.
It can slip up on us because there's no dramatic change or metaphorical explosion.
There is no signpost to tell us warning, misalignment ahead.
Slow changes in our external environment can sabotage our strategy, even if we are internally
consistent, even if we are doing the current things right.
This type of misalignment occurs when there is some change in the external environment
that radically impacts us personally or impacts our firm or our industry.
And as change occurs, we have to examine the impact of the change and alter our strategy
accordingly because if we don't, we can find ourselves out of sync with reality.
We can find ourselves misaligned with the external environment.
This is what happened to Kodak.
Military examples we've already considered demonstrate, perhaps even more clearly, how
continued pursuit of internal consistency can result in external misalignment.
Generals are often accused of fighting the last war, and there's more than a little
truth to this.
The periods between wars are usually times of strategic stagnation for military organizations.
Even while some in the military always strive to learn the lessons of the last war, in practice,
most analysis stops when the last bullet is fired.
Perhaps only those losers from the last war, who are certain they want a rematch, will
be ready, really motivated to look ahead to how the next war might be different.
For the most part, strategists look backward, evaluating what has already happened.
They rarely incorporate the horizon of the future into their deliberations, especially
with respect to changes in technology.
And as a result, strategic misalignment can occur as militaries execute their internally
consistent strategies against each other, with devastating results.
This as we've seen is what happened both in the American Civil War and in the First World
War.
In 1861, Napoleonic Principles of War, as presented by the great military theorist Jean
Lenni, still held sway in the United States, both in the North and in the South.
But the technology of war had changed, with the rifle replacing the musket in large quantities
for the first time.
Ammunition too had changed, with the adoption of the mini-ball, named for Claude Etienne
Minier.
This ammunition allowed soldiers to reload their rifled muskets faster and fire them
more accurately.
And this meant that the rate of fire against the Dancing Infantry was increased, as was
the distance at which they could be engaged.
This change in technology rendered the preferred method of frontal assault in closely packed
ranks almost suicidal, and yet armies on both sides continued their frontal assaults.
Fifty-five years later, Europeans who ignored the United States Civil War made the same
mistake in World War I, only with even more murderous results.
If anything, the European strategies of the time were even more focused on frontal assaults,
executed using technology made even more outdated by the arrival of magazine-loading small-bore
rifles, quick-firing artillery, and machine guns.
We know what happened in World War I, the squandering of an entire generation by the
infantry charge into the teeth of machine gun fire, with resulting millions of lives
lost in four years of European war.
But we often fail to learn the lesson from that catastrophe for our own projects and
our pursuits.
Beware of misalignment between your strategy and the external environment presented by
new technology.
This brings us to a third type of strategic misalignment, one that can result from attempting,
but without any strategic focus, to stay abreast of current changes.
Instead of a clever course correction, the result can be a creeping, incremental misalignment.
Beware the disease of incrementalism, or what has been variously called strategy creep,
or strategic dilution, or strategic erosion.
This is how a good strategy can eventually, almost inevitably, go bad.
The culprits are the folks who add on to the mission of the organization.
The military calls it mission creep.
This happens when current forces in place are given additional assignments, one by one.
Nothing too onerous or too far afield.
These can be tricky.
Starbucks deciding to broaden the menu of things to eat with its coffee.
Maybe that's a good way to deepen its advantage as a third destination after home and work.
So how about sandwiches and coffee?
How about a range of deli meats?
And yet, in Toto, we suddenly find resources and personnel for the original mission are stretched.
Maybe to the breaking point.
Unable to perform the mission, they were originally assigned and originally designed for.
At a more individual level, we find ourselves given additional and diverse responsibility at work.
Increasingly far afield from the office's mission.
Add-ons that leech our time, sap our strength.
We lose focus on our particular mission and we endure a relentless expansion of busy work.
We find ourselves swept along in a kind of chaotic current rather than a board of ship
with a distinct destination.
These are the conspirators against us.
Groupthink, bureaucratic politics, overconfidence, loss of focus.
Great idea, people, with the can-do attitude.
Now the first conspirator against group strategy, good strategy, is Groupthink.
Four years after George Orwell wrote his dystopian novel entitled 1984,
the Orwellian term Groupthink first appeared in a 1952 article published in Fortune magazine.
Coined in 1952 by an organizational theorist named William White.
This doesn't refer to the instinctive conformity in each of us, the yearning to belong to some group.
Groupthink refers to a kind of quasi-philosophy which holds that group values are right, good, and sought after.
Groupthink is a powerful force in organizations that compel groups of executives to think alike
and not diverge from a party line.
Divergence from that party line is derided as negative or counterproductive.
Now while there's some merit to the notion that upbeat positive attitudes are desirable in a firm,
there comes a point where honesty trumps optimism.
But Groupthink destroys the leeway to disagree and it brands those who do disagree as mavericks or troublemakers.
Bad ideas can thrive in such an atmosphere and strategy is a vulnerable target.
While Groupthink is a pathology of excessive agreement within a group,
a second conspirator against good strategy is insufficient agreement.
Due to in-group politics, what is sometimes called bureaucratic politics.
This is an organizational behavior concept borrowed from political science and it refers to a failure
to reach productive agreement at all in support of a strategic direction.
If we think of an organization as a black box that receives inputs and then delivers outputs,
so-called bureaucratic politics explains what goes on inside the box in a particular way.
Rather than rational, calculating decision-making that yields an optimum strategic result,
bureaucratic politics says that we can understand an organization's actions
as a result of politicking and negotiation by its top leaders.
As you well know, any organization has different departments that compete with each other for
budget dollars, for new programs, and for primacy.
And even if leaders share an overall goal, they inevitably differ in how to achieve it.
This leads to bargaining for power, the overall direction that results,
the company's output is inevitably suboptimal.
This kind of internal politics helps clarify what happened at Digital Equipment Corporation.
In 1992, Digital Equipment Corporation was faced with a strategic decision
of great import. It could select a direction to take, but only one.
The three options were to focus on computer hardware manufacture,
consulting IT solutions for clients, or semiconductor chips.
The CEO at the time, Ken Olson, made a pivotal decision to require a consensus direction
from a senior leadership in order to proceed.
After hard bargaining among the proponents, they could not achieve consensus.
The resulting non-strategy announced by Digital Equipment Corporation was a travesty.
DEC is committed to providing high quality products and services and being a leader
in data processing. This, of course, is no strategy at all.
Bureaucratic politics had yielded a suboptimal decision
and substituted a slogan for actual strategy.
While the company faltered and in 1998, it was acquired by Compact,
which was then acquired by Hewlett Packard.
A third conspirator against good strategy is overconfidence.
Well, high spirits and optimism often characterize the C-suite, or executive suite.
They also characterize much of what we do in our daily lives,
especially when harnessed to a goal we truly want to achieve.
Well, as a result, we tend to overestimate our own judgment and knowledge about a situation.
When we receive new information, we tend to slot this new information into the grooves
meant for old facts. We then tend to believe that we understand the new situation without much analysis.
We are overconfident, and we do not give pause for healthy circumspection.
In an article called Coq-sure, Malcolm Gladwell put it this way.
As novices, we don't trust our judgment. Then we have some success,
and we begin to feel a little sure of ourselves.
Finally, we get to the top of our game, and we succumb to the trap of thinking
that there's nothing we can't master. As we get older and more experienced,
we overestimate the accuracy of our judgments, especially when the task before us is difficult
and when we're involved with something of great personal importance.
A fourth conspirator against good strategy is loss of focus.
All of the four going causes of strategic erosion lead to a loss of focus,
which is simultaneously a cause of strategic erosion, even as it is one of its symptoms.
Paradoxically, strategic erosion can occur as a result of success.
Proposed changes in direction are framed as building on our success,
and they come clothed in the trendy slogans of the day.
Change engines tell us we must change with the times.
Sometimes we forget that the change agent's job is to get us to change, regardless of circumstances.
Marketing people invariably utilize the destructive phrase
extend our brand equity to justify strategic changes that inevitably erode a particular brand.
And a warning sign for this kind of pathology is the use of a phrase we're all familiar with.
Shake things up. When you hear that someone has been brought into a company to
shake things up, watch that company start losing focus.
This is particularly insidious because it sounds so reasonable,
but in fact, its premise is completely false.
Brand equity cannot be extended. It can only be diluted.
Coca-Cola has tried numerous times to extend its brand equity.
One such brand extension left retailers saddled with millions of dollars in inventory of
Coca-Cola branded clothing. Coke found that its brand means soft drink and nothing else.
Because strategy is generally misunderstood, incredibly bad actions can often get
through the screen of common sense because it's couched in strategic-sounding language.
Jargon can give a sense of legitimacy to bad ideas.
Loss of focus occurs because many otherwise bright people are generally ignorant of business history.
Bad ideas often resurface every 10 to 15 years, dressed in new clothing,
carrying a new phrase or a new trendy slogan.
We are, in fact, so bereft of history that we seem doomed to repeat
not only the errors of the past, but to implement entire failed programs of the past.
Such ignorance leaves us vulnerable to satin slogans that sound reasonable,
but actually have been tried and which have failed.
Let's look at a stupendous example of strategy erosion in one of America's great companies.
Think of Walmart, one of the most hated or most loved companies,
depending on your point of view. Regardless of that point of view,
we must acknowledge that Walmart is indeed a great success story.
It's the world's largest company, and it employs more than 2 million people.
Surely the company that Sam Walton founded in 1962 is doing something right.
And yet, and yet Walmart sometimes gets things spectacularly wrong,
particularly where strategy is concerned.
Let's revisit Walmart's bizarre activity in 2005.
In April of that year, the company hired a new head of marketing,
presumably to shake things up. As you might expect, by August, Walmart was buying ad space
in Vogue Magazine at a cost of $1 million per issue. Yes, Vogue Magazine.
Now, when I tell this to even my most inexperienced students,
they immediately recognize it as foolhardy. It makes no sense.
It violated everything the Walmart brand stands for. Every day, low prices.
On the heels of this blunder, Walmart continued to experiment,
hiring a change agent to get the blood flowing, as advertising age put it.
Eleven months later, the change agent was fired.
Walmart, however, continued its experimentation, creating super centers,
remodeling the stores, decluttering shelves by reformulating its brand mix,
going organic, unfocusing its brand to attract more affluent customers.
But as Walmart moved to attract well-heeled customers in order to capitalize on a slowing
economy, it raised prices. Why would a smart company act this way?
Any first-year marketing student could have told you it was unwise.
Most any person on the street could have told you it was unwise.
You could have told them it was unwise.
Walmart had succumbed to overconfidence in Mission Creek.
Walmart's CEO during 2000 to 2009, H. Lee Scott Jr.,
wanted the clothing in the company's stores to sell as well as basic goods.
And so a 19-year executive from Target was promoted to the position of Chief Marketing Officer
to make Walmart close appealing to a wider audience.
But in the process, Walmart forgot about its core customers.
No longer could Walmart's core customers count on a low-price guarantee on every item.
Walmart lost focus on its core strategic value, saving people money so that they can live better.
Only in 2011 did Walmart acknowledge its mistakes
as it began restoring the shopping experience that made the retailer great.
In this lecture, we can see, have seen how strategy can break down,
how obstacles to good strategy can be significant.
We've seen how on occasions smart companies can sometimes do strategically stupid things,
and how smart people sometimes do strategically stupid things as well.
Groupthink, in-group politics, overconfidence, and sheer loss of focus
can all give us an impetus to decisions that look hopelessly misguided from the outside.
Well, we're all susceptible to gas and bonehead decisions.
We have to be on guard against the many ways that our environment can deceive us
and pressure us, how it can erode our strategy.
We must always steer a bold course and maintain our focus against all of the malignant,
external forces that threaten it, keeping our eyes on our strategic goal,
and securing our strategy itself against the forces that would sabotage it.
