These lectures are part of the Great Courses on Tape series.
The Great Courses on Tape cover a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in
just weeks.
Browse our catalog or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just
30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by the teaching company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
The lectures on these tapes are titled Science Fiction, the Literature of the Technological
Imagination.
The lecturer is Professor Eric S. Rabkin of the University of Michigan.
Eric Rabkin is Professor of English and Literature at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor.
A graduate of Cornell University and the University of Iowa, he has taught at Michigan
since 1970.
As a teacher, Professor Rabkin is known for his large and popular courses on science fiction
and fantasy and for his many teaching innovations, including Michigan's highly successful practical
writing program for students who will use writing in their work.
He received the University Teaching Award in 1990, the same year in which he was named
to a three-year term as Arthur F. Thurnau Professor in recognition of his teaching contributions.
Each lecture is outlined in the course guide that comes with these tapes.
The course guide also includes a glossary, timeline, biographical notes and bibliography.
You might find it useful to review the outlines before and after listening to the lectures.
At the end of each lecture in this series, we have included an audio summary of the lecture
outline prepared by Professor Rabkin.
I'd like to talk about science fiction.
In this lecture, I'd like to talk about where science fiction comes from, how it evolved,
the mythic roots that it grows from, and then Mary Shelley's Frankenstein, which most people
consider to be the first science fiction novel.
Science fiction is actually a universal literature.
It emerged in the early 19th century as what we now see as a separable type of literature
under a number of pressures.
One was the ambivalence about science and other the ambivalence about technology.
Let me talk a little about these.
Newton had come along and done something quite radical, not radical to us perhaps, but radical
to the people with whom he was living at the time.
That is, he had proved that God is not in the world.
To understand this, you need to understand something about the history of physics.
We had the laws of planetary motion by the time Newton came along.
Kepler had already shown that the planets moved in orbits that cut out equal areas in
equal times.
Copernicus had shown that the planets moved around the sun, and it was easy enough to
calculate this motion.
What nobody knew was that this motion could be explained by positing a pull, a force,
between the planets and the sun.
Newton proved gravitation as a force on the earth with the famous experiment of the apple
falling and so on, which is actually legend of course.
He didn't wait for an apple to hit him on the head.
What really had gone on was this.
He had been able to demonstrate that the same general law that controlled the acceleration
of that apple was the law that controlled the motion of the planets.
Why was that important?
In the time of the ancient Greeks onward, there was a division made between the world
below the celestial sphere of the moon and everything above the celestial sphere of the
moon.
The ancients believed that the world was at the center of the universe, then there were
transparent spheres.
The moon moved in one, then there were the planets, and the furthest of all was the
imperian in which the fixed stars resided.
These all rotated, and people would talk about this sub-lunary world, our world of corruption
as opposed to the world of ideals, the planets and the stars.
By demonstrating that the same law that controlled the motion in these supralunary spheres controlled
the motion in the sub-lunary sphere, ours, Newton had created what was the first universal
law, and by universal law, which is how it was known, the law of universal gravitation,
Newton had shown that there was no special dispensation for what was going on on the
earth, that is, God was not involved in our affairs.
We could decide, we could discover what's going on, we could manipulate it, we could
make the world over.
This suddenly, instead of making us powerful, for many people made us small and weak, because
suddenly instead of being in this cocoon protected within a world of perfection, we were at
one with a limitless universe.
This was scary.
So, science, the very concepts involved, created a great deal of ambivalence.
Yes, we have the power of the mind, but what does that mean?
That we killed God?
Then there's the ambivalence about technology.
Technology was wonderful.
By the time we get to Shelly's Frankenstein, which was published in 1818, the industrial
revolution is in full force in England.
Coal mines are working like crazy, they're bringing up cheap fuel because they're using
steam engines to drain the mines of water, to carry cars of water, of coal out of the
mines and so on.
The industrial base of England is growing by leaps and bounds.
England has already had the colonies break away in what in effect was an industrial war,
that is, the colonies were kept from industrializing by the taxes imposed upon them by England.
The colonies didn't want to have that disadvantage.
There were economic issues at stake in what made the English treat the Americans as they
did, and there was the desire on the part of the Americans to have the rights they felt
they were owed as Englishmen.
So we have an industrial war, and by the time we get to 1818, we have all of those feelings
going on.
We have the conflict between the haves and the have-nots.
We have the conflict between the white majority and those whom they tended to exploit, the
people from the southern hemisphere of the world where they were going, the English were
going, in order to get natural resources to feed into the mills that were running on this
new technology and so on.
You can see this would lead to an automatic ambivalence.
On the one hand, isn't it wonderful, we're richer than we have ever been.
On the other hand, isn't it terrible, look at the conflicts we're creating.
For example, it turned out that it was much cheaper to do agriculture in some areas than
others.
Once you had locomotives running, once you had the ability to transport food from one
area to another, suddenly less economical farms couldn't compete.
There was no local market.
It was cheaper to bring food in from further away from people who actually could produce
it more cheaply with cheap transportation and those displaced farmers had to go somewhere.
In the beginning of the 19th century, we have the beginning of the building of the city
slums because workers come to the city in search of the new jobs that seem to be emerging
in the mills.
The mills, of course, create terrible overcrowding because, until the invention of the trolley
car late in the 19th century, workers had to live within a convenient walk of the mill
because all the power was centralized to do that industrial work.
So the industrial revolution created enormous wealth and enormous social pressure, enormous
social tensions between races, between classes, between nations.
Naturally enough, the English felt great ambivalence about this as well.
Hence, it was only reasonable in the beginning of the 19th century that there would emerge
a literature that would deal with these fundamental problems.
And now we call this literature science fiction.
In fact, when it emerged, nobody was setting out to have science fiction as a separate
genre.
In fact, it didn't get its name until April 1926 when Hugo Gernsback published the first
issue of Amazing Stories in the United States.
And in his editorial explaining what he wanted to have in Amazing Stories, he said he was
going to publish what he called, in one word, science fiction.
He took the word scientific and the word fiction and overlapped them.
Science fiction.
He was always making up clever things.
We'll talk more about Gernsback in a subsequent lecture.
The term science fiction didn't stick, but the term science fiction, which came from
it immediately, did stick.
And so science fiction took on a separate identity in 1926.
Once it was recognized as a separate genre, it was easy enough to look back through literary
history and see what its antecedents had been.
And it was clear that Mary Shelley's Frankenstein was in fact a work of this type, although
it hadn't been seen as a work of that type for the 108 years from publication until
April 1926.
And what is that type?
What is science fiction?
Well, there is a purist definition.
Those who think of science fiction as this great shining ideal, and they usually point
to the works of H.G. Wells as exemplary.
In this purist definition, what you do to create a work of science fiction is take the
world as we know it, make one fantastic assumption, change things radically, and then extrapolate
everything else as if that were the only change.
So for instance, in The Time Machine, which we'll discuss in another lecture, you take
the notion that you can travel through time, and having that, we'll just go down and see
what the future looks like.
And of course, the future will then have been produced by the operation of all the laws
we already know and understand, like the laws of evolution and so on, which were becoming
prominent at the end of the 19th century when Wells wrote The Time Machine.
That's a purist definition.
The fact is, though, as far as I've been able to discover, there is not a single science
fiction novel that has ever been written that fulfills that definition, because science
fiction is exciting stuff.
And when you're writing one of these things, when you have it in your power to invent a
ray gun, bring down an alien, give somebody the power of telepathy or whatever, you may
have said to yourself, I'm going to make just this one change, just this one change, but
somewhere pretty soon you start saying to yourself, I think I'll make just this one
other little change, because I can invent this goodie here and I can't resist.
There's a kind of playfulness there.
So I would recommend that we think of science fiction really as having a collection of three
related defining characteristics.
First there's the one that seems to come from Wells, and that is the fantastic made plausible.
When I say made plausible, I don't mean that it is, in fact, likely to happen.
It may be that the plausible isn't really ever going to happen.
We may know it's not going to happen.
For instance, in many science fiction works, we have travel faster than the speed of light.
Everything that we know today tells us that it's impossible to travel faster than the
speed of light.
Now, if you have a story in which somebody says, Joe Smith was here on the planet Earth
and instantly appeared there on Neptune, how a magician waved a wand over him and sent
him there.
That's not science fiction.
But if you go through a couple of paragraphs about how you have developed a tachyon drive
and this depends upon using the top quark in order to gazarch the flag in the Good Ornament
plots, then you get him into the bazoony machine and he's on Neptune, that's science
fiction.
Now, in a sense, clearly, science fiction has to share these same often infantile fantasies
that any fantasy work would have.
Very tales are very strong in the background of science fiction, as we'll discuss later.
But you make them plausible.
You make these fantastic elements plausible by paying attention to a certain kind of rhetoric.
The rhetoric of science, whether or not you're actually using legitimate science.
Of course, one way to make things sound plausible is to really use legitimate science, and there
are some science fiction writers who are well-trained in science.
Vern was somewhat trained, Wells was quite well-trained, and among modern science fiction
writers we have distinguished practicing scientists who actually write science fiction
like Robert Forward and Gregory Benford.
So the first characteristic, I'd say, is that science fiction makes the fantastic plausible.
The second is that there be high adventure.
Why do I say this?
Well, there are lots of books about science that are also fiction and that are perfectly
plausible, but in fact, they are not the flavor that we're talking about here.
For instance, Arrowsmith, which is about the building of the Panama Canal and the conquering
of the diseases that made that a difficult job.
It's really an historical novel.
It doesn't have that feeling of high adventure.
We need that high adventure.
Boy saves universe.
That's science fiction.
The third thing that we need to have in science fiction, at least as one of its core defining
characteristics, is intellectual excitement.
When that wizard sends Joe Smith from Earth to Neptune, you don't really need to think
a lot about how that wand works.
That's not the issue.
However, when in a science fiction somebody develops a tachyon drive, then we have to wonder
why is it important that the tachyon drive was developed?
What's going on with this tachyon drive?
How is this going to change the social structure of the world and so on?
There's a kind of intellectual excitement.
Science fiction asks us to think, and so in fact, does Mary Shelley in Frankenstein?
So Mary Shelley's Frankenstein already fulfills these three defining characteristics.
It gives us the fantastic made plausible, high adventure, and intellectual excitement.
In fact, in the preface to the first edition of Frankenstein, Mary Shelley writes,
and this is the very first line of the very first preface of the very first edition, the
event on which this fiction is founded, and the event, of course, we all know is the animation,
the reanimation of body parts, the event on which this fiction is founded has been supposed
by Dr. Darwin and some of the physiological writers of Germany as not of the impossible
occurrence.
Now, that's not exactly the same as saying it happened.
It's the fantastic made plausible.
By the way, that Dr. Darwin is not Charles Darwin, the fellow whom we associate with
the theory of evolution.
It's Erasmus Darwin, his grandfather.
Charles Darwin was not born at the time this was written.
It's Erasmus Darwin, his grandfather, who actually also had a theory of evolution and
wrote it in a long poem called Zoonomia about the botanical kingdom.
Dr. Darwin had already proposed an evolutionary theory that his grandson Charles then developed
and gave scientific proof for.
So, Dr. Darwin here is being referred to and these German physiologists as authorities.
This is plausible.
It's not impossible, so okay, we're allowed to use it.
Now, as far as the high adventure goes, everybody knows the story of Frankenstein where this
person, Victor Frankenstein, creates a monster and the monster gets loose and wreaks havoc
on strangers, on Victor's own family, and ultimately, of course, cost Victor his life
in the book, although in the movie, Victor seems to come back again and again as one
actor after another because sequels usually get about 60% of the gross of the original.
However, we have here the high adventure of Victor being chased and chasing the monster
back and forth across the landscape, the fantastic, made plausible, and the intellectual
excitement.
What would it be like if we could conquer death?
Conquering death, of course, is one of the great old fantasies.
I mean, the miracles of the New Testament involve bringing people forth from the grave.
Jesus does this with Lazarus.
Moses is taken bodily to heaven.
The old Greek myths that talk about death and resurrection give us the same story.
The idea that we can take someone who has died and bring him back to life, that's not
a science fiction idea.
That's an idea which science fiction shares with all of the aspirations of human culture.
That's part of why I say science fiction is a universal literature because at its best,
it plugs into these same mythic issues.
Before we talk about those mythic backgrounds for this particular novel, Frankenstein and
science fiction in general, more specifically, I'd like to talk about the literary evolution
that led to the production of this novel.
Mary Shelley was actually not Mary Shelley when she wrote this book.
She was Mary Wollstonecraft Godwin when she wrote this book.
Her mother, Mary Wollstonecraft, who died in childbirth with Mary, you can begin to
see a lot of strange psychological things going on, 1797, Mary Wollstonecraft was
perhaps the single most important feminist writer of her time.
Her father, William Godwin, was perhaps the single most influential liberal philosopher
of his time.
And Mary Wollstonecraft Godwin, who came from this enormously liberal and enormously intellectual
background, wound up being the mistress of Percy Bish Shelley, one of the great romantic
poets.
She and he were spending some time in Switzerland with Lord Byron and his mistress.
His mistress being the daughter of the woman that Mary Shelley's father had married after
Mary Shelley's mother died.
So in effect, she is living with, as another mistress, her half step sister, I guess it
is, who is the mistress of Byron and also a fellow named J. W. Poladori.
And they all sit around and decide that they want to write a story.
And she says in the preface to the second edition, I busied myself to think of a story,
a story to rival those which had excited us to this task of all writing stories.
One which would speak to the mysterious fears of our nature and awaken thrilling horror,
one to make the reader dread to look round to curdle the blood and quicken the beatings
of the heart.
Mary Shelley is trying to write romantic literature.
Why not?
She's living with two out of the five standard romantic poets at the same time.
They're all living in sin.
They're having children like crazy.
If you remember the novel, you'll remember that the very first victim of the monster
is William, Victor's youngest brother.
Excuse me, the first victim in the family is William, Victor's youngest brother.
When Mary Shelley is writing Frankenstein, she's writing it in 1816.
She was born in 1797.
She is in effect a teenager.
She already has had one child die, and she now has, in the cradle by her side, while
she's writing, her own son William, who was sufficiently sickly that he too died before
the age of five.
So she's writing about killing off this kid William while she's got her morbid child
William right beside her.
These were very strange people we're talking about.
They were writing romantic literature.
They were writing literature of feeling and soul and strange, overpowering emotions.
And she was right in the heart of that.
So there's this romanticism growing up at the time.
Now there's a particular variety of romanticism, which was not known by that word romantic
at the time that it arose, called gothicism.
Nowadays, we think of gothic novels as those things we see in the supermarkets as we go
out through the stand.
And there's usually a cover that shows a house on a hill with a light in one upper window.
And on the front, in the foreground, we see a woman in some kind of a penwar or something.
And she's looking off with some strange, strange look on her face behind her with one arm draped
around her.
There's a man, usually fairly well muscled.
You can't see where his other hand is, and you can't exactly tell what she's thinking
of, but it's the same cover all the time.
So whatever it is they do, I don't know, but anyway, someday they'll be allowed back in
that house.
But you know what I'm talking about?
There's strange curses.
There are family dynasties at stake.
There's strange sexuality.
There's crumbling ruins.
Well gothicism arose in the 1740s and finally took a name in 1764 with the publication of
a book called The Castle of Otranto by Horace Walpole, subtitled A Gothic Story.
The Castle of Otranto was about a family curse set in an Italian town, Otranto, and
to give you an idea of what gothicism really comes from, I'll tell you a little bit about
this story.
You see, to the English in the 18th century, Italy, all of those Mediterranean countries
they thought of as down there to the south, these were popish countries.
These were not nice, cool Protestants like us English.
They were those dark Italians, you know, they would run around in monasteries.
Now this idea that the papacy had a plot for world domination and so on, this was really
a live issue in England in the 18th century, and if you look around England in the 18th
century, you discover something very disturbing.
The best architecture available, the most imposing buildings that you can see are buildings
left over from the time when England was Catholic.
All of these cathedrals, all of these abbeys and so on, were built up to the time of Henry
VIII.
Then with the Reformation, these buildings were turned over to private individuals, were
taken over for other use, and then in the time after that, the religious buildings that
were built in order to support the Protestant domination of England were really much less
imposing, much less fantastic, and indeed, Gothic architecture, I'm sure you've all
been to some great cathedral, Gothic architecture is, I think, kind of fantastic.
I like to think of it as, well, when you see Mikhail Berishnikov dance, I mean yes, he's
a great artist, of course, of course.
But the thing that really gets me, at least, is this.
When he jumps, I can go out to the kitchen, get myself a soda, and come back and watch
him land.
Now, there's something about this guy that defies gravity.
It's like watching Michael Jordan take a dunk shot, you know, I mean, sure, lots of people
can take dunk shots, but usually between jumping and dunking, there's no time.
Michael Jordan goes up, signs an autograph, and then dunks the ball.
That's what's going on in a cathedral.
When you walk into a real Gothic cathedral, something, even if it's only happening unconsciously,
something tells you, granite can't do that.
Those roofs should be falling down.
Rocks can't hang 300 feet in the air.
Those are boulders.
This is amazing.
The Castle of Otranto opens up in a Gothic castle in Italy.
It is the day of the wedding of Manfred, Manfred's son Conrad, to the daughter of the prince
of the next principality.
Manfred is eager to consolidate his power.
Conrad does not really want to marry the girl, but Manfred doesn't really care because he
has political ambitions and mere human beings are trivial compared to him.
So what does he do?
He calls them over, and we're all waiting, and everyone's standing, there's a priest,
there's the reluctant bride, there's the reluctant bride's reluctant father, and there's no son.
They look out the window into the courtyard, and what do they see?
A 40-foot-high helmet with a 60-foot-high plume is lying there in the middle of the
courtyard, and sticking out of it like the two little legs of the witch in the Wizard
of Oz when the house falls on her, we have Manfred's legs, excuse me, Conrad's legs.
Now, a 40-foot-high helmet does not get into a courtyard through the doors.
Where could it have come from?
It had to have fallen from the sky.
It fell from the sky?
Well you see, we're dealing here with evil.
We're dealing here with curses.
We're dealing here with divine retribution.
The rest of the novel we have with Manfred, instead of mourning his son, deciding he's
going to marry this girl himself, and basically chasing her around the castle.
We have lots of strange rooms, we have hidden passageways, and so on and so forth.
So what do we have at the core of gothicism?
We have a notion of ancient evil, religious institutions, divine retribution, perverse
sexuality, family tensions, power.
We have the idea that something from the past will haunt us, and we have the necessity
of finding an appropriate marriage in order to re-establish the order in the world.
In a way, this goes back, for instance, to Shakespeare's The Tempest, which some people
see as a prototypical science fiction story.
Prospero controls the island with the knowledge from his books.
He has things done according to the spirits he can command.
He has his daughter Miranda.
Miranda sees Ferdinand come to the island and says to her father, what is that thing
she's never seen, a young man?
He says, well, that's a man, and where he comes from, why there's many of them, and
she says, ah, brave new world that has such people in't.
Of course, that's ironic.
It's not a brave new world at all.
It's the one that had expelled Prospero when his brother usurped his own throne.
So we have the same kind of stuff we have in the gothic literature.
In other words, it's not just the architecture.
It's the curses.
It's the secret knowledge.
It's the family.
It's the sexuality.
It's the necessity of a right marriage if you can get one.
Now gothic literature, as you can tell from the Castle of Toronto, had strange things
going on.
But after a while, people began to think, well, you know, just inventing one more strange
thing, that's not very interesting.
So along comes Ann Radcliffe, who wrote books like the Mysteries of Udalfo.
Castle of Otranto, Mysteries of Udalfo.
Obviously, these are related to each other.
Mysteries of Udalfo, 1794, did something different.
She took a story, like the Castle of Otranto, gave us all of the monks and the curses and
this and that, and let everything strange happen.
And then at the end, we get this enormous explanation of how all the things that looked
like they were supernatural really had justification.
So what this is called is gothic expliqué, the gothic explained.
In fact, by having this explanation at the end, we get a second jolt of the fantastic.
First we get the fantastic when we see the strange thing that gets invented, like the
helmet falling out of the sky.
And then we get a new jolt of the fantastic when we find out that the thing that we thought
was supernatural is in fact only natural.
Now there are many, many ways to develop a genre, to overcome what George Kubler in
a book called The Shape of Time calls aesthetic fatigue.
One of those ways is to satirize what's going on in the genre.
And so gothic literature led not only to the gothic expliqué and Radcliffe's work, but
also to satires of the gothic, which we see, for example, in Jane Austen's Northanger Abbey,
which was published in 1818 and is a satire of gothic literature.
But there are other ways to change things as well.
And in the same year, 1818, what Mary Shelley did by telling us in that first line that
the event on which this has been based is not of impossible occurrence.
What she did was take the explanation from the end of the book that Anne Radcliffe had
used in The Mysteries of Udolfo and move the explanation to the beginning.
So instead of saying, I want to engage you readers by having you think, this is supernatural,
this is amazing, I can't understand it, and then show us, aha, you should have been able
to understand it.
Isn't that amazing?
She wants to say, this is all understandable all along.
We need to use our minds.
Science fiction, although in the case of this novel there's not much real discussion of
science, is really a literature that is premised on the notion that the readers can use their
intellect.
What Poe will call tales of raseosination.
We use our rational facilities.
So Mary Shelley by moving the explanation of gothic literature, gothic explicate to the
front creates the general form for science fiction.
Now having done that, she set herself about the task of writing a story that would move
the human heart.
What were the roots of this mythic story that she wanted to tell?
To remind you of the story of the novel itself, we have Victor.
He goes, creates this being.
He claims he's doing it because he wants to benefit mankind.
He claims he's doing it because he hopes to be the progenitor of a great new race.
When he sees what he has created, its ugliness immediately horrifies him, and for no other
reason than that it is ugly.
He flees from it.
When it comes after him and says, all I want is a sense of community.
All I want is someone that I can be with, make me a bride.
He eventually capitulates to the enormous eloquence of the creature.
But when he's working on the bride and he sees the creature looking in at him through
the window and thinks these superior beings will soon displace humanity, he gets afraid
of what he's done, and destroys the bride he's working on, and that's what begins the
monster's vengeance, and the rest of the tale is a tale of pursuit.
In fact, the book is dedicated to William Godwin, the author of political justice, Caleb
Williams, et cetera, that is Mary Shelley's father.
Caleb Williams is a novel about a man who sees the Lord of the estate on which he works,
commit a murder.
He, it happens, is loyal to this Lord and would never, ever turn him into the authorities.
But the Lord decides that that man's existence, his very existence, is a threat.
And for 400 pages, the man is chased all across the landscape.
So Mary Shelley has adopted a novel plot that already exists.
But she's put it in a, if you'll forgive the pun, a novel way by having it go forward
in this system, not of class struggle, but of father-son struggle.
Victor, after all, is just a fellow who wants to have a kid, but doesn't want to bother
with the collaboration of a woman.
So he creates this, we have this pursuit, and eventually we have the death of Victor.
Now, if we look to the roots of this, we will see, for instance, the legend of the Golem.
The legend of the Golem was quite well known, and it existed in German texts.
So remember that Mary Shelley and crew were reading German stories at the time that they
were writing this.
In the story of the Golem, Rabbi Judah of Prague, who died in 1609, is a real person,
is supposed to have created a clay giant to serve as the guardian of the Jews of the ghetto
of Prague.
And what he did, the legends vary, but the most common one is that in the far head of
the giant, he inscribed the tetragrammaton, the four Hebrew letters that stand for the
unspeakable personal name of God.
And then he did mystic things, and the Golem was resurrected, was brought to life, and
served as a guardian.
Now that Golem then gets into the hands of the wrong people, and wreaks havoc.
It leads to terrible things, both for the Jews and for the whole city of Prague.
The monster escapes.
But there is a crucial difference between the Golem and Victor's monster.
The Golem is created by spirituality.
Golem is created by God's power channeled through a holy man.
Victor does not deal with God.
Victor lives in a godless world and still manages to animate dead body parts.
The legend of Faust, the scientist who makes a deal with the devil, I will give you 24
years of my bidding, Mephistopheles tells Faust, if at the end of that time I can have
your soul, is also in the background here.
Now there are two versions of Faust that are best known in our literature.
One is the version that Goethe writes, at the end of which Faust actually is able to
repent.
He's helped by the love of a good woman.
That's not the version that we ought to think of as an antecedent to Frankenstein.
What we should think of is Marlowe's Dr. Faustus, where at the end Dr. Faustus is being dragged
down through the trap door and the stage, and he says, ah, but one drop of blood in
that firmament, meaning the blood of Jesus would save me, nothing happens, and he calls
out as he's being dragged to hell, I'll burn my books.
But it's too late.
You can't undo the knowledge that you have.
And his 24 hours, which is years, which is symbolically 24 hours, one day of power, goes
for nothing and he goes to a life of eternal burning.
At the end of Frankenstein, Victor's monster carries his corpse on his shoulder away from
the ship that he's been telling the story in and says that he's going to build a funeral
pyre and burn the body of his creator, and then he will alone travel in the world.
So we have the Faust story as well, which is, by the way, a story that surrounds a real
character as well.
Johann Faust was a traveling German conjurer at the end of the 15th century, and all these
fantastic tales accreted around his name as the story of the Golem accreted around the
name of Rabbi Judah of Prague.
Perhaps more important, we have the story of Oedipus.
In Oedipus we have, in our post-Freudian world, a story of sexual conflict, about a father,
a son, both interested in the same mother.
And I think that there's no reason for us to discard that as a way of looking at the
story of Oedipus, but I think when Sophocles wrote it, and if you read it, you'll see,
you know, putting Freud out of your mind, something else is going on.
Leos, the father, wants to maintain power.
The oracle has told him he will have a child who will kill him.
So when he has a child, he takes advantage and tries to have the child killed.
He's staked out in the wilderness, staked through the foot, in fact.
He's rescued by a shepherd and grows up the son of a childless royal family in a neighboring
province.
Because he's been staked through the foot, he's lame, and Oedipus means either lame
foot or swollen foot.
Now he comes and gets his own oracle, Oedipus does, and finds out he will kill his father
and marry his mother.
Thinking that the king and queen of Corinth, where he lives, are his parents, he leaves
because he's a dutiful son.
And in the process of going, he comes to a narrow way where he meets someone else.
They get into an argument.
He hits the person.
The person gets killed and son of a gun.
Later it will turn out that the person he killed was his own father, Leos.
He has fulfilled the oracle without knowing that he's fulfilled the oracle.
When he gets to Thebes, he does so by successfully answering the riddle of the Sphinx, which
makes him likely, makes him the next king by the rules of Thebes.
In order to consolidate his power, he decides he should legitimize his rule by marrying
the widow of the previous king.
So he marries Jo Casta, not knowing that she's his mother.
The first thing he does as king is to try to bring social order into the world so he
sends forth investigators to discover who really killed Leos.
When the truth is known, first the news comes to Jo Casta.
She hangs herself in the girdle of her tunic.
Even when Oedipus finds out, he goes to tell her this in horror.
Sees her hanging there, takes the pins out that hold the tunic together, and pops out
his own eyes.
What we have in Sophocles' story is not just a story about sexuality, although clearly
sexuality is there.
What we have is a story about the conflict in the passage of power from one generation
to the next.
We have a story about the difficulty of having too much knowledge.
We have here a story about what it means to see what you shouldn't see.
That story in its general structural sense is the same story we have in The Tempest,
with Prospero, Miranda, and Ferdinand.
But since Miranda is the daughter of Prospero, it's all right for Ferdinand to marry her.
And so we have the same Oedipal conflicts, but we have a romantic outcome with a marriage
that sets things right.
Whereas since Jo Casta is the wife of Leos, it's not all right for Oedipus to marry her.
We wind up with an Oedipal tragedy, rather than an Oedipal romance.
Frankenstein is another Oedipal tragedy.
We have a conflict between the creating father, Victor, and the monster whom he has created.
Throughout the story, the monster says, I will be with you on your wedding night.
Victor is such an egotist that he thinks that the monster is going to attack him.
What he really means, of course, as we know from the novel, is if I can't have a girl,
neither can you.
And on his wedding night, the monster comes and kills the bride.
So there's a conflict between the creating father, the created son, for the same female.
But this is not a sexual conflict.
It's not as if the monster wants Elizabeth.
He simply wants to have the power to create, which the father had.
I want to have someone, and I can have offspring too.
In other words, the story is the conflict of the passage of power from one generation
to the next.
That is the archetypal story of science fiction.
Now the subtitle of Frankenstein is A Modern Prometheus.
Prometheus is yet another myth that bears on this, and that's the famous story of the
Greek god who stole fire from the gods and gave it to humanity.
What Victor claims he's doing by learning how to reanimate bodies is creating a technology
to give life, which will give us all a new tool.
It's the fire of life he wants to give us.
And just as Prometheus is punished by being tied to a chain to a mountaintop and having
his liver plucked out anew each day by eagles, Victor is punished by having one member after
another of his family killed by his own monster and then ultimately dying himself.
So the legend of Faust, the Golem, Oedipus, and Prometheus, all of these great universal
stories come together in Frankenstein, and Frankenstein itself is perhaps the single
great myth that has arisen since the Renaissance.
Whether you think it's a great novel or not, the conception behind it is perfectly in accord
with our modern world.
Now let's look at the novel per se.
First of all, it ain't like the movies.
There is no Dr. Frankenstein, and there is no Baron Frankenstein.
I will remind you that Victor is an undergraduate who has gone away to school and found out
that everything that he studied before was a mistake.
He's a crazed 19-year-old who gets up in his laboratory and works like mad until he
does this.
What does he create?
There's a key to the novel in knowing this.
If you read the novel with care, you'll see that the monster itself is never named.
It is called monster, miserable creature, demon, wretch, and fiend.
Now what do these words mean?
Monster comes from the Latin root monere, meaning to warn.
A monster is an omen, and this creature is an omen of what will happen if someone by
virtue of isolating himself with a goal to learning or a goal to power separates himself
from the community.
Miserable means worthy of pity, and creature means created one.
Demon means the spirit of the individual mind.
This demon is the representative of Victor.
It's his double.
Wretch is the old English word for exile, someone who has been pushed out of the community.
And fiend means enemy, which is an amigo.
It's the opposite of friend.
It's the one you reject.
In the monster himself, we see someone who on the basis of family and wider community
is shunned.
The problem for the monster is that he is not allowed to be part of a community.
The book has a nested structure.
It's set in letters, it's told in letters, it's an epistolary novel, written by Robert
Walton, the captain of an Arctic exploring vessel, who takes on board this traveler,
who's someone walking across the ice, Victor, who tells his story, and inside Victor's story
we have the story that the monster tells, that as Victor says, and I met the monster
on the ice, and he talked to me.
The monster is the most articulate character in the book, much more so than Victor.
Not like the movies at all.
And then inside that story, the monster tells about having watched this perfect couple,
Felix and Safi, in their cottage in Switzerland.
By looking through a chink in the wall of their cottage, he learns about, for instance,
the discovery of the New World, and I wept with the fate of their original inhabitants.
The monster is the modern man.
He's on the receiving end of the bad things of the Industrial Revolution.
He feels for these people.
He tries to help them, but when they see him, they shun his ugliness.
And in fact, he is again and again attacked because he is superficially ugly.
And he longs for community, and he's good.
It's only when he is rejected that he, in fact, becomes the evil force.
Who is the first evil force?
The first evil force is Victor.
In fact, when the first death occurs, when William's death occurs, the monster knows
that Justine had nothing to do with it.
Victor comes home, finds there's a trial for Justine, the household servant who was supposed
to have been guarding Victor, guarding William.
The judge says, who knows anything about this?
Victor is sure the monster is out there.
He knows that something should be done, that he should be sought for, and he is silent.
By his silence, Victor is complicit in the death of the servant he has grown up with.
He is the killer.
The monster has only been made into a killer.
The writing of letters is crucial in the novel.
The father says, I take any interruption in your writing as a sign that you have lost
all your other social duties as well.
That's what's wrong.
Power isolation leads us to evil.
Science is a seductive thing.
It destroys community.
But at the end, the monster goes off alive.
We don't know what will happen.
What will happen depends on us.
The indeterminate ending is a characteristic of the best science fiction.
Frederick Brown, a science fiction writer, wrote this line to begin a story contest where
fans were to write in their answers.
After the last atomic war, Earth was dead, nothing grew, nothing lived.
The last man sat alone in the room.
There was a knock on the door.
Whether that knock was the last woman, the first Martian, a robot, a tree limb caught
in the breeze, we don't know.
But to find out what's knocking on that door, that's what science fiction is about.
We'll be opening that door and looking through it in the next lectures.
Lecture summary.
Modern science fiction is a response to social and economic pressures brought on by Western
industrialization.
As new developments in science and technology have increased, many people feel powerless
to deal with the disparities in wealth and culture created by these advancements.
Scientific advances such as Newton's classification of the laws of motion also convinced many
people that God is not in or concerned with the world.
This was a significant change from the days when every natural occurrence signaled divine
intervention.
From its earliest manifestations, much like early myths, science fiction has tried to
conflate the divine and the human.
Although the roots of science fiction reside in ancient myths, the genre had no specific
name until 1926.
At that time, Hugo Gernsbach coined the term scientifiction for the contents of his magazine
Amazing Stories.
Purists consider the work of H. G. Wells as the ideal of science fiction because his
stories are based on one fantastic assumption.
Everything that happens later is extrapolated from that single change.
Modern science fiction, however, has progressed beyond that pure ideal.
Still, there are three things that we can say define science fiction today.
One, the fantastic is made plausible through the use of scientific rhetoric.
Two, science fiction includes high adventure.
And three, good science fiction asks its readers to think.
Mary Shelley's Frankenstein, for example, fits this definition.
The fantastic idea of human regeneration is made plausible through the scientific jargon
and rational discourse of Dr. Frankenstein.
The monster goes through the high adventure of escape and capture.
The reader is intellectually challenged by the idea of conquering death.
The roots of science fiction can be seen in diverse sources, from Sophocles' Oedipus
Rex to the 17th century Jewish folktale of the Golem, a clay monster created by a rabbi
in Prague.
Science fiction deals with problems like power, like the supernatural, that human beings cannot
easily resolve.
It allows the last man alive who hears a knock on the door to open that door and think.
