Thank you very much for coming. I will tell you a little bit about me and how effectively
the book came about in the first instance. Then I will touch upon the themes of the book,
which have been, if you've been following the press, quite provocative and controversial.
I know what it feels like to be chased by trolls on Twitter now. I will be very keen
on finding out whether there are some real life trolls here today. Then thirdly, I want
to just sort of get your thoughts from your own experiences because what I have found
is that in writing this book that there's a lot of what I'm saying that resonates for
a lot of people no matter where they've come from and no matter what kind of life experience
you've had. So that's essentially what I hope to do in the first sort of 25 minutes
and then we can open it up and then I will gladly sign your book as well afterwards.
So a little bit about me. I was born in Kenya to Somali parents and we were growing up in
a semi-slum called Isli in Nairobi and my parents met in Kenya about late 1980 and my
mother, bless her, has given birth to 12 children. So I'm number eight in that long list. I was
glad she didn't stop after number seven, but I wish she did after number eight and she
had got married and had the first six children with her first husband and the second six
children with my father and one of my younger siblings had died when he was very, very small.
And so they met in Kenya where they were living throughout the 80s when I was growing up there.
And roughly sort of when the war broke out in 1991-92 in Somalia, so many of my family
had moved over to Kenya seeking sort of some sort of refuge and help and it was roughly
around the time when the Dodab refugee camp had opened up in Kenya. And for my father,
we were always now settled in Kenya where he had lived and he had started his life and
had established himself and we were going to stay there, certainly his children and my
mother. And what was interesting about that was that I was the first person in my whole
family's history to be born outside of Somalia, so to be born in Kenya. And for my father,
that meant that our future was going to be in Kenya for all intents and purposes. But when
his mother, his sisters and his other siblings all were fleeing the war from Somalia and came
to Kenya, there was a choice to be made. There was a choice to be made as to whether or not
they were going to seek asylum outside of Africa or stay in Kenya or as most people were thinking
at that time, the war is just going to die down in a bit and we'll just go back over and it's
going to be fine. But then a lot of my siblings then sought asylum and I have brothers and sisters
who ended up in America, some ended up in Canada, I have cousins who ended up in Sweden,
Norway and all sorts of different countries. And for my father, we were going to stay and by
this point it's sort of like 92, 93. And then in 93 when vast majority of my family had sought
asylum where they could, my father died in a car crash in Kenya. So then that meant there was
another choice to be made. At this point my father's brother was given a full scholarship
to study and then work in Italy where he was starting to establish himself and maybe start
his own family. And he came back to Kenya to bury his brother, my father. And then there was another
choice to be made there because he had to have a conversation with my mum and say,
do you stay here with these kids? And my mum and father never learnt to read and write,
they never were formally educated. And they had to decide what to do. My uncle's advice was you're
here with no income, with no real way of feeding these children. Either you follow this wave of
people who are seeking asylum somewhere else in the world and try and find a new place to start
again with help or you stay here and nobody knows what's going to happen. You now have with you
five children under the age of 12. And my mother said, well, okay, well, I think I could make it
here but leave the youngest one and take the rest. Which meant that we, the elder ones, ended up in
London without our parents having just helped to bury our father. So you could just imagine for a
moment being a nine-year-old boy or as my sister's six-year-old girl, five-year-old girl, turning
up in a place like London without your mum, without your dad, not understanding the language. I'd
like to think I've mastered the English language now a little bit. Not understanding the culture,
not understanding anything about what's happening. Such was the shock for us
that I still remember to this day, and I talk about it in the book, walking down the street
and where I'd come from in the semi-slum in Nairobi, there were no street lights.
When walking down the street and literally walking into a lamppost and knocking myself out
as a child, that's just how different and new the environment was to us.
And settling into a place like this when you don't understand the culture and the customs,
when you don't have an adult to explain to you what's happening, why it's happening,
what it means to be here, how it's going to work, all of those things can be really, really difficult.
But here's the key point about that. That kind of beginning and that kind of start for a lot of
people like me, especially Somalis who came and sought asylum in this country, that was a really
remarkably unremarkable thing. In fact, in many ways we were lucky because we hadn't seen war.
I had my father's sister who had come to Kenya and then the UK to seek asylum. She had six kids
of her own, but her husband had been killed in the war and all of her children had experienced the
war. At least with us, we hadn't experienced the war directly, but we were victims of the war
indirectly. And so in that sense, the starting point was remarkably unremarkable in that sense.
There was nothing special about the difficulties that we were facing at that time.
Then what happens after that? Well, then it's, my mum comes four years later and we're having to
sort of get to know your mum all over again because we now all speak English. She doesn't speak any
English. You're trying to communicate with her. She's speaking to us in Swahili and Somali,
which we understand but not very well. And you can imagine all the difficulties that then that
causes. I try and talk about it in the book as much as detail as I can, but it was quite painful,
as you might imagine, to sort of dig all that up and think it through and what it meant and
why certain choices were made and why certain choices were not made and so on. But then I did
enough to get to the GCSEs, enough to get to the A levels, enough to get to an undergraduate degree
in law and French at the University of Hertfordshire. I then got a full scholarship to do my post
graduate studies at Oxford University. Then I got a full scholarship to study for the bar exams in
London. Then became a barrister fully qualified in 2012. And then here I am now promoting this book
that is telling that story. Now, you know, in many ways, it's a sort of shortened version of
people say, well, now it must mean that, you know, it's smooth sailing from here. Well, I mean,
there's still plenty of time to mess this up, you know, let's not get carried away. But it's that
kind of journey that I'm still digesting in many ways. And I will continue to digest for quite
some time because there's no shame in admitting that the pain and the sorrow and the grief will
take a lifetime. And one of the ways in which a sociologist and a psychologist and a neuroscientist
that I interviewed for the book and talked about were explaining how when grief, for example,
or a traumatic event, it's really important. Come on in. Trust you to be very late.
Just one of those things that, you know, I know him, I'm not just picking up on him.
I'm not just picking on him. And, you know, it's it's one of those things that people talk about
when, you know, trauma or a death, for example, people always say, well, you'll get over it,
you'll get over it. But actually, one of the ways in which people explain that is,
is they say, well, imagine your brain is just this one big sort of circle. When you're young,
and something very traumatic happens like death, that particular event will be also another big
circle within that brain circle of yours, because it will dominate a huge part of who you are.
But as you go older, and as you mourn properly, and as you digest that trauma, that inner circle
that signifies and represents that trauma just gets slightly smaller compared to that part of
your brain that is there to be dealing with it. So in other words, you never get over it. It just
becomes a smaller part of who you are, the contours of your life, the part of what makes
you a whole human being. And that is, for me, the best way in which somebody described to me,
the way in which we deal with trauma, and death, and that kind of thing that happens to you in
our life. So it's quite important that you don't always come across to people, say to somebody,
well, you'll get over it, it's fine, time will heal you. That's just not the right way to look at it.
Because if you do, you're going to come up against the wall that hits you and hits you and hits you.
So what about the book in terms of the themes? Well, the themes that I've looked into here
are quite varied and big. So the book ranges from what is happening to you as a child,
and sort of what is happening to you in the womb of your mother, and the kind of diet that your
mother's having in terms of what kind of human being that you grow up to become,
all the way through to whatever fulfilling career you're looking for, whatever fulfilling
destiny that you want, if you've ever dreamt of ever being at Google or whatever it is.
What exactly is happening at each stage that allows you to be able to succeed, and how does
it all come together is the kind of overall thesis of the book. So I touch upon this idea,
for example, which is that all the things that people talk about, biological determinism,
for example, are you born with your talents, or is it part of your environment that actually
teaches you? What does the science suggest? How does it affect me personally? How do I think
that my illiterate parents, who were never formally educated,
are a part of who I am now? And actually, does it mean that your intelligence can be measured
by way of sort of formal education as opposed to informal education and life lessons?
And does it mean that your destiny is determined purely by virtue of the fact that you may or may
not be born to people who actually know how to read and write, for example? It's quite controversial,
but I tackle it in the book. The answer is more or less it's 50-50. But equally,
you may be born with some talent, but your environment may well suppress it. You may be born
with very little talent, but the right environment might really, really accentuate that and make you
push whatever little talent you were born with to a level that it goes to. The way I put it is,
how do you make sure that somebody's environment doesn't determine their destiny
in the same way as somebody's environment manages to protect them from their destiny?
And that's the best way to look at the nature and nurture debate in that context. Education.
How many of you guys have heard governments, politicians, ministers always say education's
the answer. Education, education, education. If you just get them to school and they know how to
write and get a university degree, they will be fine. How many times do you always hear that? You
hear that so many times. Well, I've got a newsflash for you. The idea that education is the answer
or even the main answer to the conundrum of social mobility is nonsense.
Complete and utter nonsense. And I'll tell you why. Education, for education's sake, is fundamental
to the human progress. You need to learn how to be literate and numerate and be able to communicate
and be able to understand people. You need to be able to read a bank statement. You need to be able
to fill out forms. You need to be able to understand, you know, the mechanics of communicating with
human beings both in writing and in speaking. Of course, that's a given. But the idea that more
exams and more degrees and more qualifications necessarily equals a trajectory in which you
will become socially mobile, it just doesn't follow. It doesn't follow and we've got to tackle that
head on because the consequence of not tackling that is putting pressure on our education system.
It's putting pressures on our teachers. It's putting crazy pressure on the kids. And it's putting
forward unrealistic expectations on parents who are desperately trying to do what they can for
their children. And I set that out what that means in the book. And then when you translate that
into what that looks like, take this example that was found in, by a couple of academics at the
London School of Economics, Sam Friedman and Daniel Morrison, who wrote a book called The Class
Sealate. They looked at two individuals and took and made sure they controlled for degree
classification, the subject that they studied, the kind of university they went to, and then the
kind of entry job that they had. The only difference between these two people is that one went to a
state school and one went to a private school. Everything else is being controlled for, okay?
When they get into that same entry job, it turns out that the person who went to private school
within three and a half years is earning 16% more. How do you account for that?
These are two individuals who more or less had the exact same trajectory when you control for
everything else except for what school they went to. And yet, three and a half years later,
one is earning 16% more based on what school they went to. How do you explain that if education
and especially tertiary education was supposed to be this great equalizer, was supposed to be this
moment that everybody becomes equal in terms of equality of opportunity? Again, there are no easy
answers to this, but I delve into it and I try and figure out what it could mean and what are the
kind of unwritten rules, the social capital connections, the cultural capital, how you
understand the culture in which you're going into. The Barrister profession, where I am now as a
Barrister. Cultural capital is huge. You know, being able to understand how people communicate
when they talk about what school and what college you went to, rather than saying,
what did you study? They will say, what did you read? And that's the kind of lingo that
Oxbridge types will understand and maybe others wouldn't. And that cultural capital can make a
difference. And again, what does that mean if we keep banging on about the fact that education is the
answer? Another big theme in the book is the role of luck. How many of you guys believe you're lucky
in life? Okay. And for those of you who don't put your hand up, do you think it's all you put your
hand up? You worked hard to be here. One person, that's good. I hope you're being ironic. Because
if you're not, you really need to read the book. Luck is important, because especially successful
people tend to tell a story that it's all them, that they worked hard, that it was all down to them.
And I give about four or five examples of that. But I'll share with you two examples.
Jeff Bezos. And I'm allowed to mention the names of competitor organizations.
Jeff Bezos talks about, and many of the sort of founding fathers or individuals who start
up tech companies always tell this story of, I founded my company in a garage. You know what
I mean? It was in my garage. I sat there and I worked hard and it came together. This
nonsense that they tell people about it all began in this garage. Have you seen that image of Jeff
Bezos sitting in his garage with Amazon written on fountain pen and sitting there hunched in
front of his computer and he built this billion dollar? Well, here's the footnote. The footnote is
in 1995, Jeff Bezos' parents gave him $250,000 for free to start up his company. And all of the
connections and people that he needed to know and all of the things that he needed to push to be
where he is. And of course, things picked up in a way that has been exponential and arguably
in a way that we will never see happen again in the way that it happened at that particular
moment in time. Now, if that's not lucky, I don't know what is. But that's not the story we tell,
right? That's not the story we tell. The story we tell is he worked hard in this garage and look
at this guy now. He deserves to be there. And the reason why that's a problem is because we set
then unrealistic expectations about what success looks like. We then set people up for failure.
We then tell people the kind of stories that I consider to be irresponsible when it comes to
people's expectations of what they're worth, of what's possible and what's probable in your
set of circumstances. And that's the kind of thing that I'm talking about in the book and I try
and lay out. Another example is Bill Gates, who we all know about how he came about with the
natural stories he dropped out of Harvard. And, you know, he's amazing. Look at him now. What they
don't tell you is that he's one of the very few people who had access to the early computer
in a way that was unprecedented and learned hours and hours and hours of coding and programming
and being able to do it in such a way that his parents in that context, in that environment in
Seattle, allowed for him to grow in a way that, again, arguably will never see again.
But when you hear about his story, you hear he dropped out of Harvard, right? Dropouts are good.
Dropouts can succeed too. I won't get to the big guys of your... That's for another time. Don't bite
the hand that feeds you. But luck. Luck is an example of the way... There's a really good professor
briefly. I'll mention by the name of Robert Frank at Cornell University, who's written a really
fantastic book about luck, success and luck. And the way he describes luck is actually,
interestingly, Casey and I were talking about bikes earlier in a different context, but you're
riding a bicycle. And when you're riding your bicycle and you're riding it really strongly
and the wind is blowing at you, you're fully aware of the wind because it's pushing at you.
You're like struggling. Your feet are pedaling away. You're feeling that the wind, that current,
is pushing back at you. That's you being fully aware of your bad luck because it's there. It's
constant. It's consistent. But say you take a left and now you're going downhill in a slight incline
and now the wind is in your back and you're cycling fast and you're flying. You will only
notice that the wind is in your back and you're on the incline for the first 10 seconds. After that,
you're more likely to say it's all me. You're much more likely to say it's all me because look how
fit I am. That's you hardly ever noticing good luck. You will always be aware of bad luck,
but you're less likely to notice good luck. And again, I set that out in the book. Now don't
get me wrong. I'm no shrinking violet. I do think I'm special too. And I don't want to undermine
my own talents and what I'm good at, but it would be a complete nonsense and a folly to not acknowledge
the number of times I've had help, the number of mentors who've shown me the way, the number of
second chances I've had, the number of opportunities that people have given me,
that I then recognized, that I then worked on, that I then pushed. And that's important because
otherwise another different story is both irresponsible and sets people up for failure.
That's another, you know, it's really important that I impart that to you. The next themes in the
book are in relation to concepts like confidence. Where does this idea of confidence come from?
What does it take for you to be confident enough to be in a room like this and address people and
talk in a big meeting and hold your own and be confident? What does that actually look like?
What does it taste like? How do you teach it? Can you teach it? Can you learn it? Can you unlearn
it? What are the kind of contexts that give it a boost and what are the kind of contexts that
undermine it? It's all there. I delve into that. Imagination is another chapter which is about
this idea that if you're coming from, you know, one of the most deprived areas of the country
and you have never met a barrister or a programmer or somebody who works in an environment that you
hope to aspire to one day, how do you have the imagination to first of all picture yourself there
and then actually work towards it? How does that happen? It's a big question and I try and tackle
it. And then there's another question which is often quite controversial and I get in trouble for
it. This is a country in particular. How many of you guys grew up in the UK? Just out of interest.
Good. So those of you who grew up in the UK will recognize this instantly, perhaps less so the
ones who didn't, but you might recognize it now that you're living here more. This is a country
that is obsessed with a lot of things, but one of the things that it is really deeply obsessed with
is accents. And how you speak and how you communicate can in so many ways determine whether
or not you will be successful in this country, despite what your qualifications show and despite
how competent you might be and despite how gifted you might be. I am not ashamed of saying it.
English is my third language. I didn't speak like this when I was growing up and my accent has
undoubtedly changed. I speak in different ways depending on different languages, depending on
who I'm talking to, depending on where I am and depending on what I'm trying to achieve.
That's the reality of understanding the world as it is rather than the world as you would like it to
be. And so if it occurs to you very early on in your life, it turns out that they say that
it's very hard for you to change your accent after the age of 25, so some of you it's too late,
so don't worry about it. If very early on it occurs to you that this is a fundamental issue
for example, not me saying this, but the statistics show that if you have a Scouser accent from
Liverpool, a Geordie accent from Newcastle or the Northeast, or a Brummy accent from Birmingham
and the Black Country, you will be significantly and disproportionately discriminated against.
28% of people believe that they have been discriminated against based on their accents,
and they are right because 80%, 80% of employers say they have discriminated against people
during interviews based on their accents. Now if you're faced with that kind of fact,
do you still keep your accent or do you change how you speak? I'll ask a different question.
How many of you still speak how you spoke when you were 15? Put your hand up.
Exact same how you spoke when you were 15? Two people out of the rest of the other people who
are in this room. Sorry I didn't see if you guys might have said the same. Ish. For me,
if you still speak in that accent, I would argue that that suggests in some ways that you were
born into a particular accent that allows you to be able to keep it in one way or another.
It has to be. And those who say to you, oh you're changing and you're not being yourself,
you're being inauthentic, just be yourself, it's guff, it's nonsense. It sets you up for failure,
and I am not ashamed of saying so. You just got to read the book. Now the last thing I'd add is
there's a lot more about employment, what employers should be doing, how to improve
employment practices, and just generally about my reflections of how and where things are going.
I thought I'd read for you then a slight short bit in the book before we open it up to question
and answer. I've spoken for a bit longer. I hope this is not single use. I like it.
I'll read you this small passage here that just sort of encapsulates the book in a nutshell for
you so that when you are reading it you can kind of more or less know what it's about based on this
bit here. The reality remains that for a young refugee boy who buried his father at the age of
nine arrived in Britain without his mother and was brought up in poverty and among profound
deprivation. The chances that you would be writing a book like this one are minuscule,
not impossible, but highly improbable. In that context what politicians should really be saying
is this. The chance of you succeeding in Britain today is down to many factors. The wealth and
profession of your parents, the kind of school you attended, your mental and physical health,
and the quality of your early environment in terms of stability and attention. You'll need
to work harder than you have ever imagined and hope that whatever talents you have given the
fast-paced development of automation you are still going to be needed when you grow up.
You'll need a lot of luck as you go and let's hope that along the way someone explains to you the
unwritten rules of the world you want to join and you'll need to make it through all of that
with your belief in yourself and your vision in your future still intact and then
maybe you'll make it. It's a bit of a mouthful but it's certainly better than people that say
when we live in a meritocratic society. Thank you very much ladies and gentlemen.
Maybe up to questions. I'm going to ask mine first for I'm selfish. Please wait until you have
the mic because it is needed for the video. So my question which I know the answer but I also
like to hear the detail behind it is so would a child arriving from a similar situation now to
Britain have a better experience than you or a worse experience? It's a very good question. A child
arriving today would almost certainly not have the best experience that they might have had when I
was growing up partly because things have hardened in society these days. I don't think we've become
more racist or more intolerant. I personally don't think we have. I think we've more or less been
as racist and as intolerant as normal. It's just we're more aware of it now because of social media
and all of the things that are out there. So in some ways I think it's harder because it's all in
your face and it can be quite demoralizing but I think your life is easier because now more than
ever we're more aware generally. Now that doesn't mean that we're more aware because people are
aware because they're kind of curious. I think we're more aware because the information is out
there. The the data is out there. The opportunities are out there. People are talking about this
issue. Everywhere I go everyone's talking about diversity and inclusion and diversity and all
this that and the other. Now I talk about the book how a lot of organizations are doing this in a very
cat-handed way and actually some of them are causing more damage than good but at least it's out there.
At least we're talking about it and I gave an interview to The Guardian or The Observer I can't
remember where I said in the book I said in that interview I said I wish I had a book like this
where I'm talking about what it feels like to be growing up lonely without information without
data without understanding how to sort out my homelessness situation without getting somebody
to help you with application form or how do you know just anything any sort of information out there
how do we find it so in a way things are worse because of the kind of climate that we're living
in but actually things are a lot better because of the fact that so much of this information now
is available to you in a way that it's never been before.
Hi thanks Hashi this is an incredible story a lot kind of resonates a little bit with
some of the stuff that I've got for I guess it's advice really so people like from my community
to come and say look you know how do I crack this puzzle of British society how do I and
then now you can say to them buy this book yeah yeah yeah and and what you've articulated really
well is is like the facts of life all right and so I struggle sometimes with like what I would
aspire the culture to be versus what the culture actually is and perhaps what my experience was
was perhaps not the experience that you absolutely will be having so I can give the experience that
so my question I suppose is like how do we you know give advice without being too cynical or too
you know perhaps it's changed yeah yeah yeah well I mean it's a very good question because
my experience growing up as a you know as a young black kid with a Muslim name is not going to be
the same as a young Asian kid growing up in in a city London in similar or worse set of
circumstances right and for me the best advice I tell them and and there is some cynicism in that
is that it's really really basic and it's really fundamental it is critical that you treat the
world as you find it rather than some utopia of what you hope it to be and the sort of
advice that people give especially in my profession that just be yourself you'll be fine it is such
poisonous crap that for somebody who doesn't have the information the wherewithal the understanding
the context the ability to actually question that it is such poison for you because what then
happens is that you be yourself without understanding that the world doesn't work like that and pretty
soon you get to a point where you're in conflict with yourself because when you realize that the
world doesn't accept you as you are where are you going to turn to because what you've been told to
believe is be yourself because the world is fair and you'll be fine because soon when you realize
that doesn't work but you still believe the world is fair then the logical conclusion is that the
world that is fair won't accept me for who I am and that's the trouble and so you have to be cynical
in the you have to understand that the world as it is rather than as we would like it to be
isn't the same thing but then the question then becomes when you do make it and when you do get
to the point where you are successful whatever success looks like for you it is important that
you tell a responsible story of your eyes and that's what I'd like to say I'm doing now is yeah
I knew my what I was worth I know what my talents are worth I knew that if I sat the same exams at
the bar school if I I knew if I did the same assessments when I was being interviewed to be
a barrister that I'd be as good as anyone else but what I didn't know was if I walk into a room
and one of the softer skills is that you know did you get to see Richard the Third's performance
last weekend or or or which is the the longest Shakespearean play it turns out it's Hamlet
and you don't have that kind of cultural capital that you didn't learn in inner city London that kind
of feel that people have in a profession like mine where we all do it's not just my profession
every profession people recruit in their own image you recruit with people like us
you recruit in a way of do I like this person can I work with this person dare I say it happens
right here and so when you realize that and you realize that it's not just about your grades
although that's a good start it's not just about your performance and competence
but it's a lot what what what sociologists call the homophily which is the idea of you
recruiting people who are just like you because you are effectively then creating a tribe once you
appreciate that that's the key and so the ideal world is I'd like to think for example just on
the point about accents of course I'd like to live in a world where people judge me based on
what I have to say rather than how I have to say it but when you realize that there is a deeper
social conditioning that means that what I have to say will basically become muted after the first
couple of words and they've heard you speak in a particular accent you'd be mad to ignore that
you'd be mad that's my view people might disagree but that's my view thank you so much for coming
and sharing your story with us it's fascinating and I mean your point it's I think it's a very good
point and I'm just struggling with it a little bit because I I've been here for just over a year
and I am a member of the Gaglars which is one of the ERGs as an employee group
and we work really hard as volunteers to make sure that people like me can come here and be themselves
and I've always felt that at Google I can be myself I am gay I'm Latino and I talk to people
at work about everything that I do about who I am he has a heaven accent and sometimes I feel
the accent thing and I agree with you and I work in the legal department I know that people like me
if they want to become baristas like yourself it would be much much harder but how not the
coffee makers yeah yeah exactly so my question to you is how how do you how do you change that I
mean if it is so difficult how do you change that because I I think it's a little bit unrealistic
to expect that we all try to become something else so that we can fit in no I completely agree
in the sense that it's not easy I talk about it in the book I say look there is a tension
there is a tension between saying you need to adapt to the set of circumstances you're in
to be able to get on and the tension on the other side of that is well how are we going to change
everything when we're all aspiring to join this mono culture which is true it's a very good point
I accept that but then the the attack in my judgment has to be twofold the attack has to be on an
individual basis and on a systematic basis on an individual basis I've made the choices that I've
made and I'm not suggesting that everyone else should and on a systematic basis I am putting
the the feet to the fire by talking about it the trouble with expecting an individual to go up
against the sister is that you will always lose the game is rigged and as an individual you will
lose but then if there is a critical mass of people like me and you who are then hopefully
sitting at the top table slowly but surely we will get some sort of progress it probably won't
happen in our lifetime but we will get there but the trouble of insisting that an individual remains
who they are is to pit two different you know individuals you're you're pitting an individual
a giant against a matchstick and the giant will always win and so I accept that there is that
tension of course there is but it's not reconcilable within our lifetime and that's the conclusion I've
come to and the the the final thing is that we won't be able to reconcile it within our lifetime
and the insistent that individuals be themselves with all that that comes with that is that you
end up dying dying what I consider what I say in the book you end up dying at the altar of authenticity
and it's not worth it
I want to hear if you disagree with me I want to hear like come on man I want people who
disagree with me because I want to write in the next book I was interested to hear about luck
and accents do you feel like that's a particularly British construct because I grew up in Australia
a similar private schooling system I've spent a lot of time studying in Germany and Holland where
they don't have as much of that yeah if there was it does exist in Australia as well yeah no I mean
the Australian system is directly geared uh from the British system but you know in places like
Germany they're very very by comparison to me like you have to submit your like high school
grades when you go for a job they try to be as objective as possible if you were to say there's
like 200 countries in the world just for round sake where would you put the UK in terms of like
meritocratic I did a quiz last night turns out that the UN recognizes 193 countries but yeah
uh the UK the UK yeah yeah yeah no that's a very where would I put the UK that's a very good
very good question very good question I'll take that another question there and then the guy over
there and then I'll answer three of them together yes um you spoke about confidence
but I'm also interested in your take about motivation if it's ever a real thing actually
definitely and you mean the the ability to motivate yourself yeah correct especially
when things are extremely hard and if you have like concrete examples yeah and the other thing
is you spoke at the very beginning about um controversial things that you write and trolls and
like what is it about it's on Twitter just people who who write to me about especially on the accent
thing the accent thing is a big is a big problem for a lot of English people trust me uh right there
I'll take the last one on there so a motivation on there and accents in Australia and the question
about meritocracy in the world I'll come to that sorry thank you very much um this may be covered
in your book but my question is it was on was an aspiration like us as a society aspiring to be
better than who we are and I want to get your thoughts on that um kind of giving the fact
giving your argument around um I guess accepting the world as it is as opposed to as it should be
and if we are doing that aren't we setting ourselves up to just remain just as we are or
evolve slower I don't know very yeah so in other words if you accept the world as it is
does that limit your aspiration okay good question so just dealing with the question about accents
Australia uh and even americans some to some extent have borrowed a huge part of the the class
structures it just manifests itself in a different way um I'd slightly disagree with you in Germany
because Germany has got a similar issue in one sense because actually if you're from Bavaria
as opposed to another region of Germany there is a slight snobbery depending on which part of
Germany you're in so they have their own bits as well but you're right in the sense that you know
they are trying a little bit harder the only problem with the German education system and I've
been looking into this is that they make people choose very early on what they want to be so you
pretty much by the age of 14 15 you pretty much have to decide whether you want to go down the
vocational route or or a professional route at 15 I could barely speak much English so the idea
that my destiny could have been determined at the age of 15 you know yeah but you know what I mean
and in terms of there's there's all these different indexes about where the UK is on
this thing and it turns out that the UK and the US are right at the bottom right at the bottom
in that index of of of what it means to be socially mobile but having said that I gave an
interview to the Guardian my wife is Swedish and she always bangs on about how the Scandinavian
countries are are super meritocratic and that's also nonsense because because what you then what
you find is that the Swedish and especially Scandinavian countries like you know Denmark,
Norway and Sweden Finland is part of the Nordic countries it isn't Scandinavian they they spend
a huge amount of money on education and really training people early on and so they make sure
that by the time you get to 15 16 you have really made huge amount of progress in terms of basic
education but then when you look at what we call absolute mobility in other words are you doing
better than your parents when it comes to the kind of progress that you make Sweden isn't doing
that much better there's a really good book called The Sun Also Rises and it shows different
surnames it tracks social mobility through surnames and it shows that basically Sweden is owned by
about five families for a millennium and that has just meant that basically so in in absolute terms
they're trying to galvanize and push people up but in relative terms I really don't think that
Sweden is making that as much progress as people give them credit for I'll have to answer these guys
and I'll come back to you on the question of motivation it's a very difficult one if you're
sitting there working hard pushing yourself and then you have to get up in the morning and it's
raining and it's cold and you just want to be under your duvet it's not easy and motivation is a
lot is a something I looked into for the book and there's a there's a lot in there about what's often
described as instant gratification and delayed gratification so the idea that when I was growing
up you walk around the streets and all the guys with the nicest cars are the drug dealers or
whatever but you have to believe that you've got to go to this crap school and get the grades and
that one day I'll be something that's delayed gratification instant gratification is just like
get this why don't I just go there now and I can have that car and those nice trainers
which is not you know reality so for me what I argue is that you've got to find that motivation
for yourself wherever it comes from my own personal motivation was always that I just wanted better
than what I had I was just like I want to buy a house because we've never had our own place we've
always lived six to a room I was like I want to be able to buy whatever I want without ever asking
anyone and just work towards that you know I mean it was materialistic to begin with but
it's just that visceral feeling of being able to control more of your own life that has been that
huge motivation for me and I and I struggle with it even now you know sometimes we're all lazy we're
all bored and we're all like trying to find different ways to motivate ourselves trust me even the
most driven people have their moments so don't ever believe that again it goes back to that thing
about I dropped out of Harvard you know I started my thing in a garage it's complete nonsense we're
all facing our own deep challenges whatever that might be on the question of the of the challenge
and the tension between accepting the world as it is and to what extent and then does that limit
your aspiration my point about accepting the world as it is isn't necessarily linked to aspiration
it's simply a question of tools so whatever your aspiration is keep it there but don't expect
that the world is going to be kind to you generous to you nice to you and treat you in good faith
simply because you want to aspire to that aspiration what I'm saying is you have to accept
the world as it is because they're not going to judge you just based on your grades they're not
just going to judge you based on your raw talent they're not going to just judge you based on your
competence which is what people tell you right people tell you just study hard work hard do the
right thing and it will come together and what I'm saying is that's not true there's a lot more
deeper that you need to dig that doesn't mean lower your aspiration it just means that the
roots that you're going to take is going to be a lot more bumpier because you're realistic about
the world as it is rather than as you would like it to be which is more likely to treat you to a
sort of instant failure any other couple of questions before we wrap all these I've been
told I don't mind I've got time so if as long as you guys go got time I'm happy to take whatever
questions I'll take a few together thank you so much for sharing your story I'm really looking
forward to reading the book you said at the beginning that you ultimately you don't think
education is the key to social mobility yet you yourself are a prime example of somebody that
who's pursued chose to pursue higher education and whose ultimate career and where you are now
is a result of doubt of that so if it's not education and you know we're talking about young
people that maybe don't have parents who can give them the best advice what is the the key
very good question I'll very good question I'm really interested in your definition of success
and I am I my hunch is that that that and you know you just said about being able to buy what
you want and you know that kind of sits with very much within a capitalist idea of success
and how does that sit against happiness and yeah what is what is the measure of being
successful or making it as you refer to but lady there and then there's one more here I think yeah
so I'll I'll take those two and then I haven't forgotten no that's all right we can start there
and then go there I guess to I group you on the one hand where we have to conform but on the other
hand we have to also push like HR departments to have a different system where they're not looking
like maybe maybe they're not allowed to look at people or listen to people until they
make a certain judgment that allows those people to get to a certain degree so I just wouldn't
want to discount that but I totally agree with you what you're saying seems to fit in with yet
you've got to dress a certain way it's not just accents you've got to dress a certain way you've
got to it's your mannerisms it's all sorts of things and totally agree that you have to play the
game to degree how do we best help children or you know children and teenagers yeah good question
I'll take that last one to the lady there just lady there you haven't yet mentioned like inclinations
we talked about motivation but I'm looking at from a slightly different perspective I work a lot with
children with cancer and teenagers with cancer who miss out on a load of school their lives they
can either they've had a lot of bad luck you talk about cycling against the wind and the wind being
behind you their choice when the wind is behind them sometimes they don't even want to be on the
bike like how do you instill that inclination to be hungry to look for the opportunities because
that fits with everything you're talking about because you still have to look for those opportunities
so how do you instill that and what you discuss in the book about yes a very good question that's
a very good question about inclination so just starting out with education what I'm trying to
say is that education is not the answer I'm not suggesting that it's not part of the answer but
it's not even the main answer I would argue simply because if we see education as even having this
relationship with social mobility in the way that politicians talk about it we're setting kids up for
failure what I'm saying instead is that education is just one of those life things like breathing
like sleeping like just peace whatever like just the kind of think of anything that is just a
standard thing that you do when you brush your teeth that's what education is the idea of constantly
obsessing over then linking it to people becoming more socially mobile is where I'm disagreeing
and and I talk about that and the other stuff that I talk about that comes with that is exactly
as I've sort of alluded to in the end you know the circumstances in which you're growing up in
the kind of aspirations you're exposed to by your parents the fact that you can have a decent
diet at home to be able to allow your brain to grow and not have anxiety and not have the
kind of jittery ways in which you're then going to develop issues later on in life the kind of
things about mentoring that allows you to the chapter on mentoring I is subtitled it's subtitled
filling in the blanks so if you don't know what you don't know having those people around you to
be able to show you language so there's loads of other things I argue that make up the bigger
social mobility story but this intense focus on education there was a famous uh Tony Blair
former prime minister's uh speech where he said education education education again that was a
classic example of putting the emphasis in my judgment in the wrong place that's what I mean
so I don't hope I don't want to undermine uh the purpose and need of education just plowing
through a few of the other questions on the question of what what it means to be successful
you have to define that for yourself and I do talk about that in the book I talk about
happiness I do talk about not necessarily seeking out the kind of happiness that means that you are
monetarily more happy but rather that you're you're happy and successful in the sense that
you have pursued what you're good at and what you're not so good at what you enjoy what you don't
enjoy and and the kind of things that allow you to grow as a human being now to ignore money would
be a folly to ignore money and and and income is just nonsense either it's nonsense or you've grown up
you know financially secure and independently wealthy to which extent it means nothing to you
but I say in the book if you're going to try to be for example a lawyer pick an area of law
if you're a socially mobile person pick an area of law that will allow you to earn a lot of money
why why get obsessed over human rights and I want to save the world when you've come from
a very poor set of circumstances in that area those areas of law you're not likely to make
much money and therefore not likely to transform the lives of your family whereas if you pick an
area that does give you a decent income then you can change your life you can change that don't be
ashamed of that there's no shame in that this shame is when you make it your sole central goal
finally on that it's really interesting how football i'm a big football fan is a huge meritocracy
if you think about it it's raw raw talent and it's no wonder that a lot of the people who make it
into it are just dirt poor dirt dirt poor most of them and then when you meet a lot of these kids
who are growing up in inner city london today ask the vast majority that most kids even if they're
growing up in nice circumstances want to be footballers but disproportionately poor kids
want to be footballers why because it's the first opportunity that they think they can have through
their own hard work to change their lives there is something there on the question of inclination
i'm not a scientist i don't know what instinctively occurs to people but i do talk about
how much your early life exposure can make a difference to your inclination
so for example if you're growing up in a household where every morning everyone's leaving for work
at six in the in the morning and getting up and having breakfast as opposed to what is often
pejoratively termed by different governments working up in how waking up in households where
the curtains are never drawn until midday i think that there is something there about an
inclination that happens on for a child very early on that then sets the tone for the rest of their
lives but if you're somebody facing cancer and lots of issues with cancer and problems like that
chances of your inclinations being quite there is very hard because you probably believe i don't know
but you probably believe and feel the life's giving you a pretty raw deal and so why are you
going to be more inclined to get up if you think i didn't deserve this and now i'm ridden with this
horrible disease that i have no control over so i haven't gone into too much detail but i do talk
about inclination to an extent on the final question i remember it briefly but you're gonna have to
just tell me one word and i'll it'll come to me the hr the hr it's a very good point so the hr
points is a really interesting one so we have to do more to help hr so i did i interviewed a lot of
hr people for this book and what was really fascinating was they said to me actually we had
this amazing young lady she was really talented she was so good but she had an sx accent we can't
put her she was you know what she said to me she said i'd love to hire her but i can't put her in
front of the clients so think about that you get to a point where you've managed to convince the
hr people to not judge somebody based on their mannerisms or the way they speak but then the next
another hurdle appears out of nowhere where she says but what are the clients going to say
i can't put her in front of the clients so then i say we need to move towards an environment where
if the hr department has decided this person's competent then you should be prepared to put
that person in front of the clients or tell your clients to take their business elsewhere now
what company's going to do that on their bottom line come on come on think about it no not many
companies are going to be prepared to take that hit right now but we're slowly moving in the right
direction and the point i'm making is that what i'm learning in this process of writing is that
every time we seem to find a solution we seem to hit our heads against a new problem that we may
or may not have noticed before that has always been there but has become to the forefront of
where it is anyway thank you very much ladies and gentlemen
