In this lecture we will be studying about Arden's theorem.
So this Arden's theorem is important when you deal with regular expressions and it
states that if p and q are two regular expressions over sigma and if p does not
contain epsilon then the following equation in r given by r equal to q
plus rp has a unique solution that is r equal to qp star. So this Arden's
theorem is telling us that if you have two regular expressions p and q over
this sigma and if p does not contain epsilon then this equation r equal to q
plus rp it has a unique solution that is given by r equal to qp star. So that
means that whenever you get an equation of this form r equal to q plus rp you
can directly replace it with r equal to qp star because this is a solution
to that as stated by the Arden's theorem. So in this lecture what we'll do is we
will prove this. So first we'll prove that r equal to qp star is a solution to
this equation and after proving that we will also prove that this is a unique
solution means this is the only solution to this equation. Okay so let's get
started. So first we'll take this equation r equal to q plus rp so this is
the first equation that we have that is this one so let me call it equation
number one and we are going to prove that this is a solution to that. So what
I'll do is I will replace r with qp star. So here equal to q plus this r I will
replace it with qp star. So instead of this r I will write qp star and then I
have p over here. Okay so now we get this and from here I see that I can take
out q as common. So if you take out q as common what we get is here instead of
this q we'll get epsilon plus and q is taken out so p star p. So this is what
we get. Now if you remember in the previous lecture when we studied about
identities we already studied that epsilon plus r star r where r is any
regular expression is equal to r star. So this was one of the identities in the
previous lecture you can refer it if you have not watched. So here in the same way
we see that we have epsilon plus p star p. So this whole thing can be written as
p star. So qp star. So now we see that when we replace r with qp star we are
getting qp star over here. So we have just proved that r equal to qp star is a
solution to this equation that we got here. So we have proved the first part
of Arden's theorem. Okay now let's prove the second part and what is the second
part? The second part we have to prove that this is a unique solution means
this is the only solution to this equation. So in order to do that let me
take this equation again r equal to q plus rp and now in this equation let me
replace r with this itself that is q plus rp. So q plus instead of r I'll put
the whole thing q plus rp. q plus rp and this p will come over here this is p.
Okay and now let us continue. So how can I write this? q plus if I take this p
inside this becomes qp plus rp rp square. Okay now we have an r again over here so
let me replace this r also with q plus rp. So q plus qp plus this r I will
write it as q plus rp and this p square comes over here. So this will be written
as q plus qp plus I'll take this p square inside so this becomes qp square plus rp
cube. Okay so if you continue this n number of times you will get q plus qp plus qp square plus
it goes on up to qp to the power n plus rp to the power n plus 1. Now what now
why did I do this? If you observe it here you see that when the second last term is
a square then the last term is a cube that means 2 plus 1 3. So in the same way if the
second last term is n then the last term this rp term will be n plus 1 so this is how we get this.
Okay now we see that we still have an r here and this r let me replace it with r equal to qp star.
Let me replace it with this term in this equation now. So I get q plus qp plus qp square plus goes
on up to qpn plus instead of r I will put qp star and pn plus 1. Okay from here now if we take
out q common then we take out q common now what do we get? Here we get epsilon plus p plus p square
plus goes on pn plus p star pn plus 1. Okay if you observe this what is this? This is epsilon
plus p plus p square plus pn plus pn plus 1. This whole term it represents the closure of p. So you
can write this as q and this can be represented as the closure of p that is p star. So this is p star
this whole term. So again we get at the end r is equal to qp star. So we have proved that this is the
only solution that is the unique solution for our equation that was given. So this is how we
proved the Arden's theorem. So once we prove this Arden's theorem we can write q r equal to qp star
whenever you get this kind of a equation. So I hope that was clear to you. Thank you for watching
and see you in the next one.
