Till now we have studied about Milley machines and Moore machines and from this lecture we
will be studying about conversion of Moore machine to Milley machine.
So before we start let us understand that both Moore machines and Milley machines are
equally powerful and one can be converted to the other.
That means Moore machine can be converted to Milley machine and Milley machine can also
be converted to Moore machine.
So here we have our question here that is to construct a Moore machine that prints
A whenever the sequence zero one is encountered in any input binary string and then convert
it to its equivalent Milley machine.
So our task is to first design a Moore machine that will print A whenever the sequence zero
one is encountered in any input binary string and then we will convert it to its equivalent
Milley machine.
So this Moore machine has already been designed by us in our previous lecture.
So let me quickly design it.
So here I have designed the Moore machine for this question that is it will print A
whenever the sequence zero one is encountered.
So here we have our inputs as zero one and we have our outputs as A and B.
So we have already done this example.
So here we see that we have three states ABC and on getting zero one the sequence it comes
to state C and it prints A. All right.
So this is the transition diagram for that and this is the transition table.
We have three states ABC and on getting inputs zero and one this is where the states go
to and this is the output that it gives.
Like for example let's see state A on input zero state A goes to state B and on input
one state A goes to A itself.
And what is the output associated with state A?
It is B. So here we have written B.
And the same way we have done for the states B and C.
So this is the Moore machine that we have.
And here since this is a Moore machine the outputs are associated to the states like
for example here A, B and C and we have the outputs associated to the states given here.
Now our task is to convert this to its equivalent Mealy machine.
Now what is the difference between a Moore machine and a Mealy machine?
In Moore machine the outputs are associated to the states like given here.
But in a Mealy machine the outputs are associated to the transitions.
So how shall we change this in such a way that these outputs given here should be associated
with the transitions?
Okay.
Let's see how we can do this.
Coming to the first state we see that in state A we have output B and let's look at the transitions.
Here we have 1.
Input 1 goes to A. And what is the output associated to A?
It is B.
Now since this 1 is going to state A and since the output associated to state A is B.
So this 1 will have the output B associated to it.
So in the same way let's see for this 0.
0 is going to state B. And what is the output associated to state B?
It is small b.
Now since this 0 is going to this B and since the output here is B. So this 0 will have
the output small b.
Now in the same way let's look at this 0.
This is also going to be and what is the output associated to B?
It is small b.
So we give a small b here.
And what about this 1?
This 1 is going to C. And what is the output associated to C?
It is A. So this 1 will have the output A. And what about this 0?
And this 0 is going to this state B which is associated to the output small b.
So this 0 will have small b.
And look at this 1.
This 1 is going to state A. And what is the output associated to state A?
It is small b.
So this 1 will have small b.
Now this is how you convert it to its equivalent millimachine.
And now you can remove the outputs that were written in the states.
Now we have removed the outputs that were written in the states.
Now this is the equivalent millimachine for our question.
Now let us change even the transition table.
Now here the transition table for our Moore machine is given.
And now let us convert it to the transition table for a millimachine.
So if you are given the transition table, using the transition table, how can you convert
a Moore machine to its millimachine?
Let's see.
So here this is for the Moore machine and we know that in Moore machine the outputs
are associated to the states.
But in case of millimachine the output should be associated to the transitions.
So to do this let's see how we can proceed.
Go to state A. In state A when it gets input 0 it goes to b.
Now we have to associate the output to this transition over here.
To do that here we have b.
So go to the row of state b and check what is the output associated with state b.
It is small b.
So here you give a small b.
And come to the next one.
A on input 1 it goes to a.
And what is the output associated to state a?
It is small b.
So here also I give a small b.
Now let's come to this state b.
On input 0 it goes to b itself.
And what is the output associated to b?
It is small b.
And on input 1 it goes to state c.
And what is the output associated to state c?
Come to state c and look it is a.
So here I'll write a.
And come to the last state that is state c.
On input 0 it goes to b.
And what is the output associated to b?
It is small b.
So I give a small b here.
And c on input 1 goes to a.
And what is the output associated to a?
It is small b.
So we have now associated the outputs to the transition.
And now you can remove this column for output over here.
Now when you remove the column of outputs from that Moore machine and when you associate
the outputs to the transition that becomes a transition table for your Millie machine.
So this is how you convert a Moore machine to its Millie machine.
I've showed you the way how to do it using the transition diagram and also the transition
table.
So I hope it was clear to you.
Thank you for watching and see you in the next one.
Thank you.
Bye.
