Till now we have studied about the conversion of Moore machine to Mealy machines and in
this lecture we will be studying about the conversion of Mealy machine to Moore machine.
So here is our question, convert the following Mealy machine to its equivalent Moore machine.
So here we have a Mealy machine given and our task is to convert it to its equivalent
Moore machine.
So let's look at this and how do we know that this is a Mealy machine?
We see that the outputs are associated to the transitions.
So this makes it clear that this is a Mealy machine.
So we have to convert it to its equivalent Moore machine and listen to this lecture carefully
because this is a little different from the conversion of Moore to Mealy.
So before we start let's see what are our inputs and outputs in this example.
Our inputs are 0's and 1's and our outputs are A and B.
So now we will convert this to its equivalent Moore machine.
So let's see how we can do this.
So first of all we will start with the starting state that is state A.
So here A is my starting state.
So I start with the starting state which is state A and let's see what happens to state
A on getting inputs 0 and 1.
So on input 0 state A goes to state B and what is the output that it gives?
It gives output A.
So let me draw state B over here and state A will go to state B on input 0.
But as this is a Moore machine we cannot associate the output to the transition like this.
We have to associate the output to the states.
So how do we associate the output to the states?
You look at this it is giving an output A and it is going to be.
So what I will do is I will associate the output A to the state B.
So I will give an A over here.
So the output is associated to the state now that is the property of a Moore machine.
Now we have completed this part.
Now A on getting input 1 what happens A on getting input 1 it goes to state C.
So let me draw state C over here.
This is state C and A goes to state C on getting input 1.
And what is the output that it gives?
The output that it gives is A and since it is going to state C I will associate this
output A to state C.
So I will write an A over here.
So we have completed for state A. Now let me come to state B.
State B on input 0 where does it go and on 1 where does it go?
So we see that state B on input 0 it goes to B itself and it gives the output small B.
So if I do it like this if I send B to B itself on input 0 then I have to associate this
B to the state that it goes.
But I already have an A over here.
So I cannot associate that B to this state B. In this kind of condition what you have
to do is you have to make another state, another state of B and let me call it B B and let
me call this one B A. And this will have the output B associated to it.
So now we have created a new state and I can say that B will go to B on input 0.
So this B I will send to this B over here on input 0 and the output it gives is B. So
the output B is associated to this B B over here.
Now let's see B on input 1 what happens to it?
B on input 1 it goes to state C and it should give the output A. So I can send this B to
this state C because this gives the output small A. So that is what I want.
So I will send this B to state C on getting input what 1.
So now we have completed this state B. Now coming to state C. If you look at state C
on input 0 where does it go?
It goes to state B giving an output A. So I can send it to this B over here because
this gives an output A. So I will send C to this B A over here on getting input 0.
Okay now come to this C on input 1 what happens to state C it goes to C itself and the output
associated is B. So I cannot send this C to this C itself because I have to associate
the output B but this C already has an output A associated to it.
So in this case what I have to do I have to create another state for state C which I will
call C B and between this one let me call it C A and I will associate the output B to
this state C. So I have another state created here and C on input 1 will go to the C that
has output B which is this one.
So I will send this state C to this state C B giving the output B when it gets the input
1. Okay so now we have completed for this C A also. So we have completed for this one
this one and this one. So is it complete? No it's not complete. Why? Because we have
created two new states over here and we did not mention what will happen to these two
new states when they get input 0s or 1s. So let's first start with this one B B. On
input 0 what will happen to it? On input 1 what will happen to it? Now how do we do
this? Since this is a B I will use this B itself from the millimachine to calculate
for this B. So let's see B on input 0 what happens? It goes to B itself giving output
small b. So I can send it to this B itself because this B gives the output small b. So
this will go to this B itself on input 0 and on input 1 where does B go? B goes to C giving
an output A. So I have to send this B to a state C which will give output A and where
is that? We have this C over here which gives an output A. So what I will do is I will send
this state B to this state C over here on getting input 1. So we have completed for
this state called B B. Now coming to this state C B what happens to C B? You can check
using the state C over here. On input 0 what happens? On input 0 state C goes to state
B which gives an output A. So which is the state B that gives an output A? It is this
one. So I will send this state C B to this state B A on input 0 and on input 1 what happens?
C stays in C itself giving an output B and which is the state C that gives output B?
It is this one itself. So on input 1 I can send it to itself. So now we have completed
all the states and now we get the equivalent Moore machine for our Mealy machine that was
given here. So one thing that we can notice here is that when we converted from Moore
machine to Mealy machine the number of states were same. Means the number of states in the
Moore machine were equal to the number of states in the Mealy machine that was converted.
And when we converted Mealy machine to Moore machine like this one the number of states
increased. So if you look at this we had 3 states here but in the final Moore machine
that we have we have 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 states. We have an increased number of states. By how
much does the state increase? So let's say that in the Mealy machine we had x number
of states and y number of outputs. So x is the number of states that I have and y is
the number of outputs. Then in the Moore machine that we obtained we could have x into y number
of states at maximum. At a maximum of x into y number of states. So in the Mealy machine
if you had x number of states and if it gives y number of outputs then in the Moore machine
that you convert it could have x into y number of states in total. So this is at maximum.
That means it could have a maximum of this many states. It does not mean that it will
always have this many. In the worst case it may have this many number of states or it
could be lesser than that. So this is how you convert a Mealy machine to its equivalent
Moore machine. You can also draw the transition table for this. It's very easy. Just as we
used to draw for the Moore machine you can draw it using these states. And one thing
that you can notice is that here in this Moore machine that we designed all the states they
have an output associated with it. Like B is having A. This B is having B. This is having
A. This is having B. But what about this A? This A does not have any output associated
with it. And why is that? That is because if you look at the original Mealy machine you
see that this A did not have any incoming edges. It only had outgoing edges. That is
why this A did not get any output associated to it. So in order to just complete it you
can just leave it like this meaning that you could either give an output A or B to this.
It does not matter. So I hope this was clear to you. Thank you for watching and see you
in the next one with more examples.
