In this lecture we will be studying about derivation tree.
A derivation tree or parse tree is an ordered rooted tree that graphically represents the
semantic information of strings derived from a context-free grammar.
So we have already studied about context-free grammar and we have an idea about context-free
grammars and this derivation tree is actually an ordered rooted tree that shows the graphical
representation of how strings can be generated from a context-free grammar.
So it is also known as a parse tree and now we will see an example to understand how this
derivation tree is formed and what are the things that we need to know about a derivation
tree.
Okay, so here we have an example grammar given.
The grammar is given like this G equal to V, T, P and S. So these are the four tuples
of the grammar where V is the variables or non-terminal symbols, T is the terminal symbols,
P is the set of production rules and S is the start symbol and then the production rule
is like this S gives 0, B, A gives 1, A, A and it can also give epsilon or the empty
symbol and B gives 0, A, A. So here S is the start symbol, the variables are B and A and
then the terminal symbols are 0 and 1.
And then for this given grammar here, this is the derivation tree that is formed.
So this is how we form the derivation tree for this grammar.
Okay, so before we go into that, let us know the main things that we need to know about
a derivation tree.
The first one is the root vertex.
The root vertex must be labeled by the start symbol.
So the root vertex is the first vertex of the derivation tree, this one.
So it should be labeled by the start symbol.
Here our start symbol is S, the root vertex is labeled by S and then the next one is the
vertex.
They are labeled by the non-terminal symbols.
So the other nodes, this one, the vertex, these are labeled by the non-terminal symbols
or the variables which are A and B. So wherever you are seeing this A and B, these are the
vertex and then we have the leaves.
They are labeled by the terminal symbols or by epsilon.
So the leaves are the ending nodes or the ending vertices.
Like for example, here we see that this vertex, it's a ending vertex.
Means this vertex does not have any more children.
So those vertices which does not have any children, they are known as the leaves.
So the leaves are labeled by terminal symbols or by epsilon.
So we see that here, this is labeled by 0, this is labeled by 0, this is labeled by 1
and these three are labeled by epsilon.
So this is how we label the different vertices in a derivation tree.
Okay, now let's see how this derivation tree is formed for this grammar.
So first we start with the start symbol which is S and we see that S gives 0 and B.
So we see that S gives 0 and B. These two vertices becomes the children of the root
vertex S and then we have B over here and from B let's see what other productions that
we have.
B can give 0, A, A. So B gives 0, A and A. Okay, and then this is a terminating symbol
or terminal symbol.
So you can leave it as it is and then we have two variables A, A and we see that A gives
1, A, A. So this A, I will say that it gives 1, A, A. So these are the three children of
the vertex A over here and also we see that A gives epsilon.
So here I will just write that this A gives epsilon and then now we are left with two
As here again and since we want to end the derivation tree we will say that A gives epsilon
because we see that A can give epsilon here.
So this is how you form the derivation tree for a given grammar.
Okay, and then there are two types of derivation tree that we need to know that is the left
derivation tree and the right derivation tree.
Now we will see what are the left and right derivation trees and we will try to see some
examples to understand them.
So here we have left derivation tree and right derivation tree.
These are two types of derivation trees and a left derivation tree is obtained by applying
production to the leftmost variable in each step.
Okay, and a right derivation tree is obtained by applying production to the rightmost variable
in each step.
So this will become clear when we take an example.
So it actually means that whenever we are forming a derivation tree if we apply the
production to the leftmost variable in each step and then we move ahead those are known
as left derivation trees whereas in right derivation tree we will apply the production
to the rightmost variables.
So this will become clear when we take this example.
So here we have an example which says for generating the string A A B A A from the grammar
S gives A A S and also A S S and also epsilon and A gives S B A and also B A.
So we have a grammar given here, this is a production of this grammar and then we want
to generate the string A A B A A from this grammar.
So let us see how can we make the derivation tree for this.
So first let us make the left derivation tree for this and then after that we will make
the right derivation tree.
Okay, so we start with the starting symbol which will be the root vertex.
So S is my start symbol which is a root vertex and then as you proceed let's see S can give
the productions A A S and also A S S and also epsilon.
So the string that I want to get is A A B A A.
So in order to get A I will choose the production A S S from here because I am not choosing
this one because if I choose this production I am getting a capital A over here and from
capital A it is difficult to get a A again in the next step and I want to get A even
in the next step that is why I am choosing this one.
So here I will choose this one and so what will be the children that I will get for this
root vertex they will be A S and another S.
Okay, so I get this.
Now this is a terminal symbol so I can leave it as it is and I have two variables over
here S and S.
Now this is a left derivation tree and I have two variables over here from which I can choose
and now since this is a left derivation tree I should always choose the leftmost variable.
So which is the leftmost variable it is this one.
This is to the left of this one this is the leftmost so I will choose this S and let me
see what production should I choose.
I need to get the next symbol as A and for that what is the production of S that I will
take.
I will choose the production S gives A A S and why I am choosing this is because if I
choose this I will get A and then in the next step I need to get B and since I have
a capital letter A over here we see that capital letter A can later give a B so that
is why I am choosing this one.
So this S will give A A and S okay so this is what I get.
Okay now I am in this step and again I have to choose the leftmost variable and which
is the leftmost variable it is A over here.
Now I have A and then what is the next symbol I want it is B small letter B so I already
got A A and I need B.
Now from A if I want to get B what is the production that I can use A gives B A so I
will choose this one so this A will give B and A so I get this one.
Now I am done with this one and there are no more variables in this step so I go back
to the previous step okay so I go back to the previous step and here that I see that
I have a S which is my variable and I already got A A B A now what I need is just one more
A.
Now for that what I will do is I will choose the production S gives A S S that is because
I will get A from here and I will have two S remaining but I can replace those S with
a empty symbol epsilon so this S will give me A S and S okay this is an A okay now we
are done with this and now I already got the string that I needed A A B A A this one and
now I am still having some variables and I need to complete them I cannot just leave
them like this I will again start with the left most which is this one S and what should
I do I don't need anymore symbol so I see that S can give the production epsilon which
is empty symbol so I will say this gives the empty symbol and I come to this one which
is the next this also will give the empty symbol and if I come to the previous level
everything is done and if I come to this level I see there is one S remaining this also will
give epsilon so now we get the string that we needed A A B A A so A A B A A we obtain
this using the left derivation tree okay now let us do the same thing using the right derivation
tree so for that again I will start with the start symbol which is S and I will choose
S gives A SS just like in the previous step A S S okay now since this is the right derivation
tree I have to choose the right most variable in each step so here I have two variables
and which is the right most one it is this one so now I have to start from here and not
from this one like we did here so I will start from the right most I have an S and from S
what will I choose I need I need to get this string so just like we did here I will choose
S gives A A S this one so S gives A A and S okay so I already have two S here and now
I have to again fill up this using the right most variable which is this S and from this S I will
again choose this production A SS A SS the productions we choose are almost same like
the previous example okay now I already got A A and let's say we got this A now I need B A so
in order to get B A I have to choose the production which will give me B A that is A gives B A so
what I will do is I cannot directly go here so I have to complete this so how would I complete
this I don't want any more productions from this S so starting from the right most I will give the
epsilon symbol to this S okay and now I come up to this level and I have an A and I want B A so
A gives B A A gives B and A okay and then this is done and if I come here I see that there is one S
remaining for this also I will give the epsilon symbol now we see that we got the sequence or
string A A B A A so this is how you do it using the right derivation tree
