Till now, in this lecture series, we have been studying about the finite automata,
and under finite automata, we have seen about the finite automata with output and finite automata
without output. In finite automata with output, we have already studied about Moore machine and
Millie machine, and we also studied how to convert one to the other. And under finite automata without
output, we have already studied about DFA and NFA, and we also studied how to convert one to the other.
Now, the only topic that is left in this is Epsilon NFA which we will discuss in this
lecture.
So, let's first try to understand what is this Epsilon NFA.
So, what is this Epsilon?
This symbol right here is called an Epsilon symbol and this Epsilon is used to represent
empty symbols.
So, it is used to represent empty symbols or null symbols.
That means it is used to represent nothing.
Now, that will become clear when we take an example.
But before that, let us try to see how do we define this Epsilon NFA.
So, our regular NFA was defined using five tuples if you remember which were Q, Sigma,
Q naught, Del and F where Q were the set of states, Sigma were the inputs, Q naught
is the initial state, Del is the transition function and F is the set of final states.
So, even in Epsilon NFA, these five tuples are used to define it and Q, Sigma, Q naught
and F are the same as the regular NFA and the only thing that is different is this Del.
So, let us see how is it different.
So, in our regular NFA, Del was defined like this, Q cross Sigma to 2 power Q.
So, this was the transition function Del in case of our regular NFA.
That means any state on getting any input, it could go to any of the 2 power Q states
in that NFA.
So, this was for the regular NFA but in case of Epsilon NFA, what we have is that we have
Union Epsilon over here.
What does this mean?
This means that any state on getting a particular input, it could go to any of the 2 power Q
states or it could also go to no states and also Union Epsilon means that the state on
seeing nothing or on seeing an empty symbol or nothing also could go to one of the states.
So, this will become clear when we take the example.
So, let me draw an Epsilon NFA over here.
Here A is the starting state and we have another state B over here and let us say we have another
state C and D here and D will be my final state.
And A goes to B on getting input 0 and B goes to itself on getting input 1 and B goes to
C on getting the input Epsilon and C goes to D on getting the input 1 and on getting
input 0, C stays in itself.
Alright, so this is Epsilon NFA and how do you recognize it is an Epsilon NFA?
You see that there is an Epsilon symbol used here in a regular NFA, this symbol was not
allowed.
So, what does this mean?
We have A on getting input 0 goes to B and B on getting input 1 stays in B itself and
on getting Epsilon.
Now, what do I mean by getting Epsilon?
It means that B on seeing nothing, even on seeing nothing also it could go to C and then
C on input 0 goes to C itself and on 1 it goes to D.
So, our main focus is on this Epsilon symbol.
This means that B, even if it gets nothing it can go to the next state C.
So that is how the Epsilon NFA works and one thing that you need to remember is that every
state on Epsilon goes to itself.
Let me write it down here.
Every state on Epsilon goes to itself.
Now what do I mean by this?
This means that here we have not mentioned any Epsilon symbol for this A but even if
it is not mentioned you should know that A on getting Epsilon it goes to A itself, B
also on getting Epsilon it goes to B itself and also it goes to C since it is mentioned
here and for C there is nothing mentioned for Epsilon but we should know that C on Epsilon
goes to C itself and on 0 it goes to C and on 1 it goes to D and for D also nothing is
mentioned but you should remember that D on Epsilon goes to D itself.
So every state on Epsilon goes to itself.
This is one more point that you have to remember.
Now I hope that made the concept of Epsilon NFA clear to us and in the next lecture we
will see how to convert an Epsilon NFA to its equivalent NFA.
So I hope this was clear to you.
Thank you for watching and see you in the next one with a conversion example.
