Hello everyone, welcome to the next lecture in the course theory of computation. In the
last lecture we have seen an introduction about the course theory of computation and
in this lecture we will be studying of about some of the prerequisites that is some of
the basic important things that you need to know before starting with our finite state
machine. Alright, so let's get started. So in this lecture we will be studying about
some terms like symbol, alphabet, string, language and even some more that would follow.
We will study what this means and what they are used for. Okay, so let's start with symbol.
So what is a symbol? Anything like A, B, C, 0, 1, 2, 3, anything like this used to represent
something is known as a symbol. It could be anything like A, B, C, 0, 1, 2, 3 and so
on. That is a very simple and the most basic part of it. And let's come to the second one,
alphabet. An alphabet is denoted by sigma and an alphabet is a collection of symbols. A collection
of symbols denoted by sigma is known as alphabets. Okay, so we can take some examples. Some examples
would be example. We can say A, B, C, it's a collection of two symbols A and B or we
could even have more like D, E, F, G, the collection of these four symbols also could
be an alphabet or we could even have numbers like 0, 1, 2 and so on. Okay, so a collection
of symbols denoted by sigma is known as alphabet. Now let's come to this third one, string.
There is a string. A sequence of symbols is known as string. Sequence of symbols. Strings
actually it means a sequence of symbols. Now let's take some examples. Some examples
would be like, let me write it here, A, B just by itself or 0 by itself, 1 by itself.
Okay, just by itself also we can call it a string or we could have other sequences like
A, A, B, B, A, B or 0, 1 and so on. Okay, so a sequence of symbols is known as a string.
Okay, now let's come to the next one, language. Now what is a language? A language is actually
a set of strings. A set of strings, okay, let me just write it nicely, a set of strings.
A set of strings is known as a language and we can have some example over here. This would
become clear with example. Okay, to take an example, let's say that the alphabet that
is here denoted by sigma, the alphabet that I have is the two digits 0 and 1. 0 and 1
are my alphabets and now let's try to define some languages over these alphabets 0, 1. So
let me say I have language L1 which is the set of all strings of length 2, the set of
all strings of length 2. So what would they be? They would be my alphabets are 0 and 1.
So what would be the set of all strings of length 2 over 0, 1? 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0 and 1, 1.
So these are the set of all strings of length 2 over the alphabets 0 and 1. Now let's take
another example, L2. Now L2 is the set of all strings of length 3. Set of all strings
of length 3. Now what would these be? My alphabets are 0 and 1. So what would be the set of all
strings of length 3? I guess you have already thought about it. 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0,
0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1 and 1, 1, 0 and 1, 1, 1. So these are the set of all strings
of length 3 over the alphabets 0 and 1. Okay. Now let me take another example over here
which will be L3. L3 will be the set of all strings of, okay, let us say that it is the
set of all strings that begin with 0. The set of all strings which begins with 0 is L3. So my
alphabets sets are still 0 and 1. So what would they be? They would be like 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1,
0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1 and 0, 0, 0, 0 and it goes on. This is actually an infinite set. So the two
examples that we took here, L1 and L2, these two, L1 and L2, they are finite sets. They are finite
sets. Why? Because they have finite number of elements. Here we have four elements. Here we
have eight elements. But this L3, L3 is an infinite set. It is an infinite language. Why? Because
this goes on. This does not end. There are infinite number of elements in this set. So I think by
taking these examples, L1, L2 and L3 over these alphabets 0 and 1, the concept of language became
clear to us. So language are a set of strings over some alphabets. Okay, so I hope that was clear.
Now the next thing that we need to discuss is known as powers of sigma, powers of sigma. So this is
the next thing that we will be discussing. Okay, now to demonstrate this, let me take an example
again. Suppose my alphabet set is again 0 1. My alphabet sigma is 0 1. Now I'm going to define the
powers of sigma. So first of all, let me define sigma power 0. Now what is sigma power 0? Sigma
power 0 is a set of all strings of length 0. This is equal to the set of all strings
of length of length 0. Now what would this be? I would denote this using sigma power 0 and
this is denoted by a special symbol called epsilon. This epsilon is used to denote
the set of all strings of length 0 denoted by sigma power 0. So remember that epsilon means
it is the set of all strings of length 0. Okay, so that was about a set of all strings of length 0.
Now let us come to the next one, sigma power 1. I think you have already guessed what it is.
Sigma power 1 is a set of all strings of length 1. Now what would that be?
That is sigma power 1 is equal to what would that be? 0 and 1. The set of all strings of length 1
are 0 and 1. Here is 0. The length of this is just 1 and the length of this one is also just 1.
So the oldest set of strings of length 1 is sigma power 1. Okay, so the next one is sigma power 2
which is a set of all strings of length 2. So what would they be? Sigma power 2. I hope you
have already guessed it. They are 0 0, 0 1, 1 0 and 1 1. These are the set of all strings of length
2. See here, 1 2, 1 2, 1 2, 1 2. So these are the set of all strings of length 2 denoted by sigma
power 2. And then the next one is sigma power 3 which is the set of all strings of length
3. Okay, so what would they be? I know you must have guessed it. They are 0 0 0, 0 0 1, 0 1 0,
0 1 1, 1 0 0, 1 0 1, 1 1 0 and 1 1 1. So these are the set of all strings of length
3. See, there are 3, 1 2 3, 1 2 3, 1 2 3 and so on. So these are all the sets of strings of length
3 denoted by sigma power 3. And then it goes on like that and then it comes to sigma power n. Sigma
power n is the set of all strings of length. What would be the length? What would be the length?
The length would be n. Sigma power n would be the set of all strings of length n. Okay, so that was
about the powers of sigma, sigma power 1 2 3 up to n. So the next term that we need to discuss is
known as cardinality. Cardinality. So I hope you already some of you may already know what is
meaning of cardinality. Cardinality actually it means the number of elements in a set.
Number of elements in a set. This is known as cardinality. So let us quickly check what are the
cardinality of these powers of sigma. So sigma power 0 has only one element. So the cardinality is
1 and in sigma power 1 there are two elements 1 2. So the cardinality is 2 and for sigma power 2
it is 4 1 2 3 4 and for sigma power 3 it is 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8. The cardinality is 8 and what about
sigma power n? In sigma power n it is a set of all strings of length n. So what would be the
cardinality? The cardinality of sigma power n would be the cardinality of sigma power n would be
2 power n. So this is the formula that is followed for the cardinality if the
alphabet is over 2 digits just 0 and 1. So for the sigma power n the cardinality is 2 power n.
Okay so let's come to the last term that we need to discuss that is sigma star.
Sigma star. So in this sigma star the star can be replaced with sigma power 0 union,
sigma power 1 union, sigma power 2 union, sigma power 3 and so on. It goes on. So let us put
the values here and see what would we get. Sigma power 0 what is it? We have seen here already.
Sigma power 0 is epsilon. Sigma power 1 is 0 1. Sigma power 2 is 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 and so on.
So let us put it over here. Sigma power 0 is just epsilon union sigma power 1 what is it?
It is 0 1 union sigma power 2 is 0 0 0 1 1 0 and 1 1 and union sigma power 3 we know it is this
one so it goes on like this. So what are these? This can be represented or written as the set of
all possible strings of all lengths over 0 1. It is the set of all possible strings
of all lengths of all lengths over what alphabet? 0 and 1. So this sigma power star is the set of
all possible strings of all lengths over 0 and 1. Okay so since we have taken our alphabet as 0 1
so that is where we have written over 0 1. So depending on the kind of alphabet that you take
you have to write this. So can you guess whether this is a finite set or an infinite set? Yes I
hope you have guessed it right this is an infinite set because this goes on. Okay so those were the
prerequisites or some of the basic important things that you need to know before starting
with our finite state machines. So if you have understood this we are ready to start with our
finite state machines which we will be starting in the next lecture. So see you in the next one. Thank you.
