Till now we have seen few types of grammars and we have also seen how our strings generated
from the given grammar.
Okay, now the question is if you are given a grammar and if you are given a string then
how do you find out whether that given string belongs to that grammar or not.
So in this lecture we will be studying the method to find out whether a string belongs
to a grammar or not.
So let us see the steps that we need to follow in order to do this.
So here are the steps.
Step number one, start with the start symbol and choose the closest production that matches
to the given string.
So we start with the start symbol and we choose the production from the grammar that matches
closest to the given string.
Alright and then the second step says replace the variables with its most appropriate production
and repeat the process until the string is generated or until no other productions are
left.
So we replace the variables.
Variables are the non-terminal symbols.
So we replace them with their most appropriate production that will match the given string
and then we will repeat the process until the string that we require is generated or
until no other productions are left.
Okay, so these are the steps that we need to follow to find out whether a string belongs
to a grammar or not.
Alright, so now let's take an example to understand this.
Okay, so here we have an example.
It says verify whether the grammar, this one, generates the string 00110101.
So we have a grammar given here, actually this is the production of the grammar that
is given.
That is S gives 0B and also 1A and A gives 0 and it can also give 0S, it can also give
1AA and can also give the null symbol.
This is same as the epsilon symbol and B can give 1S and 0BB.
So this is the production of our grammar and we have to check whether this string given
here belongs to this grammar or not.
Means if the grammar given here can generate this string or not.
Okay, so let's see if this string can be generated by this grammar or not.
The first step says start with the start symbol.
So we start with the start symbol and here S is our start symbol.
So S is the start symbol and let us see what is the string that we need.
We need this string and then the first symbol in our string is 0.
So in order to get 0, what production of S can we use?
So we see that S can give 0B and also 1A.
So if I choose this 1A, 1 will be the first symbol but I don't want that.
But if I choose 0B, I will get 0 as the first symbol and that is what I want to generate
this string.
So I will choose 0B.
So this is from the production which says S gives 0B.
Now let's continue.
Now we got this 0 over here.
Now we need one more 0.
So for that, this 0 let me write it down and now the variable that we have is B.
Now from B, in order to get 0, what is the production that we can use?
So B has these three productions over here and B gives 0BB.
This is the production that I need to use in order to get a 0.
So 0BB.
This is by using the production which says B gives 0BB.
Alright now let's continue.
Now we have already got the second 0.
Now I need to get a 1 and the variables I have are B and B.
This 0, 0 let me copy them down as they are.
Now in order to get 1, what is the production of B that I should use?
So here we see that B gives 1 over here.
So this B over here, I will replace it with 1 and this B let me just write it down as
it is.
So this is using the production B gives 1, this one.
So this B gives 0BB and B gives 0BB and B gives 0BB and B gives 0BB and B gives 0BB.
So this B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives
0B.
So this B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives
0B.
So this B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B.
So this B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives
0B.
So this B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B and
B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B.
So this B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives
0B.
So this B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives
0B.
So this B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives 0B and B gives
1B and B gives 0B.
But if I choose this one, my string will end but I cannot end my string, so I will choose
this one where it gives 1 followed by a variable S.
So I will replace this B with 1S.
So this is using the production which says B gives 1S.
Now moving on, we got this one over here, that means we got this one.
So let me copy this down 0 0 1 1 0 1 and I have S and I need to get 0 so in order to
get 0 from S I need to choose this production which says S gives 0 B so this S will be replaced
by 0 B okay so this is using the production which says S gives 0 B okay and then moving
on we already got this 0 over here now the next symbol that I need is a 1 and then the
variable that I have is B so 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 and I have B and I need to get 1 so what
will be the production that I will use B gives 1 I can use this production now because this
is the last symbol so I will use the production which says B gives 1 so I will replace this
B by 1 so this is using the production which says B gives 1 now we see that we have got
the string 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 1 which is same as this now we see that using this grammar the
production of this grammar we could generate the string 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 1 so from this it is clear
that this string belongs to this grammar or this string can be generated using this grammar okay here
we have another example this says verify whether the grammar S gives AAB and A gives AAB and the
empty string generates the string AABBB so if you remember we have used this grammar in the previous
lecture so let's see if this grammar can generate this string AABBB okay so according to our rules
we start with the starting symbol S and S will give AAB okay now I got this A and I need one more
A for that what should I do here I see that the variable I have is A and in order to get a small
A from this capital A what should I do I should use this production where A gives AAB so I will
replace this A with AAB so this A comes on as it is and instead of this A I will write AAB
and this B will come down as it is so this is using the production which says A gives AAB okay now
moving on I have another variable here A and then I got AA and now what I need is I need
BBB and I already have two B's here I just need one more B over here so in order to do that
the only variable I have here is A and A can give only AAB and this empty symbol so if I choose
the empty symbol what will happen if I choose the empty symbol it will become like this AABB
this is if I choose A gives the empty symbol but this is not the string that we need okay so
instead of that from here if I choose A to give AAB this is the only other production that A has
so what will happen this two A's come down as they are instead of A I will write AAB and this
two B's two B's comes down as they are and this is using the production A gives AAB now I still
have a variable remaining here which is A and I need to get rid of that so in order to get rid of
that I will use the production which says A gives the empty symbol so it will be AABB
this is using the production which says A gives the empty symbol now I see that I am getting three
B's as I wanted but I am also getting three A's which I don't want I only wanted two A's so we see
that however you replace this with whatever productions of this grammar you are not going to
get a string of this form AABB so we see that this string does not belong to this grammar or
this string cannot be generated using this grammar okay so this is how you find out whether a string
belongs to a particular grammar or not so I hope that was clear to you thank you for watching and
see you in the next one
