Lecture 8 Freedom of the Press
The text of the First Amendment specifically guarantees freedom of the press, but this
is another instance where the language of the Constitution obscures as much as it illuminates.
In fact, as I mentioned in the first lecture, it is a fairly common misperception that the
First Amendment affords special privileges for the press and the media.
Generally speaking, that is not true.
The Court typically does not distinguish between freedom of speech and freedom of the press,
and abridgments of freedom of the press are routinely assessed using the same analytical
tools and frameworks the Court uses in speech cases.
Indeed, in a 1991 case called Cohen vs. Cowell's Media, Justice White observed, and I quote,
Generally applicable laws do not offend the First Amendment simply because their enforcement
against the press has incidental effects upon its ability to gather and report the news.
Enforcement of such general laws against the press is not subject to stricter scrutiny
than would be applied against other persons or organizations.
Difficulties of definition have been one obvious reason why the Court has not developed a
separate body of First Amendment jurisprudence just for the press.
How are we to decide who is a member of the press, entitled to some special First Amendment
status, and who is not?
No doubt, a full-time political correspondent for the New York Times would qualify, but what
about a part-time reporter from the Podunk Post, which boasts proudly that it publishes
all of the news fit to print, whether or not it is newsworthy, when and if it feels like
doing so, from time to time as it occasionally sees fit?
My apologies if you are a resident of one of the several places in the United States
that are actually called Podunk.
I'm sure you've already begun to think of some other definitional problems too.
Should freedom of the press extend to art critics or restaurant reviews?
Or do we limit it to press about politics or matters of broad public concern?
Behind this question, you will know, is a fundamental issue we've already encountered
in several lectures.
Should the press clause of the First Amendment offer special protection for political speech
only?
Such questions push us back again to first principles, to questions about why we protect
freedom of speech, or of the press, at all.
Consider another definitional problem.
What forms of publication count as the press?
No one doubts that newspapers qualify.
But what about other kinds of published materials?
In Lovell v. City of Griffin, a case decided by the Supreme Court in 1938, Chief Justice
Hughes defined the press, and I quote, as every sort of publication which affords a
vehicle of information and opinion.
In 1938, this meant that the press included newspapers and periodicals, as well as pamphlets
and leaflets.
But the court also said, and I quote, the press in its historic connotation comprehends
every sort of publication which affords a vehicle of information and opinion.
So should we extend freedom of the press to radio or television newscasters?
And again, if we do, should it include meteorologists, traffic reporters, sportscasters?
I'm not sure about where you live, but where I am, there's not actually all that much
news in the local news programs.
On the other hand, I need to know what the weather is, and I do need to know what the
traffic is.
What do we do about self-publishers, bloggers, and other kinds of citizen reporters, often
self-appointed?
Should the First Amendment demand some kind of distinction between the professional press
and amateurs?
The well-known journalist AJ Liebling once remarked, freedom of the press is guaranteed
only to those who own one.
Nowadays, however, it may indeed be the case that everyone can own a press.
These problems of definition, not only concerning what is the press, but also who is the press
themselves raise an important, if not fundamental, question.
Who will decide what the press is and who qualifies as a member of it?
If the answer is that anyone who wants to be a member of the press is in fact a member
of the press, then have we collapsed the distinction between freedom of speech and freedom of the
press?
In addition, as we will see soon, there are likely to be profound practical difficulties
with this approach as well.
But what is the alternative?
Should the government itself be in the business of deciding who is the press, perhaps by licensing
newspapers or other media outlets?
Isn't that a peculiar definition of press freedom?
On the other hand, the government does in fact license certain kinds of broadcasters,
so the idea may not be all that strange.
Given all of these difficulties, why did the founders single out the press in the First
Amendment?
We might think of two possible answers to this question.
First, as any student of English and American colonial history well knows, the long struggle
for freedom has often implicated the right of citizens to publish materials for a wide
audience.
In light of this history of press censorship, it might not seem so unusual for the founders
to want to guarantee freedom of the press in particular.
Second, we might think the press as an institution has an important, if not unique, role to play
in preserving the vitality of a democratic form of government.
As Justice Potter Stewart once asserted in a speech at the Yale Law School, the primary
purpose of the constitutional guarantee of a free press was to create a fourth institution
outside the government as an additional check on the three official branches.
Order to recognize this, Justice Stewart added, is, and I quote, an elementary error
of constitutional law.
On this approach, freedom of the press is an important structural component of representative
self-government, in large part because the press serves the checking function we talked
about in lecture one.
The press aids and advances the project of public deliberation by holding government
to account.
Think of the press as whistleblower.
Both of these explanations for a press clause in the First Amendment might suggest that
the court should carve out a special place for the media under the First Amendment.
But note, the special place of the press might not mean, necessarily, that the press should
be given special or additional protections.
It might as easily mean that the press, just because it has a unique role and obligation,
also has unique responsibilities and should be subject to rules that ensure that it discharges
those obligations.
All of these difficulties have conspired to create a history of judicial interpretation
that does not, in fact, generally distinguish between freedom of speech and freedom of the
press, which might lead us to ask, as has one student of the First Amendment, is freedom
of the press a redundancy?
Even if this is the case, even if the press clause of the First Amendment holds no special
meaning to the court, it is nevertheless true that the jurisprudence of the First Amendment
is rich with cases that involve the press and the media.
And by looking at some of those cases, we will enrich our understanding of the protections
offered by the First Amendment.
Indeed, we have already discussed some important press cases, including the Pentagon Papers
case, involving questions of prior restraint on the press, and New York Times vs. Sullivan,
which you'll recall involved liability for defamatory publications.
In this lecture, I plan to take up three issues in particular.
First, we will look at an issue that has a direct and obvious relationship to the question
of whether the press has or should have a special status under the First Amendment.
Do journalists have a special privilege to withhold information or to refuse to disclose
information or to protect their sources from official inquiries?
Secondly, we will consider when and under what circumstances the media ought to have
a right of access to the criminal justice system.
And third, we will explore a question prompted by concerns like the one suggested in the
A.J. Liebling quote I used earlier.
Should the First Amendment provide citizens with a right of access to the media?
Implicit in this third topic may be the sense that the unique role of the press in making
self-government possible may also expose it to unique obligations as well as unique freedoms.
Let's start with the question of press privilege.
And once again, let's imagine a hypothetical case.
Imagine you are a reporter for a leading newspaper.
One day you receive an urgent message from a long-standing, highly-placed informant in
the White House.
The informant tells you that the wife of a special envoy sent by the White House to
investigate whether one of our enemies was purchasing weapons-grade uranium is in fact
an employee of the Central Intelligence Agency.
You choose not to publish the information about the envoy's wife, but in due course
a colleague at another newspaper does publish it.
Publication of that information leads to an internal investigation by the White House
to find the source, an FBI investigation, a special prosecutor, and finally to a grand
jury, which is subpoenaed you.
The grand jury demands that you divulge your source.
You in turn resist, claiming that you have a reporter's privilege to protect your source.
A case somewhat similar to the hypothetical one I just described resulted in a reporter
from the New York Times, Judith Miller, being sentenced for contempt of court and spending
12 weeks in jail.
Miller appealed the citation of contempt to a federal court, and in a case called In-Ray
Grand Jury subpoena versus Judith Miller, decided in 2005 the appellate court declined
to overturn the finding of civil contempt against Miller.
The appellate court could not come to an agreement about whether there is a common law privilege
for journalists, but the judges did all agree that, quote, if there is any such privilege,
it is not absolute and may be overcome by an appropriate showing by the government.
But much of the lower court's analysis was directed to an examination of the Supreme
Court's cases that addressed the question of whether the First Amendment itself creates
such a privilege.
The leading case on this question is Brandsburg v. Hayes, which was decided in 1972.
In Brandsburg, the Supreme Court upheld the convictions of three reporters who had refused
to disclose certain information to a grand jury.
In one case, the information sought by the grand jury pertained to illegal drug use
in the state of Kentucky.
In the other two cases, the grand juries sought information about the Black Panthers,
with whom the reporters had conducted several interviews.
All three reporters claim that the First Amendment gives journalists a qualified privilege to
withhold certain kinds of information, a privilege that may only be overcome if a reporter has
information about a specific crime that was not available from any other source.
Speaking for a sharply divided five to four court, Justice White wrote that the petitioners
were asking the court, quote, to grant newsmen a testimonial privilege that other citizens
do not enjoy.
This we decline to do.
White went on to assert, and again I quote, that reporters like other citizens must respond
to relevant questions put to them in the course of a valid grand jury investigation or criminal
trial.
In response to the reporter's argument that refusing to recognize such a privilege would
undermine the ability of the press to gather the news, Justice White conceded, and again
I quote, that without some protection for seeking out the news, freedom of the press
could be eviscerated.
But Justice White also concluded that the denial of a privilege did not actually impose
much of a burden on the ability to gather the news, noting that, and I quote, from the
beginning of our country, the press has operated without constitutional protection for press
informants, and the press has flourished.
Now, read uncritically.
The majority opinion in Brandsburg seems fairly insistent and clear that the First Amendment
does not create a press privilege.
For most students of the First Amendment, however, the message of Brandsburg is less
obvious.
This is chiefly because, in his important concurring opinion, Justice Powell viewed the
matter in less absolute terms.
According to Justice Powell, there might, in fact, be a limited press privilege in cases
where a grand jury desires information, and I quote Justice Powell, bearing only a remote
and tenuous relationship to the subject of the investigation, or if the reporter has some
other reason to believe that his testimony implicates confidential source relationships
without a legitimate need of law enforcement.
Thus, in Justice Powell's view, and here again I need to quote him at some length, the asserted
claim to privilege should be judged on its facts by the striking of a proper balance
between freedom of the press and the obligation of all citizens to give relevant testimony
with respect to criminal conduct.
The balance of these vital constitutional and societal interests on a case-by-case basis
accords with the tried and traditional way of adjudicating such questions.
The generally accepted meaning of Brandsburg, that there might, in fact, be a journalist
privilege, albeit a limited and narrow one, depends in part upon a close reading not only
of Justice Powell's opinion, but also of the dissents in Brandsburg.
All four of the dissenting justices were prepared to find a privilege of some sort.
Justice Douglas, for example, argued loudly for an absolute privilege, saying, and I quote,
in my view, a newsman has an absolute right not to appear before a grand jury.
It follows for me that a journalist who voluntarily appears before that body may invoke his first
amendment privilege to specific questions.
Justice's Stuart Brennan and Marshall also dissented, noting that the subpoena power of
grand juries can impose a significant impediment to the process of gathering news.
Justice Stuart proposed a three-part test that would yield a significant, though not
an absolute privilege.
If you're following closely, you'll see then that there appear to be five votes in favor
of some sort of privilege, the four dissents and Justice Powell's concurring opinion.
The court has never elaborated on Brandsburg, but lower courts have occasionally recognized
this very limited privilege.
In another significant case, Zercher v. Stanford Daily decided in 1978 the court upheld the
constitutionality of a search warrant issued to conduct a search of a newspaper office
for photographs the newspaper had taken of a demonstration at the Stanford University
Hospital.
The paper argued that searches of newspaper offices for evidence of a crime would jeopardize
the ability of the press to gather, analyze, and disseminate the news.
The court was not persuaded, concluding instead, and I quote, properly administered, the preconditions
for a warrant, probable cause, specificity with respect to the place to be searched and
the things to be seized, and overall reasonableness, should afford sufficient protection against
the harms that are assertedly threatened by warrants for searching newspaper offices.
Partly in response to the Zercher case, Congress in 1980 passed the Privacy Protection Act,
which is legislation that prohibits searches of journalists and newsrooms, except in exceptional
cases.
Brandsburg involved the journalist's privilege to protect a confidential source.
What if a journalist voluntarily gives up a source instead?
In the interesting case of Cohen versus Cowell's media, decided in 1991, and which I mentioned
in passing just a few minutes ago, the court was presented with just that issue.
The case involved Dan Cohen, who worked with the Republican Party in the state of Minnesota.
In exchange for a promise of confidentiality, Cohen had leaked certain information to two
reporters about the arrest record of a Democrat running for office.
The papers decided that Cohen's identity was more newsworthy than the information he
had leaked to the reporters, and so ran a story in which they included the arrest information
and in which they, quote, burned the source.
In other words, they published Cohen's name and revealed him as the source.
Cohen was fired, whereupon he sued the newspaper for breach of contract.
The newspaper insisted that it was immune from such a lawsuit by virtue of the First
Amendment.
Speaking for a five to four majority, Justice White rejected this claim, again concluding,
as had the court in Brandsburg, that the media was entitled to no special status under the
First Amendment.
This is a good place to stop, I think, and to ask ourselves whether or not the Brandsburg
Cohen line of cases can be squared with New York Times versus Sullivan.
The first two cases, after all, seemed to insist that there is no special protection
for the press, but New York Times versus Sullivan, on the other hand, does establish special
rules regarding defamation.
What's the difference?
I think the court's answer would be that, in fact, the Sullivan decision did not offer
any special protection for the press, but instead carved out a rule concerning a particular
kind or category of speech.
So far, we've been addressing the topic of press privilege, or newspaper reporter's
privilege.
Let's now turn to our second topic, which concerns when and under what circumstances
the press ought to have a right of access to the criminal justice system.
It's important that we remember that, for the founders, press coverage of trials, both
mundane and sensational, was a precondition of democratic self-governance.
Unfortunately, we do not have the time in this course to explore the history of jury
trials, much less their overwhelming significance and importance in the ratification debates
over the new constitution.
But suffice it to say that the institution of the jury was central to the idea that justice
must be public and that it must be accountable to the public.
Press coverage of trials is an important guarantor of that accountability.
But it is also the case that sometimes, at least, the public's undoubted appetite for
the sensational and the lurid, and the eagerness of the press to feed it, risks compromising
our commitment to other basic constitutional norms and values.
Among those commitments is the guarantee of a fair trial to a criminal defendant enshrined
in the Sixth Amendment.
In the words of Justice Black, writing in Bridges vs. California, a case decided by
the Supreme Court in 1941, free speech and fair trials are two of the most cherished
policies of our civilization, and it would be a trying task to choose between them.
So what are we to do if the First Amendment conflicts with the Sixth?
It won't do simply to pretend that such conflicts will never occur.
The next trial of the century is surely just around the corner, and we know from all of
the previous trials of the century, the Shepherds, the Lindbergs, the Simpsons, that such trials
are both newsworthy and lucrative.
Well one approach is to try to be as clear and as precise about the nature and dimensions
of the potential conflict as is possible.
For instance, sometimes the tension between the First and Sixth Amendments arises because
of the possibility that extensive pre-trial publicity will make a fair trial impossible.
This was precisely the issue confronting the Court in the notorious case of Shepard vs.
Maxwell, decided in 1966.
In this case, the Supreme Court reversed the conviction of Dr. Sam Shepard for murdering
his pregnant wife.
Shepard had claimed that his wife was killed by a bushy-haired man who also attacked him
and knocked him unconscious.
If the facts sound vaguely familiar, the Shepard murder became the inspiration for the
long-running television series, The Fugitive, starring David Jansen as Richard Kimball,
a doctor from the fictional town of Stafford, Indiana, who was falsely convicted of his
wife's murder and sentenced to death.
Name Richard Kimball.
Profession Doctor of Medicine.
Destination Death Row State Prison.
Now you know why I am a college professor and not a voiceover guy for the radio.
The Fugitive was a great television show, much, much better than the movie version with
Harrison Ford and Tommy Lee Jones.
But I digress.
The issue in Shepard vs. Maxwell was whether the extraordinary pre-trial publicity had
so polluted the administration of justice that it violated Shepard's Sixth Amendment
rights.
Writing for an 8-to-1 majority, Justice Tom Clark concluded that the extensive pre-trial
publicity, which included salacious information about Shepard's sexual life, doctored photographs
and reports about evidence in the case that did not even exist, had produced a carnival-like
atmosphere that made a fair trial impossible.
The court wrote and I quote, we believe that the arrangements made by the judge with the
news media caused Shepard to be deprived of that judicial serenity and calm to which
he was entitled.
The fact is that Bedlam reigned at the courthouse during the trial and newsmen took over practically
the entire courtroom hounding most of the participants in the trial, especially Shepard.
Justice Clark further observed, and I quote him again, that the carnival atmosphere at
the trial could easily have been avoided since the courtroom and courthouse premises are
subject to the control of the court.
Clark suggested that the trial judge might have adopted stricter rules or even limited
the number of news reporters in the courtroom.
The Shepard court made clear that a trial judge does have a responsibility to preserve
a decorous and dignified atmosphere in a courtroom and that trial judges have a number
of tools available to them to guarantee a fair trial.
Among these tools are the options of the judge to delay or to continue the proceedings
until passions have calmed, to participate actively in the questioning of prospective
jurors and even to change the venue of the trial if necessary.
It is important to note that none of these tools actually necessitates or directly involves
the suppression of information or news.
In the case of Bridges v. California, however, from which I quoted a little earlier, the
court considered whether a trial judge could issue a contempt citation against a newspaper
for publishing certain information about a case that was still pending.
Writing for a 5 to 4 majority, Justice Black concluded that the citation was unconstitutional
and could not be justified under the First Amendment, absent a showing that the publication
itself constituted a clear and present danger to the fair administration of justice.
A judicial order like the one in Bridges, forbidding the publication of certain information, is commonly
called a gag order.
The leading case on gag orders was decided in 1976.
In Nebraska Press Association v. Stewart, the Supreme Court unanimously ruled that a
gag order banning the publication of an alleged confession by the defendant was unconstitutional.
The case began when Erwin Simmons murdered six members of a family in the small town
of Sutherland, Nebraska.
While in custody, Simmons was alleged to have confessed to the murders.
The trial was notorious and attracted extensive publicity.
The trial court, upon a motion by defense attorneys and the prosecution, issued an order
barring the press from reporting the fact of Simmons' confession, noting, and I quote,
that because of the nature of the crimes charged in the complaint, there is a clear and present
danger that pre-trial publicity could impinge upon the defendant's right to a fair trial.
Writing for the Supreme Court, Chief Justice Warren Berger began by noting that prior restraints
on speech and publication are the most serious and least tolerable infringement on First
Amendment rights, especially when dealing with communication of news and commentary
on current events.
Berger then noted that it was inappropriate to bar the media from reporting on a criminal
case prior to the trial itself, except in matters where a quote, clear and present danger
existed that the ban would impede the process of a fair trial.
In particular, the court noted, a gag order would be unconstitutional under the First
Amendment unless a trial judge had made three specific findings.
First, the trial court must hold a hearing to establish the likelihood of intense and
prejudicial pre-trial publicity.
Second, the trial court must investigate whether there are alternative mechanisms short of
a prior restraint on publication that could protect the defendant's rights.
Third, the trial judge must also conclude that the restraint or the gag order will actually
be effective in helping to control prejudicial publicity.
The Nebraska Press Rule is not an absolute bar to pre-trial gag orders, but it is fair
to conclude that such orders are presumptively unconstitutional and, in fact, such orders
are rarely upheld on appeal.
In addition to gag orders, courts sometimes also issue what we call closure orders or
orders that ban the press from trials altogether.
So let's look at the constitutionality of that practice.
May a trial court, in the interest of securing a defendant's Sixth Amendment right to a
fair trial, bar the press from a courtroom altogether, or from having access to the documents
filed in the course of a trial?
The constitutionality of closure orders involves profound and complex issues.
Let's consider some specific examples.
Should the press have access to the courtroom during the testimony of a rape victim?
What if the victim is a child?
Should the press have access to documents that might compromise the confidentiality or secrecy
of ongoing law enforcement investigations of criminal activity?
These I am sure you will agree are difficult and sensitive questions.
The most important case on this issue is Richmond Newspapers Incorporated vs. Virginia, decided
in 1980.
The Richmond case sprang from a murder trial of a defendant whose three earlier trials
had been reversed or declared mistrials.
The trial court judge, expressing concern about pretrial publicity and relying upon a state
statute that permitted him to exclude the press, granted the defendant's motion to exclude
the press from the trial.
Seven justices on the Supreme Court concluded that implicit in the First Amendment is a
public right of access to trials.
In part, an implied right of access follows from a proper understanding of history and
from the likelihood that openness in trials will be a corrective to the possibility of
bias and partiality.
Interestingly, Chief Justice Berger, writing for the plurality, also suggested that public
trials advance to other legitimate public interests.
One therapeutic, in the sense of providing an outlet for a community's sense of anger
and hostility, and one educational, in the sense of teaching citizens about the nature
and functioning of the justice system.
Finally, Chief Justice Berger concluded that the public's right of access may be overcome
only where a trial judge, based on specific findings, has concluded that there is an overriding
interest in closing the trial.
This raises an obvious question.
What might be an example of such an overriding interest?
In Globe Newspaper Company v. Superior Court, decided in 1982, the court considered the
constitutionality of a Massachusetts statute that required the exclusion of the general
public from trials of certain sexual offenses when they involved victims under the age of
18.
In the case at hand, the trial judge ordered the exclusion of the press and public during
the trial of a defendant charged with raping three young girls.
The Supreme Court had little difficulty finding the blanket exclusion statute unconstitutional
under the First Amendment.
Restating the logic of the Richmond case, the court again concluded that the First Amendment
guarantees a right of access to criminal trials because trials have historically been open
to the press and public, and because a right of access plays a significant role in the
functioning of the judicial process.
On the other hand, the court, speaking through Justice Brennan, did modify the Richmond standard.
Justice Brennan concluded that the right of access cannot be overcome unless the state
can demonstrate a compelling governmental interest and show that that exclusion is narrowly tailored
to serve that interest.
I'm sure you will recognize that test.
In this case, Massachusetts argued that it had two compelling interests.
The first was its interest in protecting minor victims of sex crimes from further trauma
and embarrassment.
The second was its compelling interest in encouraging such victims to come forward and to testify
in a truthful and credible manner.
This latter interest was not compelling, the court concluded, because there was no evidence
to suggest that closure orders would in fact encourage victims to cooperate.
The first interest was also not compelling, in part because a blanket ban could not be
said to be narrowly tailored.
This at least suggests that a more narrowly tailored ban might sometimes meet with constitutional
approval.
Is the public's right of access to criminal trials crafted in cases like Richmond and
Globe suggest that there ought to be a First Amendment right to have courtroom proceedings
televised generally?
In the case of Chandler v. Florida from 1981, the Supreme Court considered an appeal by
two men who complained that television coverage had violated their right to a fair trial.
The court disagreed, holding that the Constitution does not prohibit a state from televising
trials.
As a consequence, the question of whether trials in state courts can be televised is
a matter of state law.
By way of contrast, the Supreme Court has never allowed live electronic media of its
own proceedings, and one justice, David Souter, has remarked that if the court does allow cameras,
they will quote, have to roll over my dead body.
The court does, however, post opinions and transcripts of oral arguments on its website.
Now that we've examined the topics of press privilege and journalistic access to the criminal
justice system, let's turn to our third and final topic.
This topic also concerns rights of access, but this time in a very different context.
Should the First Amendment provide citizens with a right of access to the media?
Again, this formulation of the question may be too broad, or may require us to be more
specific about definitions.
The court appears, for example, to distinguish between a right of access to broadcast media
and a right of access to print media.
The former of the court has sometimes explained is a scarce or limited resource, although
one may wonder if this will still be the case as new broadcast technologies continue to
emerge.
In the important case of Red Lion Broadcasting Company versus Federal Communications Commission,
decided by the court in 1969, the court addressed the constitutionality of the well-known Fairness
Doctrine.
The Fairness Doctrine required that a broadcast licensee must provide a balanced presentation
of controversial subjects of public importance.
A similar rule, the personal attack rule, required that where a person was the subject
of a personal attack, the broadcaster must supply an equivalent amount of time for a
reply.
In the Red Lion case, the court upheld both rules against a constitutional challenge.
The case started when conservative evangelist Billy James Hargis attacked a prominent investigative
journalist named Fred J. Cook on his daily Christian Crusade radio broadcast, which was
broadcast on WGCB in Red Lion, Pennsylvania.
Cook sued, arguing that under the Fairness Doctrine, he was entitled to free airtime
to respond to the attack.
In an opinion by Justice White, the court noted that broadcast licensees are trustees
for the public at large.
As a consequence, Justice White wrote, and I quote him,
It is the right of the viewers and listeners, not the right of the broadcasters, which is
paramount.
The purpose of the First Amendment, the court observed, is to preserve an uninhibited marketplace
of ideas in which truth will ultimately prevail, rather than to countenance monopolization
of that market, whether it be by the government itself or a private licensee.
Absent Affairness Doctrine, the court continued, station owners and a few networks would be
able to make time available only to high bidders, and I quote, to communicate only their own
views on public issues or permit on air only those with whom they agreed.
As I hope you can see, an important element in the court's opinion in Red Lion was the
limited nature of the broadcast medium itself.
The scarcity of the resource makes the fear of monopolization more prominent, and this
in turn justifies greater regulation of the medium.
A final note on the fairness doctrine, since I suspect many of you will know of it, although
the court could find no real constitutional objection to it in Red Lion, the Federal Communications
Commission rescinded the fairness rule in 1987, noting, and I quote from its rescission
order,
The First Amendment was adopted to protect people not from journalists, but from government.
I wonder how far this logic might run.
Let's compare the court's decision in the Red Lion case with the opinion it delivered
in a subsequent case, Miami Herald Publishing Company vs. Tornillo, which was decided in
1974.
This time, the court struck Florida's right of reply law, which had provided that a newspaper
that published an attack on the personal character of a candidate for public office had to provide
equal space for a response.
So far there doesn't appear to be much difference between the statute involved in Red Lion and
the statute involved in Tornillo.
Nevertheless, the court advanced two reasons for holding the right of reply statute in
Florida unconstitutional.
First, the court reasoned that the cost of such a requirement might inhibit newspapers
from commenting on candidates at all, which would actually reduce or limit public debate
and discussion.
Second, the court worried about the intrusion of such a requirement into the process of
editorial decision making itself, which is presumably entitled to some degree of First
Amendment protection.
Is the different result in Tornillo primarily a function of the different forms of media
print in this instance versus broadcast in the Red Lion case?
Perhaps instead, it signals a more fundamental difference in philosophy between an approach
that sees government as a threat to speech and one that sees government as a guarantor
of diversity in public discourse.
In sum, the press clause of the First Amendment is probably not, as at least one scholar has
suggested, a mere redundancy.
But neither does it provide the basis for a strong or expansive set of freedoms that
the press and the press alone can claim.
Instead, for the most part, the First Amendment makes no meaningful distinction between freedom
of speech and freedom of the press.
I wonder, in an age when almost anyone can publish almost anything on the internet by
blogging or by tweeting, is the court's unwillingness to make a clear distinction between freedom
of speech and freedom of the press a good thing, or is it an elementary constitutional error?
