I've always been rather fond of books. In fact, I think they're just about the most
important things we've ever created, the building blocks of our civilization.
So when someone suggested a journey in search of the genius who invented the printing press,
I jumped at the chance. My lord, is this it? This is it?
This was the man who launched the first media revolution and opened the door to the modern
age. But his story is shrouded in mystery. So to get closer to him, we also decided to
stage an experiment and build our own medieval printing press.
So beautiful. That meant getting to grips with the tools
and technology of the 15th century. And actually making some of the ingredients with
by own bare hands. This takes me back to the art room at school,
where I was always a dunderhead. As it turned out, that was the most revealing
bit of all. I feel connected to Gutenberg somehow just by doing this.
So here it is then, the slightly more hands-on than I expected story of Johannes Gutenberg
and his marvelous machine.
Well, if you're anything like as old as me, you may well remember this, the John Bull
printing outfit made in England. This was when I got my first experience of how printing
works really. And simple as it is, these little rubber bits here tell you all you need to
know about printing with movable type. You've got ink. There it is. Oh, I'm going to get
my fingers dirty already. There are lots of different letters. And you can rearrange them
in any way you want onto one of these, which I think is called a form. And then when you
print out, it's exactly the same every time. You can have hundreds, thousands, millions
of pages are identical. And there we are. Of course, the point about it being movable
type is that I can move these letters into any order, make another word, not unlike
scrabble. So I'm going to mess around. What am I going to get? There we are. So how is
it? It took mankind so long to bring together these simple elements into one machine that
could make books. The breakthrough was made by a man called Johannes Gutenberg more than
500 years ago. His printing machine was the most revolutionary advance in technology since
the invention of the wheel. And we're still living with its consequences today. As you
can see here in the basement of the British Library, where they hold a copy of every book
published in English. You know, there are 14 miles of shelves here. There are another
eight miles added every year as three million new books come on stream in British. And above
me, all the readers demanding their books have little idea that there's this labyrinth
of shelves here. It was the invention of the printing press which started all this, making
mass production of books possible for the first time in history. Within a few years,
there were millions of them in circulation. And as they traveled, they carried their precious
cargo of new ideas or theories, philosophy or propaganda to every part of Europe and
beyond sowing the seeds for that great cultural blossoming we call the Renaissance. The fruits
of Gutenberg's work can be seen all around us, but it's more important than that. Everything
that our culture and our civilization depends on starts with Gutenberg's invention. And
this was his calling card, one of the first and finest books created using his new machine.
To the modern eye, the Gutenberg Bible opens a window onto a vanished world of monks and
monasteries. But when it first appeared in the 1450s, it was viewed not as a reminder
of the past, but as a signpost to the future, glittering proof that a new information age
was dawning in Europe, fueled by the power of the printed word. I want to find out how
and why Gutenberg invented his machine. To answer the how question, I'm planning a unique
experiment. And here's the laboratory where it's all going to happen. This workshop in
the heart of England may not look very high tech. That's because the job I have in mind
requires 15th century materials and techniques, and a man who spent a lifetime investigating
the first printing pioneers. Step forward, Alan May. So this is where you're going to
attempt to build a printing press, isn't it? That's the idea, yes. But not any old press.
I want a fully operational Gutenberg style one. There aren't any surviving machines from
this early period, and no one's ever discovered an illustration of what they looked like,
so Alan has his work cut out. Well, essentially, this is uncharted territory. It's a detective
story, if you like. The earliest illustration of a printing press is the dance macabre 1499.
That's about 15 years after Gutenberg started his printing, isn't it? And things evolved
pretty quickly, wasn't it? That's right. I think that this early period was actually
quite revolutionary. There were things changing all the time. It took off rather like the
internet has, you know, it really went whoop. Yes. Alan reckons that Gutenberg's press did
share some family traits with later machines. All printing presses up to about 1800 have
a central part which pushes down onto the type. It's a piston and platen assembly. And
the other thing that is required in any press of this sort is that you have some means of
transporting the printing surface and the paper under that platen. Right, so you've got a
slidey bit moving along here, and then you've got a flat platen, you call it. Coming down
there. And that presses down. But there's one crucial difference between Gutenberg's
original and later so-called common presses, such as the one this model's based on. To
print on a press like this, they put two pages of type on this stone here. Right. Very heavy
stone, about 100 weight. Goodness. And then the process of printing was a double process.
You wound in for the first page, just there, and operated the lever, because you managed
the platen to go down, and then release it partly, and wind it into the next page and
print again. Hence the term two-pull press. Forensic analysis of Gutenberg's original
Bible reveals that he only printed one page at a time. In other words, his was a one-pull
press. That will influence the size and design of Alan's experimental machine, which is
already starting to take shape in another corner of the workshop. Here we go. Now, what
if you'd pass me the mallet and chisel? Oh, Lord, yes, here we go. Woodwork was never
my strongest subject at school, but no one seems to have told Alan that. The trick is
to not use the whole width of the chisel. Right. To use as, just push about a third of
the chisel that enables you to steer it. Better to be shallow than to steep. So if it's too
shallow, you just pair it down by hand, OK? Right, have a go. Oh, my goodness, you may
regret this. I don't want to ruin it. Oh, I see. Right, about a third there, like that.
That way. Come on, courage. That's pretty good. Oh, wow. It's very pleasing. It's a nice
feeling, isn't it? It is. I get the feeling you're trying to reveal a fossil coming out
of a rock. Yes, it is. Oh, I hope that wasn't too deep. No, yes, fine. It's an extraordinary
thing that you create something like a mechanical part, literally out of your hands. It's a
beautiful piece. Oh, there you are. Well, that's just good. You can just finish that off for
me. About gay big. When Alan's finished the press, I want to print a replica page of the
original Gutenberg Bible. That means I'll also need to track down some other ingredients,
including movable type and 15th century paper. At first, I have a journey to make. I'll be
travelling through the Silicon Valley of medieval Europe to explore the places where Gutenberg
and his team developed the machine which shaped the modern world. My first protocol is Mainz
on the banks of the Rhine in western Germany. This was Gutenberg's birthplace in the city
where he spent his childhood. But despite first appearances, only a few traces of the
medieval city that Gutenberg grew up in still survive. This is the birth house of Gutenberg.
A chemist job. Oh, yes. You can read it? Yes, stands Gutenberg's birth house. And Gutenberg
is the name of his family? No, actually the name of his family was Gensfleisch. Gensfleisch,
which means booze meat. Who wants to run around with the name of booze meat in his life? Just
around the corner is the church where he was probably baptized, well, part of it at least.
Mainz was heavily bombed in the Second World War, so the medieval remains of St. Christopher's
are now bolstered by some post-war concrete. So it's been left like this deliberately,
as a memorial. Yeah. Yeah. Think of a printer, you think of fonts, and this must be a 7000
point font, but it's terrific to see. Oh, there's a plaque to it. Well, it tells Johannes Gutenberg.
Yeah, now, something I wanted to talk to you about, actually. Mainz, the city of Mainz proclaimed
in the year 2000 that it was his 600th anniversary, so they think he was born in 1400. Well, that
was decided on publicly, actually 1900, when they made already the same fuss about this
centennial at this time, and then they decided Gutenberg was born 1400. But the exact date
is somewhere between 1397 and 1404. Well, I have to say I slightly agree with the city
of Mainz. I think 1400 is a good year to describe his birth, not because it's a run number,
but because it's actually the year that Geoffrey Trossin died in England. So it was the end
of one age, if you like, the age of the medieval writer, and the beginning of a new age, the
early Renaissance. There's very little evidence about Gutenberg's early years in Mainz. We
know his mother owned some land, and that his father was a merchant, whose work brought
him into contact with the city's goldsmiths, expert metalworkers with skills which Gutenberg
would later find very useful. And it's likely that he studied at university, so he'd have
come into contact with books, unlike most of his contemporaries. But that's about as
far as it goes. It's like catching the occasional glimpse of a figure in a crowd, and it'll
watch him melt away a few moments later. And even when you finally come face to face
with the great man, you can't be sure you're looking at the real Mr. Gutenberg. So whether
or not Gutenberg had three hands, like this one here, whether or not he looked like David
Tennant of Doctor Who, or whether or not he had a beard shaped like a fish stuck to his
face, one thing's certain, we don't actually know what Johannes Gutenberg looked like at
all, and that gives us great scope. Perhaps he looked like you, or me, unlikely. He would
have been burnt if he looked like me. No one knows exactly when the elusive Gutenberg first
dreamed of building his printing machine. But this was a revolutionary idea in the handmade
world of the 15th century. We're so used to living with printed matter every day of
our lives, from the cereal packet in the morning to the booklet bedtime, that it might perhaps
be rather hard to imagine what the world was like before printing. So we have to come somewhere
like here, this monastery, the Coaster Aberbach, in a village just a few miles from Mainz, where
Gutenberg grew up. And this is where not the printed word, but the written word was key.
Ah, Dr Schneider. Hello. Hi. What a pleasure to meet you. It's wonderful to be here in a
monastic setting. I'm trying to get a picture of what life was like around the time of
Gutenberg, how books were produced in the scriptoria, I think they're called. This is a rather
fine room. This is in fact the chapter house where they would read the chapters of the Bible
and they'd all sit round on the benches. So a scriptorium presumably was a different kind
of room to this. What sort of thing would you expect to find in a scribes room?
Scriptoriums were smaller rooms than this because they needed heat in these rooms and
because you need warm fingers to write and to hold the feather and to do all this fine
work with your hands and they needed light. They needed windows in the summer and in the
winter they needed candles. Do we have any idea of the character and personality of some
of these scribes? Very seldom. Sometimes we have at the end of such Bibles or other manuscripts,
small texts where the scribes tell how hard they work. Oh really? They leave a record?
Yeah. It was very cold. They had to sit always in the same position and they get cramps and
stiffness and it was cold and it was dark and their eyes were tired. And they write this
down? Yes. Hand-copied Bibles were rare and expensive commodities far beyond the reach
of ordinary mortals and even the best scribes made mistakes. A printing machine would allow
the creation of exact copies and lots of them. Whilst some church leaders feared anything
that might break their near monopoly on learning, others recognised that a common and universally
accepted version of the Bible might be a powerful weapon in the battle to preserve Christian unity.
But the church was just one potential market for printed books. Beyond the cloister, new
universities were springing up across Europe. So it's tempting to assume that Gutenberg,
aside from his technical interest, saw an entrepreneurial... Yeah, yeah, yeah. It was a
mixture of three things, I think. He was an engineer about the technical things. He was a merchant
and he was an intellectual. He had studied at a university and he knew that many people needed books.
With demand for books growing all the time, anyone who could devise a machine for making them
could hope to make a fortune. And growing up in the heartland of the German wine industry,
Gutenberg didn't have far to look for inspiration. These are rather noble structures and I think
if poor old Alan back in England is trying to build a press, it's going to find it rather useful
to see what these originals were like. These contraptions are wine presses. Alan May thinks
that Gutenberg's press evolved from machines like these. Oh, that's very artistic. Very good. Yes,
for Gutenberg, these must have been a very common sight. He grew up in an area, one of the biggest
wine growing areas of the world. I wonder if there was an actual moment, though, when he was sitting
next to one of these or watching some grapes being pressed and saw the spindle sending the thing down
and thought, ah, that's what I need. Just this big frame with a spindle. Presses like these may have
started Gutenberg's creative juices running, but to turn such a basic piece of engineering
into a precision machine would be a tall order. And that was only part of the challenge he faced.
The whole project would take years of experiment and it would cost a fortune.
But money didn't grow on trees in 15th century mines. I think it was a city of past glory.
It had been very influential and very rich in the medieval times. But then in the 14th century,
it came down a little bit. The plague was there two times and the black death, yes, and the city didn't
have the richness anymore. But it had been politically very influential. The Archbishop had been the
elector and was a primus interparis, as we might say, of the electors. And so it was an important city in any case.
The sense what I'm getting from you is that Mainz was a city of the past and what Gutenberg
needed was a city to look to the future. Yes, I think so.
For a budding entrepreneur like Gutenberg, Mainz was no place to start a business.
He would have been in his early 30s when he packed his bags and set sail down the Rhine.
Two days to the south was the city where his experiments in printing would first begin.
At Alan May's workshop in England, our own printing experiments already in full swing.
Alan's invited his fellow printing expert Martin Andrews along to show him work in progress.
I'm pleased to see that my holiday snaps turned up. Alan's also finished carving this hefty wooden thread
which generates the pressure needed to print. But the thread needs a counter thread to guide it on its downward journey
and it has to be cut by hand into the head of the press. Sounds tricky to me, but Alan has a plan.
It's an amazing contraption, Alan.
I mean, the idea came from a guy called Hero of Alexander in something like AD 64.
This ingenious device uses these wooden pegs to guide the thread on its journey.
Meanwhile, a set of cutters at the other end carve the counter thread through this solid wooden block.
Careful to tap this not on the sharp edge.
So in fact, using the real thread itself to cut its equivalent part of it.
That's it. That's the elegant part of it.
Actually, it's pushed loads and loads of sawdust ahead of it, look.
It's cutting something, but there's only one way to find out if the thread and the counter thread are a perfect match.
Ah, that changes the whole perspective, doesn't it? It seems to take that out. One can see how it's all working.
Oh my goodness, there she goes. Excellent.
I think that's a pretty good job, isn't it? I do.
And I've never seen anything quite like it. So, I mean, I'm convinced. I think it works.
I'm convinced too, but there's clearly a bit more to do.
I'm following the Gutenberg trail down the Rhine from Mainz to Strasbourg.
When Gutenberg arrived here in the early 1430s, this was a bustling city with trading links across Europe and beyond.
That made it a far more promising business base than the bankrupt city of his birth.
And towering above the commercial centre was the great cathedral itself.
Of course, when Gutenberg got here, the cathedral hadn't been finished and this huge tower and spire weren't quite completed.
And as you can see, there's still some work going on to this very day.
It's worth thinking about the fact that, at this time, the only investments that human beings ever seem to make were really in their future, in other words, in the afterlife.
By participating in the building of these enormous structures, they were assuring their place in heaven.
But around about the time of Gutenberg, we started to see the rise of a merchant class who really believed in investing in the idea of their future on Earth.
Venture capitalists and such people were to prove very useful to Gutenberg.
The cathedral was more than the spiritual heart of the city. It also became a focal point for its dealmakers and moneymen.
Prototype capitalists with the cash Gutenberg needed to fund his work.
By the late 1430s, he'd struck up a partnership with three of them and was ready to start work in earnest.
And if he ever wanted to remind himself that his big idea was a good one, he only had to take a stroll through the streets nearby.
Rue des Frières, the street of the brothers, tells us something about this area.
We're right beside the cathedral, which is the ecclesiastical heart of an ecclesiastical city, at the heart of an ecclesiastical empire, the Holy Roman Empire.
We're thinking of it in terms of something like the city of London, in other words, the centre of the entire system that runs the world at the moment.
For us, its finance, for them, it was the church. It was the church that generated all the paperwork, all the legal documentation, all the printed services.
Everything, in fact, that Gutenberg might have spotted needed reproduction, needed a new technology.
And so we turn into this, frankly, less than a pre-possessing street, but at the title, Rue des Ecrivains, Street of the Writers.
Chrives du Gas. It's in this street in Strasbourg that Gutenberg must have seen the scribes bustling around self-importantly with great sheaves of paper under their arms and calluses on their inky fingers.
And you must have thought, well, you may believe you've got a job for life, but I know better.
Because one day, one day you're all going to be replaced, replaced by a vulgar machine.
He employed a carpenter called Saspach to work on his new invention.
No one knows what it looked like, so Alan May's pieced together other clues to design our machine.
He knows that Gutenberg printed one page at a time, whereas later presses printed two in quick succession.
Maybe that's why this prototype looks rather unusual to an expert eye.
Let me have a quick look and see what's actually going on here, because it is unconventional.
The first thing that surprises me is that we've got all the weight in the framework here, and normally, on a two-pole press, you'd have actually a framework out here,
which was, A, making this more rigid, but also taking the weight of the stone and the gear.
Don't need that now, look. Don't need it.
Because you only need to go that far.
You never go further than that.
When the press is in use, it never has to go beyond the cheeks.
It is unconventional.
It may be unorthodox, but Alan thinks he's found support for his design in an unlikely source.
This illustration of a press was drawn by Albrecht Dürer, 60 years after Gutenberg first printed.
It's the only drawing that I know of where the feet of the press come forward from the cheeks.
That's what mine are doing now.
And this has got a substantial structure at the front, which the common press never has.
It just has a little leg.
So, I'm wondering whether this is an obsolete press that Dürer's got hold of,
and we're looking at a product which is actually 50 years old.
Perfectly prepared to be broad-minded, whether the other authorities in the world will agree with you.
If Alan's right, this is a major discovery.
Could this be a snapshot of an early Gutenberg press?
Gutenberg's team was growing.
Besides the carpenter Zaspach, he'd recruited other craftsmen from the Strasbourg guilds
and set them to work at his new premises.
Not in the city itself, but in a hamlet downstream, far away from the prying eyes of potential competitors.
Why the secrecy? Why was it necessary?
There were a number of people working in this area trying to solve this problem.
If only they could come up with a printed word for the church, they would have their fortunes made.
So, he had to keep it as a secret, otherwise everybody else would be doing it.
Whilst they worked in secret on the printing press, they needed a second revenue stream to keep the wolf from the door.
Lo and behold, fate brought to Gutenberg a brilliant idea.
This was the creation of mirrors for pilgrims coming to the pilgrimage at Aachen.
Why was Aachen important?
Aachen was important because there was a cathedral there.
And in the cathedral were relics, directly descending from Christ, supposedly.
And they were on display every four years.
And pilgrims would come from all over Europe to see the relics
and receive the rays of healing that emanated from them.
And eventually, there were so many pilgrims that they couldn't all get close to the relics.
So, the idea came into existence that there should be some way of capturing these rays.
And the rays were captured by a concave metal mirror, which would be held up
so that it was some sort of a satellite dish capturing radiation.
Local makers could not keep up with the demand.
Gutenberg's idea was that if he could mix his metal right,
he could use the presses that were in development to print out mirrors
which could be sold to the pilgrims at Aachen.
It looked like a sure-fire winner.
But in 15th century Europe, there was one thing which could usually be relied on
to scupper the best-laid business plan.
Black death strikes again, and the pilgrimage is put off.
Right, they would postpone a pilgrimage for the plague.
It would be a real disaster if you had 100,000 people all gathered together and you got a plague.
So that means that all the investors have been hoping for the money to come to the bank.
Yes, one of the partners died, the partnership began to collapse,
leaving Gutenberg not exactly in the lurch, but struggling.
This setback would have deterred a lesser man,
but by now Gutenberg must have been completely possessed by his plan, so the work continued.
So Gutenberg island, and there's a statue of him with the fish on his face again?
No one knows exactly where his workshop was, but it must have been somewhere near here.
He had chosen a secluded base to protect himself from the threat of industrial espionage,
but there was another reason for being close to the water, because Gutenberg was playing with fire.
Do you remember my John Bull printing set and those rubber pieces of type?
Gutenberg's plan would only succeed if he could devise a system for mass producing individual letters,
which could be set and reset in any order.
He went to the Guild of Goldsmiths and found a man called Hans Dunn.
Together they made the crucial technical breakthrough which made Gutenberg's brilliant idea a practical proposition.
So this is a type foundry?
This table is, believe it or not, a complete foundry.
I've asked Stan to help me make a piece of type, a single letter E, which I can use in our grand printing experiment.
For the sake of authenticity, I want my letter to match the dimensions of the original font used in the Gutenberg Bible.
First, we have to make a punch, a master copy of the letter we want to reproduce.
After we've transferred its outline onto the tip of this steel bar, it has to be carved by hand using a file, a very sharp file.
You do maybe a punch day, two punches a day?
So, in order to do the full set of type that Gutenberg needed for his Bible, how much work was that?
Well, there were at least 270 characters, perhaps more.
So, you know, given that a lot of holidays, I would imagine close to the better part of a year.
Yeah, so if you were one of those people that invested in this new technology, you'd be getting rather impatient.
We say now, Mr. Gutenberg, do you really need eight different ease?
And the reason he needed different ones was obviously because it was a very elegant and harmonious look he was after.
He wanted absolutely top quality, so he wanted some slightly wider, some that were slightly narrower,
so that he could always have justified lines without trailing white space and sort of ugly, you know, bad compositing things.
This is a smoke proof, a way of checking that our punch is an accurate copy of the letter we want to replicate.
It looks spot on. Now, how clever is that?
So, here we have it. It's hand carved and grooved and shaved and emeryed and rust and shaped and hardened and tempered.
And now that is the key that unlocks the technology that changes the world, the punch. Beautiful.
And we made it. But what's the next stage?
Well, we have to strike a matrix with that.
Strike a matrix.
Yeah, we're going to hammer that punch straight into that piece of copper.
So, we'll leave an impress of the letter shape.
Absolutely.
The experts can't agree about how exactly Gutenberg cast letters from his molds, but Stan's theory is the most commonly accepted one.
He thinks he invented something like this ingenious device.
This tool in front of us is the single, unique element of Gutenberg's invention.
And this is the type mold. And it's made of two halves.
And these two halves mate together to form a cavity in which the type will be formed with the matrix at the bottom.
Right, this pressure matrix.
Yes, working. And so these two halves are beautifully fitted.
And because they make either a narrow or a wide opening, by placing this matrix beneath the mold, which we've carefully formed,
and closing the mold on the matrix and using the spring to keep it in place, that's what this sort of thing is.
Now, there's a hollow inside of this mold that's the shape of the letter we're going to form.
Isn't that neat?
It's quite a unique part of the invention. There was nothing else like this before Gutenberg.
So, we're going to pour molten metal here, lead, tin and antimony, straight away in there.
And it hardens instantly. It's already hard.
So, we take the spring out of the way, we release the matrix by pressing on it, we pry the mold open, and there's a piece of type.
Isn't that marvelous?
So, which bit is the type?
Well, there's the face we formed, and it's an exact duplicate.
And if you look at the punch we have here, you'll see that that punch is replicated on the face of the type.
It's back to its form. See, isn't that neat?
It's more than neat. It's revolutionary.
Because now we can make as many ease as we want, quickly and cheaply.
I wonder how many it takes to print a full Bible.
Look what I did. I made an E.
Well, these seem like components of the greatest revolution in humankind since the invention of fire.
Yet you could argue they certainly are, and one of the reasons is that they're identical.
It's an extraordinary thing, such ingenuity, using arts and crafts that have been known for some hundreds of years,
but adding to it this unique little device that just enabled printers all over Europe to start spreading the word.
I've heard great reports about Alan's progress with the press, so I've returned to base to help him put together the finished article.
If you've ever had a traumatic experience with a self-assembly wardrobe, now might be a good time to make a cup of tea.
It's like there's cereal packets. Slot A into tab B or whatever it is.
Yeah, that's right.
I'm going to get something to pull it up.
I feel like Atlas.
You can do a variety.
Through the whole box over.
That's much more sensible.
Right, now you use your mallet to tap this.
Don't do that, Stephen.
I'll hold it, you don't kick it.
Good sound effects, don't we?
We're getting good creeps.
I suppose Alan really never has done anything like this for 500 years.
That's absolutely right on this sort of press.
That's it. Let's walk.
Honestly, I would never have made a boys' wardrobe.
Hopeless.
Music
You see what I love about this is that on the one hand it's desperately simple.
On the other hand, all these little cunning things that I would never have thought of in 100 years.
And I love when Alan showed me that he was doing this double thread.
You think, OK, I'll follow my finger around here and it'll go behind and surely it'll come out here.
But now it comes out there because it's a double thread.
And the other one goes that way.
And it's quite complicated.
It screws my head quite literally.
He's not sure that this is exactly what Gutenberg would have had, but it looks right.
And so often that's the secret of this kind of engineering and designing.
If it looks right, feels right, then it is right.
It's a most satisfactory object.
Apart from anything else, wouldn't it be fun to have one in one's bedroom?
You could convert it with a little wash hand basin or something.
Or maybe even have the mirror here at a adjustable height.
I'm getting slightly mad now because I'm so fond of it.
The one thing I, of course, can't wait to see is how it actually prints.
I'm starting to share the sense of excitement Gutenberg must have felt when he was finally ready to start printing.
By the late 1440s, he had moved on from Strasbourg, which had recently been terrorized by a marauding band of French mercenaries called the Arminyaks.
Perhaps they were the reason that he decided to head home to Mainz.
As usual, money was tight, so he borrowed some cash from a relative.
This house was used as security for the loan, and he struck up a partnership with a new investor called Johann Fust.
It was a deal he would later regret, but it did give him the cash injection he needed to set his press running.
He didn't start with the Bible, far too ambitious.
He wrote, tested the new technology on modest print jobs, like this Latin grammar book.
I'm a bone, I'm a bat, I'm a bat, I'm a bone, I'm a bat, I'm a bat, I'm a bun, I remember that.
To show the church that his invention presented an opportunity and not a threat,
he also printed documents like this People Indulgence.
Now, indulgence is this wonderful Catholic way of raising money, weren't it?
It sort of reminds me of today, if you journey in an aeroplane or something, or have a very fuel inefficient car,
you can offset your carbon, can't you? You can pay money to a company that offsets your carbon.
It forgives you your carbon sins, and this is a bit like the same idea, you offset your sins, don't you?
It must have been marvellous for them to have Gutenberg's new technology, because before that, of course, each one would be handwritten by a scribe,
and it's not just a quick voucher, it's a lot of lines, so it was a very good way of Gutenberg showing off his new technology.
I think it shows also that the church really was very interested in printing, that they did not consider it a black art, as it is said in German.
And because they saw all those advantages brought to them.
With church support for his magnum opus, there was just one more issue to resolve.
Most high-end books in those days were written not on paper, but on something called vellum.
And what was vellum made out of? It was made out of those little fellows, those pretty brown, round-eyed calves.
They yielded their skins just as they yielded the rest of themselves for veal chops, for the tables of the mighty.
Gutenberg, who was determined that his Bible was to be nothing, if not the highest possible quality, thought that he would print every Bible on the finest vellum.
But either he or his business partners did some serious mathematical modelling, as it would now be called, and they quickly realised that actually only a few could be done in vellum,
because a little herd like this, well, he wouldn't be out of the Old Testament.
You've got those two there, we'll call them Genesis, we'll call that fellow their Exodus, you've got Deuteronomy over there, Leviticus.
It would take 140 calves to provide enough vellum for just a single copy of the Bible.
For a print run of 180, which is what he planned, Gutenberg would have needed a staggering 25,000 of the poor creatures.
That's an awful lot of veal chops in anyone's book.
There are therefore a few Gutenberg Bibles extant in the world, which are printed on vellum, but most are printed on paper.
Without a system for mass producing paper, Gutenberg's invention would have been dead in the water.
But although the Chinese had first invented the stuff 1200 years earlier, it was still a new commodity in the West.
This mill at Basel in Switzerland was set up at almost exactly the same time as Gutenberg was working on his machine,
and they still make paper here the old-fashioned way, not from wood pulp, but from cloth rags.
Oh, that's rather satisfying.
First the rags are mashed to a fine pulp.
A water wheel provides the power to drive these hefty hammers.
Once it's reached the right consistency, the pulp is transferred to a huge vat, which is where the fun really starts.
This is going to be our paper. It seems extraordinary that these are the bits of cut-up linen that have been pounded away and they've turned into this pulp.
OK, so I better keep stirring, yes?
Yes.
That's what you feel is the heating. The water is a little bit warm.
Because it's organic matter and it's breaking down?
No, because it's a little bit easier to work with warm water, and the warm water goes quicker down from the sieve.
So this is what now happens, OK?
Yes.
Let's do it. Let's make paper.
We go in like this, turn it, don't come up, shake it a little bit.
So the water goes down and the fiber rests.
And so we are ready for the next.
Would it be all right if I could make some paper?
Yes, it's all right.
You'll have to take over my job.
And now, shall we swap places?
Yes.
This is very exciting. OK, I better do that.
A horrible feeling.
This takes me back to the art room at school where I was always a dunderhead.
Right, so just...
The other side, the other side.
Oh!
This way?
No, no, no, like this.
Oh, I see, like so, you mean?
First of all, I've already...
I'll show you, sorry.
Ah, yeah, but there's someone already.
Should we get rid of that?
No, that's all right.
OK.
Ready to scour?
Down, turning, come up.
And specifically that way too.
Oh, yeah, there's got a few white bits in, but it's not bad.
I think we should stop it.
Stop it.
Some paper for you, René?
Amazing.
And is it ready to take a deco?
That is...
I'm going to say this is probably...
It's always the second that goes bad.
And...
This is a magical process.
It's rather like panning for gold, isn't it?
And perhaps that's not a bad analogy.
Paper was like gold in medieval times.
It was unbelievably valuable.
And although it's quite a time-consuming process,
it's a lot less time-consuming than making vellum from calfskin.
I must say, I rather enjoyed this.
I feel connected to Gutenberg somehow just by doing this.
That's good.
How do you know when it's ready, because the ripples stop?
Yes, now it's OK.
Oh, that's not so good. Hang on.
OK.
Not quite so good, that one.
Oops.
No, no, well...
Put it back?
Yeah, put it back. Should we put it back?
And just...
Oh, turning it?
Yes.
Like so?
Nope.
Oh, I thought maybe it would go...
Oh, no, turning it back.
Oh, like so?
Yes.
Oh, dear.
I've ruined this.
Oh, I see.
Better.
Screw that.
To make paper fit for printing is a fine art.
The raw materials need to be mixed to perfection
to produce the right texture and absorbency.
For Gutenberg, this was the final crucial ingredient
which made printing the Bible a viable business proposition.
Oh, can I do it again?
So beautiful.
My very own piece of paper.
And first of all, it has to be dried, doesn't it?
Yes.
But I do hope Alan will be satisfied with that.
How could he not be?
That's worthy of the finest printer's art.
OK.
The Great Days arrived.
It's been five months since Alan first got together his plans
and designed his printing press.
It's now built.
Paper's been made in Basel.
I've cast the type personally.
Nothing can stop us from printing a page of Gutenberg text.
That must be how the great man felt himself.
Before we start printing, I have a little confession to make.
It took Stan and me the best part of a day
to make just one individual letter E.
To produce all the type needed to print a full Bible
probably took Gutenberg's team around a year.
And frankly, I don't have his time or his patience.
So I've cheated.
This package has come from the States.
It's a replica page of type
set to the exact measurements of the Gutenberg original.
And thankfully, nothing's been damaged in transit.
So this is perfect, isn't it?
We can print from this?
Absolutely.
Well, almost.
Surely there's room for my little E somewhere on the page.
Here we go.
It's always going to go in.
That's so exciting.
Let's try that.
What word is that?
Can you read that?
Legas.
L-E-G-E-S.
Yes.
That's great.
You know, I have to confess I had my doubts about whether or not
I would be able to bring off the construction of a printing press
in the time we've given him.
And whether, in fact, there was enough known about printing,
then, to be able to produce something that could actually work
and come up with a reasonable facsimile of something
that Gutenberg could have done.
I have to say all my doubts have been cast aside
by the brilliance of the work he's done.
And all three of the experts are through their giggling-like children
with the excitement of what they've all created together.
I'm going to see now if some real printing can happen.
Right, this is a moment of truth.
Let's see how it fits.
Let's see how it fits.
That's not that, actually.
That's not that.
I think we're almost OK.
OK.
Right, here we go.
Oh, my goodness.
Wait for the creek.
Good luck, everybody.
Here we go.
Oh, there's impression there, Martin.
I can see that.
Yeah.
Look at that.
It's just bit into the paper.
Wow.
Oh.
Oh, my word.
Sure, that is quite remarkable.
Remarkable.
That is extraordinary.
Congratulations, everybody.
The inking is superb.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, everybody.
The inking is superb, Martin.
The alignment is fantastic.
And there is your E, right?
And that, in particular, stands out as being...
It's the best one on the page.
...far and away.
Excellent job.
Bravo.
Ah.
I am very, very pleased with that.
So you should.
I mean, this is the first one.
I think that startling thing would be extraordinary.
Anyway, let's do some more.
Well, that's the proof of a printing press
is being able to do more.
As we print, the normal procedure would be that the puller,
the puller, you're the puller, OK?
The puller, OK.
It takes the sheet off.
Yeah.
And it gives it a cursory glance,
but he's got to get really ready for the next print.
Right.
While the inker, while he's away from the press,
the inker is going to be inking up again for him.
Right, so it's a real assembly line.
And when he comes off the inking,
he checks the quality of the printer you've just done.
Right, he's not proofing it.
That's all...
No, he's looking to see that the impression is...
He's printing up.
Right, and then I'm going to character him.
That's right, yeah.
OK.
Done with my frisket.
Yes.
Tim pan down?
Tim pan, that's it.
Now we all hold on to the press now.
Right, and...
That's him.
That's nice, isn't it?
It's super.
Super.
Yes.
There you go.
Pretty good, yeah.
No, I think actually that's better.
It is, isn't it?
It's really getting there.
It's really getting there.
Gutenberg's first edition of the Bible
ran to 180 copies,
each containing more than 1200 pages,
which had to be set, inked and printed.
Very nice.
Very nice.
That's it.
That's it.
That's it.
That's it.
That's it.
That's it.
Very nice.
And that was just the black and white work.
After they'd left the press,
each page was hand-decorated by an illuminator
before the whole thing was bound together
to make a finished book.
This is the miracle.
They're identical.
Each one of these wonderful pages.
And that had never been seen before
in the history of the world.
Our experiments nearly finished,
but for Gutenberg,
this was just the beginning
of a monumental two-year print run.
But what a beginning it was.
The first copies of Gutenberg's Bible
were displayed at the Frankfurt trade fair in 1454,
and they caused a sensation.
Today, fewer than 50 of those original books
are still in existence.
One of the finest is held here
in Göttingen in Germany.
You know what?
I'm genuinely tingling with excitement
about coming close to a Gutenberg Bible,
having only seen one through glass
and having examined so much about its means of production
and having discovered just how important it was
and what a symbol it is
and everything the modern age stands for.
The idea of actually touching one
or being it through cotton gloves
is giving me goose flesh.
Ah, cannot believe this.
You know, I've looked at them through glass
and I've read about them,
and to be so close is an extraordinary feeling.
You want to have a look?
Please.
This is actually a remark by Jakob Grimm.
Of the famous Brothers Grimm?
Yeah, when he was a librarian in Göttingen,
he says,
This is a Gutenberg Bible,
a Gutenberg Bible,
and he says,
Von Hüster's Atenheit
of the highest rarity.
Thank you.
This is the first page of the first volume.
Do you know what's interesting?
Although the illumination and decoration
and the, you call that a rubrication,
the red letters, literally,
although they're very beautiful,
it is the typeface that really draws the eye, isn't it?
Yes, I mean, people have said
that it's, even at the start of this new technology,
that it's also an example of perfection.
Yes.
The general view is that it's so much more beautiful
than it need to have been.
That is very true, yes.
Simply, he was clearly a very driven perfectionist.
Yes.
He uses what the scribes in the monasteries also used.
He used abbreviations.
That was the only way to create this right margin
as clean as it is.
Now, there's a little hole here.
Yes, somebody must have...
Vandal!
...plundered this. I don't know when this happened.
You see, the illumination went up the page
when somebody needed a model...
Right. ...for an illumination.
So they cut it out and put it next to his manuscript
and painted it off this model,
which is unfortunate.
MUSIC
Naturally, I feel very privileged to be able to
leaf through this unbelievably rare and important object,
a Gutenberg Bible, in my hands.
I'm wearing white gloves.
I'm terrified of breathing water vapor on it.
You know, the odd thing is that it doesn't feel like something
that is going to be crumbling to dust
if I turn the pages too fast.
It feels very solid and robust,
and after all, it was made to be used more than once a day.
I mean, if it was bought by a monastery,
I guess it would have been used for all the offices of the day.
And it was a solid object.
A Bible was a thing that people expected to turn to all the time.
And it isn't a fragile little thing like an ornament.
It's a useful object.
And the extraordinary thing about this is that,
although there were only 100 or so of these made,
and 12 of these in existence on Vellum,
you know that, aside from the illuminations,
every page is the same.
And that was really the most remarkable breakthrough, wasn't it?
That somebody in a monastery in Germany,
somebody in a palace in Florence,
somebody in a private house in Amsterdam
could turn to the same page number.
The same word would begin at the top, end at the end.
They were looking at mass production for the first time.
And although they were very rich, those who could afford it,
they were nothing like as rich as those who could afford
the ones that had been made by scribes, handwritten.
I can't believe I'm here looking at it.
I'd like to report a happy ending for the man
who created this extraordinary book,
but it didn't turn out quite like that.
Do you remember Mr. Fust, the dragon who bankrolled the printing of the Bible?
Soon after the presses started running,
he asked Gutenberg to repay the money he'd borrowed.
Gutenberg didn't have the cash,
so he was forced to hand over all his printing equipment instead.
It had taken him almost a lifetime to build his machine.
Now, so soon after it had been completed,
it was snatched from Gutenberg's grasp.
My journey ends here, in the village of Eltsville,
a few miles outside Mainz.
Gutenberg had family roots here,
and his friends helped him get back on his feet
and even to set up a new printing workshop.
But he never enjoyed the riches which his invention
earned for his former business partner, Fust.
Well, Gutenberg finally got the recognition he deserved.
Up in the castle there, the elector called him a knight
and gave him a pension, and when he died,
the world knew that he had founded a modern art of printing.
But it's not that, really, that has brought me here.
It's the thought of what went on after Gutenberg's death,
the replication of printing across Europe at such a speed,
an unimaginable speed for that time,
from zero books to 20 million in just 50 years.
Gutenberg's technology spread across Europe
like a benign virus.
It gave new ideas a ticket to ride and kickstarted the renaissance.
For the next 500 years, his method of printing
was used to make books everywhere.
His was the machine that made us.
And that art, the art of movable type printing, defines us.
It's our civilization more than anything else.
I can imagine a modern world without cars,
I can imagine one without telephones or computers,
but I cannot begin to imagine a society
anything like the one we have that doesn't have the printed word.
Copyright© OSHO International Foundation
