Hi, welcome to Narration IT, this is Kishore and today we are going to discuss about C
plus plus introduction. Now, we are going to start C plus plus introduction. In this
concept we are going to discuss about what is C plus plus. According to this C plus plus
is general purpose high level compiler based and object oriented programming language.
According to the introduction to C plus plus, C plus plus is called it is a general purpose
high level compiler based and object oriented programming language. Now, we are going to
discuss one by one topic. So, first see this according to this C plus plus is a general
purpose high level compiler based and object oriented programming language. Now, the first
concept is C plus plus is general purpose. Now, what is called general purpose? Why it
is called general purpose? Here the purpose means you says here purpose means you says
and general means what? Here general means what? For example, there is a general store.
In general store we are able to get different types of items. Here very simple example we
are calling general store. In a general store we are getting different types of items. In
the same manner by using C plus plus also we are able to design different types of softwares.
Here using C plus plus we are able to design different types of softwares. That is why
C plus plus is called general purpose programming language which is also called multi purpose
programming language. Now, I will show you what are the softwares we are able to design
with C plus plus. Just watch this. Now, it is a C plus plus and using C plus plus we
are able to design operating systems. First thing using C plus plus we can design the
operating systems. Now, first topic operating system and I am giving the examples also.
For example, DOS, Windows, Enix. Now, all these are called operating systems and we
are able to design these operating systems by using of C plus plus. Next using C plus
plus we are also able to design editors. Using C plus plus we can design the editors also.
Now, what is called editor? The world best editor, the world best free editor notepad,
wordpad and MS office MS word is there and DOS edit is there and edit plus is there.
All they are called editors. That is why using C plus plus we are able to design operating
systems as well as editors and I am giving some of the examples and so on. Next using
the same C plus plus we are also able to design commercial applications. Using C plus
plus we are also able to design commercial applications. Now, the examples for commercial
examples means commercial programs are nothing but suppose there is a shop. In shop they
have to conduct the bill. Now, the billing program is designed with C plus plus. Now,
the bank transactions which are conducted with C plus plus not only that one college,
hotel, wherever you go all they are related to money. That is why when it is related to
money they are called commercial. That is why using C plus plus we are also able to
design the commercial applications like I am giving examples. For example, bank program,
supermarket program and hotel program. Now, all these are the programs we can design with
C plus plus and all they are related to the money transaction. That is why it is called
when it is related to money transaction it is called commercial. That is why we are able
to design commercial applications also. Next using C plus plus we are also able to design
database. Using C plus plus we are also able to design database softwares. For example,
the world famous oracle, the world famous and popular database oracle is there and the
total oracle is designed with C and C plus plus. That is why some of the examples for
database are oracle, SQL server, MySQL and so on. Now, these are the examples for database
applications and by using C plus plus we are able to design the database applications also.
Next using the C plus plus we are also able to design translators. Using C plus plus we
also design translator. Now, translator what is called translator here? Here we are getting
one doubt what is a translator? Now, here translator means nothing but a converter
and why we need the translators in our programming and here we have to determine one thing. Actually
as a user we can understand only English or we know only the English, but our computer
does not know English operations and the computer understandable code is binary code which is
also known as machine code. The total computer operations are going in 0s and 1s which are
called binary code. As a humans we are not able to understand this binary code. That
is why we know only the English and we are writing the programs also in English, but
the computer is not able to read this English programs. Now, what happens? This English
program is later converted into machine code which is called object code and this one is
conducted by translator. That is why translator work is translator work is it converts the
user input. That means which is also called source code and the computer understandable
code is called object code. Now, translator work is converting the source code into object
code. That is why translator is being what? It is converting the user input into machine
understandable and this process called translation and to conduct this operation we are using
translator and we are having three types of translators. Examples compiler, interpreter,
assembler, compiler, interpreter, assembler they are called translators. Now, the point
is here compiler and interpreter both are used to convert high level languages to machine
code and assembler is used to convert low level languages to machine code. Here compiler and
interpreter both are used to convert high level programs to machine code and assembler is
used to convert low level programs to machine code and in C plus plus we are using compiler.
In C plus plus we are using the compiler as a translator that is why C plus plus is called
compiler based programming language. Here in C plus plus we are using the compiler as
a translator that is why C plus plus programming is called compiler based application or compiler
based programming language. Next using C plus plus we are also able to design device
drivers. Using C plus plus we are also able to design device drivers. Now, what is called
device driver? For example, there is a new printer. Now, you are going to connect the
printer with the device means with our system. Later you are going to make a print out, but
your computer is saying no printer found. Watch this example. Suppose, there is a computer
you are going to attach a printer to this one. Now, just assume it is a system and it
is a new printer. Now, paper is there ink is there everything, everything is fine and
it is connected properly also. Later you are going to open MS word. Here you are going
to design a letter. Later you are going for print option, but your computer says no printer
found, but here the point is printer is connected properly, printer connected properly everything
is fine, but our system is saying what no printer found because of here the system does
not know about this printer. Now, what we have to do with every printer the company is providing
one CD also with every printer by default the company is giving one CD also and now our
duty is just insert the CD and install that software CD software. Now, the printer is
detected. Now, here the CD contains what printer information and that printer information is
called printer drivers. They are called printer drivers not only that one sometimes our keyboard
and mouse they are not detected or suppose you are having a pen drive. Now, you are going
to connect the pen drive to your system. Now, at the right most bottom corner it is showing
one message USB device not recognized. It is the common message we are getting in windows
why because means here your system is missing that corresponding drivers. Now, they are
called device drivers they are called device drivers and these device drivers are created
with a C and C++ software. That is why using C++ we are also able to device design device
drivers like keyboard comma printer comma mouse drivers etcetera.
Next, using the same C++ we are also able to design PC and mobile games using C++ we
are also able to design PC and mobile games. The best example generally we are playing
with Nokia mobiles means once upon a time we are using Nokia mobiles. In Nokia mobiles
there is a popular game called snake game that snake game is totally designed with C
and C++ softwares. Not only that one Mario is there super Mario dev game is there Contra
is there all these games are designed with C and C++ softwares. That is why using C++
we are able to design operating systems as well as editors and commercial applications
database applications translators device drivers and PC and mobile games. Not only this one
the especially C++ especially using C++ we are able to design protocols. It is the major
advantage of C++. Majorly C++ is used for designing the protocols. Now, what is called
protocol? Simple example there is in internet every day we are working with internet. Suppose
when a website is opened automatically it starts with the HTTP that means hypertext
transfer protocol. Now that HTTP is designed with C++ not only that one FTP is there file
transfer protocol, Bluetooth transfer protocols all these protocols are designed with C++
software and here one more important point 90 percent of telecom protocols 90 percent
of telecom protocols they are designed in C++. That is why using C++ we are also able
to design protocols. Examples HTTP, FTP and so on. According to all these examples
according to all these examples using C++ we are able to design different types of softwares
that is why C++ is called it is a general purpose or multi purpose programming language.
Here that is why it is called general purpose or multi purpose programming language. Now
it is nothing but general purpose which is also called multi purpose. Next now what is
called high level programming language? Why C++ is called high level programming language?
Before going to start high level programming language first of all what is called program
and what is called software and what is called language and how many types of languages are
we are using in designing the programs. Now I am going to give that one software first
of all I am going to start software. Now what is called software? Collection of programs
is called simply software. Collection of programs is called software. Next here collection
of programs. Now here one point is there what is a program? Just watch it. Program means
what? A set of instructions. Now a set of instructions is called program. Next here
software means what? A set of programs or a collection of programs is called what? Software
and there is another definition for software. What is that means? Or it is a digitalized
automated process. Now software is also called as per industry. As per industry a software
is also called it is a digitalized automated process. Now what is called digitalized and
what is called automated process? Now I am giving small example for this. Just watch
this. I said software means collection of programs. Now why it is called just watch
it? I am giving a diagram for this. For example there is a media player. Now what is called
now in media player there is a play button. Next here the slider is also there and it
is showing the timing like this. Now watch this example. Actually it is a media player
and here it resembles the play button. Now I am going to press this button. I am going
to press the play button. Now what happens? In place of play button we are getting pass
button like this. Now the play button is converted into pass button. How this one is possible
because of inside this play button there is a program. Now this play button is nothing
but a program. In that program what is written? When this button is pressed convert the symbol
into pass button. Suppose once again you are pressing the pass button. Now the pass button
will become play button. That means now there is a program inside the button. That means
now play button is a program. Next here what it is backward forward or previous or next.
Now the point is when this button is pressed actually movie is going to backward. Now it
is backward and it is the forward. Now here it is the stop button and here it is the equalizers
and it is the volume. Watch it here. Inside this button there is another program to operate
the video and here also there is another program. Here also program and everything is program.
That is why here we will see media player is called it is a software. According to my
explanation software means what? Program. Program. Program. That means software is nothing
but collection of programs. Next here software is also called what? It is a digitalized.
It is a digitalized. Why? Because it is called digitalized. Say this here the starting video
time is 0 0 0 0. Now I am going to press the play button. After sometime what happened?
Suppose this button is going to reach here and it is showing for example 34 minutes 25
seconds. That means here how much time elapsed 34 minutes 25. How can we say? Because of
digitally they are displayed. Now this process is called digitalized. Next what is called
automated? Now in every media player there is a rewind button. For example in every media
player there is a rewind button or repeat button. Now I am going to press this button.
What happens? After playing completion means after completion of the playing automatically
your audio or video file is going to play. Now you have to press this button only one
time. Here the point is we have to press this button only one time. Automatically every
time it is going to repeat the process. Now this concept is called automated. This concept
is called what? Automated. That means inside every button we are having a particular program
to organize the topic. That is why software is said collection of programs and they are
automated and digitalized. That is why a software is called it is a digitalized or automated
process. Next how many types of software are available? We are having basically two types
of software. One is system software and another one is application software. Now the software
is divided into basically two types. One is system software and another one is nothing
but application software. Now what is the difference between system software and application
software? I am giving very simple example for system software and application software.
In our human body we are having several organisms. Means several parts are there. Now all the
parts are working when the heart is working. Here watch it carefully what I am saying we
are having several body parts. But when the heart is working then only all these body
parts are working. For example we are using the nose for smelling, mouth for eating and
ears for hearing. That means every organism is having particular task. Now the point is
when they are working when the heart is working. Why because heart is sending or heart is pumping
the blood to the all the body parts. That means blood is carrying what? Power. When
power is there or all body parts are working. That means here eyes, nose, ears all these
are nothing but applications because of each organism have a particular task. And here
the heart is nothing but a system software. For example your system software is stopped.
That means for example when the heart is stopped automatically our body also completely dead.
That means all the body parts are not working. As usual here also operating system is there.
Every system contains one operating system. Actually operating system is called what?
System software. Operating system is called system software. And here suppose tally is
there, oracle is there. We will see media player is there. And all these are called what? Application
software. Suppose your operating system is working properly then only you are able to
work with tally or oracle or C or C++ or java what it may be. And I am giving one more
small example. For example nowadays everybody is using android mobile phones. In android
mobile phones everybody is going to download whatsapp and facebook. In common I am giving.
Now here I need the whatsapp and facebook. For android mobile phones we have to download
the whatsapp and facebook from play store. And here observe it. I am going to open the
play store and from play store what I am downloading apps. What they are called apps. Apps means
what? Application software. That is why in my example whatsapp and facebook actually
they are called application software. And for which device you are downloading whatsapp
and facebook for your android mobile. Now the android is the OS. For example your mobile
your android system is not going to open. Now the whatsapp and facebook are not working.
That is why I said OS is similar to our heart. When it is working all the parts are working
means when your android mobile phone is working then only you are able to work with either
whatsapp or facebook. That is why whatsapp and facebook are application softwares and
android windows, unix, linux and etc. They are called system software. Not only system
software OS. And here we are having device drivers and translators. They also comes under
system software. That is why without system software there is no application software.
And every application software is designed to perform a particular operation. For example
here tally. We have discussed about tally. Especially tally is designed for accounting
purpose. Tally is designed for accounts. Next oracle which is very familiar. But it
is designed only for database operations. Only for database operations. And just before
we have discussed VLC media player. Now the VLC media player is only doing what? Playing
the audios, videos and images. That means it is only for media. It is only for media.
Now photoshop is there. Only the photoshop is designed only for to manage the photos.
That is why all these are called application softwares. And each application is designed
to perform a particular operation. And when these application softwares are working means
when your system software is working properly. It is the relation in between the system software
and application software. Thank you for watching. And in next section we are going to cover
the remaining topic. Thank you.
