Welcome to my favorite universe. I'm Neil deGrasse Tyson. I'm an astrophysicist and
I'm director of the Hayden Planetarium in New York City, part of the Rose Center for
Earth and Space of the American Museum of Natural History. And I'm here to present
to you not lectures that are part of some curriculum, but in fact I've combed the universe
for just my favorite subjects and I'm going to spend 12 lectures bringing those favorite
subjects to you. These are subjects about which I've thought quite a bit. In fact,
I've written about each one of them in the form of essays that have appeared in Natural
History Magazine. I've written many essays and these are some of my 12 favorite. Organized
in four groups of three, the first set of lectures on being. What I mean by on being
is there's a series of three lectures there that present to you some of the machinery
of what shapes and forms the cosmos. Machinery that we explore and investigate and discover
here on Earth's surface and find out that in fact the same properties of matter and
forces and energy reveal themselves elsewhere in the cosmos, enabling science to be an enterprise
at all. The fact that what happens on Earth happens elsewhere. The next set of three is
all about the blood and gore of the cosmos. It's cosmic catastrophes really. We learn
about how black holes rip apart stars and in fact we take a person and toss a person
into a black hole. Not really, but we describe what would happen if we performed that experiment
and that's pretty gory. But it is the real universe and we need to know about that sort
of thing. Also in those lectures we talk about cosmic impacts and what role they've played
in the history of life on Earth. The next set of three, we start at the beginning, the
Big Bang and move forward and present to you sort of the frontier of our understanding
of the biggest questions of the cosmos. How did the universe get here? How has it evolved?
How will the universe continue to evolve into the future? And we end on a set of three lectures
which broadly refer to the search for life in the cosmos. It just so happens anytime
I'm on an airplane and someone finds out I'm an astrophysicist, I always get asked a series
of questions and the first one, 99 times out of 100 is their life elsewhere in the cosmos.
So we've saved the best for last. We've saved the most enticing subjects for last because
everybody wants to know whether or not we're alone. And we'll tackle those subjects and
we'll do it broadly and talk about how to find environments where you might expect to
see life. And not only that, if we find life, what might that life be like? Might it be
like us or nothing at all like us? So welcome to this series of lectures and let's begin.
The on-being series is a set of three lectures, on being round, on being rarefied and on being dense.
And these are three sort of properties of matter that by describing them take me places
in the cosmos and have me describing objects that will show up again in later lectures.
So it's not only a philosophical introduction, it's also an introduction in some measure
by what objects are brought in to make the examples that we give. So let's begin with
on being round. You've looked around at globes, at pictures of orbs. Why is so much
stuff in the universe round? I don't know if you've ever asked that question, but now
that I bring it to your attention, why not? Let's ask it. Why is so much stuff in the
universe round? We learn in fact that the forces that make things round operate on small scales
as well as large scales, because it refers to the energy of a body. And energy likes
descending to the lowest energy state it can. So in other words, if you build a house of
cards, the cards don't really want to stay built. If you jiggle it, they all fall down
and they get to a lower point on Earth's surface than they once were. This is profound.
It wasn't simply that it's a shaky thing. It's that it's natural for things to want
to go to the lowest levels possible. That's a natural consequence of physical law. You
look around at all the round things in the world. Is there anything nature makes that's
not round? Well, yes, there is. There are a few things. Let's name a couple. Crystals
are not round. Crystals have sharp edges. So there's some action going on geochemically
that make crystals. And it's beautiful. Crystals are beautiful. That's an exception. Plus, you've
got fractured rocks. Those have angles to them. But by and large, you look around in the cosmos.
There are very few things that make angles. Things are round. And in the best of the cases,
they make beautiful spheres. In that list, we can, let's make a short list of round things.
We've got soap bubbles. Soap bubbles are round. You had those as a kid, of course. Soap bubbles,
moons, planets, stars, galaxy halos. Even the observable universe is round. It's a perfect
sphere centered on us. And we'll end with that concept to learn exactly what we mean by the
observable universe and why it's a perfect sphere centered on us. Now, the way this works
is we have forces that want to shape the object in such a way that the surface is minimized.
And what do we mean by that? Let's take a look at a soap bubble. So here we have a child
blowing soap bubbles. We've all done this as children and I wish more adults would do
it into their later years. But soap bubbles are fascinating because no matter the cavity
through which you blow this soapy liquid, out the other side comes a sphere. And what
goes on there is, since a sphere is the shape that encloses the largest volume with the
least surface, if a soap bubble wanted to be another shape, then the soap film would
not be as strong as it is as a sphere. Because any other shape, it has to give more of itself
to cover that surface area, making it thinner in one place and not another. It would just
break. Now, this generalized feature can be revealed if we, I've got a cube here conveniently.
We take a look at the fact that on a cube, there are parts of the cube that are more distant
from the cube center than others. So every corner is farther from the center than the
middle of the sides. So in a way, that makes the sides kind of weaker, kind of weaker.
That makes the corners that are farther away. If this were the middle of the middle of the
kind of weaker, that makes the corners that are farther away. If this were an orb that
had gravity, this would be some kind of mountain. And the forces that take over, that enable
gravity to have made the planet in the first place, will want to make that mountain smaller.
The rock on the side of the mountain will roll down and fill up the low areas. And this
process continues until you get something that much more closely resembles a sphere
and not a cube. So, bubbles aren't the only thing that make spheres. Rain drops make spheres.
Notice that classical depiction of a raindrop. It looks like a little teardrop. But in fact,
if you would watch rain comes out of the clouds and it falls down, it is a perfect sphere
coming down. And what's holding it together? Well, there's this thing called surface tension,
the surface of liquids. The boundary between the liquid and the air, that surface, kind
of the molecules kind of grab on to each other. And the act of establishing the surface of
the liquid gives it a kind of a tension that wraps the liquid so that when it's left to
fall on its own, it wraps itself into a perfect sphere. Once again, making the most efficient
shape it possibly can. You ever wonder how you make ball bearings?
These little round things. Well, you can't lathe them. They're too small. One way to
make them is you have liquefied metal and you have an evacuated tube and you take eyedroppers
of this liquid metal and you drop them down the tube. And as it comes down, it cools and
hardens. But before it hardens, that drop of liquid metal turn into a sphere. It hardens,
it lands down and you collect your ball bearings at the bottom. That's one way you make ball
bearings. Another way is if you are weightless in the space shuttle orbiting the earth, you
can just take your liquid metal, it's heated and just squirt it out of the eyedropper.
The liquid comes out of the eyedropper, floats in front of your face, makes a sphere and
it just hardens right there. In fact, you can make the most perfect ball bearings ever
if you had a ball bearing factory in a weightless environment like on the space station.
So you're relying on the surface tension of the metal to bring itself into a sphere.
And by the way, the metal, the only metal that's like runny liquid at room temperatures,
of course, mercury, not the planet, of course, but the metal. When I was a kid, we had little
games where there's a mercury bead that would roll around and you'd go through a maze. But
now we've learned that mercury is bad for your health. It interferes with your development
of intelligence as a child. But with these games, you notice that the mercury has such
high surface tension, it pops into a sphere just sitting here on earth. In fact, the surface
tension was greater than that which would otherwise make it flatten out than the force
of gravity that would otherwise make it look like a bead of water sitting on a nicely waxed
car. That looks like it wants to pop into a sphere but doesn't quite have enough surface
tension to wrap itself up into its little package, its little spherical package.
Well, if a sphere minimizes how much surface air you have, you might ask the question,
why isn't everything a sphere? Why aren't goods offered for sale in a grocery store spheres?
You could say billions of dollars on packaging by not having to use, imagine a box of Cheerios
and it's just a sphere, that would minimize how much box you would use. Or can of beans,
but spherical cans of beans, that'd be so cool. So I thought of advising the industry
on this but of course you realize there's another problem, spheres roll. And so it'd
be very hard stacking these things on the shelves, it would just be a mess in the grocery
store. So there are other factors that contribute to this but it doesn't change the fact that
if you have a spherical container you have maximized the volume and minimized the outer
surface, both at the same time. And nature knows how to do that beautifully.
Let's ascend from earth and think about the solar system and what kind of spheres we have
going there. As I already alluded to there's kind of a conspiracy of gravity and energy
that gives you spherical shapes. The sun is one example. The sun, everyone's favorite
star, is basically a perfect sphere. There's some structural form on the surface but you
step back from it, it's a perfect sphere, it's a big ball of gas. Gas is easy to make
into a sphere, any part of the gas that's a little higher than the other part, it'll
sink down, push the other side up, it might oscillate for a bit but it's going to end
up forming a perfect sphere. You know why? Because it all wants to get as close to the
center of gravity as possible. The only way we can do that is to make the high places
low that minimizes how much total energy is expressed in that field of gravity. And again
that's why rocks roll down hills instead of up hills. They roll down hills into the ditch
and it'll stay there forever unless you go and pick it up and put it up somewhere else
again. So things have the tendency to fill in low places. That's the sun, it's nice
and big, big gashes ball. Let's go to something that's one-tenth the diameter of the sun,
the planet Saturn. Hold on to the ring for a moment, we'll get back to Saturn's ring
but look at that ball, it's a gorgeous spherical ball. It's one-tenth the diameter of the sun,
it's also a sphere. Look carefully, actually it's a little bit flattened, top to bottom.
We'll get back to that too because we'll learn that if something's not a sphere, it
tells us something about what's going on in the environment of that object. Why something
is not a sphere is more interesting even than why it was a sphere in the first place because
it wants to be a sphere and if it's not one, it's telling us something. Let's go to an
object one-tenth the size of Saturn. Earth, beautiful blue ball looking like a marble
in the sky, it's an image taken by Apollo 17. Let's go to one-fourth the size of Earth.
We all know it's coming, one-fourth the size of Earth, we get the moon. Once again a sphere.
Gravity has no problems in a wide range of size objects turning it into a sphere. But
you can ask the question, does gravity always win? Is there a point where gravity fails
in its attempt to turn something into a sphere? The answer is yes, gravity does fail. There's
a point where the object is so small that the field of gravity is so weak that imagine
you're looking at this mountain I described a moment ago and you nudge the rock, there's
not enough gravity to have the rock roll all the way down hill and it just kind of goes
a little lower but that's about it. But otherwise it's happy staying up there because it doesn't
weigh that much. There are such objects. Let's go to something one-tenth the size of the moon.
What do we get? We get one of the, one-tenth the size of our moon, we get a moon of Mars,
Phobos. Phobos, look at that poor thing. Craters and it's got a funny shape and I wouldn't
want to have been there when that got hit or punched or whatever, but that's Phobos.
You notice it's starting to not look like a sphere anymore. It doesn't have enough gravity
to have wrapped it into a sphere in the first place. Let's go even smaller than Phobos.
One-tenth the size of Phobos, we get an asteroid, Gasparra, looking like a fine Idaho potato.
Not a chance. It has rounded edges, sure, but it's not a sphere. Something's going on.
It turns out if you're small enough, the chemical bonds of the stuff you're made of, which are
no stronger in this case than they were for the earth, but the gravity is so weak that
it is helpless in the presence of those chemical bonds of the rocks themselves. So the rocks,
you're born a rock, they stay a rock. They don't get rounded out by the action of gravity.
This is one asteroid, Gasparra. I got another one for you about the same size. This is one
of my favorites called asteroid Cleopatra. This is a series of images of Cleopatra rotating
and we call it the dog bone asteroid. It looks like a dog bone, nothing like a sphere. Forces
of gravity are helpless in its attempt to turn that into a sphere. By the way, it's
also helpless turning us into a sphere. I am not a sphere, lest I looked. The chemical
forces in my body enable me to retain my shape even in the presence of gravitational forces
within me that might want to shape me into a sphere. I'm small enough so that I'm in
full control. But wait a minute now. The earth picture that we saw is looking really spherical.
We know that earth has mountains and valleys and craters and cliffs and there's the bottom
of the ocean and it goes really deep and really high. It's got texture. It's got surface.
It's the soul of geology going on in the surface of a planet. What am I saying that earth is
a nice perfect sphere? Surely it's got this structure on it. Let's analyze that structure.
Let's think about that. We've got these mountain ranges and I come to my trusty globe here.
You can't feel it but I can and I rub my fingers across it. I'm coming across here in Nepal
and there's some ridges there. That's the Himalayan mountains. I come over here to North
America and I feel the ridges and there goes the Rocky Mountains, the Alaska Range up here
in Alaska. I come down to the Andes Mountains. The globe makers in consort with the geologist
raise the surface of this globe in order to tell me where the mountains are and say sure
it would feel like that. You will tell yourself. The answer is no. It would not feel like that.
You know why? Because let's go to the deepest part of Earth's crust. You know what that is?
Right here, Marianas Trench, far away in the Pacific Ocean, 35,000 feet down. That's the
deepest part of Earth's crust. How many miles is that? 5, 6 miles. 6 miles down. What's the
highest point on Earth's crust? Mount Everest. How high up is that? It's 28, 29,000 feet.
That's 5, 6 miles up. The total distance between the lowest part of Earth's surface and the
highest part of Earth's surface is a dozen miles. That's the length of Manhattan Island.
You can drive that in 12 minutes obeying the speed limit. Earth, as much credit as we'd
like to give to the beautiful structures upon its surface, Earth being 8,000 miles in diameter,
it only has a 12-mile variation on its surface. It is as good a sphere as you could ever make
in a laboratory. If Earth was shrunk down to the size of a cue ball, it'd be the smoothest
cue ball ever made. You would not even know where the mountains are, where the valleys,
the hills. In fact, if I were just some cosmic giant and Earth was out there in the sky and
I took my finger and rubbed across it, I would not know. I would not be able to tell what
was water, what was land, what was mountain, what was a valley, because the depth of the
mountains and the valleys would be the same as the depth of my fingerprint lines. It would
go unnoticed. So, yes, gravity works. It works beautifully. We just have to be really small
and can't make the observation we need to make that these fluctuations are only 1,600
in the diameter of the globe itself. In the rest of the universe, we find some interesting
things. We look around for places where objects are not spheres and ask, why not? Because
we know nature wants it to be a sphere. So, let's use this as the assumption that it wants
to be a sphere and that we can learn a lot about why it's not. Let's take, for example,
tidal forces. Tidal forces really wreak havoc on spheres. What are tidal forces? It's simple.
The fact that if you're an object and there's a source of gravity over there somewhere,
and that's tugging on you, that the side of you closer to that source of gravity feels
more gravity than the side of you that's farther away. It makes intuitive sense. The
closer you are to the object, the stronger its gravity feels. So, if I have some extent
to me, this arm is going to feel your gravity more than this arm is, and it might try to
stretch it out like this. In fact, that happened. The moon exerts tidal forces on the earth.
One side of the earth is closer to the moon than the other. The oceans respond to that,
and the oceans on this side bulge out high tide. The oceans on the other side are not
pulled as much towards the moon as these, and everything is sort of stretched in this
direction, and thinned in the perpendicular sides. So, you have two low tides, two high
tides. That's the tidal force of the moon acting on the earth, turning it slightly out
of sphericity. You know, this happens also in binary stars. You have stars, two stars
in orbit around each other. The sun is only one star. We look around the cosmos. Plenty
of places where two stars are in orbit around each other. One of them happens to be a black
hole. We have such cases. Another one is a blue supergiant, or a red supergiant star.
You learn about those in another lecture. It can become so large that some of its material
will be funneled down towards the black hole itself. And as it fills up, the side closer
to the black hole feels an extra tug, and the shape of the giant gets distorted, and
it comes to kind of a point as it funnels down onto the black hole. And that shape resembles
a Hershey kiss, I'd like to think. And it's a distortion from what would otherwise be
a native sphere. So once again, you have gravity, tidal forces of gravity changing
the shape of things. Also, if you're an object and you think you're okay and you come too
close to another object, it can rip you apart. You know, that happened with Saturn's ring.
Some object, an asteroid, a loosely bound asteroid, or comet, some combination that
came too close to Saturn, that one side of it was closer to Saturn than the other, and
it ripped it apart and scattered the whole thing into a ring. Eventually, those particles
will fall out of orbit, and Saturn will lose its ring. I'm happy to be around at a time
where my favorite planet has the most beautiful ring in the solar system. Another thing that
can affect your shape is rotation. Rotation. Jumbo gas clouds are what gives birth to stars.
And anything out there has some kind of movement, but as it begins to collapse, there's something
called the conservation of angular momentum, physics term. All it refers to is the fact
that if you're big moving slow, big rotating slowly, as you get smaller in order to compensate
for having gotten smaller, you have to spin up. You got to spin up. We've seen this before.
You know this happens. It happens every day on an ice skating rink. There's some ice
skater who's turning like this with their arms outstretched, and what do they do? They
bring in their arms and what happens? They speed up. And let's try that. We can go slowly
and then speed up. In fact, they could be much more effective at that if they carried
weights in their hands, bringing more weight into their chest than just the weight of their
fist. But that happens to gas clouds as well as happening on an ice skating rink. The gas
cloud collapse, it begins to spin up. And there's a sort of, there's a resistance for material
to flow inward in the plane of rotation. It's like that centrifugal force you're trying
to resist, that force of the rotating platter at the amusement park. If you're in the plane
of the platter, it's going to hard to work in because it's trying to throw you out to
the outer wall. That's kind of like a, we call it a centrifugal force, but it's not
really a force at all. It's just your tendency to fly off. Fortunately, there's support
back there so that you don't fly off the playground, the amusement park ride, but it's real forces
of physics. So this rotation preserves the plane, but continues to collapse from top
to bottom. And so it has the effect of flattening a system, flattening a system. When you make
a galaxy, big gas clouds make stars, they also make galaxies. Galaxies with a hundred
billion stars in them. So let's make a galaxy. So here we go. Here's a big gas cloud and
oh, I'm going to make some stars early. So I make some stars and now they have orbits
that sort of come around like this and that's fine. But the rest of the gas is still collapsing
and it meets in the plane of rotation. So it sort of kept its shape out here because
that's where, that's the plane of rotation. The rest was able to collapse down and we
get a flattened system. They're galaxies that look like this. I've got an edge on spiral
galaxy. Look at that. That's a flattened system seen edge on. Some stars retain their
spherical distribution. That's the bulge in the middle. But the fact that this system
is rapidly rotating meant in the plane, it's not going to collapse in the plane, but it
did collapse top to bottom. So we lost what was previously a full sphere and it went down
to something flat as a pancake. Flatter than a pancake in fact. The Milky Way looks like
this. We are as flat as a crepe. It's about a thousand to one diameter to thickness. A
crepe. We've got stars above and below the plane of the Milky Way galaxy formed before
it collapsed. In fact, those stars are the skeleton of the sphere that was once there.
In fact, I have a galaxy that has a much bigger bulge than our, than our galaxy. It's called
the Sombrero galaxy. Look at that. It's beautiful. One of my favorite ones in the cosmos. This
one, about half the stars formed before the thing collapsed and retained their spherical
orbits. And the other half of the stars collapsed, preserved the plane of their rotation and
made the disk. So this one is a hybrid of the collapsed story. There's also a general
flattening. Simply, once you're made, if you keep rotating fast, you just get a little
flatter. Earth is slightly bigger at its equator than it is at the poles. The equator, we make
one day. The circumference is 25,000 miles and we make one rotation a day. So 25, if
you're on the equator, you're moving 25,000 miles in 24 hours. So how fast are you going?
You're going about a thousand miles an hour if you're just standing on the equator, minding
your own business. Well, that puts a stress on the ball and so it'll bulge out a little
bit. So Earth has a bulge, an equatorial bulge. You might read about that. Not only that,
Saturn has an equatorial bulge. That picture of Saturn we saw, Saturn is actually 10%
shorter pole to pole than it is across its diameter, across its, its, its equator. Saturn
also rotates much faster than Earth and is much bigger. So in fact, if you're standing
on the equator of Saturn, you're moving 22,000 miles an hour. So that's, that's, that's
going on such a good clip that in fact Saturn has flattened for having rotated so fast.
And it becomes oblate. You have two words. Oblate means you're flattened. Prolate means
you're sort of elongated. I just think of hamburgers as oblate and hot dogs as prolate
if you need some examples, especially when I'm hungry, I think that way. But what happens
if you rotate really, really, really, really fast? If you spun up Saturn even faster, you
know what will happen eventually? Pieces of it will fly off. Imagine doing this experiment
like with the Pillsbury Doe Boy. That's all, that's it. You take them, you spin them, his
arms fly off, end up on the walls. So you've got to be tough enough to sustain that rotation
rate and to stay in one piece. There are objects in the universe that are so tightly packed
and so dense that they can sustain a high rotation rate. They're balls of neutrons. We call them,
sensibly, neutron stars. If they rotate and they pulse at us, they're also called pulsars.
But they are neutron stars and they're densely packed. It's the most dense state of matter
known. Take the Sun, compress it down into a ball about 10 miles across. That's the density
of a neutron star. Let me tell you how dense it is. Scoop out a thimble full of the material
and put it on a scale, on one of these balance scales. Do you know what you have to put on
the other side of that scale in order to make it balance? A herd of 50 million elephants
and that would balance one thimble full of neutron star material. Or equivalently, take
the 50 million elephants, cram them into a thimble and that's the density of a neutron.
So, neutron stars are extraordinary things. Turns out, they have such high gravity that
they can spin enormously fast without any risk of flying apart, like the Pillsbury
Doughboy. In fact, we look in the universe and we find these pulsars, they're spinning
30 times a second. Then when we first discovered these, we said, we don't know any form of
matter that can hold together and spin at that speed. And that's when someone was able
to say, wait a minute, this is not ordinary matter, this is nucleonic matter. This is
a dense ball of neutrons and thus was the discovery of stars made completely of nuclear
matter. Neutron stars otherwise known as pulsars. And let me tell you how serious the gravity
is on there. We have mountain ranges here where it locks roll down the mountain. Go
to a neutron star, I'll put a sheet of paper on a neutron star and you say, what's the
thickness of that sheet of paper? The gravity is so strong that my effort to get on top
of that sheet of paper, lifting myself to that thickness will require as much energy
as a rock climber on earth ascending a 3,000 mile cliff. So that's some serious gravity
going on on the surface of a neutron star. And in fact, nothing has a chance of taking
shape against the will of its gravitational force and neutron stars are the most perfect
spheres in the entire cosmos. Nary a mountain range to be found. My last point here is just
the observable universe. It's simple. Light takes time to get from one point to another
and the universe has a birthday 13 billion years ago. So every direction we look, the
farthest we can see is 13 billion light years, 13 billion light years, no matter which way,
because at that point we see the beginning of the universe. So our visible edge is exactly
13 billion years in every direction. And we're at the center of that horizon, just the way
a ship at sea looks around and it's the same distance from every point on its own horizon.
Wherever it is kind of takes its horizon with it. Just as is true here in the entire cosmos.
Let me just say that spheres are everywhere. They make a very useful tool. Now I'll end
with one of my favorite jokes. How do you make a cow produce more milk? Ask that of
someone who's an animal husbandry expert. They might say, oh, we'll change the diet of
the cow to feed it better food, whatever. Ask that other question, that same question
of an engineer. They say, well, fix the machine. Change the suction rate. They'll try to change
the machinery of the process. But ask that question of an astrophysicist who lives in
the world of spheres where anything that's not in a sphere is better off thought of as
a sphere and see how you adjust to make the real case. We would say, imagine a spherical
cow.
