Welcome back to my favorite universe. Today I want to talk about, of course, one of my
favorite subjects, and that is rarefied phenomena, rarefied objects in the cosmos. Of course
there's a lot out there that's dense, but there's so much more that's rarefied that
it's certainly deserving of its own presentation. And let's begin on earth. Let's begin with
what's most familiar. We've all been to a magic show and seen a magician with a top
hat and pull a rabbit out of a hat. Well that's usually described as pulling a rabbit out
of thin air. Thin air. Air is something we think of as very low density, very rarefied.
In fact, if someone didn't tell you there was air between us, you might not think there
was anything there. You know there's air because wind blows trees and you see storm systems
and you see all this, but if you just plopped here on earth, there's no obvious measure
that there's air there, but that there's anything there at all. Nothing blocking your view.
But let's ask ourselves, what is this air made of? Well we know it's got nitrogen and
oxygen, sure. How dense is it? Well let's look at how many nitrogen and oxygen
molecules of our atmosphere at sea level air pressure would fit into a thimble, a cubic
centimeter of volume. Well, that has about the same number of molecules as the number
of grains of sand on an average beach, about a quintillion, one with 18 zeros. So there's
nothing thin about air at all if you're counting molecules. But we still like thinking of air
as nothing. In fact, that concept goes very far back with something close to nothing. Look
at the famous Aristotelian elements, earth, air, fire, and water. It's one of the base
elements from ancient thinking. But in fact, there was a fifth element that was lighter
than all four of those. A fifth element, a quintessence, quintessence it was called,
and that was the substance of the cosmos, space. And that rose above the earth and above the
air because in fact it was even lighter than air. So it was not where earth is, it was
in the heavens, filling the cosmos. Let's think a little more about this, the quintillion
particles per cubic centimeter. There's a certain weight that that has. We call it
sea level air pressure, but pressure is a force per unit area. And so let's think of
it as a force, as a weight. Let's take a square inch. Sea level air pressure is about 15 pounds
per square inch. Now what does that mean? Something simple. It means something simple.
Put a square inch on the ground and cut through the atmosphere a column of air, one square
inch in cross section, and start from the surface of the earth and go all the way out
to the farthest reaches of the atmosphere. That is a column of air. It goes up hundreds
of miles, even thousands of miles. Take that, put it on a scale and weigh it. It's 15 pounds.
That's what air pressure means. It is the weight of the column of air above. Well, what happens
when you have a suction cup? You have a suction cup and you press it down onto the ground.
You're removing the air that used to be inside that pressure cup, balancing the air all around
it. Once you take out the air, the full weight of the 15 pounds per square inch is resting
on the outside of that rubber. You try to pick up the suction cup and say, oh, it's sucking
me down. No, the atmosphere is pressing down on the surface of that suction cup, preventing
you from pulling it up. How much force do you need to lift it? Well, what's the surface
area of the suction cup? If it's 10 square inches, you need 10 times 15 pounds per square
inch, 150 pounds. If you could put 150 pounds on it, you pop the thing right off the ground.
That's how suction cups work. The moment you lift it up, air swiftly swoops in to fill the
vacuum that had been left there by pressing the air out in the first place. There's this old
adage, nature abhors a vacuum. Whoever there's a vacuum, nature collapses down on it to get
rid of the vacuum. We have this idea that somehow a vacuum is rare or uncommon or something
that nature does not like. Well, I'm an astrophysicist, and my concept of nature is not just what
happens on Earth's surface, it's what happens in the cosmos. In the cosmos, in fact, nature
loves a vacuum. We'll see more about that in just a few moments. Let's keep playing with
this notion of atmospheric pressure. If you go to a mountaintop, let's go to one of the
highest mountaintops where there are large telescopes, Mauna Kea, Hawaii. In Hawaii, that
is at 14,000 feet. It's not 15 pounds per square inch anymore. You're higher up. The
column of air above you is shorter. There's less air. There's less pressure. In fact,
it's about 10 pounds per square inch. There's less air. That also means, of course, there's
less oxygen to breathe. So at the console for all the telescopes, at the console for
all the telescopes is an oxygen tank. In case you start getting giddy, in case your data
taking starts becoming compromised, you whip out the oxygen, and that'll help you.
Now, Earth's atmosphere, as I said a moment ago, extends for thousands of miles. We don't
think of it that way because we have the space shuttle and things orbiting relatively low
compared with that, and we say that they're out in space. But in fact, the boundary of
Earth's atmosphere can be defined by where the density of air is no longer distinguished
from the density of space between the planets. At that point, you say, okay, Earth's air
is here, and the rest of the solar system is there. But that being said, we know most
of that air is compressed down at the lowest level. In fact, 99% of all the air molecules
on Earth is found below an altitude of 50 miles. There's still a little bit of molecules
up above that, not many. That conditions are wholly unlike what you find in the laboratory.
It's very low density compared with sea level, compared with monarchy at very low density.
At those altitudes, 50 to 100 miles up, molecules collide less frequently. So the whole dynamic
among the molecules has changed. Here's an interesting fact. There's a stream of particles
coming from the sun. We call it the solar wind, stream of charged particles. This is
well known ever since we've been studying the sun. These charged particles travel through
interplanetary space, and they come near Earth. Since they have charge, they respond to the
magnetic field of Earth. Positive charges go to one pole, negative go to the other, and
they spiral down in towards Earth's magnetic poles. But it's not a free trip. There's
atmosphere there. So they start colliding into atmospheric molecules. You know that begins
to happen? Between 50 and 100 miles up. They never make it low down. As low density as
that is, between 50 and 100 miles up, it's high enough density for these things to hit.
When they hit, they excite the molecules. Molecules love getting excited because you
excite a molecule. Upon being excited, it says, OK, how will I de-excite myself? And
one of the ways is, it releases light, photons of energy, green light, yellow light, blue
light. And as it releases this energy, it creates a display of lights in the sky, better known
as the aurora. One of my favorite images of the aurora is not one taken from Alaska,
although some of the best images, terrestrial images, come from there. My favorite is taken
from the space shuttle. And we take a look at an image now. We see the tail end of the
space shuttle. Space shuttle orbits a couple of hundred miles above Earth's surface. You
notice in this image that, of course, the aurora is below, is lower in altitude than
the space shuttle. And just look at the light emitted. That is the emitted light from miles
of Earth's atmosphere, having been excited by particles streaming from the sun. This
only happens in very low density environments, such as what happens in the upper atmosphere.
You get this in the northern hemisphere as well as in the southern hemisphere, and you
might be more familiar with them as the aurora borealis and the aurora australis. Another
place where material is thin is the sun, the solar corona. You hardly ever get to see
the corona unless you're eyewitness to a total solar eclipse. I've seen one in my life,
unforgettable. That was off the coast of northwest Africa some years ago. And what happens is,
of course, in a solar eclipse, the sun moves, the moon moves in front of the sun, eclipsing
the sun, occulting the disk of the sun. And when that happens, when the light of the sun
is removed, you see the glowing outer atmosphere of the sun, which is not bright enough to
reveal itself when the sun is visible. When the disk of the sun is, you have to blot out
the disk of the sun, then you see the solar corona, the crown of the sun. The solar corona,
we didn't know much about it for a long time. Like, what is it? It's just some glowing gas.
What is it? That's what we assumed, but we didn't know much about it. Then we study
the light, take the light, pass it through a prism, and study the features of the light,
the component colors. You pass light through a prism, it breaks up that light into its
component color, just the way sunlight moves through raindrops, and it makes a rainbow.
Red, orange, yellow, green, blue, violet. Sunlight's composed of those colors. Do the
same thing for the solar corona. And you can study what kinds of elements are present in
that corona. And we found a signature of an element nobody had ever seen before. In fact,
we invented a name for it. We call it Coronium, because we didn't know what it was. There
was no laboratory counterpart for it. We didn't know where it might fit in the periodic
table of elements. We didn't know anything, because we had this placeholder name for it.
Turned out, under the low density conditions in the outer atmosphere of the sun, under
very high temperatures, millions of degrees, iron. Iron emits a signature of light. Highly
ionized iron. We're talking about iron that has lost most of its electrons. Ionized, heavily
ionized. It has a spectral signature, unmistakable. But we had never ionized iron that much before.
We had never subjected it to low density environments, such as the corona before. We had no way to
understand it until we figured out that it was under very low density and very high temperature.
And so the solar corona is an example of something that's quite visible and quite beautiful, but
is also very, very low density in the cosmos. By the way, if it were much higher density,
it might be more visible even with the sun in the picture. You really have to blot out
the sun in order to see the corona. Temperature of the corona? Millions of degrees. Millions.
That's how hot you had to be to ionize iron as much as you got ionized. And the surface
of the sun is a mere 6000 degrees. And it remains a mystery how you can get something that hot
sitting above something that cold. Major frontier of solar physics. We have ideas, but no true
consensus just yet. Let's keep rising up. How about the asteroid belt? We all have a
favorite vision of the asteroid belt as this shooting gallery. Don't dare take your spaceship
through the asteroid belt. They'll come and knock out your antenna. It'll be really dangerous.
Now wait a minute. Let's look at the facts. Take all the mass of the asteroid belt and
combine it together and weigh it. How much is it? What do you get? You get about two
or three percent of the mass of the moon. Of our moon. No, it's not some jumbo planet.
And all its debris that got shattered and all its debris is still there. It's like two and
a half percent of the moon. Now, of all that mass, put 75 percent of it in only four asteroids.
And take the rest and scatter it for 100 million miles wide in an orbit around the sun. One
and a half billion miles around. That's the asteroid belt. Now it's still more dangerous
to go through the asteroid belt than to not go through the asteroid belt. But it is much
less dangerous than most people ever think of it to be. Much lower density of material
than we ever credit it for having. And of course, our fourth spacecraft that have gone to the
outer solar system and have left beyond the orbit of Pluto, that's Pioneer 10 and 11,
and Voyager 1 and 2, those four spacecraft, travel through the asteroid belt without incident,
just as we suspected. Let's keep going out into space. By the way, the density of matter
and interplanetary space, we learned what it was on Earth, sea level, what was it, a
quintillion molecules per cubic centimeter. Out of interplanetary space, we're down to
10. 10 per cubic centimeter. There's a vacuum for you. There's a vacuum. And that's about
the best laboratory vacuums, the best we can get with laboratory vacuums. Here's a sketch
of one. The compartment that has the little circular parts, that's inside that cavity
is where they're pumping on that cavity to remove as many molecules of air as they can
so that you have as low a density environment as possible, and then you could do interesting
experiments, particularly with the excitation of molecules. But in the vacuum of interplanetary
space, the other objects that are quite visible, but are also quite thin, comet tails. Comet
tails are long, big comet tail. A good comet hally, 100 million mile long tail. Recently
Comet Halebop and Comet Yacotake in the last several years, those comets were great comets,
great in the sense, in the classical sense of the word great. You get a few of those
in a lifetime, so make sure you put in your schedule to go see them as many of us did.
But what of a comet tail, as visible as they are, what are they made of? They're still
thin. They're still thin, but they're remarkably visible for their thinness. They reflect sunlight
and they emit light of their own for having been excited by the high energy photons from
the sun. So yes, it's a visible stream, not very high density. Yes, it's more dense than
interplanetary space, but not by much. In fact, the comet pioneer Fred Whipple once
described comet tails as the most ever made of the least. A thousand times the density
of interplanetary space, which is still small compared with ordinary earth air. Now, let's
quantify how thin the comet tail is, even though it's dense, even though it's densities
high compared with interplanetary space. Let's take the whole tail, collapse it to atmospheric
density, and ask how much do you have? That's a good way to compare. Take the 100 million
mile long tail, say let's make atmospheric pressure out of that. You could fill a cube
maybe a half a mile on the side. That's all it is. Fred Whipple is right, the most ever
made with the least. Now, when people first invented tools of spectroscopy, studying the
light from objects and looking at what material was in them, what spectral signatures permeated
the analyzed light, they found the comet tails had cyanogen, CN, a deadly poison, would kill
you post haste. Well, when comet Halle came around in 1910, people didn't know, the public
didn't know about how low the density of the comet tail was, and how it was barely, no
matter what you found, it's not enough to do anything to anybody. What scared people
was that we knew that Earth was passing through the tail of Halle's comet. It passed through
the tail, it actually did. Intersecting some of that gas. People got all worried. Shawletons
were selling anti-comet pills, making a lot of money on people's fear. But if you knew
a little bit about how thin it was, you would have saved your money. So knowing about rarefied
phenomena in the cosmos can be good for your pocketbook on occasion. That takes us to something
not widely appreciated. Let's look at the density of the sun. It's gaseous, but you
might think it's really dense. It is very dense in the core, less dense on the surface,
but if you averaged it, it's about the density of water. So two are human beings. That's
kind of interesting. Water has a density of one gram per cubic centimeter. Human beings
would basically float or sink or somewhere in between, so that puts us at about one gram
per cubic centimeter. The sun is actually a little heavier. The sun is just a little
heavier. One point four grams per cubic centimeter. So if you took a scoop of the average material
of the sun, it would sink in your bathtub, but it would not sink that fast. What happens
in five billion years? The sun is about to die in five billion years. It swells up, becomes
a red giant. It becomes a hundred times bigger in diameter than it is now. Of course it didn't
add, there's no mass that got added to it, so the average density drops. It drops to
one millionth its current density. By then, the surface of the sun is very close to earth.
That's bad, bad day on earth. The atmosphere would evaporate. The oceans would come to a
rolling boil. They too would evaporate. Life would vaporize. Ignoring those complications,
what we find is that the material of the sun, as rarefied as it is, earth is trying to orbit
the sun, plowing through some of that material, and that resists the motion of earth, and
earth ends up losing its orbital energy and spiraling into oblivion, down into the center
of the sun. That's going to happen in five billion years. So as rarefied as the sun becomes
as a red giant, it will still impede the motion of the earth. Let's go to interstellar space.
We go beyond the planets, beyond the orc cloud of comets that surround the solar system.
The interplanetary space, it's even less dense there. By the way, the nearest stars are far.
Our space probes, Pioneer 10 and 11 and Voyager 1 and 2, at those speeds, it will take you
25,000 years to get to the nearest star. It is far. It is far. It is big. It is empty. There you
be hard pressed to find a couple of atoms, couple of atoms for every few cubic centimeters.
There's one tenth what it is between the planets. Much better than most vacuums ever created on
earth. Gas clouds that live between the stars, they are rendered visible, much like comets
that come near the sun. Gas clouds in the galaxy are rendered visible if they're near a star.
The star reflects light off of them and they get excited and release light from their own atoms
and molecules. And we use special telescopes to detect this. In these gas clouds, there was another
spectral feature that no one knew about and no one had ever seen before. In the nebulae of space,
we found an element. We didn't know what to do. We called it nebulium. You ever hear that? Nebulium. What did
nebulium turn out to be? It turned out to be oxygen in a peculiar state of temperature and density. What
kind of density? Very low density. The kind of densities that were very uncommon on earth and very hard to
create in the laboratory. Although now we can do it routinely.
Interstellar space. It's got stars. It's got gas clouds. It's pretty empty between those places.
However empty that is, it's empty here between the galaxies. Between the galaxies. That's empty.
There's no dust. There's no stars. There's no planets. There's no moons. There's no comets. There's no
comatea. It's empty. It's as empty as you could possibly find. And then you get one atom in a cubic meter.
A cubic meter. Another way to think of it is take a 200,000 kilometer cube.
How many atoms are in that 200,000 kilometer cube? About the number of atoms in the air in your refrigerator.
That's empty.
That means most of the entire universe is a vacuum. As I said earlier, the cosmos loves a vacuum.
Now, you might have heard that the universe is expanding. There's not enough mass in the universe to exhibit enough gravity to halt that expansion and bring it back.
But we can ask the academic question, now academic question, how much mass would it take to balance the expansion of the cosmos?
How much density of matter is required for that? Well, it's got to be more than the one particle per cubic meter.
How much more? Okay, 10 particles per cubic meter. If the whole universe had 10 particles per cubic meter, that would be enough to halt the expansion and send us right back from whence we came.
That doesn't sound like much. It's not that much. Just more than what it is now.
But what again of this notion of perfect vacuum? Suppose there were no particles. Does that even have any meaning? How do you do that?
How do you, is such a place exist? Well, we see from our favorite vacuum pump, once again, that we're making great strides to try to create the vacuum of interstellar space, intergalactic space.
It may be impossible, but let's imagine the day comes where we can create the perfect vacuum, like the perfect storm, the perfect vacuum inside of this cavity.
What would we measure? Turns out, the field of quantum mechanics, a very successful branch of physics, discovered in the 1920s, added to in the decades that followed.
That's a description of nature on its smallest scales. It tells us what atoms and molecules are doing, which is wholly unfamiliar to the kinds of things we see happen in everyday life.
All kinds of new forces take effect, forces of quantum mechanics, new forces of physics, new behavior of material. Turns out, quantum mechanics predicts that in the vacuum, the vacuum can't really be a vacuum, that it's seething with these things called virtual particles,
which are particle pairs, matter and antimatter pairs that pop into existence, annihilate and then go out of existence again.
And they live too short a period of time to measure their existence.
Now, this just sounds like a cartoon. It sounds like science fiction, sounds like fiction, but so much else that quantum mechanics has predicted has come true.
That no one has the audacity to assume that this prediction is somehow going to be false when everyone else turned out to be correct.
So, what does that mean if particles are popping in and out of existence in the vacuum?
You can measure what effect this has on the environment and it creates a pressure, a pressure.
A density of energy that has an opposite effect of gravity.
Instead of bringing things together, it pushes things apart.
We call this the vacuum energy.
And you know something? If you calculate how much vacuum energy is in the entire cosmos, you get a number that's kind of insane.
Something's wrong with our calculation, but we do calculate that, in fact, there's a pressure on the cosmos that will never let us re-collapse, no matter how much matter we would ever find.
Recently, we discovered that, in fact, the universe has a kind of an anti-gravity pressure operating on it.
It was a recent discovery a few years ago.
This is this famous dark energy.
Nobody knows where it came from, nobody knows what it's made of, but we know it's there.
This vacuum energy from these seething virtual particles predicted by quantum mechanics could explain that.
Except that when you calculate it, the numbers are wildly different from each other.
So we don't know what the problem is.
It remains a frontier of our understanding of the cosmos.
But we feel a little better that there is something that we know about that can create this negative pressure on the universe, forcing it to expand exponentially into the future.
Even though the calculation doesn't work out, it's far too much compared with what we see.
But it's encouraging because before we had these ideas, there was nothing we could conceive of that could resist the titanic forces of gravity on a cosmic scale.
Well, is there some limit to this nothingness?
I talk about empty space, but I still use the word space.
I'm still saying there's a thing called space.
Suppose there was a place where there wasn't even space.
What is that?
Maybe that's outside of our universe if there is such a concept.
Because if space, there is nothing, then perhaps outside of our universe where there is no space, there's not even nothing.
What shall we call that?
We would call it nothing, nothing.
