Welcome back to my favorite universe. Today, following up on an entire lecture devoted to
that which is rarefied in the cosmos, today I want to talk about that which is dense or
more generally a discussion of what it means for things to have density at all. Some of
my favorite objects in the universe have some of the highest density of any this mind boggling
range of measured densities in the cosmos. In fact, it spans 40 powers of 10. Now, it reminds
me of when I was a kid. That's our first way we understand things that are dense and things
that are not. There's the old joke, which weighs more, a ton of feathers or a ton of lead. And
of course, a ton of lead. Well, of course, no, no, they weigh the same because they're both a
ton. But what that the fact that some people answer that question wrong is indicative of the
fact that many people think of the weight of things not so much for how much it weighs, but
for how dense it is. There's some intuitive sense of density. And we can define density
mathematically. It's just a ratio of the mass of the object divided by its volume. Very simple.
That is the density. Could be grams per cubic centimeter, could be could be kilograms per
cubic meter. These are densities. The unit of density. Now, there are other kinds of densities
that aren't strictly measured that way. One of them is the human resistance to common sense. That's a
kind of density. He's dense or she's dense or okay, we all know what that means. Although if you
took it literally, it means they had more gray matter than others with the same size head. If
they're denser, it means they have more brains. So maybe there's an occasion to reverse that
insult. Another way to think of density is population statistics. You're not thinking of a volume
density. You think of an area density. How many people per square mile live here? In Manhattan,
my home borough of New York City at mid afternoon is 100,000 people per square mile in Manhattan.
That's very high. My wife, who's from Alaska, has nearly zero people per square mile. The whole
state has a half a million people tops. Very low density populations. There are other ways to think
about the term density. Now, in the universe, again, thinking about mass density, the range
is so large. We hinted to some of the thinner densities in the previous lecture, intergalactic
space has the lowest density of all. One atom per cubic meter. Can't get much lower density than
that. But at the other extreme, one very common form of high density matter is a white dwarf.
Here we have a white dwarf, NGC 3132. In this image, what you see here is the, this nebulosity is the
shell of a star that had been released into space in its dying days. Laying bare the hot dense core
of what was once, of what was once the center of thermonuclear fusion. It is densely packed atomic
matter. It's small and it's hot enough to be glowing white. We call it a white dwarf. To get the
density of a white dwarf, what you need to do is take the sun or slightly less mass than
that and cram it down into something the volume of the earth. That's how high the density is
of a white dwarf. But it's not the king of high density objects. That goes to my favorite
object, a neutron star. A neutron star can be seen in the center of this image. This particular
image is of the crab nebula. Crab nebula is the remnant of a star that has once, that some time ago
exploded. Exploded spread its guts into the galaxy, enriching the galaxy with heavy elements.
Elements, the kinds of elements you and I are made of. The kind of elements you find that are the active
ingredients of life and of planets and of asteroids and comets. We learn more about that in an entire
lecture devoted just to that subject. But right now what's of interest here is not the crab-like
nebulosity of this, the crab nebula, but in the center of the crab nebula, there's a pair of stars.
One of those is the exact center of that explosion and that is the neutron star. An object so dense
Well first let's use the sun analogy. Take the sun, cram it down into a volume about a dozen miles
across. Far more dense than a white dwarf. Let's get a more earthly analogy. Let's take a thimble full
of that neutron star. In fact we gave this example in the on being round lecture. Take a thimble full
of it and ask what will it take on earth to sort of balance that on a scale. So you put it on one
end of a seesaw and on the other end of the seesaw stack a herd of 50 million elephants. Then it'll
just about balance. That's how crammed together the material in a neutron star is. That's dense.
That's as impressively dense as anything I have ever thought of. But the things that go on when
you're dense. You're small dense and have a lot of mass packed in there. You have a high surface
gravity and high surface gravity wreaks havoc on its immediate environment. If a gas cloud comes a
little too close, it'll take the gas cloud and draw it in in such a way that it'll spiral around the
central point in a region spinning faster than the outer regions creating friction. When you create
friction, you have heat. When you have heat, you have high temperature and high luminosity. You have
these spiral areas look like toilet bowls, but we have an official word for it. It's called an
accretion disk. It's a system by which these small dense objects consume matter because they're so
small the matter doesn't fall straight down on it. Most of the time it misses and hits the disk on
the side. The disk is a way to release energy so that it can descend into the oblivion. Not only
do you find accretion disks around neutron stars, but you also find them around black holes. Another
favorite object in the cosmos that is small and has a high surface gravity. Now the density of
things in the cosmos, as I said earlier, ranges 40 orders of magnitude. But let's start with simple
things that we know and love and understand. Let's start with water. Water has a density of
one gram per cubic centimeter. In fact, it was originally defined that way. Water is a very
important part of our culture. It makes sense that we would find metric measures based on that.
Other things have about the density of water frozen methane, frozen ammonia. In fact, frozen water has
slightly less density than liquid water. We know that because ice cubes float. Ice birds float.
Not much above water, but it's floating. They go ice sheets in the polar regions. They're floating
on top of liquid oceans. There's a moon of Jupiter. Europa has ice sheets that shift around. We think
there's liquid water underneath from that evidence. That all floats. Those frozen objects out in space,
it's easy to freeze methane and frozen carbon dioxide, and comets are made of this stuff.
Comets. And by the way, when they come too close to the sun, the sun evaporates them. It helps to
make the tail that we know and love. But in the core, the actual chunk of comet in the head of the
comet is made of these frozen gases, approximately the density of water. On Earth, we get rocks.
I could have had a picture of any rock because a rock, I'm not a geologist, so one rock is the
same as another rock. Here we have a rock formation in the southwest. Rocks, kind of density to rocks
have. Rocks, they range anywhere from twice that of water, maybe up to five times that of water.
First crust is mostly rock. It's mostly rock.
Let's keep going up. Is anything more dense than rock? Sure there is. They're metals. More dense
than rock. Iron. Iron. Two or three times the density of rock. That, I have a sample of iron.
Right here. This slab of iron, in fact, is a meteorite.
From the Canyon Diablo, meteor crater Arizona. It's a fragment of, a fragment of, the larger
meteorite that made that crater. This is very heavy. It is very dense. That's hard for me
to convince you of that. Until I do this. This weighs 15 pounds, about three five pound pegs
of sugar. Imagine that. Iron. 90% iron, 10% nickel. 4.6 billion year old piece of the
origin of the solar system. Iron. Yes, there's some iron on earth's surface, but you know where most
of the iron went? Down to the core of the earth. Because iron is heavier. It is denser than rock.
So we have iron and nickel in our core. Rock on our surface. Air above the rock. In the early
stages of earth, when it was partially molten, the heavy things fell to the center. The lighter
things rose to the top. Yes, there's still some mixtures among them. But the core is predominantly
this. Crust is predominantly rock. By the way, the stuff denser than iron out there. Platinum
is much denser than iron. So is gold. One of my favorite scenes is you watch movies where there's
some gold heist and they finally get into the vault and they just grab the gold blicks and they
start, they're tossing them to each other and walking out with, with the backpack full of,
listen, no, no, no. As heavy as this is, gold is heavier, denser, denser. If they're trying to
run, if they're trying to steal some bricks of, bricks of gold, they're going to have to be like,
going like this. One at a time. They're not running out with satchels full of the stuff.
Aridium, also very high density. The densest thing out there, however, is osmium. Make the world's
best paperweight. Although this would do a pretty good job too. By the way, a cubic foot of osmium
weighs about as much as a Buick, by the way. You want to know how dense these things are.
Now, another way we know, you can reason that Earth would have its heavier materials in its center,
but there are other ways we know this, because they're earthquakes that take place periodically
on Earth's surface. It sends these seismic pressure waves through the Earth. And depending
on the density of material, it will refract the seismic wave at one angle or another,
depending on where the earthquake was and what the run of density is as you go from
the crust down through the center. And you have enough of these stations measuring the time delays,
you can construct what the profile of density is for the Earth. And what do we get? Core has
a density of about 12 times that of water. It's up there with the heavy metals. Crust has a density
of about 3. The whole average for Earth is about 5.5 grams per cubic centimeter. About 5.5 times
that of water. As I've already noted, we so often use the word heavy when we mean dense.
There are plenty of things you would pick up in your life that weigh much more than this.
Like, what's a good example, a nice well-stocked bag of groceries is going to weigh more than this.
But you're going to say, oh my gosh, you don't freak out by lifting it because the size seems
commensurate with the weight. That's not so with this. This is some of the
most amount of dense material anyone would ever pick up. Usually when we have iron in the world
extracted from iron ore on our crust, we would extrude this into i-beams and things where you
get strength but with low mass. So we hardly ever build anything with slabs of iron this large
or slabs of steel, that chunky. So getting back to the old feathers and lead question,
if I just come out and tell you, lead weighs more than feathers,
even though that sentence is not scientifically precise, you know what I mean by that.
You know what I mean. Lead weighs more than... You're not going to say, you know, you didn't say that
right. Oh, I don't know what you mean. You're confusing me. You know what I mean by that.
I mean lead is denser than feathers. That's really what I mean.
Fine, no ambiguity there, but if you want to play that game, watch out because there are cases
where that phrasing fails you. I'll give you a good example.
You go to the store, you go to the dairy section, the skim milk is half and half and then what else
is there? Heavy cream. The word heavy is labeled on the carton. Have you ever done the experiment?
Heavy cream is lighter than skim milk. It floats on skim milk.
Those of you who are older out there in the audience will remember that they would deliver
milk unhomogenized to your house. The cream was on the top. The only way heavy cream can go to the
top is if it is lighter than the rest of the milk that's below and you skim it off and what's left
is of course skim milk because you stole all the cream for your strawberries. So it fails there.
Plus, here's another example. The QE2, one of the biggest ocean liners the world has known.
It weighs 70,000 tons. It's lighter than water.
Of course it's lighter than water, otherwise it would sink.
It doesn't sink. So the total volume, the total mass divided by the total volume is less than one.
Same is true of course with battleships and aircraft carriers and everything else that's out
there that is really massive and heavy. Now I have fun with dancing. Let me give you some other tidbits.
Some other density tidbits. You ready? We say that hot air rises.
Well of course that would only happen if there's gravity. Hot air would not know where to go where
there's no gravity out in space in the space shuttle when they're weightless in orbit around
the earth. If the air is hot it just stays there unless they blow on it. But here on earth we say
hot air rises but really you could just as legitimately say cold air sinks.
Because it's not simply that it's hot, it's that when you heat air it becomes less dense and less
dense things rise and more dense things sink. So I'd like to sort of broaden the vocabulary
and spread the word instead of saying oh hot air rises, cold air sinks. What else do we have?
I got a good one. We already know that solid water is less dense than liquid water. Okay.
Fine.
There's another one. Dead fish are less dense than live fish.
How do we know this? Because they float belly up for at least some part of the time after they
have died whereas the other fish are just happily moving around. Now if the fish is sort of
neutrally buoyant it means a live fish has a density of one and a dead fish has a density less
than one. Hence the posturing with its belly up in the tank. And we mentioned this in an earlier
lecture but it's worth repeating that the density of water, the density of human beings
and the density of the sun are all about the same. Sun is a little bit more dense but it's all about
the same. One gram per cubic centimeter. So I'd like to think so many people flock to the beach
during the summertime and we enjoy water. There's some there's some communing going on. I think we
know that we're the density of water and we're made mostly of water and we want to sort of get
close to it. There's something deeper going on than just oh I want to play in the sand.
My favorite planet, the planet Saturn, has a distinction among all planets in the solar system
for being the only one whose average density is less than water.
So that if you had a bathtub and you took a scoop of the average material of Saturn it would float
in your bathtub and it's the only planet that would do that. So when I was a kid I always wanted
instead of the rubber ducky that you play with in the bath I wanted a little rubber Saturn.
So because I knew that Saturn would float. Unless no one has come up with such a product.
But I encourage you to out there in audience land.
There is a limit to density even beyond that of neutron stars. It's what happens at the center
of a black hole. Now the size of a black hole by convention is described as
the size of its event horizon. That's that boundary if you pass it you're never coming
out because you have to exceed the speed of light to do so. That's why they're called black
because light can't even get out even at the breakneck speed of 186,000 miles per second.
So it's black you go you cross the event horizon you're never coming out. Well
by the way if black holes eat the event horizon gets bigger
and bigger and bigger. But what happens to the material? The material kept collapsing down in
this no known force to prevent the continued collapse until all that matter
ends up at a singular point at the center of infinite density.
And we call that sensibly the singularity the center of a black hole.
I don't even know what infinite density means but I can tell you that our laws of physics that
describe a black hole when we carry the matter down to its center all those laws of physics
lose their applicability. We're in desperate need of a new theory of physics in order to explain
the singularity. So when I say it as infinite density I'm just I'm just professing my ignorance
because the community has not yet come to a replacement theory for general relativity
of Albert Einstein that gave us black holes in the first place. It's a missing piece.
Stay tuned for that. So that's infinite density infinite density.
Now density there's some mysteries to density. There's some mysteries.
My favorite mystery is that a can of diet pepsi floats and a can of regular pepsi sinks.
That we may never understand that one. By the way the only way you know this
because there aren't many occasions to float cans of soft drink is if you hang out very late at a
party when everyone else has gone home and the big cooler that used to be filled with ice is now
what it's now water with ice cubes the remaining ice cubes of course a float on top and so whatever
cans of soft drink are left you get to determine whether they have sunk or whether they're floating
and take a look you'll see the diet pepsis floating and the regular pepsis have sunk that's one of
my the most profound mysteries I know but let's look at ways that things can behave.
The black hole is odd because it eats all the material goes to a singular point of infinite
density and the veneration grows okay that's kind of peculiar but let's let's think about
the classical way you would add material to something let's think of marbles in a box
add more marbles you've increased the volume and you've increased the mass
you've increased the both terms in the equation for density mass divided by volume
if one increases at the same rate as the other one the density is the same just divides out
so a bag of marbles this big has the same density as a bag of marbles this big
same it weighs more has more volume but it's got the same density fine
but would that happen with other ingredients that's a marble those marbles but let's suppose we took
down feathers let's try that experiment dump a bunch of down feathers in a box
figure out how much mass it is look at its volume now take that same amount and add it
to what you just put in that box what is the volume is it twice as much no of course not
because it's down feathers and the down feathers at the bottom are feeling the weight of the extra
feathers on top and they're getting squished so that the act of adding down feathers to a previous
supply of down feathers makes the ensemble more dense than how it started so you could in fact
double the mass and not double the volume that's of course a general behavior of squishy things
earth's atmosphere is squishy it's compressible at the lower atmosphere is much under much higher
pressure than the upper atmosphere half of all the molecules of earth's atmosphere are below
below three miles half of all the air that's why strom is always running to mountaintops
trying to get above as much air as possible and the next next best thing to do
launch something into orbit we're above 99.99999 percent of all the air molecules that could
interfere with your observations and of course where does earth's atmosphere end
there's not there's not there's not a signpost that says you are now leaving earth's atmosphere
nasa suggests that they leave the atmosphere they suggest so because they say oh we're up in orbit
and you you see clouds way below you of course that makes sense to think of it as that but no
no earth's atmosphere goes for thousands of miles and only a thousands of miles does the
density equal the density of interplanetary space then you could say i can't tell the difference
anymore between being closer to earth and being out there between the planets that must be the
edge of earth's atmosphere thousands of miles out and even at the distance that the space shuttle
flies in the space station how high up do they fly anywhere between two and four hundred miles up
surely there's no atmosphere there no not the case here's the space station
with all its solar panels in orbit in orbit around the earth and up there even though it's
a couple hundred miles up there still remain atmospheric molecules and this thing is plowing
into them and what effect does that have it slows down its orbit in fact the space station and every
object in low earth orbit couple hundred miles up it has to go up with extra fuel to keep itself
boosted so that it doesn't just fall out of orbit because once it starts falling there's no stopping
it because you fall a little bit you've descended to a region of the atmosphere that has much higher
density of particles than where you would once were so then you fall faster for a little bit more
now you're in a denser you fall faster yet the decay of your orbit is exponential and you know
what's when it's especially worse you may have heard or remember that the sun goes through cycles
eleven-year cycles of activity so every eleven years the energy level of the sun kicks up a
little bit a notch then it descends back down and evidence of that you see sunspots you see
extra solar flares and prominences and all kinds of turbulent features on the on the sun's surface
that extra activity warms earth's atmosphere and the act of warming it makes it swell up
and reach out farther from earth's surface than it normally does so anytime you're going through
solar maximum as we call it solar max all of your satellites orbiting between two and four
hundred miles are at risk higher risk than they would otherwise be for having their orbit decay
so you have to be careful when you launch satellites you have to watch for the density of
the atmosphere and watch for what the sun is doing it's not insurmountable you just give
a periodic boost but you have to know you got to do that one of my favorite cases of this
is the largest thing ever de-orbited you may remember as a few years back the mere space station
the mere space station built by the soviet union followed on by the russians after 1989
the mere space station was getting long of tooth the russians agreed to participate in the international
space station which is up there now the first permanently occupied space platform and so
what do you do with it you de-orbit it how do you de-orbit it those rockets that normally used
you use to keep it buoyant up there face them in the opposite direction face it in the opposite
direction will slow down the orbit drop it to a lower altitude where it exposes itself to more air
and it descends rapidly and you can do this with such precision plus fortunately
there's this big wide open area area here called the pacific ocean you can start a de-orbit burn
out here over asia and by the time that thing comes tumbling out of orbit you've aimed it
straight for the center of the pacific ocean so it doesn't fall on somebody's head a lot of pieces
burn up in the atmosphere the rest just descends into the bottom of the pacific we think of it
as littering the pacific but there's no comparison to how much lost ships from the past 400 years
at the bottom of the pacific ocean our little space space debris is nothing compared with how many
lost voyages of explorers of the past 400 years we can find at the bottom of all the oceans even
in areas very close like cape cod bay for example
so the lesson here i think is you need to think creatively about the concept of density and how
it plays out in your life it's not just some abstract scientific concept the very valuable
tools you can bring with you by thinking of density thinking of how density reveals itself
in different materials in how you um why is it for example that uh
certain you know take for example an automobile accident some cars survive accidents better than
others in almost every case it's because they not only weigh more they're also denser
the denser the material the more it is likely to survive an encounter with something else that
is passing through little things like that and also i'll leave you with this one uh case i was in a
in a restaurant in pasadena california one of these coffee houses that also serves evening dessert
you go to your fancy restaurant and then you do your dessert at one of these places
and one of my favorites is hot chocolate with as much whipped cream as could possibly be balanced
on top so i ordered the whipped cream with i ordered the hot chocolate with whipped cream
and it came and then came the whipped cream and i didn't see i mean it came the hot chocolate i
didn't see any whipped cream at all so i asked the waiter i said waiter there's no where's the
whipped cream you know what the waiter said i couldn't believe it the waiter said oh it must
have sunk to the bottom and i'm thinking either the laws of physics are different in this restaurant
from the rest of the universe or you are mistaken mr waiter he said i'm sure it's like
he said i'll show you so he went back and got some blobs of whipped cream came up
plopped it in and you know what it did it sunk for a split second because it had momentum
popped right back up and sat up and i said thank you for putting whipped cream on my hot chocolate
