Welcome back to my favorite universe. Today, the subject is one of the most fascinating
in all the cosmos. Today we're going to talk about black holes. And just by way of statistics,
when I'm out in the public and people know that I'm an astrophysicist, it's one of the
top three questions I get asked. Usually I get asked something about the search for life
in the universe. Next is about the Big Bang. Third, right up there with those two, is what
is a black hole? Are they dangerous? What will it do to me if I run into one? Well, first,
yes, they are dangerous. They will kill you post haste. And they're also extremely fascinating
because they wreak havoc on the environment in which we find them. I've titled this lecture
Death by Black Hole because while we can first describe how a black hole would kill a person,
that's fascinating unto itself. But this havoc that gets wrought upon the environment by black
holes throughout the galaxy and throughout the universe in a way is killing stars and gas
clouds. And so it's really just a lecture about death and destruction caused by black holes.
For human beings, it's quite a spectacular way to die. If I were to choose a way to go,
I'd say launch me into a black hole because what it does is it rips you apart atom by atom and
you go in as a stream of matter right down to this bottomless abyss. And we'll detail that a
little more in just a moment. But first of all, what is a black hole? Let's start at the beginning.
What is a black hole? A black hole is a region of space within which the escape velocity has
exceeded the speed of light. And the escape velocity is a magic speed with which if an
object were launched at that speed, it would escape the object forever. It makes sense that for
higher gravity objects, they have very high escape velocity. But for a black hole, that escape
velocity is the speed of light. And you know the speed of light is the fastest stuff we know of
in the whole universe. So if light can't get out, nothing gets out. Nothing. Hence the name, black
hole. It's black because nothing comes out. It's a hole because if you fall in, you're gone,
sensibly identified. Now this business about escape velocity, let me give you a sort of
grassroots discussion of escape velocity. I'll use my shoe for this demo if you don't mind.
If I take my shoe and toss it, I play catch with myself, I toss it up. It goes up about a foot and
comes a foot and comes back. I threw it at a particular speed in order to reach one foot
above my head. But if I threw it at a higher speed, it goes even higher. It takes longer for it to
return to me. If I keep doing this, constantly increasing its speed, I can do the experiment
and find out at what speed will the shoe never come back. If you do that experiment, you'll find
that that speed is about seven miles per second converted in speed limit language. It's 25,000
miles per hour. Extremely fast. You don't encounter this in everyday life. And that's probably what
led to the adage, what goes up must come down. But that adage is more just for some everyday
experience. If you look at the physics of the cosmos, there is a speed with which you can
launch something so it'll never come back, rendering that childhood remembered phrase
incorrect. You might go back and tell your teachers that.
So it makes sense that the escape velocity must somehow be correlated with how much gravity
there is on the object from which you're launching your object. Let's take a very low mass thing
like a comet. Comets are small. A big comet might be 100 miles across. The escape velocity on a
comet is about one meter per second. You can calculate that out. That's about two miles an hour.
You can walk that. A brisk walk is three miles an hour. So if you ever found yourself on a comet
and just started walking fast, watch out because you'll just sort of go, you'll propel yourself into
orbit around the comet. And by the way, that's why comets are very dirty things in the solar system.
Anything gets jostled loose on it. It flies away and the comet loses it. It's this big
garbage heap and it's true garbage behind it every time it comes around the sun. In fact,
that's the cause of meteor showers. Earth plows through the debris of these things and it rains
down on Earth's surface. It's because it has a low escape velocity. But what's next? We can go to
the moon. The moon is more mass and more gravity than a comet. For the moon, the escape velocity
is about two and a half kilometers per second. That's relatively fast. That's about, what is that,
one and a half miles per second. I can't throw anything that fast. You need launch vehicles to
do that, even on the moon. NASA did that, of course. We landed on the moon and then escaped back out
of the moon. They had to be launched from the moon at that speed, otherwise they would have fallen
back to the moon. Let's keep going. As we know, Earth, 25,000 miles per hour. The sun, escape
velocity is about a little more than 600 kilometers per second, about 400 miles per second. That's
fast. That's really, really fast. It's very hard for things to just sort of escape the solar system
because the sun has this near eternal lock upon them because of such a high escape velocity.
But what it means, what that number means is if you're standing on the surface of the sun
and you want to say goodbye solar system, if you don't have that speed, you're going to fall right
back to the sun from whence you came. Now, yes, mass matters. High mass objects generally have
high gravity, but size matters too. Size matters too. The more compressed an object is, the closer
you can get to its center. The closer the surface of that object is to its center and the force of
gravity is related not only to the mass, but what is your distance to the center? That is the force
of gravity. And so black holes and other dense objects in the cosmos, they might not even have
that much mass. A black hole might have the mass a few times the mass of the sun. There are plenty
of stars with that mass, but it's because the black hole is small that its surface gravity is high
and the escape velocity is high and it can plunge down in, close back on itself, preventing life
from escaping because its escape velocity has exceeded the speed of light. Now, this region of
space, you know, we think of it as a surface, but it's not a solid thing. It just happens to be within
which you don't come out. It's the point of no return. We have a word for that, this point of no
return, rather poetically described as the event horizon, the event horizon of a black hole.
Now, you might ask, where did all this come from? Did we just make this stuff up? No, no, someone you've
heard of before, Albert Einstein, when he introduced the theory of relativity back at the turn of the
century, 1905, that was special theory of relativity concerning motion in straight lines, non-accelerating
motion, and then 10 years later, 1915, published in 1916, he counts the general theory of relativity,
which described motion of any kind, accelerated motion, including gravity and the acceleration
of gravity. That is known as Einstein's general theory of relativity, and in that, he described
the force of gravity not purely as a force of attraction between two objects. That's very
Newtonian, Newton's theory of gravity, thinks of attractions in that way. What Einstein did was
said, no, gravity curves space, and when objects move, they're moving in response to that curved
fabric of the universe. There's something called an embedding diagram, which indicates this
for a black hole. Here we have, imagine space, we live in three dimensions plus the dimension
of time that gives us four, and it's hard to imagine that warping. By the way, we would be
able to see it if we were higher dimensional creatures looking down on the space in which we
live, so let's do that, but for our case, let's create a two-dimensional universe, this sheet
of rubber, with a grid on it, and let us warp that sheet of rubber. We're living inside that
sheet of rubber, and there's the warp that we're talking about. That is the kind of warp that
exists except in higher dimensions in the universe we live as described by Einstein,
but here because of our feeble human minds, we can only imagine it in the two-dimensional case,
notice the warping of space, so that the center of that funnel is an object of very high gravity,
and if it's a black hole, that funnel is so long, you'd never climb out of that,
to escape back into the grid of the rest of the cosmos.
So that's a way to think about what's going on. By the way, if there were two objects in orbit
around each other, you'd have two dimples. Imagine a cluster of stars, they'd be dimples all over,
all responding to their own distortions of space and of time.
I'll add that there's a phrase, I first heard it from John Archibald Wheeler,
who was a student of Albert Einstein, summarizing all of general relativity, and he said,
matter tells space how to curve, space tells matter how to move, and for me that summarized
all of the philosophical underpinnings of the theory of general relativity.
Now, why would if something collapsed down into a black hole in the first place? Well,
it turns out, usually things are supported from collapsing under gravity, they could be chemical
forces, it could be thermal forces, the movement of molecules, gravity's trying to squeeze it down,
but they're moving fast, and so it prevents it from collapsing. So those are forces, but if you
have so much mass, you can actually overcome that, and cram matter down until it's sort of atom next
to atom. That's possible, you can do that. We have states of matter that are just that,
we call them white dwarfs. Then you can cram it down even more until it's not just
cheek to cheek, atom to atom, but it's nucleus to nucleus. If you do that, you get a neutron star.
That's the densest matter we know. Neutron stars, if they're rapidly rotating and we see them that
way, we would label them as pulsars. Now what happens if it has so much gravity
that this pressure of neutrons can't even support against them? That's all she wrote. We know of no
force of nature that can support an object against the gravitational forces of, let's say, a ball of
mass, ball of mass, 5, 6, 10 times the mass of the sun. Once that starts making its nuclear fuel
and it begins to collapse, nothing is left available to support it against the collapse.
And the matter just keeps going and go, it descends through its own event horizon.
That's when it disappears from view. And as far as we know, all the mass collapses down to a single
point of infinite density, zero volume. That's kind of absurd. What does that even mean, infinite
density? I don't know what that means, but what I do know is that general relativity,
the most successful theory of gravity ever put forth, fails at that singularity.
So we know that it's a theory that is incomplete, even though everything that is predicted has
been true. It's an incomplete theory and we're searching. String theory is one of them.
One of the ideas put forth, that'll give us a handle on the singularity deep inside. But it's
for all these reasons that black holes are one of some of the most romanticized of cosmic objects.
They're mystery, they're dangerous, they're dangerous, and they're basically fertile for
storytelling, particularly in the realm of science fiction. So why don't we take a feet first dive?
Why don't we take a feet first dive into a black hole
and see what happens? Well, as I'd already mentioned, as you're descending towards the
black hole, the force of gravity is growing exponentially. But all that means is you fall
faster and if you're in free fall, you're actually weightless. So you wouldn't care that you're
descending towards a black hole because you wouldn't notice it just yet. You'll just be
falling. It'd be like falling towards earth or falling towards anything. So that's not
what kills you. It's not the high gravity that kills you. You know what it is? It's the difference
in gravity between your feet, which is closer to the black hole, than your head.
There's a difference in gravity as I stand here on earth between my feet and my head.
I barely notice it because my height is very small compared with the radius of earth.
You can ask, how much stronger is the gravity at my feet than at my head? Well,
look at the size of earth and look at my height. That's basically nothing. So I don't even notice
that difference. But if you're descending towards a black hole, and black holes can be tiny things,
if the size of the black hole and your height are comparable, imagine in a limiting case,
I've got a six foot diameter black hole and I'm about six feet. I'm like falling towards the black
hole. My feet are twice as close to the black hole with my head. You calculate what force that is,
is that my feet are feeling an acceleration towards the black hole that's four times the
acceleration of my head. I begin to stretch. My body begins to feel like something is like I'm on a
rack or made of rubber. Of course, I would rubber man. I would just stretch according to these forces,
but I'm not made of rubber. I'm made of human flesh and that has force limits. By the way,
these forces, this force that stretches you as you descend towards a black hole,
we have a word that's called tidal forces. It's the same word as in the tides on earth.
Earth feels tides from the tidal force of the moon. One side of the earth is closer to the moon
than the other in a measurable way. And so the oceans feel a little bold. They're drawn a little
more on the near side of the earth than on the far side of the earth so that there's the stretching
of the oceans in response to the tidal forces of the moon. Now, if the moon could do that to earth,
imagine what a black hole can do. So what happens? I begin to descend and eventually these tidal
forces exceed the chemical bonds of human tissue. And as I descend, there's a point where I can no
longer resist it. And I snap into two pieces, a lower segment and an upper segment. And I keep
falling and then sure enough, those two segments feel enough of a tidal force that they snap
into two pieces. And then those four pieces each snap into two pieces. And it goes from one to two
to four to eight to 16. And this just continues. Eventually, you are completely snapped into
countless pieces of biological matter as you descend towards the black hole.
Now, it gets worse than that. It turns out, space and time
have collapsed onto a black hole. This is what general relativity describes for us. It squeezes
down into the black hole. And so here I am occupying a space that is in fact getting narrower and
narrower and narrower, like a funnel. So not only am I stretched head to toe, I am squeezed
shoulder to shoulder. It's as though my body is being extruded. I think it's like toothpaste,
being extruded through the hole in a toothpaste tube. That's what's going on as you fall towards
a black hole. It's also like, I don't know if you've ever had one of these homemade spaghetti
making machines, you take the semolina dough and you knead it and put it up and put it in the machine,
you squeeze it and out the other side comes these long strands of spaghetti. In fact,
this phenomenon is officially known as spaghettification. It's what happens to matter
that's descending into a black hole. Now, black holes eat. What happens to them? Well,
it turns out they get bigger. It's true with most things. You get bigger. Black holes, it turns
out, get bigger in exact proportion to how much mass they have consumed. So if a black hole is
of a given size and a given mass and it eats its own mass again, the equivalent of its own mass
again, then it becomes twice that size. Each three times as much, it'll become three times that size.
The arithmetic of relativity demonstrate why this is so.
And again, the size is referring to the event horizon, size of the event horizon. Well,
what that means is black holes can actually be any size, depending on how hungry they've been in
their lives. And not all black holes will kill you before you descend through the event horizon.
Small ones will, but really, really big black holes, really, really big black holes.
The tidal forces right at the event horizon are relatively low. And so they're less damaging
to human biology as you descend. And by the way, so what that means is it's the low mass black
holes, the ones that are the smallest that'll do the worst damage to you as an unsuspecting visitor.
It's because the rate of change of the gravity, that's the tidal force, the rate of change of
the force of gravity gets significant as you near its center. In both cases, you'll get ripped apart
no matter what, because there's some distance from the center where this will happen to you.
The difference is that with a small black hole, it'll happen before you get to the event horizon,
and everyone will get to see this happen. Whereas in a big black hole, black hole,
you'll descend through the event horizon, you'll get ripped to shreds and no one will know.
Except for you, but you won't be able to tell anyone about it, of course.
So now, suppose you get really, really, really big black holes.
Well, let's go back, let's go to the real universe. I was describing ones that might
eat a person, but let's get to ones that do some real damage in the universe.
The real universe, you have stars that don't necessarily travel alone. A lot of stars that
travel in pairs, called binary stars. And when you have stars in pairs,
typically one will age before the other, and part of its aging means it becomes a red
giant, it swells up. And as it gets bigger, some of its material gets a little too close
to the neighboring object. If the neighboring object is a black hole, black hole is going to,
it's going to eat it. That's not just going to eat it, it's going to
flay the red giant as it expands into its space. And we have an image of this.
First, there's a person descending down into the black hole.
That person is not having fun. You see the spaghettification in progress. By the way,
that would happen to any material going in. It's just more explicitly conveyed
when you're a human being. But notice in this image, we have a star, a red super giant,
that has become big and bulbous. And in that effort, some of its material has gotten a little too
close to its companion. And that little companion is that little dot off to the left.
There's a disc of material around it. That is the collection area of the red giant gas.
And it feeds the material. It feeds the hole in the center. It feeds the event horizon.
If we take another look at this, go close up, notice that there are jets coming out above and
below. There's so much material trying to descend into that black hole. And it gets so hot,
because there's friction from all the gas rubbing against itself, descending down into the center,
that that friction heats up the gas and that that energy is trying to escape somehow.
It can't escape through the plane. So it pops out the top and the bottom. And this is a classic
image of a black hole with a disc of material around it, in companion with the red giant,
and jets tossing, being spewed up and below, above the plane and below the plane.
At those temperatures that it reaches, it starts radiating ultraviolet light and especially x-rays.
A sure giveaway of this kind of system is you look out in the universe at a star that
you think is mining its own business, whip out an x-ray telescope and that's one of the brightest
objects in the sky. See something's going on there. It's a disc of material heated,
coming down to a small central area.
See we have another look at that. There's the disc of material once again, but now from above the
plane you see the black hole in the center and you just want to avoid that, really. You don't
want to come anywhere near this thing. The black hole is bigger than this. These black holes
may be 10 times the mass of the sun and they're wreaking havoc on its neighbor star.
They get bigger than this though. They're black holes in the centers of galaxies.
We know this because we've looked at galaxies, galaxies of stars. We're talking about systems
that have 100 billion stars. In their center is a supermassive black hole, in some cases
a billion times the mass of the sun, a billion times. They're enormous. These black holes
can wreak such havoc on their environment that whole star clusters can get eaten.
Here in the previous case of the blue supergiant, or it could be a red giant, but any large
swelled up star, in the case of the large star in the neighboring black hole, it's only eating one
star at a time. You go down to the center of the galaxy. This black hole is so large it has the
capacity to dine on enormous gas clouds and star clusters of voracious appetite and it too will
make an accretion disc of titanic proportions. In fact, the radiation coming out of these accretion
discs is so significant that in fact it can on occasion outshine the entire galaxy in which
it's embedded. In fact, such objects when they were discovered, we didn't even know what they were.
We said, what is this? They emitted not only high energy radiation, they also emitted radio waves.
In fact, they were discovered using radio telescopes. Most of the energy came from a tiny
little spot, not spread out like you'd see in a full galaxy. When these were discovered,
they weren't really stars, because their energy profile didn't match that of stars.
We call them quasi-stellar and they gave off radio waves. So quasi-stellar radio objects,
quasi. Turns out these were galaxies with supermassive black holes sitting at the
edge of the universe that has such high energy coming from them. It's coming from such a small
spot that if you look at it in the night sky, say, oh, there's another star sitting up there,
when in fact the thing is hailing from the edge of the cosmos. Extraordinary, extraordinary.
Now, you know what happens? It's possible to get so big and to have your event horizon stretch out
so far that no longer are you able to rip things apart, because your tidal forces are very shallow.
And if you rip, you're trying to, when you rip things apart, that's what makes the accretion
disc, this disc of material that feeds the center. That's where the friction takes place.
If you're so large and you don't get ripped apart as you descend, then you get eaten whole.
You get eaten whole. If you eat in whole, no radiation comes out, no high-energy x-rays,
gamma, none of that. So it's possible for a black hole to get so big that it shuts off this mechanism.
We think some quasars that have turned off since the beginning of time have done just that.
By the way, there's another way to turn off, and that's if you've eaten everything in your
environment and nothing comes close to you anymore. That's another way to turn off. You just ran out
of food. Well, the latest evidence suggests that perhaps all galaxies have black holes in their
centers. Some more massive than others. Some galaxies that have supermassive black holes,
if those black holes are kind of quiet, we suspect that those galaxies in the distant past
would have looked to us like quasars. So it's a shift in paradigm of how we think of galaxies
in modern times. When I first started school, it was, well, there's this kind of galaxy and
there's that kind of galaxy and there's a quasar and that. It's all the same kind of galaxy,
just slightly different properties within it. It's not a different species. They're all the
same species, just with different mass of the black hole in the center, slightly different
rotation rates. By bringing them all together in one intellectual construct, it enables you to
more thoroughly examine how it is that these objects differ, because you're already grabbing
onto a core of what is the same. The fact is they're all galaxies. Milky Way, our galaxy,
of course, it's got a black hole too. No, it's not as big as the biggest, you know. It's not as,
you know, but it's kind of like an ordinary black hole. Our black hole, if you have a black hole
envy, alright, our black hole is about a million times the mass of the sun. It turns out that's
not big enough to have ever really looked like a quasar in the early times. But it is big enough
to kind of disturb the middle of the galaxy. And the colleagues of mine, whose entire research
program focuses on exactly what's going on in the center of the galaxy. You track the motion
of stars that get almost too close to the black hole. The gravity is so high, they get pulled in
very fast. You see stars kind of minding their own business and then they come a little too close
to the black hole and you see their speed increase dramatically. Speeds that you don't find anywhere
else in the galaxy. That tells you that there's a lot of mass in a small volume. These are some
of the ways we have deduced that every galaxy we've ever looked at has evidence for a black hole
in its center. So black holes, they're things to respect in the cosmos. And
I like to summarize their danger with just a rhyme. I suffer through this rhyme that I
once composed because I felt compelled to do this. Because black holes, I couldn't get black holes out
of my head. And it goes something like this. In a feet first dive to this cosmic abyss,
you will not survive because you surely will not miss. The tidal forces of gravity will create
quite a calamity when you're stretched head to toe. Are you sure you want to go? Your body's atoms,
you'll see them, will enter one by one. The singularity will eat them and of course you won't be having fun.
