Welcome back to my favorite universe. In this particular lecture, we're going to review
things that can bring an end to Earth. Title of this one, Ends of the World. Now, typical
references to the end of the world that you might hear, people might think of rampant
virus that totally decimates an entire species. If not some other species, then perhaps humans
themselves. There's a lot of talk about, especially in the days of the Cold War, about
global thermonuclear exchange, bringing an end to Earth, or perhaps just the extent to
which we are destroying the environment. That's often how you think of people talk about the
end of the world. But these save the Earth slogans are really, they don't mean save the
Earth. That's not what they mean. Earth is going to be here no matter what we do. Earth,
the planet. It's actually egocentric to say, let's save Earth, when in fact you're only
really talking about saving Homo sapiens. Earth was here before us, it's here now, it's going
to be here long after we are gone, and a memory in the fossil record. So what I want to talk
about are real scenarios that put the entire planet in jeopardy. I can think of three scenarios
for this lecture. One of them, well all of them actually, we actually won't live long
enough to see. So then why am I talking about it? Well, because the formulations of astrophysics
allow me to tell you about them. So why not? Maybe if our species live long enough, our
very distant descendants will care about what these prognostications are. But the laws of
astrophysics and the phenomenon in the cosmos tell us what is going to happen in the very
distant future. And let's start off with the death of the sun. Following the death of the
sun we'll get to the collision between our Milky Way galaxy and our nearest neighbor,
the Andromeda galaxy. And a third of these will be the heat death of the cosmos. Let's
start with the sun. We know what the sun is made of, okay? Made of gas, hydrogen healing
mostly, and some residual other materials, that's fine. But what we have are the colleagues
of mine who specialize in stellar evolution. You're given the birth ingredients of a star,
they crank it through a machine and they look through the forces and the thermonuclear interactions
and the whole life cycle of a star. And what they do is produce, they'll call them this,
but they produce what are basically actuarial tables for the stars. This one is this old
and it's going to last for another this many years and it's got this kind of health and
the black hole is a little too close to what it's going to have in early death. They figure
this stuff out. Let's look at the actuarial statements for the sun. The sun was born about
five billion years ago, giving birth not only to itself but to the entire solar system.
We date Earth back to about 4.6 billion years. The sun is going to live another five billion
years. So we're exactly midway, we're middle-aged. We now, I'm referring to the sun. How about
the sun's structure? Well, let's look inside. Starting at the sun's surface, here's a nice
image of the sun, reminding you that it's a hot and turbulent place. Strong magnetic
fields embedded in the plasma that is the outer surface. These magnetic fields grab
on to the structure of the sun and they snap and twist and pieces of the sun burst forth.
It is a busy place. It's a busy place. On the surface, it's about 6,000 degrees Kelvin.
In the core, about 15 million gets hotter as you get towards the center as you might
expect. In the center is the source of all the energy generated within the sun. We call
it the core, and in the core is where the thermonuclear fusion takes place. It is stable.
It is an equilibrium. Hydrogen atoms, the nuclei, are being brought together to make heavier nuclei.
You take four hydrogen atoms and what do you get at the end of that? You get helium. We
go from hydrogen to helium and the act of doing that releases energy because the act
of doing that loses mass and we use the E equals mc squared equation of Einstein, our
first equation any of us ever learned even before we know what it means. That equation
applies to the center of the sun. That energy's being generated and it's got to get out. It's
trying to get out. The sun, by the way, wants to collapse under its own force of gravity,
but it has a hard time doing it because this energy is working its way out. The balance
of forces and pressures between the thermal energy caused by this thermonuclear fusion
and the gravitational pressures trying to collapse the star are in balance. The sun basically
keeps its same shape and the same rate of energy output for billions of years. It's a very
efficient process. By the way, before we knew that it was thermonuclear fusion going
on in the center of the sun, people postulated that it might be a lump of coal in the center.
That was back in the 19th century when coal was what produced energy in your homes. It
was fascinating to bring your sort of home life into the cosmos on the assumption that
it's just a big charcoal briquette out there in the center of the solar system. But this
party is not going to last forever. Eventually, the conversion of hydrogen into helium that
can only continue while there is hydrogen in the core of the sun at these temperatures.
One day, the sun is going to run out of hydrogen in the core. By the way, you need these high
temperatures for a very simple reason. The nucleus of a hydrogen atom is a single proton.
The nucleus of any hydrogen atom is a single proton. I just told you that we're bringing
together these protons to create a brand new nucleus, to create a helium nucleus. How am
I supposed to bring two protons together when they have the same charge, a plus charge
and plus, as you know, like charges, repel? Here are these protons. I try to slam them
together, they repel. Try to slam them together, they repel. The only way you can get them
to actually touch is if you create a high enough temperature so that their speeds overcome
that repulsion. In high temperature gases, particles are moving very fast. They overcome.
It's like rolling something up a hill and then it rolls back and you say, let me roll
it a little faster. Almost gets to the top and then it rolls back. Well, now you really
shove it and it goes all the way up to the top over the cliff and over down the other
side. That barrier has to be overcome and it's overcome by the high temperatures in
the center of the star. So they links together. At the moment they touch a brand new force
takes over. It's got to be a strong force to keep two protons together. In fact, it
is a strong force. We call it the strong force of nature. You don't have much encounter
with that in everyday life, but it's there and it's operating in the center of the sun.
So we run out of hydrogen. Now we've got a big blob of helium in the center of the sun.
What do you do with the helium? Let's try to fuse it into yet a heavier element. Can't
fuse helium at 15 million degrees. No good. It's not hot enough. Why? Because helium has
two protons. You try to bring two protons together against two other protons that has
even more repulsion. You need even a higher temperature. So if we had a knob, we just
say, okay, turn up the knob. Let's get to the next temperature, the next magic temperature
to fuse helium. Well, the sun actually has a built-in mechanism to do that. It's called
the loss of equilibrium. And in that loss of equilibrium, the energy snuffs out. No more
hydrogen. There's nothing to support the star. What does the star do? It collapses under
its own weight. And the act of collapsing heats the center of the star. It's marvelous. Marvelous
regulatory system inside of these stars. It heats it until it collapses and heats, collapses
and heats down in the core until it ignites helium. What temperature is that? About 100
million degrees in the core. Much hotter than what it took to fuse hydrogen to helium. So
helium, you look through the nuclear pathways and in the end, you end up taking three helium
nuclei together and making the nucleus of one carbon atom. And that releases energy. Oh,
but it releases a lot of energy. Much more energy than hydrogen going to helium in total.
How do you get that energy out? Star has to respond somehow. Energy is trying to get
out. You know what the start is? It begins to expand and expand and expand. That's going
to happen to the sun. Five billion years from now, it's going to run out of hydrogen. It's
going to start fusing helium into carbon after it collapsed a little bit, got the temperature
up and started cranking out the energy. And it's going to start doing that. It's going
to swell and you're going to look in the sky and say, hmm, sun is getting kind of large.
And as it gets large, the outer surface cools. It becomes cooler. Astrophysically, when I
say something's cool, it's thousands of degrees still. The surface of the sun will drop from
6,000 degrees down to about 2,000 degrees, start glowing red and become enormous. How
big? It'll first fill the entire orbit of Mercury, the closest planet to the sun. It'll
engulf Mercury and then fill the orbit of Venus. It'll engulf Venus and begin to, what's
next? Mercury, Venus, Earth. It'll engulf Venus and then fill the orbit of Earth. Imagine
what that looks like. Just imagine. Imagine what would sunrise be? It would be the whole
horizon, just rising up. Eventually, if it engulfs the entire orbit of Earth, the sun
occupies half the sky, half the sky. Here we have an artist's rendition of the scenario
depicting a red giant about to engulf its next victim. In this case, an attempt has been
given to show Earth and how the temperature of the surface of the Earth might be on the
rise. Of course, as I described, the temperature of the sun's surface is dropping. Yes, it's
dropping from 6,000 down to 2,000 or 3,000 degrees. But as that surface gets closer to
Earth, the radiant energy that's hitting Earth goes up. And as it gets closer to Earth, it
eventually the temperature of the Earth becomes the same as the temperature of the sun's
surface because we're orbiting on the surface. That, once again, would be bad because at
3,000 degrees, what begins to happen? Well, you heat the oceans, bring them to a rolling
boil, and they evaporate into the atmosphere. The atmosphere itself gets so hot, you evaporate
it, laying bare Earth's surface without protection, without any way to cool itself. Now, the surface
starts rising in temperature. You vaporize all known life. Render rocks aglow like what
goes on inside of a volcano. Then, of course, Earth, as we get engulfed, Earth slowly starts
to get glams into the gas that is the material of the sun. It's bad for the orbit. The orbit
was happy out there in its near vacuum with nothing to force a decay in its motion. And
now we've got star material there. It plows through it, slows down its orbit, and it descends,
spirals down in, and evaporates into a puff of smoke. That'll happen in about 5 billion
years, the end of the Earth, end of the Earth. I once wrote a planetarium show that depicted
just that scenario up on the dome, the sun getting larger and ahead, sort of ominous music.
Unlike anything else I've ever written for that audience. Wrote about big bangs, media
impacts, all kinds of bad stuff I've written about. The sun getting bigger in the sky.
I got mail for years from parents who told me their kids could not get to sleep when they
woke up with nightmares because they were worried that that was going to happen next
week or in their lifetimes. And so maybe there's just something scary about that notion that
something we've taken for granted, the stable sun, would somehow be responsible for our
own demise. Not only the demise of life on Earth, but of course of the entire planet.
So, this red giant phase of the sun, it actually continues, eventually runs out of helium. It
has a core of carbon left over. Well now we want to fuse carbon. How do you do that?
Will 100 million degrees do that? No. No, you need a higher temperature. Well, let's
try it. Here we are, we're the sun. We now got this core of carbon and now we have no
energy source. So we've been there before. What happens? The interiors of the sun begins
to collapse. Temperature begins to rise, not enough mass to raise the core temperature
up to the next magic place on the thermometer where you can begin to fuse carbon. We don't
have enough mass to get there. So the sun stops with a core of carbon. And these outer
layers had gotten so far away from the sun that they were only then tenuously connected
to what was formerly their home. And eventually it dissipates out into space and makes, in
fact, a rather beautiful view when viewed in other solar systems. In fact, we have pictures
of such objects. We call them planetary nebulae, not because it has much to do with planets,
because it's really just part of the life cycle of a star. It's just because William
Herschel, when he first saw these in the sky, he discovered them with his telescope. This
is now a few hundred years ago. He discovered these with his telescope and they look like
disks on the sky just like the way planets looked. Stars are just points of light. Planets,
you can see the full surface of a planet. And these planetary nebulae were so circular that
he said they resemble planets. He called them planetary nebulae. But there's nothing deep
about it. It's just, it's really a misnomer and it's stuck. Notice the core of the star
that has been laid bare. That in the center is what we call a white dwarf. No bigger than
the size of the earth. And it's dead nuclear material. And the rest of that is the outer
most layers of the red giant. And by the way, if you want to, the extent of the solar system,
this is now so large, the full extent of our solar system only comes out just the tiniest
bit from that central point of light. So by the time it's a full blown planetary nebulae,
it is enormous. Many, many, many, many times larger than the full extent of the solar system.
And there are thousands of these in the night sky and they're gorgeous. You can make whole
catalogs of them. Here's another one. NGC 6751, another planetary nebulae. Look at that.
It looks almost explosive. Although it did happen rather gracefully. The center there
is what, again, what we call the white dwarf. It's either composed entirely of helium
or in our case, it'll be composed of carbon. And any solar system, any system of planets
that this one's had, they are kissing their days goodbye. If we are on earth and that begins
to happen to the sun, that kind of makes interstellar space travel a high priority, doesn't it?
And while the sun is on its way out, we at least want to be able to travel between planets.
Let's go out to Mars, okay? As the sun is coming over our back. Maybe Mars will be nice and warm
like earth. And then it starts to come out closer to Mars. Maybe let's find an asteroid to hang out on.
Well, one of the moons of Jupiter. But we've got to be able to do something. Can't just sit here
like a chicken in a pot ready to get cooked. Let's go on to the Milky Way. The Milky Way,
that's our galaxy. It's going to have problems of its own. But these are kind of fun problems.
The Milky Way, this is not a picture of the Milky Way. It's a Milky Way lookalike. I can't
step out of our galaxy and look back, take the snapshot and go back in and show that to you.
This is a lookalike. We've got a little nuclear bulge in the center. We have a spiral shape.
And if you saw this edge on, it would be quite flat. Milky Way lookalike. It's one of the countless
galaxies in our night sky. Just to give you a sense of what we look like. That system is actually
the blurred, fuzzy light of a hundred billion stars. Back in the 1920s, Edwin Hubble,
famous American astronomer after whom the Hubble Space Telescope is named, he looked around
the night sky, found all the galaxies, did a little Doppler measurement on them, slightly
different from but similar to in principle what a police radar gun does when it gets your
speed of your car on the street. He looked up at all the galaxies in the sky and said,
how fast are they moving? They're coming towards us, coming away, and he made a whole catalog
with the help of others. And once he made that catalog, he found that nearly every galaxy
was moving away from us. That was the discovery of the expanding universe. Some galaxies, however,
were coming towards us. We had motion towards each other. And one of those galaxies is the
Andromeda Galaxy, the nearest galaxy to our own. And it's not surprising if all galaxies
have random motions and the expansion of the universe becomes more and more significant
yet, then you might expect the nearest galaxies with whatever is their speed to be overcoming
the expansion of the universe. And in fact, that's just what's happening. These random
motions have overcome whatever is the expansion of the cosmos in the nearby universe. And we
are on our way towards each other at a speed about 100 kilometers a second. What's that
in ordinary terms? About a quarter million miles an hour. Quarter million miles an hour.
Fast. Here we have the image of Andromeda, the closest large galaxy to our own. It's about
2.4 million light years away. Beautiful. And by the way, it has a satellite galaxy. You
see the little smudges off below and above it? Those are satellite galaxies in its vicinity
orbiting with the rest of the 300 billion stars that are in it. Well, take a close look
because that is the place we are headed. Strictly speaking, we are approaching each other. And
the closing rate is a quarter million miles an hour. Collision is imminent, assuming that
we don't have too much sideways motion. It's possible that we have sideways motion that
we haven't measured yet that'll take us an orbit around it. But the evidence thus far
suggests that in fact we are on a plunge orbit right on down to the center. Two galaxies
colliding and andromedas two or three times the mass of the Milky Way. It's going to be
a bad day for the structure of the Milky Way galaxy. When will that happen? Well, it's
2.4 million light years away and a light year is the distance light travels in one year.
It's a distance. It's about 5.8 trillion miles if you want to know that thing, that sort of
thing. 5.8 trillion miles in a year. That's a light year. And it's 2.4 million of those
miles away. That sounds far, but we're going to close that gap and it'll take between 5
and 7 billion years to do it. So if we survive the death of the sun by whatever means, we'll
be around to see the collision between andromeda and the Milky Way. Now we have computer
simulations that tell us what this will do. We have computers. We have a very strong idea
of what happens. The galaxies feel tidal forces between each other. We're one side of the
galaxy is closer than the other, so it feels a stronger force of gravity and it gets tugged
and twisted and turned. Thing looks like a train wreck when it's done. And we didn't
make this up. We do the calculations. Hey, this looks like a mess. Then we look out in
the cosmos and we find galaxies that are in the middle of collision. By the way, a collision
takes several hundred million years to execute. So we're not sitting there eating our sandwich
watching a collision happen, but what you do, there are enough galaxies out there. You can
see some that are like this far and then that far and another set that's that and another
that's intersecting and another that are all distorted all the way. The universe is big
enough so that you find pairs of galaxies in every stage of collision. And in that way
we can test our models to see, well, were these galaxies born looking like that or is there
some story that's unfolding? And in fact, you compare all these pictures to our models
and that is what it looked like at stage one, stage two, stage three. We've got the whole
evolution of the collision mapped out. It'll happen in five to seven billion years. So what
actually goes on? Well, space is pretty empty. We've got big gas clouds. When gas clouds collide,
they'll stick like hot marshmallows and they'll give birth to new generations of stars. That's
fine. Stars, however, are so separated that as many stars as are coming into this encounter,
they're not going to hit each other. Statistically, they're just not going to hit. So that's not
going to be a problem. We can sit back and watch. What I worry about though is a star that comes
kind of close, not hitting the sun, but close enough so that maybe we Earth lose our
gravitational allegiance. Here I am happily orbiting the sun and then another star comes
closer to me than the sun is. What then? Well, I'll start to respond and react to that force
of gravity. In fact, I could be stolen from the sun, kind of like a fly by looting. Worse
yet, but if that's the case, fine. Now I have a new home star, but maybe I'm not at the right
distance. Maybe I end up in orbit too close and all my water evaporates. Maybe I'm in orbit
too far and all the water freezes. We want liquid water for life as we know it. So that's
not going to be a good thing. It's probably going to be bad for us, but at least we'll
have a home star. Another scenario, Earth or any other planet, could get flung out from
both stars and we'd become an interstellar vagabond. That would be bad. That would be
bad too. What happens there as an interstellar vagabond? You've got no home star, no source
of energy. Quite the contrary to the sun becoming a red giant, what happens? The ocean is
free. The atmosphere liquefies. And all life as we know it ceases. Except, wait a minute, there's
still some energy. There might be some geothermal energy sources deep down. Deep down in the
Earth's crust. We've got that now. We have life forms that thrive on geochemical energy
that have nothing to do with the sun. It may be that there are thousands of interstellar
planets that have life thriving beneath its frozen surface, existing on the energy sources
left over from the formation of the planet in the first place. While this image is a real
photo of the two galaxies in real collision, we can also display this as an artist would
show it. And this particular case is given to show how the distortion of the spiral arms
can make for some rather graphic displays. And this is very early in the collision. A
few more of those passes you have a wholly unrecognizable train wreck. By the way, how
cold do we get if we're flung out into space? Real cold. Without a sun, temperature drops
to the temperature of the whole universe. We can measure the temperature of the whole
universe. It's about three degrees on the absolute temperature scale. Three degrees
cold. That is cold. That's cold. And so we kind of just radiate all of whatever heat we
had into space, becoming this little ice cube. That's a bad day for Earth. You hope that
no star comes that close. But perhaps the most terrifying of all of these deaths is the
heat death of the universe. The Big Bang is the most successful theory the universe ever
put forth. And it describes an expanding universe. Expanding against the will of gravity that
would try to have it collapse back because we don't have enough gravity to accomplish
that. We also know that there is this new pressure that was discovered. We call it dark
energy. That's the accelerating universe. We know that the universe not only doesn't
have enough mass to bring it back, this is a force that will make sure that never happens.
It's the accelerating universe. So on a one-way trip, as the universe gets bigger, its
temperature drops. When we were one-one-thousandth our present size, the universe was about
three-thousand degrees. Today it's three degrees. When the universe gets a thousand times
bigger than it is today, then it's one-thousandth of three degrees. That's cold. In the distant
future, what happens? All the gas clouds run out because they've made all the stars
they can with their supplies. And all the stars burn out. So we start running out of
supply, we run out of stars, and galaxies start to turn off one by one. And the night
sky goes dark. And the galaxies that are in our night sky now, whether or not they
turn dark, the acceleration of the cosmos will move them so fast that they'll go beyond
the visible edge of our horizon. They will be redshifted out of our view. Not only that,
all processes in the cosmos, anything that relies on energy moving from one place to
another, and machines do that. Volcanoes, there's energy from down here coming up.
Earthquakes as energy builds up and releases. All the movement of energy will cease. No
earthquakes, hurricanes, volcanoes, none of that. No machines. It all winds down because
every time a machine moves, it makes heat. The heat gets radiated to the frozen space,
the frozen temperatures of the universe. And everything that ever could happen in the
universe ceases. The universe is cooling like a pie out on a window sill, radiating its
heat out to the cool air. Bad day for the universe. When that happens, we can assert that the
universe, though born with a big bang, has died. Not with a bang, but with a whimper.
