Welcome back to my favorite universe. Today I want to talk about a subject that's on a
lot of people's minds, a subject that has been worked into two feature-length Hollywood
motion pictures. I'm talking about killer asteroids. Asteroids that are out there in
space, normally minding their own business, and occasionally a wayward one comes our way
and slams into the earth. It turns out that if you look at the statistics of asteroid
impacts, they represent the biggest threat to human civilization that exists in nature.
The biggest threat because, while most are small and cause little or no damage, the fact
that there are few that could render the entire species extinct means we ought to be paying
attention to these things. We know earth has been slammed before by some combination
of comets and asteroids because there's evidence in the fossil record. Paleontologists have
known for a long time that there are periods in earth's history where it was teeming with
life and then they hit some boundary in the sedimentary rock and then most life is gone
in the next layers. Before we had a deep understanding of impacts, it was often described to, oh,
there might have been too many volcanoes or the climate change or the ice age or whatever.
We now know every now and then earth gets a deposit of energy sufficient enough to cause
the damage observed in those layers. We know that in that fossil record, about every
hundred million years, plus or minus a few, earth loses anywhere between 50 to 90 percent
of all the species on the planet. It's more than just, well, there's life here and then
no life on the layer that follows it may be all the life migrated away from that spot.
You look all around the world and the evidence is irrefutable and incontrovertible that when
the life disappeared here, it also disappeared on another side of the earth. Nobody was running
from one place to another. Something happened catastrophically. We're going to spend the
next few minutes talking about what this risk is and trying to get closer to it and come
to an understanding of what the risk is and is there anything we can do about it being
intelligent human beings? The only intelligent species ever to walk the face of the earth
and I'll define intelligence by the capacity to maybe build something that will knock it
out of the sky. Let's begin with a statistic. Perhaps you don't know, but the chances that
your tombstone will read killed by an asteroid are the same as the chances of your tombstone
reading killed in a plane crash. You might say, how's that possible? You know of people
either first hand or second hand who might have died in a plane crash. You don't know
anyone, I'm sure, you don't know anyone who's been killed by an asteroid. A couple hundred
people a year die in airplane accidents. Zero die a year in asteroids. So what am I saying
here? It's because you've got to look at it at how it works. We'll go a hundred million
years and then an asteroid large enough will strike the earth and kill ten billion people.
So that's a hundred million years, ten billion people. So now let's talk about airplanes.
Airplanes on average might kill a hundred people a year, but if it does that for a hundred
million years, at the end of that same baseline of time, airplanes have killed ten billion
people. That's why those two data are equivalent. Your risk of death are the same in an airplane
as they are by asteroid. Now, this is something we should worry about. It's something we need
to alert the legislature about. The problem is, of course, to go to someone who needs
to get reelected every two years that something might hit in the next hundred million, it
doesn't square with the attention span of Congress. But I'd like to believe that in
the next few minutes together I can convince you of why it's an important step to take.
Let's look back at what started all this. That's the early formation of the solar system.
We started out as a large gas cloud with the right mass to make one star in its center,
the sun. The rest of the material enriched with heavy elements, elements beyond hydrogen
and helium, the kinds of elements that make planets, that's there mixed with whatever
hydrogen and helium did not participate in the formation of the star. So we have gas
coalescing, making molecules, molecules making dust, dust making rocks, also volatile dust
making ices. So you get rocky debris, you get icy debris depending on the distance from
the sun where it formed. If it's too close you're not going to condense out the ice.
So most of our comments reside very far from the sun, for example. So there's all this
debris. Now some debris is a little bigger than the others, so that will have a little
extra gravity, a little bigger cross section to impact, and so they'll grow by creating
more of the debris. And through this method you can actually build and create large masses
out of what was previously just this scatter box of small objects in orbit around the host
star. So by these collisions small objects become large. Slightly bigger ones grow bigger
faster than slightly smaller ones. They reach a large enough size, gravity then shapes them
into a sphere. We spent a whole lecture on that, on being round. This ensemble of spheres
is what we now describe as our solar system, the planets and the planets' moons. But not
everything ended up part of the planets. There's still a lot of debris out there. In fact,
even after you form the planets, there's a period of sort of cleanup after the initial
formation. There was 600 million years where planets fully formed were still hit. And
technically they were accreting, but they no longer were growing appreciably in their
total mass. They were simply being subjected to impacts. In this 600 million year period,
we call it the period of heavy bombardment. Impacts came in such a way that there wasn't
time for the surface to cool down between this impact and the next one. So the average
temperature of the surface remained high, high enough to kill anything that might have
formed, high enough to break apart complex molecules, high enough to consider the surface
of the earth a sterile environment. In fact, the moon, the moon, if you look at it for
an orb that size in the solar system, it ought to have much more iron in it than it does.
We look at the moon, the moon has very little amounts of iron. We say, why is that so?
Latest models show that the moon was spawned, was hewn out of the surface of the earth,
that a Mars size impactor had a glancing blow onto earth's crust, grabbing whole pieces
of the earth and thrusting it back out into space, coalescing again, forming a sphere
in orbit around the earth, making today what we call the moon. Since the earth had already
segregated its materials with iron being towards the center and the lighter rocks towards the
surface, it makes sense then that you'd make an entire orb just of rocky material with very
little iron, because the iron had already been filtered out, so to speak. So now think
about that, when did life begin? The earliest records of life fossils on earth go back about
3.8 billion years. So if you say, that's the earliest fossils and how old is earth, earth
is 4.6 billion years. Subtract those two numbers, you get 800 million years. You say, all right,
it took life on earth 800 million years to start. That's a commonly quoted number. But
don't re-quote that number, because that's not fair to the fertility of organic chemistry.
You know why? Because you can't include the 600 million years that we were sterile. Nothing
could have formed. That's just not fair. Wait for that to die down a bit, so that at least
between impacts, the earth had a chance to cool and make complex molecules. And so in
fact, 4.6 billion minus 600 million, that takes you right back to 4 billion years. Start
your life clock at 4 billion years ago. You say, wait around, where's life? You ate 200
million years, there's your one celled creature. So life was remarkably fertile, the early
ingredients. And what were those ingredients? Carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, silicon, the ingredients
of life, many of which were brought to the surface of the earth by those impacts. Water
brought to the surface by comets. So this period of heavy bombardment, in fact, was kind of
like a superstar for life in the early earth. Now, we continue to accrete, but not at that
rate. And that accretion, that's the official word, accretion. I actually don't like that
word, but it's the official term. People more formally use the word accretion when they
really should talk about species killing, ecosystem destroying, impacts, because that's
what these things are. That's what they're, as the leftovers of the solar system, they're
still out there. It's just that the impact rate has dropped into what we might consider
manageable rate. It's, there's enough time between really bad impacts to evolve species,
from one form to another. So in that respect, it's okay. It's okay. But what is that leftover,
what are the leftovers? Well, first we have tens of thousands of asteroids in an asteroid
belt. That's a region of the solar system in orbit around the sun between Mars and Jupiter.
We have trillions of comets, trillions of comets. Some are nearby, like comet Halley,
has only a 76 year period. Other comets go very far away and have orbital periods of
thousands of years and tens of thousands of years, but if you add them all up, it's trillions.
Since these are left over from the early solar system, if you capture one or experiment on
one or get a piece of one, that is a, they're kind of like fossils of the formation of the
solar system, fossils. And so anytime you see someone trying to send a mission to a
comet, pay attention to that because these comets have been hanging out there for billions
of years, untouched, unscathed, unaltered. Now, I don't know about you, but every time
I drink a cup of water, I think about comets as the delivery system for this refraction.
It keeps me connected to the cosmos. Now, most comets do not cross Earth's orbit. Most
asteroids don't cross Earth's orbit. We don't have to worry about those because the dynamics
of the system prevent them from essentially ever crossing Earth's orbit. But there are
samples of comets and samples of asteroids that do cross Earth's orbit. Those are the
ones we're worried about. And they cross every time they come around. They say, well, why
don't they hit us if they cross our orbit? Why don't they hit us? Well, you've crossed
the street before, the same street the trucks have gone by, and you didn't have an encounter
with the truck because you crossed at different times. So these are very big orbits. A lot
of real estate out there. So you can go a long time without ever actually colliding. You're
at the right place at the right time rather than the wrong place at the wrong time. So
what we want to do is actually sort of catalog the bad ones. In fact, let's look at a real
asteroid. I've got one asteroid Eros. Look at that. That's a potato-looking thing, if
I've ever seen one. Funny-looking potato. That's a real asteroid called Eros. That would do
serious damage if it hit the Earth. In fact, every now and then we see one of these combine
a close approach. A close approach might be between Earth and the orbit of the Moon.
Even if not, I suppose it's twice the orbit of the Moon. That's close. People call it
a near miss and I call it a near hit. It didn't nearly miss us. It nearly hit us. If it nearly
missed us, it would have hit us. I think of them as shots across our bow. We see them
when it's too late to do anything about it, either coming towards us or receding from
us. We've got to watch out. In fact, a few years ago, there was an asteroid whose orbit
we calculated to intersect with Earth sometime in the next 100 years. The original calculation
gave a high probability of that and everyone went berserk. When I say everyone, I mean
the media went berserk. Every astronomer in every town was shoved in front of a TV camera
saying, is this bad? What's it going to do? Astronomers became the most important people
in the world for 48 hours. What happened? Better data became available in that short
amount of time. We recalculated the orbit and found that no, it's not going to collide
with Earth. It wasn't before the press gave it enormous levels of attention and my favorite
headline of them all was from the New York Post, the day after the calculation was refined
and instead of saying the asteroid almost hit us but it's not anymore, what headline
did they give us? Kiss your asteroid goodbye. I thought that was a brilliant headline in
the style that only the New York Post can put together. I remain astonished by the auxiliary
headlines that go together with these major other headlines. Kiss your asteroid goodbye.
This is an article about what might have been the end of all civilization and it's combined
with a movie review of Leonardo DiCaprio's recent film. This is the world in which we
live. Do we need evidence that we've been hit other than extinction layers? We've got evidence.
There have been Arizona. Arizona's known for its holes in the ground. The one most people
talk about is of course the Grand Canyon but the one I think about most is a big crater,
meteor crater, Arizona. Before it was called meteor crater, it was called barrenger crater
because people didn't know that it was made by a meteor. It took the efforts of the geologist
Eugene Shoemaker who as part of his PhD thesis analyzed the structures of the crater, the
surrounding areas and he was also kind of like a planetary geologist. He knew about craters
on the moon and what could cause them and postulated that in fact this was made by an
impact as opposed to what was previously believed it being a volcanic caldera even though there's
no evidence of volcanic activity anywhere for hundreds of miles of that location in Arizona.
So that crater, one of the most famous on earth because of how well preserved it is,
it's not heavily eroded. You don't keep your crater shapes for very long on earth because
of weather and the elements are devastating to surface features. So here we have a crater.
So here we have a crater. Want to get a sense of how big this is, if you played a football
game in the center of that crater there's enough seating for two million people around
the crater edge. My first visit to Arizona took a trip to the Grand Canyon and I was
underwhelmed by it. It was a big hole in the ground but it took however long nature took
to make it, I don't know millions of years whatever. When it's a meteor crater came up
to it that impressed me because I said look at this hole in the ground and how long did
it take to make a tenth of a second? I remain impressed with the power of nature simply
by my memory of visiting that crater. And by the way this is a sample, this is a piece
of the larger meteorite that made that crater. It's an iron nickel meteorite, 90 percent
iron, 10 percent nickel, it's very heavy, very dense, it's hard to convince you of that
out there in video land but I can put it on the table and you get a sense of that just
from the sound. Now the most celebrated extinction event in
history is when the dinosaurs kicked. Well when was that? Well we call that the Cretaceous
tertiary boundary, the KT boundary which is a boundary in the rocks that tells us that
it sets up a difference between what happened before and what happened after. I've always
known about that boundary but no one really knew what caused it. Was that event as significant
as meteor crater in Arizona? Meteor crater in Arizona in fact is small, it would have
wreaked havoc in its local area 50,000 years ago when it hit but beyond that it's a minor
encounter with an asteroid. If we're going to blame an asteroid for the KT boundary it's
going to have to be something bigger than that and the paleontologists were in denial.
If you're paleontologists what do you do? You look for fossils so you're looking on the
ground, they never looked up, you look for solutions to their problems on the ground.
Dinosaur's looked up. Hey guys we've got stuff coming, I can deliver you significant sources
of energy that can take out your dinosaurs at about the rate that all your fossil records
are going away. It wasn't until recently that community finally warmed up to this fact.
So let's take a look at an artist's rendering of what this might have been.
The KT boundary, as I said 70% of all earth species, land species, when extinct, no animal
bigger than a bread box survived. Evidence indicates that the impactor was about anywhere
between 10 and 20 miles in diameter. It came in and hit the tip of the Yucatan peninsula,
it's known as the Chicksalube crater. There's a crater there, we found a crater, it's the
smoking gun. After hypothesizing an asteroid took out the dinosaurs, we found a crater
of about the right size and we dated the crater 65 million years ago. Something bad happened
on earth 65 million years ago. Oh by the way, the dinosaurs went extinct.
Let's get another view. Here goes one, shows some pterodactyls flying by. This one hits
the ocean in this image. Either case, you're hosed. Don't try to pick your spot, it won't
matter, you're dead. I like to think of T-Rex observing this and then, of course, what's
the next scene we have of T-Rex? Of course, he's all bones in the museum. Makes you wonder
though, can we have our cake and eat it too? Can we say, oh these impacts are bad, I don't
like these impacts, they'll kill us. Well, wait a minute, our ancestors, our mammalian
ancestors, tree shrews, running underfoot at the KT boundary, survived that impact. They
spent their whole lives not wanting to be eaten by T-Rex. T-Rex gets knocked off, they now
have a fresh ecosystem in which to populate. Modern day mammals owe their origin, owe the
origin of their diversity, and they're spreading across the world by the virtue of the dinosaurs
having been taken out of the picture. We can't simultaneously be happy that we live on a
planet, be happy that a planet is chemically rich, what to us by impacts, happy that we're
not dinosaurs, but yet somehow resent the possibility of it being a, of us being knocked
out by a planet-wide catastrophe. Because a planet-wide catastrophe enabled us to be
here in the first place. Maybe we should just take it in stride. What kind of collisions
can you have? Well, think about it. If this fell from 12 inches above my head to hit my
head, it would probably crack my skull. Now imagine this going 45,000 miles an hour. It
would swap me like a bug, like a chain nail glove hitting a bug. Some blasts explode in
the atmosphere, and by exploding in the atmosphere, they create shock waves. Shock waves, a plane
moving faster than the speed of sound, leaves a shock wave. We call it a sonic boom. It
might rattle your dishes, but a shock wave left by one of these flattens your house.
It's a whole other scale. But what happens if it survives the atmosphere? Well, if it
impacts Earth crust, it'll make a crater as we know, but if it's a big enough crater,
it'll thrust the dirt into the upper atmosphere, into the stratosphere. It'll wrap around
Earth. It'll cloak Earth with a darkened sky, preventing sunlight from reaching the base
of the food chain. And so even if you were not there at ground zero of the impact, where
you'd then be vaporized instantly, if you're living on the other side of the world, this
stuff affects you because it completely changes your climate. I've got a table here just to
get a sense of how often these bad things happen. We get certain encounters with these
stones once a month, once a year, once a decade, once a century, and the rarer is the impact,
the bigger the impact is. And so I put this up just so you know, but every 100 million
years, let's look at the bottom number there, every 100 million years, an asteroid 10 kilometers
in diameter has an energy of 100 million megatons of TNT. How many A-bombs is that equal to?
5 billion A-bombs. Can you even imagine that? You can't even imagine that. That's what took
out the dinosaurs. That's bad. That's bad. How about once a century? Let's look at that.
Come up halfway in the table. Once a century, an asteroid about 30 meters in diameter has
an impact of 2 megatons of TNT, equivalent to about 100 A-bombs, once a century. Once
a century, has that happened? How do we do that? Well, there's a couple of famous impacts
that we can refer to. One of them is Tunguska. Some of the most famous people in the world
are Siberia. Tunguska, Siberia, 1908. What happened there? A thousand square miles of
forest was felled. 100 square miles of vegetation was vaporized, but there was no crater. What
did we learn about it? We studied the event using modern computing. We found a stony meteorite
60 meters across. 60 meters. Here we have 130 meters. Same ballpark. It came in and never
survived Earth's atmosphere. It exploded in mid-air. The energy's got to go somewhere.
There's a blast wave, shock wave. There's a radiant heat, and that destroyed the forests.
Get that every 100 years. If that happened over a city, that's the end of the city.
Another famous impact, of course, was the KT boundary. All of the people in the world
have a number square with that. That energy, how much impact energy the object had that
made that crater is the right amount of energy that it would take to take out all the major
life forms on Earth. It all matches. We get this rate of impacts from looking at the cratering
history on the moon. The moon preserves all its craters. There's no weather on the moon,
nothing to erode any features that it has. We have craters on top of craters. You analyze
that, say, here's the rate, here's how often big ones come, here's how often small ones
come, and you produce a table like this. Now other planets are at risk as well. We're
not alone in this. The moon, as you know, but Mars and Venus and Jupiter. Just a few years
ago, 1994, Jupiter got slammed by a comet. Comet Shoemaker Levy. Those are the code
discoverers. In fact, it was the husband life team, Eugene and Carolyn Shoemaker, along
with David Levy, patron saint of amateur astronomers. He's got something like 20 com. I've lost
count of how many comets he's discovered. The fact that that one was named Shoemaker
Levy 9 meant that comet hunting team. That's the ninth one they found. They found a comet
whose trajectory was going to intersect Jupiter itself. It was going to collide with Jupiter.
That comet formally in one piece got broken apart into a train of many comets. If you
take one comet, break it in two, you've got two comets, like cutting up earthworms. You
calculate the orbit, say, we're going to see a collision of the first rank, something we've
never seen in the era of the telescope. Sure enough, we make the prediction, 1994, July,
this whole train of comets slam into Jupiter. Each one of these blobs was enough to have
taken out the dinosaurs on earth. There was two dozen of them running like a train, lemmings
off the cliff into plunging into Jupiter's atmosphere. Whatever effect it had on Jupiter,
you know Jupiter's got no dinosaurs today. That was a bad day on Jupiter. I can tell
you this. What are you going to do about it? If you see one headed our way, it's going
to get our name on it. What do you want to do? Well, you can say, let's blow the thing
out of the sky. But these are big hunks of rock. You'd have to aim right. By the way,
you can't explode, if here's the asteroid, you can't explode something here and expect
it to affect your target because there's no air to propagate a blast wave. You need
the change in air pressure in order to actually destroy a target. So you actually have to
hit it. But there are kind of gentler ways to accomplish the same thing. One of them is
you send little rockets up to it that attach to it and it gently sort of nudges it out
of harm's way. If you get it early enough in its orbit, you just have to move it by
like one centimeter per second. And if your collision course was for 200 years from now
that you calculated and you move it now one centimeter a second, 200 years from now, it's
way off course. Just where you want it to be rather than on course, ready to hit the
earth. Fortunately, the bigger the asteroids are, the easier they are to find. Those are
the ones that do the most damage. What we really want to do is catalog every asteroid
bigger than about a kilometer, about a half a mile. Those are the ones that would change
Earth's ecosystem. You want to know about all those. They would change civilization. Smaller
than that, it could be really bad, but we'll recover. One half a mile and bigger, it's
not clear that we're going to recover from those. Those are the ones we want to track.
Interesting political ramification of this, of course, is that if we find an asteroid
headed our way, the asteroid becomes the enemy to everyone on Earth. And all those who are
formerly enemies of each other must come together to fight the common enemy. And you'd
be surprised how quickly you can make friends when you both have an enemy, no matter what
your previous relationship was. I will conclude with the following thought. I don't want
to be the laughing stock of the galaxy. We are human beings with a brain. We've got a
space program. We don't have to launch rockets. I don't want to be caught sitting here watching
our species go extinct, being the first life form in the galaxy to have the technology
and the intelligence to protect ourselves, yet not actually do anything about it. And
if we don't do anything about it, we are no better off than the proverbially pea-brained
dinosaurs who, in fact, had no choice.
