Welcome back to my favorite universe. Today, we're going to spend the entire lecture in
defense of very famous theory known as the Big Bang. In fact, that's the title, In Defense
of the Big Bang. I take this time to do it because it's a theory that's so misunderstood
by the public. People hear the word theory attached to it, and they say to themselves,
oh, it's just a theory, so I don't need to believe it, or there's some sort of discounting
of the intellectual achievement that it represents, but I'm here to set the record straight.
But before I begin, let me remind you that if you look throughout cultures and throughout
time, people, if you look at their writings, have always wondered how things began. Origins,
the question of origin seems to be perhaps even genetically encoded in our capacity
to ask questions. And we, living in modern times, are no exception to this. Even today,
I sit on an airplane and people find out I'm an astrophysicist, and they ask me. It's
not the first question they ask. The first is, is there life elsewhere in the cosmos?
Tell me about the Big Bang. So it's there. People want to know. And it turns out the 20th
century was the very first time in history where we were able to bring the methods and
tools of science to answer that question. All previous times and all previous cultures
had no greater tools than simply the mythology of their imagination. And so we do live in
special times because we don't, we're not relegated to just having to imagine how things
began. We can look out with our largest telescopes, probe exotic states of matter with our particle
accelerators, and come to terms with how the universe began, how it evolved, and how it
will end. And so let's explore the evidence for the Big Bang. Let me begin by saying what
could possibly force a rational astrophysicist to believe that all the matter, energy, space,
and time of the universe began 13 billion years ago, packed into a primeval fireball
smaller than some infinitesimal fraction of the size of the point of a pin. And it's been
expanding ever since. What could possibly bring someone to believe that? Well, the answer's
regardless of what you may have read or heard, the Big Bang is supported by an overwhelming
body of evidence, more evidence in support of the Big Bang than any idea that has ever
preceded it or any idea that has come since. It's all about the evidence. It's not about
belief systems. I've had people come up and say, do you believe in the Big Bang? I don't
even understand the question. The question properly worded would be, of all the evidence
that's out there, what idea is best supported by that evidence? It's the Big Bang.
Now, let's talk about theory. If you look back in the 1800s, excuse me, the 1800s and
the 1700s, there were theories put forth in the world of physics that some of them were
kind of radical ideas, but they were finally tested and confirmed, and then they got called
laws. Laws. There's the law of gravity, Newton's laws of gravity, Newton's laws of optics,
laws of motion, laws of thermodynamics, the era of laws. You enter the 20th century, very
early in the 20th century, we get to Einstein's theory of relativity. In the 1920s, we have
quantum theory. We have quantum chromodynamics. All these theories, we no longer use the term
law, and that's for a couple of reasons. First, these modern theories are as tested and as
successful as what were previously known as laws. So we could call them laws if we wanted
it and be consistent with the naming schemes of our generations past. But what happened
in the 20th century is that we came to learn that whatever it is we determined to be true
about the universe may only be a subset of a larger truth, and we learned that with Newton's
laws of gravity. Newton's laws of gravity describe, and laws of motion describe the
environment at which Newton was comfortable, where he had never seen anything move faster
than a fast-running horse. So his laws of motion surely accommodated anything that came
up in his day. Enter the 20th century, start thinking about the speed of light, high-speed
motion, and all kinds of other phenomena take place. We need new theories to account for
these new domains in which we're testing how the universe works. And Einstein's theory
of relativity does just that, theory of motion and of gravity. And it encloses the piece
of the universe described by Newton. It doesn't discard Newton, it enhances the sphere over
which the laws apply. So in modern times when we say law, in modern times when we say theory,
if it's a well-tested theory, had that been the same theory around back in the 1800s,
they'd be calling it a law, as they'd be calling the Big Bang, the Big Bang Law. But
I will remain humble in the presence of theories yet to be put forth, recognizing that perhaps
one day the Big Bang will be enclosed in a bigger picture, a deeper understanding of
how the universe works. But the day that happens we're not throwing away the Big Bang. We will
preserve it as a piece of what works under much broader circumstances and under much
wider conditions. Now, there's another piece of information we need before we start analyzing
the evidence. And that is, you know, we're born and raised with our five senses. You
know, sight, hearing, touch, taste, and smell. You grow up, things happen and you receive
them through these senses, and you come to learn, you come to expect things to follow
certain sort of rules and regulations. You drop a cup, it falls. Something vibrates quickly,
it makes a sound. These things make sense. And the definition of make sense is they are
consistent with what we expect to happen given the application of the five senses with which
we're born. Enter the 20th century where science, physics in particular, no longer takes place
on the tabletop. We start getting into particle accelerators, exploring domains of matter
that your senses had never seen before, whipping out the largest telescopes in the land, looking
to the outer reaches of the cosmos, experiencing a scale of the universe unlike anything you've
ever seen in your life. So, we start deducing the nature of the cosmos, learning how the
cosmos behaves, and it's falling outside of our senses. No longer can we invoke the does
it make sense criterion for theories or phenomenon that we see take place in the cosmos. It is
long past our capacity to judge whether or not something makes sense. Now, throughout
all this, we've always required that whatever is your theory, it ought to make mathematical
sense. The math is a logical image of the idea so that you can then manipulate the idea
ensuring that you're not going to make a mistake in so doing. It's always got to make mathematical
sense. But it doesn't have to make intuitive sense because your intuition was carved in
the wrong place. So, let's also demand that if you come up with a new theory, it's got
to agree with the evidence and predict things that maybe you hadn't known before. Otherwise,
it's just sort of an explanation that comes after the fact, putting pieces together without
giving you new insight into how the world works. For the Big Bang in particular, a variety
of experimental pillars support its status as the most successful theory ever put forth.
And I call them pillars because the thing is resting on these pillars. Big Bang makes
three assumptions out of which all the predictions that it makes follow. One assumption, although
it knew this at the time the theory was put forth, is that the universe is expanding. Second
assumption, yesterday the universe was hotter than it is today so that if you turn the clock
back and you somehow found a way to measure the temperature of the universe, you'd get
higher temperatures than now. And it also asserts that the universe had a beginning.
That's all it needs. Those three assumptions. By the way, if it explained everything we
knew and had a thousand assumptions, that's not a very good theory. The theory should have
the fewest number of assumptions possible. That's what gives you confidence in its power.
So let's take these one by one. Well, 1929, Edwin Hubble of Hubble Telescope fame, discovered
that all the galaxies, except for just a few that are sitting right as our neighbors, all
the galaxies that he saw in the nighttime sky had speeds, high speeds, and all those
speeds were moving away from the Milky Way galaxy. All the galaxies, except for a handful
right closest to us, were expanding away from us. That's something he noticed. Now
you also notice that galaxies that were twice as far away, we were sitting from us twice
as fast, three times farther away, three times as fast. So it wasn't just sort of a uniform
expansion, there was this sort of the stuff farther away was moving faster. And you ask
correct, what, that's a signature of what? In fact, that's a signature of an explosion.
If you study the debris tossed in any explosion, what you find is some degree, landed twice
as far away as the other debris, yet it all settled at the same time. So it meant the
farther debris had twice the speed, as the debris that was only half as far. It is the
signature of an explosion. And we also learned 13 years before this, Albert Einstein put
forth a new theory of gravity, general relativity. General relativity generalized the premise
of the assumptions of what went into his special theory of relativity. Special theory had constant
motion and there were no accelerations, there was no discussion of gravity within it. Gravity
causes accelerations. And so it was an important special case of a broader story called the
general theory of relativity. In the general theory of relativity, he noted that space,
the space through which we walk, actually can be thought of as a fabric that distorts
in the presence of matter. And the distortion is what we call gravity. And this expansion
of the universe was not a galaxy moving through a preexisting space under the tenets of general
relativity, the space and the galaxies within it are embedded together and it's the fabric
of space that's expanding. Like some kind of three dimensional rubber sheet. They say
that doesn't make sense, but it doesn't have to make sense, like I said. We're talking
about modern physics here and domains that don't happen in your everyday life. It didn't
happen in the sandbox when you were growing up. General theory of relativity, three years
after it was proposed, it was proposed in 1916 and 1919, it was already tested. Sir Arthur
Eddington, a well-known astrophysicist in England, went on an eclipse expedition, waited
for the sun to be blocked by the moon so stars come out in its vicinity, measured the exact
positions of those stars, right near the edge of the sun. You can't see them when it's
not an eclipse, so obviously he needs this condition to make the measurement. Wait six
months later, take the same measurement and notice that the stars were in different places.
During the eclipse, the light came past the limb of the sun and its trajectory was altered
because the curved fabric of space and time in the vicinity of the sun, just as predicted
by Einstein's relativity. Relativity, as exotic as it was, was turning out to be correct,
and that while individual objects curve space-time, the whole universe, the sum of all the objects
in the cosmos, curves the entire cosmos. The space is something that has structure that
can expand or that can curve or that can warp, and galaxies are embedded within that space.
So it's consistent with relativity. Now how do we really know that distant galaxies have
high velocity? Well we measure something akin to a Doppler effect. That's like the police
radar gun, they aim the gun at you and they measure your speed of approach or speed of
recession. In the galaxy, you perform a similar kind of experiment using light, light of any
kind, and you notice that features in the spectrum are shifted towards the red part
of the visible spectrum. You have red, orange, yellow, green, blue, violet. If there's any
feature in that spectrum that belongs attached to a particular color, if an object is receding,
it has shifted towards the red part of the spectrum. We call it a red shift. The farther
away the object, the more the red shift is measured to be. Well, if you're receding fast,
general relativity predicts that there's something called a time dilation for events that take
place at these great distances. I'm moving away from you and I'm, let's say I'm counting
out seconds. Let's say one, two, three, four, five. But if I'm receding from you, counting
out seconds, every second that I lay down, the next time I take out a second, I am farther
away than I once was. And that signal doesn't get to you until later, so that the duration
of a second is actually increased according to your capacity to measure. It's called time
dilation. It's a prediction of general relativity. Sure enough, sure enough, we have a way to
measure this without actually going out into space. These objects call supernovae. Here's
an example of one in a nearby galaxy. It's that bright star in the bottom left corner
of the image. Looks like a star that's brand new on the scene, but in fact it's a dead
star. It's the explosive death throes of a high mass star, thrusting its chemically enriched
guts into the galaxy. Sometimes they are so bright, they rival the luminosity of the hundred
billion stars in the galaxy in which it resides. We understand these beasts. We know how quickly
they gain in luminosity. We know how slowly they decline. We know how long that takes.
Well, let's look farther out in the cosmos. We look farther out. We find much more distant
galaxies, now much smaller and they're just smudges. They got supernova too. Look at each
one of these images. You see a bright star rivaling the brightness of the rest of the
system. These supernova are far enough away so that this effect of general relativity
can be measured. We look at their rise in brightness and their drop off. We say, you
know something? All the nearby supernova rise up and drop down in this much time, but these,
they take longer to execute the course of brightening and dimming. Maybe it's a different
species of star in the early universe that just has a different property. Maybe. But
let's figure out how much longer this what we call light curve lasts. Calculate that.
That's easy. Just measure it up. Wait a minute. How much time dilation is general relativity
predicting for a galaxy at that distance? It's bang on. It's exactly what we measure
with the stretching of the light curve of the supernova. So we measure the time dilation.
That's real. No doubt about it. Now, let's put this together. We've got an expanding
universe. We've got galaxies embedding in space. We've got a theory to account for it, the
general theory of relativity. There's a brilliant man back at the, he was around at the turn
of the century, but the work for which we remember him was conducted in the 1930s. Here
is a Jesuit priest, George Lematre, a Jesuit priest and cosmologist. Impressive things to
have on your business card. He was the first to connect the new theory of relativity, the
new discoveries of, of Edwin Hubble, and the fact that you've got galaxies sort of embedded
in this expanding system. He was the first one to think if we're expanding, maybe in
the past we were smaller. And if we were smaller, maybe we had a beginning. Just maybe the universe
had a beginning. And maybe, based on his knowledge of physics, maybe the universe was hotter
at a time when it was much more compressed. You ever pumped up air into a bicycle tire,
you feel the valve, it's hot after you've done your pumping, compressing air into a
smaller volume. Let their air out with your thumb. You don't have a bicycle, just try
it on a car tire, it works too. You let your, and the air comes by, it'll feel cooler, rapidly
expanding air, drops a little bit in temperature. So the expanding universe is dropping in temperature.
It operates under similar physical principles. So if you turn the clock back, let's look at
the universe. It was hotter, hotter, hotter, hotter. And there's a point where it was about
3,000 degrees. 3,000 degrees, well, you're a glow. And if you're 3,000 degrees, atoms
are ionized, which means the electrons are, are detached from their host nuclei, and they're
sort of swimming in this soup. Light tries to move through the medium, and it gets batted
back and forth, so that light does not travel in straight lines through the universe. It's
kind of a fog of light, actually. It was 3,000 degrees at a particular time in the history
of the universe. And all times before that, the universe was opaque. But at that point,
as we cool through those temperatures, electrons combine back to the atoms, and light freely
flows through. Well, it's been a long time since that has happened. The universe is 1,000
times bigger, in fact. How much cooler should we be? Turns out it is proportional. So we're
1,000, the temperature that it was back then, now being 1,000 times larger. It was 3,000
degrees then. Right now, the temperature of the universe is 3 degrees Kelvin. Kelvin
is the absolute temperature scale. If you're zero on the Kelvin scale, there's nothing
colder. Zero on Celsius, you've got colder temperatures. Zero on Fahrenheit, it's really
cold, but you can get colder. Zero on Kelvin, that's all she wrote. Three degrees Kelvin
in the universe. That's the measured temperature today. This bit of arithmetic was actually
first done by George Gamow, after the Second World War, 1948. He proposed, he said, if
the universe were hot, we know enough about particle physics now, we'd just finish the
war effort and the Manhattan Project, building the bomb, getting inside the atom. We knew
enough about the atom and about particles and particle physics to know that particles
behave in particular ways under particular circumstances. And the electron would jump
out of the atom and back into the atom. The light would be released. He predicted what
the temperature should be today. He said it'd be about five degrees Kelvin, plus or minus.
He got the wrong answer, but his idea was right. And at five degrees, are you emitting
visible light? No. Your photons are primarily microwaves. So he said, maybe someone will
look around for the signature of the Big Bang, and it would be found in the microwave part
of the spectrum. And in fact, in 1967, 19 years after he proposed this, after he made
this prediction, two physicists at Bell Labs, Arno Penzius and Robert Wilson. You know,
Bell Labs, it's the communication center of the United States. It's where much of modern
technology that we use to communicate with each other was invented, including, for example,
the transistor. So they're trying to measure what signals of microwaves exist in the sky
that might interfere with your ability to use microwaves to communicate. So they blot
out their antenna, and they're measuring that, well, there's a hiss over here, we know what
that is. Let's remove that. Oh, there's a little signal over here. Let's remove that.
And they removed everything they could possibly find, but there was still a signal left over.
They couldn't remove it. And it was everywhere, no matter where they looked. It didn't focus
in one direction and not another. It was everywhere. So they published it. They said, excess microwave
signal everywhere we look. They were not cosmologists. They were sort of engineering physicists.
It took other physicists to look at that signature and say, you've discovered the big bang, the
remnant, the visible remnant. Now, red shifted to microwaves. So red shifted is out of the
visible spectrum, passed infrared all the way into microwaves. It has shifted into that
part of the spectrum and is what was predicted by George Gamow. And you have just seen evidence
of the birth of the cosmos. They won a Nobel Prize for that discovery, even though they
didn't know what they had found, which is kind of cute, slipped into the Nobel Prize.
But somebody had to discover it. Now, how do we know that the microwaves actually come
from the edge of the universe? Maybe they're scattered. Maybe they somehow a property of
space. So if you look between here and there, you'll see a little less than if you look
between there and there, because you're not looking through the whole distance. Well,
there's a way to test for that. There's a way to test for that. In fact, let's look at
a cluster of galaxies right here. This image is the, it has that sort of, you see the chevron
there because this is the shape of the detector for the Hubble Space Telescope. It just happens
to have that little bite taken out of it. But this is an image of a cluster of galaxies.
We know that clusters of galaxies have gas within them that is extremely hot, so hot
that it's radiating x-rays. Well, if you're a microwave light, mining your own business
coming from the edge of the universe, and you come upon one of these clusters, that
high temperature microwaves actually gives you a kick. It bumps up your energy just a
little bit as you move through the cluster. The prediction is that if the cosmic microwave
background is truly in the background, every place where you see a cluster, the microwave
signature is going to be a little warmer for having passed through it. The x-ray feature,
this is a picture with the Chandra X-ray Telescope, and you see this glowing gas.
You see also a signature of black holes, the two bright spots, those are black holes in
the centers of galaxies, but all the rest is gas. Sure enough, everywhere we look, every
sight line in the sky that passes through one of these clusters that has a hot intracluster
x-ray emitting gas, the cosmic microwave background is pumped up a little bit in its temperature.
So that tells us that in fact, this stuff is coming from beyond every piece of matter
that we see. That's an important distinction. Now, is there another way to know that it
was hotter in the past than today? That's one of the predictions. Sure there is. There
are galaxies out there that if you look far enough back in time, which is just by looking
up, you're looking back in time because it took light time to reach you, find a galaxy
anywhere you want. Go back in time a billion years, two billion years. Whatever time you
go back, the universe was hotter then. And there's a molecule, the cyanogen molecule,
CN, that gets excited when taking baths and microwaves. And the higher the temperature
bath of microwaves, the higher is the excitation level of that molecule. So we can measure
that here and you say, oh, you're excited by how much? What's the bath that you're
exposed to? You measure it, it's about three degrees. Find that cyanogen molecule at a
distant galaxy, measure it 10 degrees. Is that consistent? We'll figure out how much
the size of the universe changed between now and then. Correlated with temperature, flipping
the equation, bam, it's exactly the temperature of the universe at that time. Smoking gun.
What else do we know? The universe was born with a lot of hydrogen and 10% helium. Born
that way. So we'd expect every nook and cranny of the universe to have no less than 10% helium.
We looked, because that was predicted, that's predicted out of the early universe nucleosynthesis,
the early universe particle physics. Regimes of laboratory physics tell us what was going
on then. And it predicts 10% hydrogen atoms, helium atoms, anywhere we look. You could
have more, but nobody's going to have less because that's what you were born with. And
when we look around, look under the table, look around the galaxy, and no matter where
we look, everybody's got no less than 10% helium. No less. That's a smoking gun if I'd
ever heard one. Then there are a couple of other elements, lithium and deuterium, made
in trace amounts. They have the opposite problem. They're not made in any great way after the
Big Bang. In fact, they're easily destroyed. So what we look for there is, you don't expect
more than what we were born with because natural phenomena in the universe destroyed. So you
look around. How much was predicted in the Big Bang? Look around. Do you see any more
than that? No. Look in the same haunts. Nope. Nope. Nowhere. So we have two predictors that
actually work in the opposite directions. The helium, no less than 10%. The lithium and
deuterium, no more than their miniscule fractions. We don't expect any more than one in 100,000
hydrogen atoms to be deuterium. Deuterium is just a version of hydrogen that has an
extra neutron in its nucleus. We didn't just make this stuff up. There's an unprecedented
marriage of astrophysics and particle physics and a coherent picture has emerged by the
application of those two disciplines. When you combine them, it tells us that the galaxy
velocities are real. The galaxy distances are real. The expanding universe is real. Relativity
is real. Quantum mechanics is real. The early universe was hot and the Big Bang is law.
But all is not golden. There's some problems that worry all of us. 90% of all the gravity
in the universe comes from something that we don't even know what it is. We call it
dark matter. We don't know what's causing it. Also, the future expansion of the cosmos
will be driven by some phenomenon that acts opposite the sense of gravity. We call it
dark energy. We don't know what it is. It's like an anti-gravity pressure. We don't know
what that is. By the way, there's a place for it in Einstein's equations. But just because
it has a place in the math doesn't mean we understand the phenomenon. Big Bang doesn't
know we can't use the Big Bang to tell us what happened before the first 10 million
trillion trillion trillionth of a second. That's a long time ago. But at that moment,
general relativity and quantum mechanics break down. They're incompatible at times before
then. We need a new theory to get us before that. Big Bang also doesn't tell us what
happened before the beginning of time itself. Can we throw away the whole theory just because
it doesn't fit? No, that would be unwise. Had we done the same thing with Copernicus,
who put the Sun back in the center of the universe instead of the Earth and had planets
orbiting in perfect circles, he got the basic idea right. The details are wrong. The orbits
were ellipses, not perfect circles. But you'll throw away the whole idea if the idea has,
in its soul, is the correct thing going on. Then you fix the details around the edges.
But I look forward to the day when maybe a new theory supplants the Big Bang. The Big
Bang is just a part of a bigger story. There's one going on right now, where you look back
early enough, this quantum foam, this girdling of the early universe in its earliest times
actually spawns different universes, an unlimited number of universes, bubbles growing out of
this hyperspace, if you will. Our bubble happens to be our universe, with our laws of physics.
Other bubbles might have different laws. Maybe in that universe, it's incompatible with life.
So we're not there making these statements. We're here. And in that case, the beginning
of our universe is just part of this long-going, long-running phenomenon, making baby universes
daily. There's not much evidence and support of those ideas, but they're intriguing nonetheless,
and they are consistent with some major tenets of relativity. So let me leave you with some
thoughts. First, whether or not you like the Big Bang is irrelevant. It's consistent with
the data, and the data overwhelmingly supported. Nothing's ever come close to describing how
the universe is structured. Nothing's ever come as close as the Big Bang. And science
is not discard successful theories. It enhances them. I leave you with a quote from Max Planck,
a famous physicist from 1936. He said, an important scientific innovation rarely makes
its way by gradually winning over and converting its opponents. What does happen is that its
opponents gradually die out and that the growing generation is familiarized with the idea from
the beginning.
