Hello, and welcome to our series of lectures on Albert Einstein.
Einstein was, simply put, the greatest scientist of the 20th century.
In 2000, Time Magazine named him its person of the century, and its German counterpart,
Der Spiegel, the mirror, dubbed him Das Gehirn des Jahrhunderts, the brain of the century.
But Einstein was more than just a physicist.
Thanks mainly to his achievements in physics, he also came to be one of the most influential
philosophers of the 20th century, and he was highly esteemed in his day as one of the
most thoughtful and effective voices on a wide array of social and political issues,
ranging from pacifism, Zionism and socialism, to racism and the dangers of nuclear weapons.
The overall aim of these lectures is to understand both Einstein and the world that produced
him.
What was distinctive about Einstein's intellectual and moral character?
What was distinctive about his family, his community, and his education?
What was distinctive about the new physics that he discovered and developed?
What was distinctive about a world that came to prize him as a thinker and a moral leader
in ways that are hard to imagine today?
And what does it say about us that we still look to Einstein as a model?
An important goal of these lectures will be to understand Einstein the whole person and
the whole thinker.
His work in physics will of course take center stage, but Einstein the physicist cannot be
understood without also understanding Einstein the philosopher and Einstein the humanitarian.
One might be surprised to find out how many and how deep are the connections among the
different aspects of Einstein's life and work.
Equally relevant is understanding Einstein the human being, for even though Einstein looked
to science as a world apart, even a refuge from the merely personal as he termed it,
his intellectual achievements still reflect a complicated human personality.
The structure of this lecture series blends a basically historical or chronological survey
of Einstein's biography with something of a thematic approach to Einstein's ideas in
physics, philosophy, and political affairs.
A thematic approach is necessary if, for example, we want an integrated understanding
of Einstein's work on the quantum theory, which stretched over more than three decades,
or his pacifism, which was born early and was an important part of his world view to
the end of his life.
But keeping the history and the biography clearly in focus is just as important.
It's not a trivial or unimportant fact, for example, that Einstein struggled to complete
the general theory of relativity while his first marriage was falling apart.
He was having an affair with his first cousin and World War I was raging around him.
We begin with Einstein's early life.
Our goal for this and the next lecture will be to follow Einstein's path to his so-called
honest, marvelous, or miracle year of 1905, a remarkable year it was.
In the space of just four months, the largely unknown 26-year-old Swiss patent clerk published
in just one volume of the world's leading physics journal, the Anaheim der Physique,
Annals of Physics, three revolutionary papers, any one of which would have made the reputation
and the career of any ordinary physicist.
The first paper, one of the most important papers in the history of the quantum theory,
was the paper in which Einstein introduced the concept of the photon, or the idea that
light and other kinds of electromagnetic energy live in the form of discrete, particle-like
quanta of energy.
The second paper is less well known today, but it was equally important in its day.
It concerns the seemingly erratic motion of tiny particles suspended in a fluid, like
pollen grains in water, that we call after its 19th century discoverer, Brownian motion.
Einstein proved that this motion was a result of the pollen grains' random collisions with
invisible, individual water molecules, and so gave visible proof for the reality of atoms,
something that one is amazed to learn was not all that widely accepted at the beginning
of the 20th century.
The third of Einstein's three miraculous papers was his most famous, the paper introducing
the special theory of relativity.
And this was followed a few months later in 1905 by a short paper in which Einstein announced
the most famous implication of relativity theory, the equivalence of mass and energy,
known by the theory's signature equation, E equals mc squared.
In subsequent lectures, we'll study in some detail Einstein's work on the quantum theory
and the theory of relativity.
Right now, our aim is to understand how he arrived at the threshold of such an achievement,
to understand that is Einstein's path to his miracle year.
Einstein was born on March 14, 1879 in Ulm, a middle-sized town in the German state of
Württemberg.
His parents, Hermann Einstein and Paulina Koch, were both descended from Jewish families
with old and deep roots in that part of south-central Germany.
It had been only a few decades earlier that German Jews gained full civil rights and began
to move out of the ghetto, literally, and into the mainstream of German life.
But in the 1870s, paths to many careers were still effectively blocked, even for assimilating
German Jews like Einstein's parents.
For example, it was only in 1875 that for the first time a Jewish philosopher, Hermann
Cohen, won a full professorship in a German university.
A career in government was virtually impossible.
Many ambitious and talented Jews therefore sought careers in fields like business, banking,
industry, and medicine.
In Einstein's family, industry was the choice.
In Ulm, Hermann Einstein had been a featherbed salesman, but now Einstein's father and uncle
Jakob Einstein together founded a company in the field then called Electrotechnology.
The Einstein firm manufactured electrical generation and transmission equipment and competed for
contracts to electrify Germany's growing cities.
When Einstein was one year old, in 1880, the family moved to the Bavarian capital of Munich,
where the new firm was located.
By contrast with Ulm, Munich was a big cosmopolitan city with a vigorous cultural life and for
the most part a vigorous economy.
Bavaria was not then the kind of industrial center that one found in, say, the Ruhr Valley,
nor was Munich the kind of world city that Berlin was becoming, but as an important part
of the newly unified German Reich, Bavaria and its capital city were booming along with
the rest of Germany and Central Europe during what was to be a nearly 40 year period of
peace and prosperity.
At first the Einstein firm prospered too, making possible a comfortable middle class life and
access to the very best schools.
We know a little about Einstein's earliest years thanks mainly to an incomplete biography
by Einstein's younger sister and only sibling, Maya.
It's from Maya that we learn, for example, about such noteworthy traits as the young
Einstein's unusual powers of concentration.
In her biography, Maya wrote this, even when there was a lot of noise, he could lie down
on the sofa, pick up a pen and paper, precariously balance an inkwell on the backrest and engross
himself in a problem so much that the background noise stimulated rather than disturbed him.
There are also reports of more normal little boy behavior, like Albert's once having whacked
Maya on the head with a garden hoe or throwing a chair in anger at his violin teacher.
It's remembered that Einstein was slow to learn to speak, but that when he did finally
speak from the beginning it was always already in full sentences.
The Einstein household was a cultivated one in which learning was encouraged.
For elementary school, Einstein was sent to the neighborhood Peter Schula, the St. Peter's
school.
Einstein recalled that because he was dreamy and slow to speak, he did not do well.
As at all German public schools, religious instruction was mandatory.
That meant the Catholic religion at the Peter Schula.
Jewish religious instruction would have to be provided at home.
Like many upwardly mobile, middle-class Jewish families, the Einstein's were not strictly
observant Jews.
The Einstein family did not convert to Christianity, as did many such families ambitious to escape
the still potent social barriers to Jewish integration.
After all, prejudice against Jews was still common, as evidenced by the fact that even
the young Einstein suffered the occasional taunt from his classmates.
But while the Einstein's kept their official status as Jews, Jewish ritual was not strongly
emphasized at home.
Einstein later remembered having experienced a brief period of intense religiosity thanks
to his own early encounters with both Christian and Jewish religious teaching.
But this brief religious phase left no permanent mark unless one chooses to look here for the
first roots of Einstein's quasi-mystical notion of cosmic religion in which law-governed, rationally
knowable nature itself takes the place of the divine.
This was an idea about which Einstein spoke and wrote often in later life.
We'll examine it carefully in a later lecture.
At the age of nine, Einstein graduated to the most prestigious humanistic high school
in Munich, the Louis Paul Gymnasium.
Widespread myths to the contrary, notwithstanding, Einstein was a perfectly respectable student
from the point of view of academic performance, not brilliant in all fields, but on balance,
clearly an above average student.
In a few minutes, I'll have more to say about the legend of Einstein's having failed mathematics.
Much of Einstein's real education took place at home, however.
It was at home, for example, that Einstein, at age 12, first discovered what he called
the wonder of Euclid's geometry.
It was at home that he read the best popular scientific literature of the day.
And it was at home that he had the good fortune to meet a poor, young Jewish medical student,
Max Thalme, who was a regular visitor in the Einstein household, invited there in keeping
with an old Jewish custom of opening one's home to less advantaged members of the community.
Thalme became both a mentor and a kind of older brother to Einstein.
Thalme's most important service to Einstein was probably his introducing the adolescent
Einstein to the works of the great German philosopher Immanuel Kant.
Remarkable as it might seem, by his early teens, Einstein had read, and as the later
evidence suggests, thoroughly digested, Kant's three major works, the critique of pure reason,
the critique of practical reason, and the critique of judgment.
The name of Kant will come up more than once in later lectures, testimony to his immense
influence on German philosophical thought in the late 19th and early 20th centuries,
and testimony as well to his deep and lasting influence on Einstein, if only as a foil against
which Einstein defined his own importantly different philosophical views.
Einstein's very early first encounter with Kant is certainly noteworthy, but such a
young exposure to serious philosophy was not in Einstein's day quite the anomaly that
it would be today.
The cultural aspirations of Einstein's class, combined with the strong cultural traditions
embedded in the curriculum of the German classical gymnasium, these combined to produce a world
in which it was just taken for granted that really talented students headed toward a university
education would already have read thinkers of the caliber of Kant.
Another crucial part of Einstein's early education might well have taken place in the
family's factory on the workshop floor and in the drafting studio.
For part of the family's time in Munich, the Einstein house was on the grounds of the
Einstein Brothers factory.
The young Einstein grew up in intimate daily contact with the machinery of the new electrical
age.
We should remember this background when we learned that Einstein's first paper on special
relativity in 1905, a paper entitled on the electrodynamics of moving bodies, opens with
a puzzle about the physical description of dynamos, that is to say electrical generators
and induction motors.
And when later we learned about, we learned about Einstein's lifelong love of invention
and tinkering with machines, we should recall that such work evoked not only memories of
the patent office, but also memories of what was literally Einstein's boyhood playground.
For all that Einstein was a good student, he gradually developed an intense dislike
of school.
Perhaps it was in part a classic case of the exceptional student who was not sufficiently
challenged by his studies, but Einstein remembered it differently.
It was mainly the militaristic discipline of the German schools that so upset him.
He complained that, the teachers in the elementary school appeared to me like sergeants and the
gymnasium teachers like lieutenants.
Einstein's alienation clearly affected his behavior as shown by an incident that he later
described this way.
This is quoting Einstein.
When I was in the seventh grade at the Louis Paul Gymnasium, I was summoned by my homeroom
teacher who expressed the wish that I leave the school.
To my remark that I had done nothing amiss, he replied only, your mere presence spoils
the respect of the class for me.
I myself to be sure wanted to leave school, the main reason being for me the dull mechanized
method of teaching.
Because of my poor memory for words, this presented me with great difficulties that
it seemed senseless for me to overcome.
I preferred therefore to endure all sorts of punishments rather than learn to gabble
by rote.
Einstein's unhappy experience with the German schools did leave a permanent mark.
Education was a topic about which he spoke and wrote many times in later years.
He was clearly deeply interested in the question of how one educates children in humane ways
that cultivate and reinforce creativity, originality and independence of judgment as opposed to
the education and conformity that he thought was the basis of the German schools of his
day.
By 1894, a series of business reversals, including the loss of major electrification
contracts to future giants of German industry like the German General Electric Corporation,
forced Hermann and Jakob Einstein to close their Munich factory.
They sought to restart the business in the less competitive environment of northern Italy,
eventually building a new factory in Pavia, south of Milan.
Since Albert had barely a year of high school left, it was decided that he should stay behind,
living with relatives.
But Einstein's disaffection with school grew so great that without consulting his parents,
he dropped out of school, took the train south to Italy and just showed up on the doorstep
of the family's new home.
What to do with such an errant headstrong boy?
For some months, Einstein took advantage of his freedom to explore his new Italian surroundings,
often on foot, but this gypsy life couldn't go on forever.
On the advice of friends, it was decided to have Einstein take the entrance examination
for one of Europe's preeminent technical universities, the Swiss Federal Polytechnic
Institute in Zurich, now commonly referred to by the initials of its German name as the
ETH, or Etihad, the Eidgenesische Technische Hochschule.
Einstein passed the entrance examination with flying colors in all technical subjects, but
failed in a couple of humanistic fields.
Einstein so impressed the physicist on the examining committee, Heinrich Friedrich Weber,
that he invited the precocious young Einstein to audit his lectures.
But Einstein's parents decided instead to send him for one final year of high school
at the famously progressive and liberal Cantonal School in Aarau, about 50 kilometers west
of Zurich.
They did this, both because Einstein could genuinely benefit from some additional schooling
in the subjects in which he was weaker, and because, with a diploma from a Swiss high
school, he wouldn't have to retake the ETH entrance examination.
By the way, remember the name Heinrich Friedrich Weber, or HF Weber?
He might have been Einstein's booster on the occasion of the failed entrance examination,
and he would be Einstein's major physics professor at the ETH, but he was also to become,
to Einstein's surprise, one of the chief impediments to the launching of Einstein's physics career.
If high school in Munich had been hell, high school in Aarau was heaven.
Einstein flourished like never before in a free and stimulating intellectual and social
environment.
Einstein ruined with one of his teachers, Jost Vintler, whose daughter Maria became the
first great love of Einstein's life.
Though Albert and Maria went their separate ways after Einstein left for the university,
Einstein's bond to the Vintler family was so strong and so enduring that his sister
Maya married Maria's brother Paul, and Einstein's later best friend, Michele Besso, married Maria's
sister Anna.
By all accounts, Jost Vintler himself was an important influence on Einstein.
Progressive in his politics and something of a free thinker, he could tolerate and encourage
Einstein's independence.
There's also reason to believe that it was conversation in the Vintler home about the
issues of the day that first began to direct Einstein's attention toward politics and social
problems.
In Aarau, it was not just Einstein the romantic who blossomed, it was also Einstein the physicist.
It was during this time that Einstein recalled inventing a thought experiment that later
played a significant role in the development of his thinking about relativity.
Einstein asked himself what one would see if one could move alongside a light wave traveling
at the speed of light, and realized that one would no longer see a passing train of wave
crests and troughs, but instead just a standing wave, something not permitted according to
Einstein by classical electrodynamics and something not encountered in our experience.
That was enough to convince Einstein that there's something problematic about the idea
of an observer moving with the speed of light, and it became a fundamental principle in the
theory of relativity that no observer or other material system can move at the speed of light.
As we'll see, in the theory of relativity, the speed of light plays a privileged role.
What exactly Einstein meant when he later described this thought experiment, and whether
the 16-year-old Einstein actually got his physics right, those are matters of debate.
What's clear is that Einstein saw this thought experiment as playing a crucial role on his
road to special relativity.
It's worth pausing to note that here, at a surprisingly young age, Einstein already displays
a way of thinking, the thought experiment, that would continue to be an essential part
of his way of doing physics to the end of his life.
In subsequent lectures, we'll discuss several other famous Einstein thought experiments.
Some speculate that Einstein's work as a patent clerk sharpened his ability to think
in visual terms, since diagrams are an important part of the patent process.
Many years later, Einstein told a mathematician interested in the psychology of science and
mathematics that he, Einstein, always thought about a physics problem first in terms of
visual images, and only later translated those pictures into a mathematical formalism.
Whether all thinking is inherently visual is an interesting and often debated question.
It was certainly a widespread view in the late 19th and early 20th centuries that we
can think rationally only about things that can be pictured in the sense that they can
be represented as processes occurring in space and time.
This view has roots in the philosophy of Immanuel Kant.
Some scientists and philosophers, like the physicist Heinrich Hertz and Ludwig Boltzmann,
went so far as to assert that scientific theories are best understood simply as providing us
with pictures or models of the phenomena they aim to represent.
And as we shall see, one of the most vigorous criticisms of quantum mechanics in the 1920s
and beyond would be the charge that, thanks to the Heisenberg Uncertainty principle,
quantum mechanics makes it impossible to picture quantum phenomena coherently.
Other scientists and philosophers argued that visualizable models are no more than psychological
crutches.
The British physicist James Clerk Maxwell, who formalized classical electricity and magnetism,
held that the mind was constrained to think in terms of models.
But that those models don't necessarily picture reality correctly, is evidenced by the fact
that we sometimes have to use mutually contradictory models to illuminate different aspects of
one and the same phenomenon.
The French physical chemist Pierre Duembe, whose philosophy of science will encounter
in a later lecture because it had a big influence on Einstein, Duembe held that thinking in
terms of models was a symptom of scientific immaturity.
One seen especially often among the British, a weakness to be overcome as science becomes
more formal, more rational, and well, more French, as Duembe would say.
However these philosophical debates are resolved, it remains an important and distinctive fact
about Einstein's way of doing physics that it was so very visual.
If we're interested in what sets Einstein apart from other scientists, what made it
possible for him to achieve so much, then here is one place to look.
If nothing else, the example of the 16 year old Einstein's first serious thought experiment
proves the point that Einstein was unusually adept at developing or discovering the most
helpful picture.
It's one thing to have a good imagination.
It's quite another thing to be able to find just the right picture to solve the riddle
of relativity.
Einstein's year in R.O. was in this way good for his development as a physicist.
It was also ironically Einstein's year in R.O. that produced the legend of his having
failed several subjects, including mathematics.
It long seemed as though there was documentation of Einstein's failure, for his R.O. grade
record shows what appears to be a precipitous drop in grades in many subjects in his last
term.
Was this the worst case of senioritis ever?
No, not at all.
It turns out that the school had merely chosen to invert its grading scale.
In fact, Einstein's grades still placed him near the top of his class where he had always
been.
By the way, the inversion of the grading scale was discovered only in the course of research
on Volume 1 of the collected papers of Albert Einstein.
Can there be any better proof of the value of careful historical scholarship than that
it deprives us of excuses for our failings?
The final fact of note about the R.O. year is that it was then that the willful Einstein,
on his own initiative, sought and won his release from German citizenship.
More specifically from citizenship in the German state of Württemberg, the location
of his birthplace Ulm.
Einstein's ever more intense hatred of German militarism made this for Einstein a moment
of life-changing importance.
Several years would pass before Einstein could apply for and be granted Swiss citizenship,
meaning that he was for those years literally a stateless person, that he could nonetheless
enter and graduate from a leading Swiss university points up an important difference between
Einstein's world and ours.
But even in Einstein's day, it was a remarkable thing for a 16-year-old to renounce his citizenship.
Was this nothing more than a continuation of an adolescent rebellion that drove his
dropping out of the Louis-Polde Gymnasium in Munich to follow his parents to Italy?
Was Einstein's perception of all things German wrongly colored by his unhappy experience
of the military-like discipline of German schools in those days?
Or do we see here the first genuine stirring of a social conscience that would later propel
Einstein into the limelight as a proponent of many progressive social and political causes?
There's no denying the signs of all too typical adolescent rebellion and alienation in the
teenage Einstein, even if the expressions of those attitudes were a bit more extreme
than the norm.
And in some sense, Einstein would remain an alienated rebel for the rest of his life.
But in Einstein's response to German militarism, we seem to encounter, even at this young age,
something deeper, something more visceral, something that goes beyond merely a rejection
of conformity.
One story has Einstein, even as a little boy, telling his parents after watching a military
parade that he does not want to be one of those, quote, poor people.
As we shall see, after Hitler came to power, Einstein saw the need for war and even the
atom bomb to counter a greater evil.
But then, as in his youth, Einstein was still a pacifist at heart, and that pacifism came
from somewhere deep within Einstein's character.
When Einstein graduated from the Argaul Cantinal School in 1896, he was 17 years old.
In pictures from his graduation, one notices especially the intensity in his eyes, which
contrasts with the softness of his other features.
Arau had transformed a precocious, but perhaps insecure adolescent into a confident, almost
cocky young man.
It was said that all of the girls fell in love with Einstein at this time, as had Maria
Wintler.
Were Einstein's head and heart ready for the challenges that university life would bring?
That's where we'll begin our next lecture.
