Welcome to the second in our series of lectures on Albert Einstein.
In the previous lecture, we began our study of Einstein's early life leading up to his
so-called miracle year of 1905, the year in which he launched the revolutionary transformations
of 20th century physics with his first papers on topics such as relativity and the quantum
theory.
We talked about the emergence of a gifted and headstrong young Einstein growing up in
a middle class, largely secularized Jewish family that prized learning and culture.
We discussed the significance of the Einstein family's electrotechnical business that thrived
for a time in Munich and then was relocated to northern Italy.
We focused on Einstein's frustrations with his early education, leading up to his deciding
on his own to drop out of Munich's prestigious, elite, polled gymnasium and his finishing
high school in the comparative academic heaven of the R. Gower Cantonal School in R. L. Switzerland.
In this lecture, we pick up the story as Einstein begins his university studies at the Aethe
Ha, the Swiss Federal Polytechnic in Zurich, Switzerland in 1896.
These next nine years, from 1896 to 1905, saw Einstein become a father, a husband, a
sort of Bohemian rebel, a budding young philosopher and a physicist who would completely rewrite
our understanding of the universe.
These being crucial, formative years in Einstein's development, we must think about them carefully.
In 1896, Einstein entered the Aethe Ha, the Swiss Federal Polytechnic, choosing physics,
of course, as his major field.
The same Heinrich Friedrich Weber, whom Einstein so impressed during the failed entrance examination,
became his major professor and were fortunate that Einstein's notebooks from Weber's introductory
lectures still survive.
One can read them in English translation in Volume 1 of the collected papers of Albert
Einstein.
Many of the topics covered by Weber would be recognized immediately by any first-year
physics student today, topics such as Jules' demonstration of the mechanical equivalent
of heat and calculations of the potential difference between the plates of a capacitor.
But in other respects, the lectures were old-fashioned, even in their day, especially noteworthy was
the lack of any mention of the new electrodynamics of James Clerk Maxwell, an omission about
which Einstein himself complained.
In fairness to Weber, it should be explained, however, that he was an accomplished and respected
experimental physicist.
Weber had a good reputation for work in the area of precision measurements of crucial
physical quantities, such as specific heat, which is the amount of thermal energy needed
to raise a unit mass of a substance by one degree Celsius.
A precise knowledge of such properties of many materials was then of vital interest
to rapidly expanding industries, which is why a figure like Van der Fonds Siemens, founder
of the Siemens engineering firm, helped to endow Weber's physics institute at the Athe
Ha.
But as we shall see, such precision measurements also turned out to provide empirical data
that drove early 20th century revolutions in physics.
For example, one of the earliest and most convincing proofs of the rightness of the
quantum hypothesis was Einstein's showing in 1907 that applying the quantum idea to
heat transfer was the key to resolving what were, from a classical physics point of view,
frustrating and puzzling anomalies in the precisely measured specific heats of many
substances, exactly the sort of thing that Weber was measuring in his lab.
Perhaps it was the shortcomings of the physics available in the Athe Ha classroom that turned
Einstein into the famously bad university student who cut classes and passed his exams
only on the strength of notes borrowed from his friend and classmate, Marcel Grossmann.
We'll meet Grossmann again soon, more than once he helped Einstein at crucial moments
in his life and not just with cramming for exams.
Instead of enduring what he regarded as boring and useless lectures, Einstein spent much
of his time in the library reading on his own all of the best new physics literature.
Evermore the rebel, Einstein knew what he needed to learn and knew how to find it by
himself.
Another noteworthy fact about Einstein's physics education at the Athe Ha was the
extent to which it included the history and philosophy of science.
All physics students at the Athe Ha were then required to take a course in the theory
of scientific thought from the neocontain philosopher August Stoddler.
Einstein also signed up for Stoddler's lectures on Kant and on his own he read first-rate
historical and philosophical works such as the famous physicist Ernst Mach's critical
philosophical studies of the history of mechanics and the history of the theory of heat and
a wonderful new intellectual biography of Newton by Ferdinand Rosenberger.
Partly it was Einstein's own strong interest in philosophy that led him to such authors,
but it was partly also thanks to the larger institutional culture of the day in which
it was assumed that philosophical and historical perspectives on science were important for
the sake of science itself.
It was not just with Einstein and not just at the Athe Ha that one encountered such attitudes.
In the same year that Einstein began his university studies at the Athe Ha Ernst Mach was appointed
to a brand new chair for the history and theory of the inductive sciences at the University
of Vienna, a chair in which he was succeeded in 1902 by the equally famous physicist Ludwig
Boltzmann and literally just down the road from the Athe Ha at the University of Zurich,
the prominent philosopher of science, Richard Avanarius, had only a few years earlier established
the first regular scholarly journal for philosophy of science, the Viertel Jahre Schrift für
Wissenschaftliche Philosophie, the quarterly journal for scientific philosophy.
The role of history and philosophy in physics and in physics education will be one of our
major themes in these lectures.
What is Einstein himself later said on many occasions, his extensive study of the history
and philosophy of science made a crucial difference in the way he did his physics.
It was the history and philosophy of science that Einstein credited for giving him the
independence from the prejudices of his generation from which most scientists are suffering.
That's a quote.
That independence, said Einstein, is again quoting the mark of distinction between a
mere artisan or specialist and a real seeker after truth.
As it is for all of us, the university was a place where Einstein grew intellectually.
But again, as with you and me, the university was a setting in which Einstein came of age
in other ways.
Physics was obviously important for Einstein.
So too was romance and the Athe Ha was where Einstein met the second great love of his
life and his future wife, Maleva Maric.
Born and raised in the Serbian city of Novitsad, then part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire,
Maleva overcame huge obstacles to make her way to Zurich at a university education, first
in medicine at the University of Zurich and then in physics at the Athe Ha, where she
became Einstein's classmate.
She was smart and beautiful in spite of her slight limp but congenital condition.
The combination of brains and beauty overwhelmed Einstein.
He fell head over heels in love.
Albert and Maleva seemed to have shared some of the bohemian attitudes then common in a
Zurich that attracted not just students, but artists and revolutionary political refugees.
Pacifists, socialists, modernists in the arts, even vegetarians were to be found in Zurich's
many cafes and coffee houses.
Many people today are surprised by the kind of relationship that we will see developing
between Albert and Maleva, a relationship that doesn't conform to stereotypes about late
19th century Victorian moral attitudes.
But in the Zurich of 1900, the love affair between Albert and Maleva would have raised
few eyebrows.
Einstein was proud in 1901 to become finally a citizen of the Switzerland that was then
a tolerant home to such non-conformity and he remained something of the bohemian to the
end of his life.
How diverse was the Zurich in which Albert and Maleva fell in love?
Consider just this one example.
The non-conformists in Albert and Maleva's circle of friends included Friedrich Adler,
son of Victor Adler, the co-founder of the Austrian Social Democratic, which is to say
socialist party, and then a physics student at the nearby University of Zurich.
Adler is another student friend whom we'll meet again later as he competes with Einstein
for a physics job, introduces Einstein to the writings of the French philosopher of
science Pierre du M, and then is helped by Einstein after being jailed for assassinating
the Austrian minister-president Graf von Stuck in 1916 as a gesture of protest against Austria's
role in World War I.
The Paris of the 1920s, the Greenwich Village of the 1950s, the Berkeley of the 1960s, none
of them were more densely populated with a wild and various human fauna than was the
Zurich of Albert and Maleva's youth.
Albert and Maleva shared not only a bohemian outlook, but also a love of physics.
Their letters, all of which are now available in English translation, are sprinkled with
references to books and papers they're studying, and to a few joint projects.
One such from March 1901 even mentions, this is a quote, our work on relative motion.
Some have asked whether remarks such as this mean that Maleva was cheated out of credit
rightfully hers for contributions to the development of relativity, but the scant historical record
supports nothing more than the conclusion that Maleva was at least a valued sounding
board for Albert's ideas.
The important point is that their shared love of physics was one of the most significant
factors drawing Albert and Maleva together and keeping them together in the early years
of their relationship.
Moreover, exaggerated claims that Maleva was the co-discoverer of relativity simply obscure
the far more interesting story of Maleva's struggles, first to get a good secondary education
in her native Serbia, and then to win admission to a good university, all of this in a world
still by no means hospitable to the intellectual ambitions of well-educated, bright young women.
In the mid 1890s, the University of Zurich, where Maleva first enrolled, was one of the
precious few places in Europe, or North America for that matter, where a woman could study
medicine.
The strong will and independent spirit that helped Maleva to meet such challenges are
surely traits that only further endeared her to Albert.
The texture of Albert and Maleva's relationship is beautifully illustrated by a letter that
Einstein wrote to Maleva in August of 1899, when he was on vacation with his mother and
sister at the Hotel Paradis, whose name makes for an irresistible pun, as you'll see.
Let me read you a bit of that letter.
It begins, Dear Doctoral, that was Albert's pet name for Maleva, I bet you are surprised
to see my hieroglyphs so soon again knowing what a lazy letter writer I am.
Here in Paradis, I live a very quiet, nice, Philistine life with my mother, hen, and sister,
exactly the way the pious and righteous of the world imagine Paradis to be.
Meanwhile, I have already studied quite a bit of Helmholtz on atmospheric movements,
out of fear of you and also for my own pleasure, let me immediately add that I will reread
the whole stuff with you.
I find my mother and sister a bit narrow-minded and Philistine, despite all of the sympathy
that I feel for them.
It is strange how a way of life will gradually change us and all the nuances of our soul,
so that the closest natural family ties are reduced to a friendship born of habit and
that deep inside, we become so incomprehensible to each other that we are unable to empathize
actively with the other and feel what moves the other.
Paradis regards to your dear family and especially to you from your Albert.
The mix of physics and family gossip in that letter is typical, but an interesting insight
into Einstein's developing character are those latter words about natural ties, reducing
to mere habits of friendship, about incomprehension and obstacles to empathy.
As we shall see in later lectures, Einstein the Humanitarian became also someone capable
of surprising emotional cruelty to some of those whom he was supposed to love.
Do we see here already in a love letter the seeds of that later hardness of heart?
Einstein graduated from the Eite Ha in 1900.
He passed his exams, but not with the most brilliant marks.
The normal next step for a promising young physicist would have been to secure a job
as assistant to a senior physicist.
Einstein sought in vain for such a job at the Eite Ha and elsewhere, writing to just
about every major physicist in every major university.
Why was he not succeeding?
There's some evidence that Einstein was now paying the price for his not showing enough
respect to his teacher Weber, as even Malava hinted to a friend, and that Weber might well
have been writing behind Einstein's back to torpedo his applications.
Einstein was forced to settle for poorly paid, temporary teaching positions.
One was at the Technical High School in Winterthur, Switzerland, in the summer of 1901, and the
next was at a private boys' school in Schaffhausen, Switzerland, in the fall.
But his headstrong ways cost him here, too.
His exasperated boss in Schaffhausen, spluttering at one point after a mutual parting of the
ways, quote, I hired an assistant teacher, not a Socrates, a lack of immediate professional
success did not diminish, however, Einstein's enthusiasm for physics.
As was to be the case throughout his life, he managed to carry on his scientific work
Even as the rest of his life, or even the whole world, was in turmoil, in physics, Einstein
found a refuge from worldly cares.
In December of 1900, Einstein submitted to the Anaheim der Physique the paper on capillarity
that was to become his first scientific publication.
At issue are the intermolecular forces responsible for phenomena, like the liquids being drawn
slightly upward by surface tension, where it meets the glass wall of a test tube, or
like the way water is taken up by a porous structure, such as a sponge or blotting paper.
While Einstein's first paper is of little enduring importance for its content, its publication
in March of 1901 is still significant.
The Anaheim der Physique was, after all, the leading German-language physics journal
of its day, that an unemployed Einstein, lacking even a doctorate, managed to publish there
on his first attempt, speaks to the potential that others began to see in him.
That he was to publish four more papers in the Anaheim before his miracle year of 1905
means that when he dropped his quantum and relativity bombshells in 1905, he was not
quite the totally unknown figure that legend too often portrays him as being.
The lack of a doctorate was a problem Einstein tried to address when, in November of 1901,
still without a permanent position, he submitted a doctoral dissertation probably on the topic
of intermolecular forces to the University of Zurich, but for reasons that remain unclear,
he seems to have withdrawn the dissertation three months later.
As it turns out, as 1901 drew to a close, Einstein had a lot more on his mind than physics,
and is deteriorating financial and professional situation, for Malava was now pregnant.
The evidence suggests that it happened when Albert and Malava had met in Como, Italy in
early May, and then took a vacation trip together over the Schblugen Pass connecting Italy and
Switzerland.
This was right after Albert had spent six weeks visiting with his parents in Milan, who were
not at all happy about Albert's relationship with Malava.
Malava had failed her Eteha final examination for a second time in 1901, a development perhaps
not unrelated to the pregnancy.
Marriage was, for the time being, out of the question, largely because of opposition from
Einstein's parents.
In spite of their problems, however, Albert and Malava were clearly looking forward with
joy to the birth of their daughter, which happened in Malava's Serbian hometown of
Novitzad in late January of 1902.
That joy is obvious in Einstein's first letter to Malava after the birth of their daughter,
whom they named Leserl.
Let me read you a bit of that letter as well.
Einstein writes, My beloved sweetheart, Poor dear sweetheart, you must suffer enormously
if you cannot even write to me yourself, and our dear Leserl too must get to know the world
from this aspect right from the beginning.
I hope that you will be up and around again by the time my letter arrives.
I was scared out of my wits when I got your father's letter because I had already suspected
some trouble.
External fates are nothing compared with this.
But you see, it has really turned out to be a Leserl, as you wished.
Is she healthy, and does she already cry properly?
What kind of little eyes does she have, whom of us two does she resemble more, who is giving
her milk?
Is she hungry?
And so she is completely bald.
I love her so much, and I don't even know her yet.
I would like once to produce a Leserl myself.
It must be so interesting.
She certainly can cry already, but to laugh, she'll learn much later.
Therein lies a profound truth.
And now, get well again fast, I beg you as nicely as I can, give my kindest regards to
your dear mother, and for you, tender kisses from your loving Yohansel.
Albert and Malave married a year later, in January 1903, after Einstein's dying father
gave his blessing to their union.
Two enduring mysteries are why they never brought Leserl to live with them, and what
eventually happened to the child.
There's evidence that Leserl survived a bout of scarlet fever, but there the trail goes
cold in spite of countless hours of detective work by historians, a reasonable guess for
which there's some weak evidence is that she was put up for adoption.
But we don't know for sure.
Late in 1901, just as Leserl's birth was drawing near, Einstein's professional fortunes finally
took a turn for the better.
Thanks to interventions by the father of his friend and classmate Marcel Grossmann, a
position was made available for Einstein as a patent clerk in the Swiss Federal Patent
Office in Beren, the Swiss capital.
Einstein formally applied for the position in December and began work in Beren in June
1902.
One might think that such work would be poison to scientific creativity.
For Einstein, it was just the opposite.
Years later, he looked back upon his seven years at the Patent Office as golden years.
The Einstein who had shown such powers of concentration as a child was able to finish
his patent work with dispatch, sometimes even working on his own problems when his supervisor
wasn't looking.
And he always had his head clear for evenings and Sundays devoted solely to physics.
Einstein also built for himself in Beren a community of friends and colleagues who provided
intellectual support.
Most importantly, he rounded up two new friends, Konrad Habicht and Maurice Souleveen, to form
a weekly reading and discussion group humorously named the Olympia Academy.
The list of their readings is dense with important books in the history and philosophy of science.
These include the highly influential analysis of sensations by Ernst Mach, whom we've met
before, and the treatise of human nature by the famous 18th century British empiricist
philosopher David Hume.
They also read a system of logic, the major systematic treatise of the 19th century British
philosopher and social reformer John Stuart Mill, and an important collection of essays
entitled Science and Hypothesis by the famous and then very influential contemporary French
physicist, mathematician and philosopher Henri Poincaré.
Einstein would later say that his reading of Mach and especially Hume gave him the key
idea that he needed for his final breakthrough to the theory of relativity in 1905.
We'll talk about this in lecture five.
Poincaré's philosophy of science, a version of what is known as conventionalism, was to
have an equally important influence on Einstein at a later stage during and after his work
on general relativity.
This too we'll discuss later on.
Another important intellectual friend at this time, a friend from Zurich days, was the engineer
and for a time fellow patent clerk, Michele Besso, who was to remain Einstein's closest
intellectual friend to the end of his life.
Besso joined the discussions of the Olympia Academy.
He and Einstein saw one another frequently and Einstein discussed with Besso many of
the scientific projects on which he was working.
Besso's crucial role in Einstein's work is demonstrated by the fact that he is the only
individual specifically credited with having helped Einstein on the road to relativity.
This in a footnote to the first paper on special relativity, where Einstein thanks Besso for
having triggered an essential insight regarding the nature of time.
On the personal side, Albert and Malava settled into a comfortable domestic routine during
at least the early years of their time in Bern.
Their second child, a son, Hans Albert, was born in 1904.
As Einstein's fame began to spread after 1905, his relationship with Malava grew cold, despite
the birth of a second son, Eduard, in 1910.
As we'll see, they separated in 1914 and the marriage ended in divorce in 1919.
One might imagine that the frustration of Malava's own intellectual ambitions once
so strong played a role as Einstein's star ascended that Albert's difficulty in maintaining
a loving relationship played a major role as well.
Still, the early years in Bern were largely happy ones.
The Olympia Academy was an important source of intellectual sustenance for Einstein during
those early years in Bern.
How much so is shown by the fact that one of the few pieces of evidence bearing directly
on the genesis of the papers that Einstein published in his miracle year is a letter
that Einstein wrote to fellow academician Conrad Hobbich announcing the paper's appearance.
It's such a classic piece of Einstein prose that it has to be quoted at length.
Dear Hobbich, such a solemn air of silence has descended between us that I almost feel
as if I am committing a sacrilege when I break it now with some inconsequential babble, but
is not not always the fate of the exalted ones of this world?
So what are you up to?
You frozen whale, you smoked dried canned piece of soul or whatever else I'd like to
hurl at your head, filled as I am with 70% anger and 30% pity.
You have only the latter 30% to thank for my not having sent you a can full of minced
onions and garlic after you so cravenly did not show up on Easter.
But have you still not sent me your dissertation?
Don't you know that I am one of the one and a half fellows who would read it with interest
and pleasure?
You wretched man, I promise you four papers in return, the first of which I might send
you soon, since I will soon get the complimentary reprints.
The paper deals with radiation and the energy properties of light and is very revolutionary.
As you will see if you send me your work first, the second paper is a determination of the
true sizes of atoms from the diffusion and viscosity of dilute solutions of neutral substances.
The third proves that on the assumption of the molecular theory of heat, bodies on the
order of magnitude of one in a thousand millimeters suspended in liquids must already perform an
observable random motion that is produced by thermal motion.
The fourth paper is only a rough draft at this point and is an electrodynamics of moving
bodies which employs a modification of the theory of space and time.
The purely kinematic part of this paper will surely interest you.
Greetings from your AE.
As mentioned a moment ago, the Einstein who was about to publish such revolutionary new
works was not the complete unknown that legend portrays, having already published five quite
respectable papers in the Anaheim der Physik, two on intermolecular forces and three on
the foundations of statistical physics.
And for some time, Einstein had been publishing reviews of literature from other journals
in regular supplementary volumes of the Anaheim.
Still, he was only a clerk in a patent office and he had just inaugurated the greatest revolution
in physics since the time of Newton.
In the next few lectures, we'll dig more deeply into the physics of Einstein's quantum
and relativity papers, our aim being to understand exactly how Einstein radically transformed
the classical physical worldview in which he had been trained.
For now, let's just ask, what made it all possible?
Only a brilliant physicist could have done it.
Einstein was surely that.
He had always been a superior student.
His Etihad education gave him a solid foundation, but his broad and deep knowledge of the best
new physics was largely self-acquired.
It could also only have been done by someone with more than normal self-confidence.
But that was Einstein too.
He was still the same headstrong young man who had dropped out of high school in Munich,
had won release from German citizenship, and had defied his parents by falling in love
and starting a family with Malava.
And it could only have been done by a thinker who moved independently of the dominant currents
of thought of his day.
That too was Einstein.
He had to teach himself how to do the physics of the quantum and the physics of relativity.
He told us that his philosophical training and habit of mind were also crucial to achieving
independence from the prejudices of his generation.
His working largely alone as a clerk in a patent office was probably crucial as well.
