Welcome to Lecture 6 in our series on Einstein.
In the previous three lectures, we reviewed the physics that was at the heart of Einstein's
miracle year of 1905, his introduction of the photon hypothesis, which was a fundamental
contribution to the quantum theory, and his very famous introduction of the special theory
of relativity.
We take a break now from the heavy-duty physics and return to biography and history, reviewing
in this lecture the course of Einstein's personal and professional life from 1905 until his
move to Berlin, the capital of German physics, in 1914.
In just nine years, between 1905 and 1914, Einstein went from being an obscure clerk
in the Swiss Federal Patent Office in Beren to being the most prominent physicist in
Europe if not the whole world.
Only in 1909 did Einstein win his first regular university appointment in Zurich, but after
that his rapidly growing reputation brought him a steady stream of enticing offers with
the result that he worked at four different universities in the space of five years.
But growing fame and professional success were accompanied by a steady deterioration
of his marriage to Malava in spite of the birth of their second son, Edouard, in 1910.
After Einstein's move to Berlin in 1914, his clandestine love affair with his cousin Elsa
became public knowledge, leading to a permanent separation from Malava, who moved back to
Zurich with the boys.
But Berlin was to become the scene of Einstein's greatest scientific triumph yet, the general
theory of relativity.
Einstein's miracle year of 1905 inaugurated great revolutions in physics, but at home
in Beren little changed at first.
Einstein still went to work six days a week at the Patent Office, and him and Malava cared
for their son Hans Albert.
The intense burst of work leading up to the paper on special relativity left Einstein exhausted.
It was Malava who checked the draft of the paper, and it might well have been that Albert
and Malava were celebrating the paper's completion when Malava wrote a postcard to Conrad Hobbitt
that summer, reporting that they were both, quote, dead drunk under the table.
Another development of 1905 was that Einstein was finally awarded a doctorate with a dissertation
on a new method for determining molecular dimensions that he did under the supervision
of Alfred Kleiner at the University of Zurich.
This work was related to that other important paper that Einstein published in 1905, the
one showing that Brownian motion, the seemingly random movement of microscopic particles like
pollen grains spendered in water, was a result of random impacts on the particles by the
individual water molecules.
You will remember from lecture three our talking about the fact that even if Einstein had not
invented relativity and the photon hypothesis, his work on Brownian motion would have made
for a good career, since it proved very important in convincing physicists of the physical
reality of atoms.
Viewed in its own light and not in the shadow of relativity and the quantum theory, Einstein's
doctoral dissertation is also an impressive piece of physics, not revolutionary, but more
than respectable, and work on a more classical problem like molecular dimensions was surely
a better choice for a dissertation submitted to the good but old-fashioned physicist Kleiner
than a revolutionary idea like the photon hypothesis would have been.
Einstein the rebel was always a bit cynical about empty academic ritual and polite forms,
but one gets the sense that as he started to establish a reputation in physics, he gradually
allowed himself to care more about such normal markers of professional progress as a doctorate,
which was after all a necessary condition for Einstein's ever winning an appointment
as a professor.
Eventually the world began to take note of what Einstein had wrought in 1905.
He began to correspond with prominent physicists like Max Planck.
In 1907, he was invited by the eminent experimentalist, Johannes Stark, to write a major review article
on relativity for the Yarbuch der Radioaktivität und Elektronik, the yearbook of radioactivity
and electronics.
In a later lecture, we will talk about the irony of Starks becoming in the early 1920s
one of the leaders of the so-called anti-relativity campaign, part of a broader, ugly, anti-Semitic
attack on so-called Jewish physics.
But in 1907, Stark was among the first to recognize the importance of what Einstein
had achieved.
Young physicists came to Barron to seek him out, like Max von Lauer, who published the
first important book on the special theory of relativity in 1911 and won the 1914 Nobel
Prize for his discovery of x-ray diffraction.
When Lauer came calling upon Einstein at the Patent Office in Barron in 1906, he was expecting,
of course, to meet a distinguished, more senior figure, and so at first didn't even notice
the young man who walked right by him.
In 1908, Einstein took the next step up the regular academic ladder when he obtained the
so-called habilitation, the second doctrine, as it were, that made it possible for him
to offer lectures for a per-student fee as a private lecturer at the University of Barron.
Those lectures on topics like radiation theory and the molecular theory of heat were not
very memorable and not all that well attended, but this was another necessary rite of passage
for someone seeking an academic career.
Unfortunately, Einstein's growing fame was accompanied by growing tensions at home as
the once warm and loving relationship with Malava began to deteriorate.
Was it her jealousy of Einstein's success?
Was it his growing neglect of family and home?
Was it perhaps lingering bitterness over their failure to make lesor a part of their own family?
We don't know exactly what happened, but it is clear that the seeds of much later unhappiness
were sown at this time.
The papers of 1905 were, of course, followed by more, as when in 1907, Einstein showed
that applying the quantum hypothesis to material structures like molecules could resolve the
famously vexing anomalies regarding specific heat, the amount of heat energy needed to
raise the temperature of a unit mass of a substance by 1 degree Celsius.
You will remember from lecture 3 that unresolved puzzles over specific heats were a major reason
for doubt about the basic correctness of the atomic theory of matter.
Einstein's clearing up the problem by extending the quantum hypothesis from radiation to matter
provided yet another reason for accepting the reality of invisible atoms and molecules,
along with Einstein's work on Brownian motion.
Einstein's reputation continued to grow rapidly.
In July of 1909, he received his first honorary degree, this from the University of Geneva,
just three years, mind you, after he received his doctorate from the University of Zurich.
Even more noteworthy was Einstein's being invited in September 1909 to give a lecture
on the theory of radiation at the major annual conference of German language scientists
meeting in Salzburg, Austria.
It was in this lecture that Einstein first made public his doubts about the universal
validity of the photon hypothesis and his speculations about wave particle duality,
a topic that we discussed late in lecture 3.
This was an important moment in Einstein's career.
It marked the first time that he appeared in front of a big, high-powered academic audience.
The Gezelschaft Deutscher Naturforscher und Erste, the Society of German Natural Scientists
and Physicians, was to the German-speaking scientific community of the early 20th century
and is still today what the AAAS, the American Association for the Advancement of Science,
was and is in the United States.
The annual meetings, called the Naturforscher Versammlungen, were the premier events in
all of German science.
An invitation to lecture in this venue was a sign that one had truly been recognized
as being among the scientific elite.
This meeting also afforded the 30-year-old Einstein one of his first opportunities to
meet many of the other important scientific figures of his day.
It was a very big deal that the ever more famous Einstein had no regular academic position
became more and more of a scandal.
Finally, in 1909, he was summoned to the University of Zurich as what was called an
extraordinary professor for theoretical physics, which is roughly equivalent to what we today
call an associate professor in North American universities.
The other finalist for the job was Einstein's old student friend Friedrich Adler, who was
initially favored for the position for political reasons, in part.
Remember that Adler was the son of Victor Adler, the co-founder of the Austrian Social
Democratic Party and a person of considerable influence.
The socialism of both the older and the younger Adler was in favor in Swiss government circles
at the time.
But when Friedrich Adler heard that Einstein was a finalist, he withdrew his candidacy
in deference to his friend's obviously superior qualifications.
When Albert and Malava moved from Beren to Zurich in the fall of 1909, they rented an
apartment in the same building as Adler and his wife, and for the next year and a half,
the two families were very close.
Einstein and Adler even set up a shared study for themselves in the attic of the building
where they could talk and work free of the noise and other distractions from the children
playing in the courtyard.
In Zurich, as in Beren, Einstein could hardly be called a scintillating lecturer, but he
took his new duties seriously and he gathered around him a small group of students.
If you wish, you can read Einstein's own notebooks for his lectures on mechanics, the
kinetic theory of heat and electricity and magnetism in the English translation that
accompanies Volume 3 of the collected papers of Albert Einstein.
Einstein's own work continued apace.
He was thinking and writing about many problems, from relativity and radiation to specific
heats and the foundations of statistical mechanics.
He even published a small note correcting an embarrassing mathematical error in his doctoral
dissertation on molecular dimensions, and during this time, there was germinating in
his mind the seed that would soon sprout in the form of the general theory of relativity,
which will be the focus of our next two lectures.
In July 1910, the Einstein family grew again with the birth of a second son, Edeward, or
Tete, as he was known affectionately.
But the birth of a new son did nothing to improve the ever-worsening relationship between
Albert and Malava.
After his slow start in the profession, Einstein reached the top at a surprisingly young age.
In 1911, at the age of just 32, Einstein was offered and accepted a senior full professorship,
the formal term is ordinary professor, at the German University in Prague.
It is called the German University because there was also a Czech University in Prague.
Einstein spent only one year in Prague.
Malava was very unhappy there, far from friends and family, and living conditions were not
as comfortable as in Zurich.
For Einstein too, Prague was less than an ideal location, even further from the scientific
mainstream than Zurich.
The move to Prague in April 1911 came only a few months before Einstein's participation
in another very prestigious scientific congress, the first Solvay Congress in Brussels, Belgium
in October 1911.
There Einstein joined a small group of the world's physics elite, including such famous
figures as Lorenz, Planck, Henri Poincaré and Marie Curie.
Einstein's own lecture was yet again on the problem of specific heats, and thus the application
of the quantum hypothesis to material structures.
The Solvay Congress quickly became one of the most important meeting places for physicists
at the cutting edge of research.
We will ourselves have occasion later on to discuss famous encounters that Einstein had
with Niels Bohr at the 1927 and 1930 Solvay meetings, where they clashed over the question
of the correctness and completeness of quantum mechanics.
Crucial to the success of the Solvay meetings was their unusual mode of organization.
Costs were underwritten by a wealthy Belgian chemist and industrialist, Ernest Solvay.
Participation was by invitation only.
The idea was to gather a few of the best minds in physics in a cozy, somewhat cloistered
setting that facilitated a focused argument not possible anywhere else, certainly not
in the huge, highly public annual Natueforschef Asammlung.
There were prearranged lectures, but the long discussions after each lecture were probably
more important in advancing research.
After each congress, both the lectures and transcriptions of the discussions were published
in beautifully produced volumes.
In one respect, at least, Einstein's year in Prague was very important.
This is because, for the first time in his life, Einstein came into regular contact with
a distinctively Jewish intellectual and cultural world.
Prague had long had a major Jewish community, but as legal and social barriers to Jewish
participation in business and education began to disappear in the latter part of the 19th
century, there was a big influx of Jews from the villages of Eastern Europe into cities
like Prague, Budapest, Vienna, and Berlin.
Moreover, many of these new arrivals brought with them very traditional forms of Jewish
religious practice, and so contrasted strikingly with the more rapidly assimilating Jewish
world that Einstein had known in his early years in Munich.
Important too is the fact that Prague's Jewish community felt keenly the spirit of the Zionist
movement.
Prague was therefore a place where clear expressions of Jewish cultural distinctiveness
and pride were not hard to find.
One place where Jewish artists, writers, and intellectuals gathered in Prague was the weekly
salon run by Bertha Fanta, wife of a prosperous Jewish pharmacist.
Known as the Fanta Christ, the Fanta Circle, this group included such future luminaries
as Franz Kafka.
Einstein participated in a number of the meetings of the Fanta Circle.
Whether he actually met Kafka is not known, probable but not known.
But we do know that he met Kafka's friend, the writer and critic Max Brod, and many people
believe that the character of Johannes Kepler in Brod's 1915 novel, Tycho Brahe's Vegzogot,
Tycho Brahe's Path to God, was modeled directly on Einstein.
Yet another important feature of Einstein's year in Prague is that, as it was ending,
Einstein strongly recommended as his replacement a young Viennese physicist and protege of
Ernst Mach named Philip Frank.
Frank had already made an important contribution to the mathematics of relativity theory.
But as Einstein's letter of evaluation makes clear, it was equally Frank's typically Machian
philosophical approach to physics, an approach much like Einstein's own, that impressed Einstein.
Thus began a long and cordial relationship between Einstein and Frank that bore fruit
in many forms.
One is that many years later, after both Frank and Einstein had emigrated to the United States,
Frank took on the challenge of responding to Christian religious critics of relativity
who wrongly feared that physical relativity somehow implied a relativity in morals as
well.
Frank would also publish in 1947 one of the first, and still in my opinion, one of the
best biographies of Einstein entitled, Einstein, His Life and Times.
By 1912, many of the best universities in Europe were dangling lucrative offers in front
of Einstein.
The aging Andric Lorenz, for example, wanted Einstein to be his successor in Leiden.
The offer that Einstein chose to accept was from his alma mater, the polytechnic in Zurich.
His old teacher and nemesis, H. F. Weber, was dead, a fact that the not always tactful
Einstein actually celebrated in private correspondence around the time of his move.
But with Weber out of the way, the Eitei Ha was now, for Einstein, a much happier setting
than it had been when he ended his university studies there.
And Maleva was certainly glad to be returning to the city that she loved, the city where
she had so many friends, and, as we will see in a moment, the city that she was never
again to leave.
The interest that Lorenz displayed in Einstein at this time calls for special comment.
Einstein and Lorenz first met a year earlier, in 1911, when Einstein lectured to a student
group in Leiden and was a guest in Lorenz's home.
That first visit marks the beginning of a remarkably warm and lasting relationship between
two physicists who might have been expected to be antagonists rather than friends.
After all, Einstein and Lorenz disagreed about so many fundamental points of physics.
Lorenz believed in the ether.
Einstein wanted to abandon it.
Lorenz thought that contraction was a real physical process.
Einstein thought that it was merely perspectival.
Moreover, they represented different generations and had very different personalities.
Lorenz epitomized the respectable academic.
Einstein was a nonconformist in his personal life as well as his science.
Would it be a silly kind of romanticism for us to see in their deep mutual respect and
their abiding affection an example of the way science can transcend difference?
In 1912, Einstein chose Zurich Overleiden.
But Einstein lobbied successfully to have the chair in Leiden filled instead by his
new and even closer friend, Paul Ehrenfest, who was a student of Ludwig Boltzmann, a young
master of the new science of statistical mechanics, and in his own way, another rebel and nonconformist.
The Leiden that was now home to both Lorenz and Ehrenfest would soon become a kind of
second home to Einstein.
Einstein returned to Zurich as a senior full professor at the Eite Ha in July of 1912.
Once again, he had the normal array of professional duties.
His classroom lectures did not really improve, as we can tell from the meticulous notes kept
by his student, Walter Delenbach.
The lectures were perfectly confident to be sure, but they inspired less by the elegance
of the presentation and more by the way they gave Einstein's students a glimpse of a first
rate physics mind at work, complete with stops and starts, wrong turns, and the occasional
train of thought that wanders wide before returning to its intended goal.
Einstein's work in physics might, however, have been the principal beneficiary of the
return to Zurich.
In the middle of 1912, Einstein was at last beginning to focus on the problem of generalizing
the special theory of relativity, but he found himself blocked by the lack of needed
mathematical tools.
He was lucky to find at the Eite Ha his old student friend, now a mathematics professor,
Marcel Grossmann.
Einstein and Grossmann began a collaboration that launched the general theory of relativity.
Grossmann had helped Einstein during their student days by the loan of his notebooks.
Einstein's father was the person who had engineered Einstein's appointment at the patent office.
Now Grossmann supplied Einstein with the mathematical expertise that was so keenly needed.
The first major paper ever published on general relativity, presenting a seriously but interestingly
flawed version of the theory, was written jointly by Einstein and Grossmann in the spring
of 1913.
Einstein's second stint as a professor in Zurich lasted only a few months longer than
the previous one.
He was now clearly established as one of the most prominent physicists in Europe.
The offers from elsewhere kept coming until finally there came the offer that marked a
truly major turn in Einstein's life, an offer from Berlin.
From a professional point of view, it took a lot to persuade Einstein to leave his beloved
adopted home in Switzerland in the close circle of good friends and colleagues in Zurich
in order to return to the Germany from which he had fled as a teenager.
But Berlin was the capital of the German scientific world, just as it was the capital
of the German Empire.
One can imagine that Berlin's leading scientific figures, like Max Planck, should have thought
it only natural that sooner or later the world's most prominent German-speaking physicist should
call Berlin his home.
The first direct contacts were made when Einstein visited Berlin in April of 1912, but it was
only in the summer of 1913 that the complicated bureaucratic arrangements necessary to make
possible such a move began to take shape.
Planck was directly involved in the negotiations, as were other prominent members of the Berlin
scientific establishment, such as the chemists Fritz Haber and Walter Nernst.
The offer was to win the 1918 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his development of a process
to make ammonia synthetically.
Nernst won it in 1920 for his discovery of the so-called Third Law of Thermodynamics,
which describes the behavior of material systems at or near absolute zero.
One of the surest measures of both the importance and the delicacy of the approach to Einstein
is the fact that Planck, Nernst, and both of their wives traveled to Zurich in July
of 1913 to pitch the deal to Einstein.
After meeting with Einstein, the Plancks and the Nernst went off for a day of sightseeing
in the impossibly beautiful area around Zurich, which sits at the edge of the deep blue waters
of Lake Zurich in a valley shaped by high mountains and with a picture postcard view
of the distant Swiss Alps.
Einstein promised to meet them at the station the next day, bearing red flowers, if his
answer was yes, and white flowers if the answer was no.
How glad they must have been, went upon their return, the flowers with which Einstein welcomed
them were red.
The position offered to Einstein in Berlin was unprecedented.
He was to be a senior full professor at the University of Berlin with a right, of course,
but no obligation to lecture or lead seminars.
As it happens, he did both, but mainly only in his earlier years in Berlin.
Along with the appointment to the University came election to membership in the prestigious
Royal Prussian Academy of Sciences, which carried its own salary.
But that was still not the whole package.
Einstein was also promised the directorship of a new Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics
that was expected to be launched within a couple of years.
Did one ask for anything more?
A fat salary?
Minimal duties?
The regular companionship of the best physics minds in Germany?
Does it get any better?
Well, in Einstein's case, yes, it was to get a lot better, but not for professional reasons,
and not in ways equally beneficial to his wife and sons or to his reputation.
But another one of the important discoveries made in the course of background research
for the collected papers of Albert Einstein is that Einstein had other reasons for accepting
the offer from Berlin.
We now know that for some time, Einstein had been carrying on a clandestine affair with
his cousin, Elsa Leuenthal, who lived in Berlin.
Elsa was three years older than Albert.
They were cousins on two sides.
On the Koch side, the family of Einstein's mother, Paulina, they were first cousins,
and on the Einstein side, they were second cousins.
They remembered playing with one another as children during visits in Munich.
Elsa's first husband, whom she divorced in 1908, was a textile merchant, Max Leuenthal,
by whom she had three children, including her two surviving daughters, Ilse and Margote.
In many ways, the world that Elsa inhabited was far removed from the Bohemian world of
Einstein's Zurich University days, the world in which Albert and Malava had fallen in love.
Elsa had no intellectual pretensions.
She was a wealthy woman who enjoyed all of the comforts, diversions, and cultural delights
that Berlin had to offer.
She was handsome in a respectable middle-class way, and some thought that in later years,
she enjoyed a bit too much playing the role of wife to a famous man.
What drew Albert to her we might never understand.
One guess is that she offered Einstein a kind of domestic piece that he no longer enjoyed
in Zurich.
She was clearly a strong-willed person, and their steadily warming relationship was as
much her work as his.
Whatever the basis of the attraction, the affection that Einstein felt for Elsa at this
time is obvious, as one can see from their letters, which are now published in Volume
Five of the collected papers of Albert Einstein.
Needless to say, when Albert and Malava arrived in Berlin in the spring of 1914, and Malava,
who had had her suspicions, found out what was really going on, an already strained marriage
collapsed.
Almost immediately, Malava moved out of their new apartment and set in motion arrangements
to move back to Zurich with the two boys.
Friends and colleagues in both Berlin and Zurich sought to mediate, especially Fritz
Haber and his wife, with whom Malava found temporary refuge in Berlin, but all to no
avail.
It would be another five awkward years before Albert and Malava divorced.
If there is blame to be assigned, not all of it is Einstein's.
Malava had evidently been involved in a relationship of her own in Zurich with a mathematician,
Vladimir Varicek, with whom Einstein had, in fact, had a minor public dispute over a
question related to the relativistic treatment of a rotating disc, something that we will
discuss in the very next lecture.
On the other hand, as we will see, this would not be the last time when Einstein had trouble
honoring marriage vows.
His wrenching as the experience of the separation was for Einstein.
Once Malava had left, Einstein found a new peace.
He was free to enjoy Elsa's growing attentions, and he was free to concentrate on his work
as never before, with no teaching duties and only minimal responsibilities at the Prussian
Academy of Sciences.
Berlin was a very different city from Zurich.
It was a world center of scholarship, culture, and politics.
Einstein's scientific reputation earned him entree to important political, business,
and artistic circles.
He made many new friends, and it was in part through those friendships that Einstein the
physicist was now to begin testing himself as a thinker, speaker, and advocate on a much
larger stage.
Of course, Einstein's early years in Berlin were to be dominated by one tragic fact.
The World War I was to break out only a few months after Einstein settled there.
But in spite of that, the Einstein who had already accomplished so much was about to
pull off his greatest achievement ever with his completion of the general theory of relativity.
That will be the subject we discuss in our next two lectures.
