Welcome to lecture 8 in our series on Einstein.
We've already covered a lot of ground.
We've followed Einstein's life and career up to his arrival in Berlin in the spring of 1914.
We've studied the physical concepts and theories at the heart of his achievement in his miracle year of 1905.
We've examined in detail the elevator and rotating disc thought experiments that played a crucial role along Einstein's own route to a general theory of relativity.
Now we're ready to take a look deep inside the general theory of relativity itself to try to understand how it works and how it still further modifies our picture of space, time and gravitation.
General relativity is a remarkable scientific theory.
We will learn how by postulating the curvature of space-time, one explains the freefall of heavy objects near the Earth's surface and a planet's orbital motion around the Sun.
Still more surprising implications will be examined, such as Einstein's prediction that clocks tick more slowly in stronger gravitational fields.
The most famous new prediction of general relativity was that the path of a ray of light would be bent when it passed near a massive object like our Sun,
a phenomenon that should be observable when looking at the apparent positions of stars near the edge of the Sun during a total eclipse.
It was Arthur Eddington's confirmation of this prediction in 1919, right after World War I, that made Einstein a world famous figure.
But before we do more physics, let's first do just a little bit more history.
We learned in Lecture 6 that it was in 1912 and 1913 that Einstein started serious work on general relativity, at first in collaboration with his mathematician friend Marcel Grossmann.
In Lecture 7, we talked about how, as early as 1907, Einstein hit upon the idea of the equivalence of gravity and acceleration through the elevator thought experiment,
which taught him that a general theory of relativity, one valid for accelerated frames, would also be a theory of gravitation.
And then we looked in some detail at the rotating disk thought experiment, which also dates from 1912.
This was what first gave Einstein the crucial clue that a general theory of relativity, one capable of handling transformations involving accelerated and thus non-inertial frames of reference,
would, for that very reason, imply that the space-time of general relativity would be curved, in a way that required for their description the tools of non-Euclidean geometry.
Einstein had to turn to Grossmann to learn, and further to develop, we might note, the mathematical tools best adapted to describing such curved spaces,
a body of mathematics then called the absolute differential calculus, and now called differential geometry and tensor calculus.
In Lecture 6, it was also mentioned that Einstein and Grossmann together wrote the first really important paper on general relativity in 1913.
Nowadays, everybody calls that version of general relativity the Entwüff theory, after the German word Entwüff, which just means outline,
and was the first title word, excuse me, the first word in the title of their paper, the outline of a generalized theory of relativity and a theory of gravitation.
But as was also mentioned, Einstein and Grossmann got it wrong. Let's spend a moment trying to understand their error.
Think back to our discussion of special relativity in Lecture 5.
Remember our talking about the fact that when we use Lorentz transformations to translate a description of a physical situation from one inertial frame of reference to another,
Maxwell's equations keep the same mathematical form.
That the basic equations of our physics behave that way when we shift our perspective from one frame of reference to another is actually a deep and important fact.
We speak of this property of a set of equations as they're being quote invariant or covariant under a set of transformations like the Lorentz transformations.
Again, to say that an equation is invariant or covariant under a set of transformations is just to say that it keeps exactly the same mathematical form when we translate our description from one frame of reference to another.
The covariance of a theory's fundamental equations is important not just because it simplifies the mathematics.
Many physicists and philosophers think that it's important also because reality itself is something unique and invariant,
which means that a physics that accurately describes such a reality should also be invariant.
You already met the idea in Lecture 5 when we talked about the fact that distances and time intervals in special relativity are not themselves objective and real.
They are frame dependent and so not invariant.
That's why it's okay that length contraction and time dilation are perspectival.
The earth twin sees the rocket twins clock ticking slowly.
The rocket twin sees the earth twins clock ticking slowly.
Neither perspective is the real or true perspective precisely because frame dependent clock rates are not invariant.
There is in special relativity a deeper feature of space-time structure that is invariant.
It's called the space-time interval and is a kind of hybrid measure of distance in both space and time.
But spatial and temporal intervals by themselves are not invariant and so are not real.
Okay, keep the concept of covariance in mind.
We learned in the last lecture that general relativity is general in the sense that it is supposed to accommodate relations among not just inertial frames of reference,
frames moving in straight lines at constant speeds, but also among accelerated frames of reference,
frames of speed or direction of motion change, like with a rotating frame of reference of the rotating disk thought experiment.
We should expect, therefore, that in a general theory of relativity, our fundamental equations should be covariant,
that they should retain the same form with respect to transformations among all such frames.
Let's take this to its logical extreme and seek a set of equations that are covariant, that keep the same form,
with respect to any transformation whatsoever that is a continuous transformation.
No skips or jumps are allowed or anything like a left-right switch, but otherwise, anything goes.
It turns out to be an important fact about general relativity that its basic equations, called the field equations,
and we'll meet them in just a moment, have this property.
It also turns out that Einstein and Grossman had found these equations already by 1913, but they made a fateful error.
They wrongly convinced themselves that such generally covariant field equations could not be correct.
Exactly why they thought this would be too much to try to understand now.
And besides, they were wrong, so we really don't want to follow them too far down a mistaken path.
Let's just leave it at this.
Their basic mistake had to do with how one takes the appropriate classical limit from general relativity,
which is to say how you derive, in effect, Newtonian gravitational theory in the case of weak and stationary non-changing gravitational fields.
Einstein and Grossman made another even deeper mistake that had to do with how one decides whether two events in spacetime are the same or different events.
Remember from Lecture 5, Mankowski's spacetime formulation of relativity theory, a spacetime event is just a point in four-dimensional spacetime.
This problem of the identity of spacetime events has been much discussed in recent historical literature on Einstein under the name of the whole argument.
That's H-O-L-E, the whole argument in general relativity.
But even more so than with the mistake about the Newtonian limit,
our trying to understand the mistake in the whole argument would take us way too far afield.
What's important for now is that because of these two mistakes, Einstein and Grossman chose a set of gravitational field equations that were not generally covariant.
This offended Einstein's sense of elegance and simplicity, but he wrongly thought that it was a price he had to pay.
Still, he was not wholly satisfied.
Einstein knew that he was ever so close to getting it right, but it took him over two years until November of 1915 to sort through all of his mistakes, correct them, and publish finally the now famous generally covariant gravitational field equations.
The first real glimmer of light began to dawn for Einstein after he spent a week in the summer of 1915 lecturing about his Entwerp theory to the participants in the mathematician David Hilbert's seminar at the University of Göttingen.
Hilbert was a brilliant mathematician, the most famous in Germany. He had long had a deep interest in the relations between physics and mathematics, so it was no surprise that he invited Einstein to lecture to his seminar.
But this encounter had a remarkable and unexpected outcome.
As it turned out, Hilbert too published essentially the same gravitational field equations almost simultaneously with Einstein, which led Einstein to suspect and to allege in private correspondence that Hilbert had plagiarized Einstein's work.
It took time and the mediation of mutual friends to patch things up, and we now know definitively that Hilbert found his own independent road to general relativity thanks in no small measure to his extraordinary mathematical talents.
What's important to learn from this bit of history is that when we speak of Einstein and general relativity, we should do Hilbert the favor of recalling that he deserves almost equal credit.
The road from the elevator and rotating disc thought experiments to the final formulation of the general theory of relativity was thus a somewhat rocky one.
But in November 1915, Einstein did finally complete his work, the main content of which is expressed by the field equations of general relativity, also known as the gravitational field equations or the Einstein field equations.
Notice first that what we commonly write as if it were one equation is really a shorthand representation of ten independent equations with the indices mu and nu each taking values one through four corresponding to the four dimensions of space time.
In modern notation, g is the gravitational constant and c is the speed of light.
R and r mu nu, called the Ricci scalar and the Ricci tensor, are themselves functions of the expression g mu nu, which is the crucial term on the left hand side.
Called the metric tensor, this expression g mu nu represents the essential information about the degree of curvature of space time at any point in space time.
Tensors, by the way, are just a generalization of more familiar vectors.
The crucial term on the right hand side, T mu nu, is called the stress energy tensor and encodes the essential information about the amount of matter and energy at any point in space time.
The way these field equations work is this.
The mass energy at a point in space time, represented by the stress energy tensor on the right hand side of the equation, determines via the field equations the magnitude of the metric tensor on the left hand side at that point of space time,
and thus determines the curvature of space time in that immediate vicinity.
The curvature in turn determines how both massive bodies and electromagnetic radiation move in that region of space time.
Let me say that again.
The right hand side of the field equations is a mathematical representation of the mass and energy at a specific point in space time.
Remember that mass and energy are inter-convertible in relativity.
The mass in question might be the mass of our sun or the planet Earth.
The left hand side of the field equations is based on a mathematical representation of the degree of curvature at the given point in space time.
So the mass energy content of space time determines the curvature of space time.
Literally, the mass of an object like the sun bends space time.
And it's that curvature of space time that does all of the important work when general relativity explains the motions of the planets, gravity waves, black holes, and all of the other really cool stuff that's part of Einstein's universe.
Let's next try to understand how that works.
A mental picture helps us to understand how space time curvature determines motion.
For the moment, think just about the spatial part of space time and pretend that space is just a two-dimensional rubber-like sheet where there is no massive object resting on the sheet.
It is flat, but place a heavy object like a bowling ball on the sheet and it causes the sheet to curve just as the presence of a massive object like the sun or the planet Jupiter curves space time.
Now imagine a smaller object like a marble rolling across the sheet.
If the sheet is flat, the marble rolls in a straight line, but if the sheet is curved, then the marble follows a curved path.
If the marble is moving fast enough and is far enough away, it might only be deflected a little bit by the bowling ball-induced curvature,
much like Voyager 1's trajectory was deflected during its flyby of Jupiter in 1977.
But if the marble is moving more slowly or is closer to the bowling ball, then it might be captured by the bowling ball-induced curvature and revolve around the bowling ball just as a planet revolves around the sun.
Precisely the same kind of behavior would occur with rays of light following curved trajectories in the vicinity of massive bodies.
We speak in this way of a massive body or array of light following a curved trajectory in space time.
But if we were being more careful, we would say that in the absence of non-gravitational forces, light and material bodies follow geodesic trajectories,
which are the lines of shortest distance in a curved space time.
Remember that we often say that a straight line is the shortest distance between two points.
And remember that the concept of a geodesic is just a generalization of that way of thinking about straight lines.
It follows that, in fact, light and material bodies are following straight, that is, shortest distance geodesic trajectories in a curved space time.
In other words, it is space time itself that is curved, not the trajectories of light and material bodies moving in an unforced way in space time.
It is as if, in the absence of forces other than gravity, light and material bodies seek out and find the paths of least resistance through space time.
Einstein's brilliantly original idea of explaining the motion of light and material bodies in a gravitational field by means of the curvature of space time is profoundly important.
One reason why it is important is that it solves yet another old puzzle that had plagued Newton's theory of gravitation.
According to Newton, two massive bodies attracted one another with a force proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them.
This mutually attractive force was thought to act instantaneously across whatever distance separated the two bodies.
But how could that be? How could the force of gravity act at an instant across vast stretches of empty space?
Einstein gave us the answer in 1915. Gravity does not act instantaneously across empty space.
Instead, the presence of a mass like the sun induces curvature in the surrounding space time.
Another massive body, like a comet or the Earth, feels the induced curvature in its own vicinity.
Moreover, according to Einstein, gravity doesn't reach out instantaneously.
According to the general theory of relativity, changes in a gravitational field are propagated at a finite speed, which just happens to be the speed of light.
So if there is a big disturbance in some far-off region of the universe, like a collapsing star, we don't feel the gravitational ripples immediately.
It takes time for the effect to reach us.
Even before he put all of the finishing details on the general theory of relativity, Einstein recognized that it had some striking implications.
First, he realized that general relativity would precisely account for a famous problem in the classical Newtonian description of planetary motion,
a problem called the anomalous precession of the perihelion of Mercury.
How general relativity explains this phenomenon is a bit hard to follow, but the problem is simple.
Planets revolve around the sun in elliptical orbits, but in addition to the planet's motion around the ellipse, there is also a slow movement of the long axis of the ellipse itself.
It is this that is called the precession of the perihelion, the perihelion being the point of the planet's closest approach to the sun on the short side of its elliptical motion.
It had been known for a long time that Newtonian planetary dynamics gave the wrong values for the precessions of the perihelia, an error especially noticeable in the case of Mercury.
There were ingenious attempts to explain the phenomenon classically, such as assuming the existence of a disc-shaped cloud of dust near the sun,
or positing a new planet with an orbit inside the orbit of Mercury.
Physicists and astronomers in the late 19th century actually gave that hypothetical planet inside the orbit of Mercury a name. They called it Vulcan.
But none of these ideas for explaining the precession of Mercury's perihelion could be confirmed.
General relativity, on the other hand, gave a natural and exact explanation.
The agreement with observation was so perfect that when Einstein first calculated the result, it left him stunned, but also convinced of the essential truth of general relativity.
The second implication of general relativity was a previously completely unknown effect called the gravitational redshift.
Here again, understanding how general relativity gives rise to the effect is rather difficult, but the effect itself is simple.
Einstein showed that the rate at which any periodic process proceeds, like the motion of a light wave, that this rate will be affected by the presence of a gravitational field.
The stronger the gravitational field, the more the periodic process is slowed down.
With light waves at other forms of electromagnetic radiation, this means that the frequency will be lower in a stronger gravitational field.
In the case of visible light, lowering the frequency means shifting the color toward the red end of the spectrum.
Hence the name of the phenomenon, the gravitational redshift.
Clocks are another example of a periodic process, so the rate at which a clock ticks will also be slowed when the clock is in the presence of a gravitational field.
This general relativistic slowing of clock rates should be distinguished from the special relativistic phenomenon of time dilation.
Other things, the general relativistic slowing of clocks is a real physical phenomenon, whereas you will recall that special relativistic time dilation was purely a matter of perspective.
It took a number of years for a definitive test of this prediction of general relativity, the gravitational redshift.
But it was eventually proven with light emitted from distant stars, with radiation in earth-based laboratories, and with clocks flown for long periods of time at high altitudes above the earth, where gravity is a little weaker, and the clocks therefore run a little faster.
That last experimental test of the general relativistic slowing of clocks in the gravitational field is a really cool one, in my opinion.
They put highly accurate atomic clocks in high-flying jets, and left them there for months as the jets made flight after flight.
When finally they compared those clocks with identical clocks that had remained on the surface of the earth, where the gravitational field is a bit stronger, they found that the high-flying clocks were just a little bit ahead of the earthbound clocks.
This literally means that frequent flyers don't live as long as people who travel by train, though for reasons having nothing to do with the stress of canceled flights or bad airline food.
But the most famous prediction of general relativity was the bending of light near massive objects like the sun.
Ordinarily this effect would be hard to detect, because light from distant stars, though deflected when it passed near the sun, would be lost in the glare of the sun's own light.
Einstein realized at an early date, however, that this prediction could be tested during a total eclipse when the sun's light is blocked by the moon.
If one compares the observed positions of stars near the edge of the sun during an eclipse with their observed positions at other times,
one should find the stars positions shifted by 1.7 arc seconds, a tiny amount, but just within the range of astronomical observation.
The way one does such a measurement is to look for apparent shifts in the stars positions with respect to nearby stars, light from which is less affected by the sun's gravity.
In 1919, British astronomer Arthur Eddington organized expeditions to Africa and South America to test Einstein's prediction during a total eclipse.
Eddington's announcement in November 1919 that they had confirmed the prediction catapulted Einstein from being merely the world's most highly respected physicist to being perhaps the world's most famous person.
Eddington was not the first person to have attempted a test of the light-bending prediction during an eclipse.
Einstein had already predicted such an effect on the basis of his earlier Antwerp theory, the incorrect version of general relativity with non-generally covariant field equations that he and Grossman had developed in 1913.
In mid-July of 1914, the German astronomer Erwin Freundlich led an expedition to the Crimean region of Russia to perform the test during a total eclipse that would occur on August 21st.
Unfortunately for Freundlich, after he left and before the eclipse, World War I broke out with Germany declaring war on Russia on August 1st.
Freundlich and his colleagues were seized by Russian authorities and held as enemy aliens. It took many months for Germany to win their release.
That Freundlich had no real reason for worry when he left Germany on July 19th is a sign of how sudden and shocking was Europe's descent into war.
Another irony of history is that Freundlich's misfortune in being seized by the Russians was as it turned out a lucky break for Einstein.
This is because Einstein's early and verve version of general relativity gave the wrong prediction for the gravitational bending of light near the sun.
Had Freundlich succeeded, had World War I not erupted, had there been a cloudless sky in the Crimea on August 21st,
had all the equipment functioned properly, had all the stars been thus aligned, then general relativity might have died before it was really even born.
In this way, World War I added an element of irony to the birth of general relativity.
In a different way, the lingering shadow of World War I added an element of drama to Eddington's confirmation of general relativity five years later.
Eddington's announcement of the results of his eclipse expedition became front page news in papers all around the world.
The New York Times headlined its story on November 10,
light's all a skew in the heavens, men of science, more or less a gog over results of eclipse observations.
No single scientific event had ever before garnered so much attention so quickly in the popular press in the popular mind.
One important reason for all of the public attention was political.
Great Britain and Germany had just fought over four dreadful years the most horrific war in European history.
A year after the armistice, tensions were still very high.
It would be some time still before anything resembling normal scientific relations between Britain and Germany would be resumed.
But at this crucial moment, a revolutionary new scientific theory proposed by Einstein,
a German Jew, a pacifist and an open critic of German war policies had been stunningly confirmed by Eddington,
a Quaker and a pacifist who had avoided military service on the argument that his scientific work was of vital national importance.
Here now is an opportunity eagerly seized by both Eddington and Einstein to prove that science could transcend politics,
that the common pursuit of scientific truth could help to reunite a war-torn Europe.
Later on we'll talk about Einstein's ever more public championing of world peace and international cooperation over the next three and a half decades.
Einstein the humanitarian was as important in the 20th century as Einstein the physicist.
Should this come as a surprise? Perhaps not.
As the experiences of Freundlich and Eddington show, physics and politics are frequently entangled,
as we will be reminded again by such events as Einstein's helping to launch the American atomic bomb project in 1939.
But who could have imagined in 1919 the especially ugly way in which the theory of relativity was soon to be entangled
in the politics of fascism and antisemitism in a Germany humbled by defeat and struggling to build a new democracy?
This is one of many topics that we will discuss when in our next lecture we resume our review of Einstein's biography
with a focus on his 19 years in Berlin.
