We've completed our review of Einstein's early work on the quantum theory and the fundamentals
of both the special and the general theories of relativity.
There's more physics to come, also a long look at Einstein the philosopher of science
and the humanitarian.
But first, let's turn our attention back to history and biography with an overview of
Einstein's years in Berlin.
Einstein worked in Berlin for nearly 20 years, from 1914 to 1933.
This was by far the most hectic period of his life.
He arrived in triumph, already the most famous German physicist, but he left as a refugee,
his fame no protection from Hitler's insane assault upon German science and learning in
the name of Aryan racial supremacy.
Divorce from Belava and marriage to Elsa brought about major changes in Einstein's
personal life.
Confirmation of the general theory of relativity in 1919 made him world famous.
He received the Nobel Prize in 1922.
It was during his Berlin years that Einstein became famous not only as a physicist, but
also as a spokesperson on behalf of a wide array of social and political causes, foremost
among them being pacifism, Zionism and international intellectual cooperation.
Travel took him all over Europe and to the United States, Japan, Palestine and Argentina.
Regular visits to Caltech in the early 1930s were the prelude to Einstein's permanent
move to Princeton late in 1933.
Einstein's first four years in Berlin were dominated by war, and war's shadow cast a
pall over Germany throughout Einstein's years in the German capital.
When Einstein moved to Berlin in the spring of 1914, the world was at peace.
The Austrian Archduke Franz Ferdinand was assassinated in Sarajevo on June 28.
More rapidly than anyone could have imagined, simmering tensions boiled over into war.
Germany entered the war on August 1st in a burst of patriotic fervor, determined to
secure for itself once and for all the leading place it thought it deserved among the nations
of the world.
To Einstein's surprise and dismay, even many German scientists and intellectuals whom he
admired, such as Max Planck and Fritz Haber, joined in public expressions of support for
the war.
Einstein was one among the lonely few who dared to dissent, upholding the vision of a united
and peaceful Europe in an October 1914 manifesto on the oil payer to the Europeans.
It was to no avail this manifesto, succeeding only in earning Einstein the attentions of
the Berlin police, but it was important nonetheless, being the first occasion on which Einstein
ventured to use his scientific reputation in support of a political cause.
Early German success was followed by the famously brutal stalemate that was World War I on the
Western Front.
Patriotic enthusiasm turned slowly into despair.
A grinding two-front war and a British naval blockade that choked off the import of food
stuffs and war materiel began to take a toll.
By the later stages of the war, in 1917 and 1918, hunger and cold were the lot of many
Germans.
Einstein's income and Elsa's family wealth shielded them from the worst, but the stress
of wartime life and a poor diet put Einstein's own health at risk.
Einstein grew so ill that in September of 1917, he moved into his cousin and lover Elsa's
apartment where she could more easily care for him.
When the war ended suddenly on November 9, 1918, and the Kaiser abdicated, there was
an outbreak of revolutionary turmoil.
Einstein could not avoid being drawn into the maelstrom.
His student and future colleague, the young philosopher of science Hans Reichenbach, was
a leader of the student socialists at the University of Berlin.
When student revolutionaries arrested the university's rector, it fell to Einstein to
lead a delegation, including the physicist Max Born and the psychologist Max Wertheimer,
to win the rector's release.
This because Einstein was respected by the rebels as a leftist and well-known to the
New Republic's president, Friedrich Ebert.
But Einstein also took the opportunity to lecture the radical students about the enduring
importance of intellectual freedom.
A measure of political stability was achieved with the establishment of the new Weimar Republic
in February of 1919.
But a devastated economy and lingering political tensions still made life difficult.
Postwar economic recovery was long in coming, thanks in part to harsh war reparations that
the Allies demanded of Germany.
The period from August 1921 to November 1923 was especially difficult, as hyperinflation
destroyed people's life savings and brought the German economy to the brink of collapse.
Even senior academics, who lacked income or wealth that was denominated in foreign currencies,
found themselves facing privation.
That is why, for example, in 1920, Einstein helped arrange an English translation of an
important new book on relativity on how one cites in der Gegen-Werthigen Physik, Space
and Time in Contemporary Physics, by his friend, the philosopher of science, Moritz Schlich.
The little bit of income that Schlich would earn in British pounds would help a lot in
the Germany of the early 1920s.
By the way, we'll talk more about Schlich and the logical positivist movement that he
represented in lecture 11.
An especially unhappy consequence of postwar tensions in Germany was that Jews became a
scapegoat for Germany's losing the war.
The so-called stab in the back theory portrayed Germany's Jews as part of a larger international
Jewish conspiracy to undermine the German war effort, this in spite of the fact that
many German Jews proudly served their country at war.
It was, for example, the Jewish chemist Fritz Haber, who pioneered the development of poison
gas for the German army.
The anti-Semitism reached all the way into the sciences, with Einstein's theory of relativity,
and Einstein himself becoming prominent targets.
In August 1920, a big public meeting was held at the Berlin Philharmonic Hall, where with
Einstein himself in the audience, a series of speakers railed against the dangers of
so-called Jewish physics supposedly epitomized by the theory of relativity.
The leaders of the anti-relativity campaign even managed to air their views at the annual
meeting of the Society of German Natural Scientists and Physicians at Bodnauheim, Germany, in
September of 1920, where Einstein had a public confrontation with a Nobel Prize-winning experimentalist
Philip Lennard.
In the midst of all this turmoil, Einstein's personal life began to stabilize.
Albert and Malava finally divorced in February 1919, and Albert married Elsa shortly thereafter
in June.
For years after their separation, Malava had hoped for some kind of reconciliation, but
Einstein was not really interested.
In one especially cold-hearted communication in the summer of 1914, he laid out terms for
a possible reconciliation that were guaranteed and perhaps designed to be unacceptable.
Included were such stipulations as that Malava would have to renounce all personal relations,
intimate ones included, that were not strictly necessary for social purposes, that she would
have to leave his bedroom or study when asked, and that she would cease speaking to him when
asked.
When at first Malava signaled acceptance of these terms, Einstein responded by emphasizing
that he would accept only a business-like relationship, in which he treated Malava as
he would any other woman who was a stranger.
The separation and divorce were hard on the two boys, and Einstein's occasional visits
with them did not always go well.
In the final divorce settlement, Einstein agreed to generous support from Malava and
the boys, including the promise that Malava would get the money from the expected Nobel
Prize still three years away, which had the advantage of being insulated from the ravages
of German inflation.
Einstein's marrying Elsa less than four months after the divorce might have raised some eyebrows,
but it also relieved Elsa of the embarrassment of a now all-too-public liaison.
Elsa relished her role as wife of a world-famous scientist and the access that it gave her
to Berlin's social and cultural circles.
She created for Einstein a comfortable upper-middle-class home that contrasted starkly with the bohemian
world of his university days.
Her daughter Ilsa served as Einstein's secretary at the now finally established Kaiser Wilhelm
Institute for Physics, which Einstein directed.
Professor, institute director, distinguished member of the Prussian Academy of Sciences,
and now at home a comfortable bourgeois, in many ways, Einstein was now a member of the
establishment.
Not all was domestic bliss, however.
More than a few women were drawn to Einstein and he to them.
Particularly after the mid-1920s, he indulged in a number of not-so-secret extramarital
affairs.
Elsa, the realist, made her peace with Einstein's philandering, seeing this as perhaps the price
of marriage to a famous man whose personal moral sense did not always measure up to his
high-minded public moral crusades.
Within a year of the war's end, Einstein had become truly world-famous.
As we saw in lecture eight, Arthur Eddington's November 1919 confirmation of general relativity's
prediction of the bending of light near the sun made Einstein front-page news in every
major newspaper around the world.
The Nobel Prize in Physics followed in November of 1922.
It was the 1921 prize, by the way, delayed by a year.
It was awarded not for relativity, but for the photoelectric effect.
One reason being, sadly, that anti-Semitic attacks on relativity in Germany had an effect
even in Sweden.
But relativity also encountered resistance among more conservative scientists simply
because of its radical challenge to classical physics orthodoxy.
Einstein had been nominated for the prize for the first time in 1910 by the physical
chemist Wilhelm Ostwald.
That Einstein had not won by the early 1920s was becoming as much of an embarrassment to
the scientific world as his not having earned a teaching position was in 1909.
Winning the prize for the photoelectric effect was a clever way out of the impasse even if
Einstein chose relativity as the theme for his acceptance speech in July of 1923.
Invitations to lecture poured in.
Einstein's first visit to the United States was in 1921 when he was invited to accompany
the Zionist leader, Keim Weizmann, on a trip to raise funds for the planned Hebrew University
in Jerusalem.
But while in the United States, Einstein gave a series of scientific lectures at Princeton
that was soon published under the title The Meaning of Relativity and became one of the
most widely read introductions to the theory for a technical audience.
In the spring of 1922, Einstein made a somewhat controversial but politically important trip
to France where he lectured at the Collège de France and toured World War I battlefields.
Relations between Germany and France were still not cordial and were to deteriorate further
when France occupied the Ruhr Valley a year later.
But Einstein, who always championed international intellectual collaboration, was willing to
do what he could to rebuild regular scientific contacts with the country of the late Henri
Poincaré and of Einstein's friend Marie Curie.
In 1922 and 1923, Albert and Elsa went on a grand tour that took them all the way to
Japan.
On the way home, they visited Palestine, where Einstein laid the cornerstone for the
Hebrew University.
In 1925, it was South America, Vienna and London got to know Einstein as well, and he regularly
visited in Leiden, home to his friends Lorenz and Ehrenfest, where he held a part-time appointment.
A sad measure of Einstein's prominence in Germany and abroad is the fact that anti-Semitic
attacks on relativity as early as 1920 evolved into direct physical threats.
Germany's foreign minister, Walter Rottenau, who was a prominent businessman and a Jew,
was assassinated by right-wing extremists in June 1922.
When the investigation revealed that Einstein was also on the hit list, he was forced to
curtail public appearances for a while.
Otherwise, throughout the 1920s, Einstein was one of Berlin's most often seen and often
heard public figures.
He was invited to appear at all manner of public events.
His scientific lectures at the Prussian Academy and his scientific publications were sometimes
front-page news.
His face was well-known to readers of Berlin newspapers, and the one-time Bohemian was
often to be seen in formal attire.
In March of 1928, Einstein was felled by another serious health crisis that kept him in bed
for weeks.
It was triggered when he collapsed while on a lecture and vacation trip to Switzerland,
this after carrying his own heavy suitcase for several hundred yards uphill through the
snow from the train station.
The problem might have been pericarditis.
On the occasion of Einstein's 50th birthday in 1929, his adopted home of Berlin sought
to honor him with a gift of a summer house on one of the many lakes on the city's outskirts,
so that he could more easily pursue his love of sailing.
These plans fell through, but did lead to Einstein's having built for himself his own
much-beloved summer house in the Berlin suburb of Kuput, near Potsdam, about 40 kilometers
southwest of central Berlin.
During his last four years in Berlin, the summer house in Kuput became Einstein's favorite
residence, not just in the summer and not just for the tristing that sometimes took
place there.
Many photographs from this period show him entertaining important guests in Kuput, including
international visitors like the Indian poet Rabindranath Tagore.
In many ways, the late 1920s and early 1930s, after Germany's economy stabilized and before
Hitler rose to power, were perhaps the happiest years of Einstein's life.
Berlin during those years was a remarkable city.
Energetic, cosmopolitan and sophisticated, Berlin rivaled Paris as a center for every
avant-garde movement in art, literature, theater, music and architecture.
Its own distinctive culture was famously portrayed in the musical Cabaret, which was based on
Christopher Isherwood's Berlin story.
This was the Berlin of Kurt Weill and Bertolt Brecht.
It was the Berlin whose dark side was savagely portrayed in the paintings of George Groesch
and Otto Deeks, and in Alfred Dublien's masterpiece, the novel Berlin Alexanderplatz.
High culture thrived as well.
Otto Klumperer conducted at the Kroll Opera and Wilhelm Fertvingler at the Berlin Philharmonic.
Architectural modernism in the form of the Bauhaus might have had its headquarters two
hours to the southwest in Dessau, but its influence was felt strongly in Berlin, as
with the simplicity, clean lines and plain wooden materials in the design of Einstein's
own Caput's summer house by the noted architect Conrad Wochsmann, who won the Prussian Academy
of Arts Rome Prize in 1932.
Berlin was also the center of a vibrant Jewish community that combined more thoroughly assimilated
German Jews, the world of Fritz Haber and Walter Rottenau, with thousands of very recent
Jewish immigrants from the East, who, as in Prague, brought with them more traditional
forms of Jewish religious practice.
Einstein's celebrity and growing circle of friends drew him into the life of Berlin's
Jewish community, never of course as a practicing Jew, but as someone with an ever more acute
sense of his own Jewish identity, an identity reinforced by his being too often a target
of attack because of his Jewishness.
It was physics, along with Elsa, that had drawn Einstein to Berlin in 1914, and physics
was of course still the center of Einstein's life in Berlin.
His colleagues at the University of Berlin included Max Planck and Max von Lauer.
After Planck's retirement in 1927, they were joined by Erwin Schrodinger, the inventor
of wave mechanics.
The experimentalist Walter Bota worked at the Imperial Physical Technical Institute.
Otto Hahn and his collaborator, Lisa Meitner, who were to discover atomic fission in 1938,
worked at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry in the Berlin suburb of Dahlem, where
Einstein's own Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics was also located.
The weekly physics colloquium at the university was one place where many of these notables
gathered regularly.
One was a magnet, drawing bright young physics students like Eugene Wigner and Leo Zallard.
Everybody who was anybody in physics made it a point to come to Berlin.
Niels Bohr first met Einstein during a visit to Berlin in the summer of 1920.
Arnold Sommerfeld, Max Born, Wolfgang Pauli, and the brilliant young Werner Heisenberg
all stopped in Berlin at one time or another.
One colleague in the physics department at the University of Berlin deserves special mention.
Hans Reichenbach was to become famous in Germany and later in the United States as
one of the leaders of the movement in the philosophy of science known as logical positivism,
logical empiricism, or scientific philosophy.
This latter was Reichenbach's own preferred label.
We already met him as a leader of the student socialists at the university in 1919 and we'll
meet him again in lecture 11 as one of the most thoughtful philosophical commentators
on relativity.
He had attended Einstein's lectures on relativity at the university in the late 1910s.
After finishing a dissertation on the foundations of probability and beginning his career as
a Provattot cent at the Technical University in Stuttgart, he wrote two books on the philosophical
interpretation of relativity in the early 20s that impressed Einstein enough to move to
promote Reichenbach for a position at the University of Berlin.
But Reichenbach's conservative old teachers in the philosophy department remembered him
too well as a political radical.
As a result, Einstein and Planck engineered a new chair in the philosophy of science for
Reichenbach in the physics department.
This is just one more piece of evidence bearing on the noteworthy relationship between physics
and philosophy in the early 20th century and on Einstein's own attitude toward the importance
of integrating the two.
In the late 1920s, Germany was still the world's leading scientific nation.
Any bright young American who wanted a good career in physics had to take a PhD in Germany,
a perfect example being J. Robert Oppenheimer, future leader of the American Atomic Bomb
Project.
Oppenheimer did his PhD in Göttingen in 1927 under the supervision of Max Born.
But American universities were working hard to achieve parity.
Perhaps the most ambitious was the comparatively young California Institute of Technology
in Pasadena.
Its president, the famous American physicist Robert Milliken, who won the 1923 Nobel Prize
in physics for his determination of the electron charge, was recruiting the best scientific
talent he could find, including the young Oppenheimer, who split his time between Caltech
and the University of California at Berkeley.
Milliken's prize catch was none other than Einstein, who accepted a regular visiting
appointment at Caltech starting in 1931.
When the Einstein's boat docked in San Diego on December 31, 1930, they were greeted by
the usual scores of reporters and by something quite unusual, 500 uniformed high school girls
serenading them with what the Los Angeles Times described as California songs.
After a night's rest in Pasadena, the next item on their agenda on Thursday morning,
New Year's Day, was the annual Rose Parade.
Albert and Elsa thoroughly enjoyed their American visits.
With minimal duties, Einstein had more than enough time to get to know some of America's
scientific elite, such as the astronomer Edwin Hubble at the nearby Mount Wilson Observatory.
In lecture 18, we'll talk about how Hubble's discovery of galaxies and the expansion of
the universe stimulated the development of modern relativistic cosmology.
Hollywood was even closer by car than Mount Wilson, and Einstein got to meet the Hollywood
elite as well.
He became friends with Charlie Chaplin, who brought Einstein and Elsa along as special
guests to the premiere of City Lights in January of 1931.
They attended a seance at the home of the author and socialist leader Upton Sinclair.
On their way back east by train in March, they stopped at the Grand Canyon, where Einstein
was made an honorary chief of the Hopi.
While Einstein enjoyed the California sun each spring in the early 1930s, life was once
again growing grim for many people.
The Great Depression was driving unemployment in the United States up to record levels.
Breadlines, soup kitchens, and hobos riding the rails were becoming commonplace.
India was being flooded with refugees from the Dust Bowl, produced by prolonged drought
in places like Oklahoma.
But in Germany, things were growing much worse.
A worldwide depression just added to the strains that were already threatening Germany's still
young Weimar democracy.
The Nazi Party had been gathering strength slowly since the mid-1920s and was finally
handed control of the government on January 30, 1933, when President Hindenburg, named
Hitler the Chancellor of Germany.
New elections on March 5 gave the Nazis an absolute majority in the Reichstag, which
then voted on March 23 to cede absolute power to Hitler.
Einstein was in his third visit to Caltech in the winter of 1933, when Hitler became
Germany's Chancellor.
Under no illusions about Hitler's intentions, Einstein made up his mind immediately that
he would never return to Germany, as he announced publicly on March 10.
On March 28, he formally resigned from the Prussian Academy of Sciences.
The Nazis retaliated by raiding Einstein's Berlin apartment and summer house in Koppelt,
the latter on the absurd excuse that they were searching for hidden weapons.
Einstein's property was seized, but his son-in-law Rudolf Kaiser, husband of Elsa's daughter
Ilsa, somehow managed to get nearly all of Einstein's papers out of Germany via the
French diplomatic pouch.
Einstein watched with dismay, as many physicists and other intellectuals whom he had once
esteemed quickly made their peace with the new political order.
In a face-to-face meeting with Hitler, the aging Max Planck tried in vain to prevent
the firing of Jewish scientists, but he was too old to carry on such a fight alone.
The only prominent physicist who refused to acquiesce was Max von Lauer, who used his
position as head of the German Physical Society to give a speech at its September 1933 annual
meeting attacking Nazi persecutions under the guise of recalling Galileo's suffering
at the hands of the Inquisition.
Einstein never forgave the rest of his German colleagues for their failure to oppose Hitler.
Even after World War II, Einstein would not relent.
When a friend planning a visit to Germany asked in the late 1940s to whom he should
convey Einstein's greetings, Einstein said only,
«Greet laua for me».
Albert and Elsa sailed back to Europe, finding a temporary safe haven in Belgium, in the
coastal village of Lecoque-Somère, under the protection of the Belgian royal family,
with whom Einstein had become friends a few years earlier.
It was a worrisome and hectic time.
Right away, Einstein threw himself into the task of helping the many Jewish scientists
and intellectuals who had lost their positions thanks to a Nazi law euphemistically titled
Restoration of the Professional Civil Service.
One very public example of Einstein's efforts to help his displaced colleagues was his speech
on October 3rd in London's Royal Albert Hall at a meeting to raise funds for refugee organizations.
Where were the Einstein's settled?
Offers came from London, Paris, Madrid and Jerusalem, but they chose Princeton.
Many months earlier, Einstein had begun negotiating with Abraham Flexner about a part-time appointment
at the new Institute for Advanced Study that Flexner had founded in Princeton.
Under the press of circumstance, that part-time position became a full-time one, and Einstein
arrived in his new American home on October 17, 1933, accompanied by Elsa, his secretary
Helen Dukas, and his assistant, Walter Meyer.
Leaving Europe as a refugee from Nazism was not an easy task for Einstein, however quick
and firm his decision had been not to return to Germany.
He left behind two sons, two stepdaughters, his first wife, Maleva, many relatives and
many friends.
He left the land of his youth and his ancestors.
He left behind the academic world in which his mind had been shaped and tested, the cultural
world in which his love of music and literature had been nurtured, and the social and political
world in which his conscience had been formed.
Einstein had always thought of himself as something of a loner.
The young man who renounced his German citizenship in 1896 had always dismissed the importance
of national ties.
In 1918, in the last year of World War I, he had written, and I quote now, I am by heritage
Jew, by citizenship a Swiss, and by disposition a human being, and only a human being, without
any special attachment to any state or national entity whatsoever.
Saying that one has no such ties is one thing, however, leaving for good the world one has
known for 54 years is something very different.
Four visits to the United States had given Einstein a good feel for his new home, and
while he admired its democracy and egalitarianism, he deplored its often parochial and Philistine
ways.
But Einstein never again set foot in Europe, and he never left the United States, except
for one brief trip to Bermuda in 1935 that was necessary to make possible his later
application for US citizenship.
Still, it was surely with a great sigh of relief that Albert and Elsa settled into the
small, quiet university town of Princeton, the contrast with the fast-paced life of a
world city like Berlin could not have been greater.
In August 1935, Einstein finally moved into the modest, white-frame house at 112 Mercer
Street, Princeton, New Jersey, which would be Einstein's address for the last 20 years
of his life.
