We've discussed Einstein's most famous early contributions to physics in areas like the
quantum theory and relativity. We've surveyed his life and career up to his arrival in his
new American home in 1933. There's more science to discuss, and soon we'll turn our
attention to Einstein the Humanitarian. But for the next two lectures, we'll focus
on Einstein the Philosopher of Science. More than once, we've already noted the prominent
role that the philosophy of science and the history of science played in Einstein's way
of doing physics. Now we're ready to take a deeper look, our aim being to understand
Einstein's distinctive philosophical views and his impact on the way others thought about
the nature, aims, and methods of science. In this lecture, we begin by asking why the
revolutions that Einstein wrought in physics posed such a daunting philosophical challenge.
History has always been stimulated by developments in science. Aristotle's theory of science
was shaped by the new geometry of his day, and by his own careful studies in what we
now call mechanics, biology, and psychology. The early 17th century French rationalist René
Descartes was a physicist, mathematician, and philosopher in equal measures. The later
17th century British empiricist John Locke sought to make philosophical sense of the
scientific achievements of Newton, as did the 18th century Scottish empiricist David
Hume and the great Immanuel Kant toward the end of the 18th century. But the new physics
of the early 20th century challenged philosophers as never before. Almost overnight, centuries-old
philosophical views about the nature of the universe and about how science itself works
were called into question. The quantum theory, for example, is non-deterministic, postulating
an essential randomness in elementary quantum events, and so threatens the long-established
idea that, as Einstein once famously said, God does not play dice with the universe. Relativity
theory contradicts the claim, famously defended by Kant, that absolute Newtonian space and
time are necessities of thought. One is not surprised that Einstein's new physics provoked
a philosophical response and stimulated a philosophical revolution. From a historical
perspective, the most important reaction was the rise of the view known as logical positivism
or logical empiricism, the most influential school of thought in 20th century philosophy
of science. Logical empiricism famously insists that the only meaningful concepts and theories
are those whose experimental and observational credentials can be made crystal clear. It
follows that ethics and politics lack cognitive meaning, as they said, and must be seen as
no more than expressions of emotional attitudes. Whether and how one can reason from special
relativity to the meaninglessness of ethics are obviously controversial questions. One
might take comfort from the fact that while Einstein's physics prompted such developments,
Einstein the philosopher disagreed strongly with many core points of logical empiricist
doctrine.
To understand the philosophical reaction to the new physics, we have to understand the
philosophical background. As elsewhere in these lectures, we'll try to do that through
Einstein's eyes.
The dominant philosophical figure at the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the
20th century was still the late 18th century German philosopher Immanuel Kant. One telling
mark of Kant's prominence was the fact that, as you will remember, the young Einstein read
Kant's three major books at the age of about 12 or 13. And Kant's philosophy took center
stage in the courses on philosophy in which Einstein enrolled at the Athe Ha, courses
taught by the neo-Kantian philosopher August Stadler.
Kant was deeply impressed by Newtonian mechanics as the very epitome of scientific knowledge,
and he took as his philosophical project the attempt to understand the conditions for the
possibility of Newtonian science. Kant asked, in effect, what is it about the nature of
human knowledge, the way the mind works, that made Newton's great achievement possible?
Kant reacted against two earlier philosophical traditions. One was the German rationalist
tradition in metaphysics, represented by the great German polymath Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz.
Kant thought that rationalists like Leibniz were mistaken in holding that the first principles
of metaphysics and science could be deduced by reason alone through the analysis of concepts.
The other school of thought against which Kant reacted was the British empiricist tradition
in epistemology, philosopher's word for the theory of knowledge, a tradition represented
by Locke and Hume.
Kant thought that empiricists were mistaken in making science the product of passive experience,
and thus as contingent and as changeable as that experience. Real science thought Kant
had to have at its core a body of necessary truth, but that necessary truth had to reflect
the way in which experience informs us about the world. In one sense, Kant was trying to
find a middle way between rationalism and empiricism.
This new approach is called the transcendental term. It sought the necessary features of scientific
knowledge by asking how knowledge must be organized in order for scientific cognition
to be possible in the first place, how the mind must work in order for us to be able
to think like scientists. The resulting so-called synthetic a priori principles, that's Kant's
technical term, synthetic a priori, these principles were viewed by Kant as being imposed
upon our knowledge of nature, or structuring our knowledge of nature, because in effect
they were the necessary rules according to which our minds function. These principles
are synthetic in the sense that they are not just the result of analyzing concepts. They
give us knowledge that goes beyond just the meanings of our words. The principles are
a priori in the sense of being logically prior to all experience. We don't discover the principles
on the basis of experience, instead these a priori structuring principles are what make
possible our having experience in the first place and our forming judgments on the basis
of that experience. And again, all such synthetic a priori principles are supposed to be necessarily
true. New observations and experiments can't overturn synthetic a priori principles because
it's only those principles that make experience and observation possible in the first place.
Foremost among these necessary a priori features that structure human knowledge according to
Kant are space, time, and causality. More specifically, space and time for Kant are the absolute
space and time of Newton, with space being the space truly described by Euclidean geometry.
Causality is just a philosopher's name for the determinism that we earlier discussed
as being one of the fundamental principles of all classical physics. But there one sees
the problem because the quantum theory that Einstein helped to discover denies strict determinism
and so denies the a priori nature of causality. And relativity theory denies that space is
Euclidean and that space and time are absolute. There had been other challenges to Kant, but
the challenges from quantum theory and relativity theory were the most severe because they pretended
to come with the same kind of empirical warrant that earlier set Newton's physics apart from
the medieval natural philosophy it had helped to overthrow. To the extent that Kant's philosophy
was validated by Newton's physics, its validity was now seriously threatened.
Can Kant be saved? There were ingenious attempts to salvage some or all of Kant's doctrines.
For example, some defenders of Kant argued that his claims about space and time were
to be interpreted as pertaining to psychological space and time the way the mind apprehends
space and time, not to physical space and time. But that surely wasn't Kant's view.
For Kant, physical space and time, the space and time described by our physics are the
space and time structured according to the necessary synthetic a priori principles that
organize experience and judgment. The most sensible defense of Kant was to argue
that Kant had been too specific in his claims. Typical of this strategy was the approach
of the German Neocontian philosopher Ernst Kassierer who later became famous as the author
of the philosophy of symbolic forms, a grand synthetic project that explored the symbolic
meanings that are found at the heart of all human cultural achievements, from the hardest
of the sciences to the most refined of the arts. Kassierer learned philosophy from the
Neocontian Hermann Cohen at the University of Marburg, the same person who taught Einstein's
Atheha philosophy teacher August Stadler. Einstein and Kassierer met one another in
the 1910s in Berlin where they had more than a few mutual friends and professional acquaintances.
Kassierer's brother Bruno and his cousin Paul were prominent figures in the cultural life
of Berlin. Bruno Kassierer was a respected publisher. Together with Paul, he ran one
of Berlin's most important art galleries. And in 1898, the two of them had helped with
the establishment of the avant-garde Berlin's secession artists movement. After Ernst Kassierer
took a position in Hamburg in 1919, he and Einstein corresponded with Einstein expressing
respectful and cordial disagreement with Kassierer's Contianism. One of Kassierer's best books
was his 1921 Sir Einstein'schen Relativitätstheorie, Einstein's theory of relativity.
Recall from Lecture 7 our discussion of the differences between flat Euclidean geometry
and curved non-Euclidean geometry. In his 1921 book, Kassierer suggested that while
Kant was wrong to claim that space had a specifically Euclidean or flat geometrical form, there
were nevertheless weaker so-called topological facts about space and time, facts more fundamental
than geometry, that were still, as they had been for Kant, necessary a priori features
of our science. One such necessary feature of space would be the fact that any one point
in space is surrounded by a three-dimensional continuum of neighboring points through which
bodies can move in a continuous fashion. Kassierer's strategy for saving Kant is more
than just clever. Still, it runs a risk. For however much one weakens the list of necessary
a priori principles upon which to found science, it's always possible that another scientific
discovery can challenge the validity of even those more modest claims. That's exactly
what happened to Kassierer's specific proposal for weakening Kant when a few years after 1921,
Some physicists began to ask whether the new quantum theory implied not only indeterminism,
but also a discrete, hence not continuous, structure for space-time. Today at the forefront
of research, most of the leading contenders for what is called a theory of quantum gravity
postulate a discrete, fundamental space-time structure, atoms of space-time as it were.
Whether there is any room left for a further retreat by Kant's defenders is not clear.
Of course, there was one other way to defend Kant. That was simply to deny the truth of
relativity. Needless to say, this was not an option seriously entertained by Einstein
or by other philosophers impressed by what he had achieved.
The French physicist, mathematician, and philosopher Henri Poincaré proposed a different
way of saving Kant's claim that the geometry of physical space is Euclidean.
Einstein met Poincaré in 1911 at the first Solvay Congress. You will recall from lecture
two that Poincaré's very influential collection of popular and philosophical essays, Science
and Hypothesis, was on the reading list of Einstein's Olympia Academy in Bern. In one
of those essays, entitled Experiment and Geometry, Einstein found an argument similar to this.
We learned in lecture seven that the sum of the angles of a triangle on a non-Euclidean
surface differs from the Euclidean value of 180 degrees. On a surface of positive curvature,
the sum is more than 180 degrees. On a surface of negative curvature, the sum is less than
180 degrees. Here's another important fact. The larger
the triangle, the greater the difference from 180 degrees, and the difference shrinks to
the Euclidean value as the triangle becomes infinitely small. That means that one might
not notice the difference when measuring the angles of a small triangle. But what if one
measures the angles of a triangle of truly cosmic proportions?
Imagine that one measures, via telescopic observations, the angles of a triangle formed
by a distant star and two locations six months apart on the Earth's orbit. Assume for the
sake of argument that the angles sum to more than 180 degrees. Writing more than 10 years
before the advent of general relativity, Poincare asked, in effect, whether such a result would
prove empirically that the geometry of space is non-Euclidean.
No, said Poincare. He pointed out that all such measurements make an unspoken assumption
about the path followed by a ray of light, which is that light travels in a straight line.
According to Poincare, such assumptions have the status of conventions, that is his technical
term, conventions that we may choose to accept or change. Another way of thinking about it
is that such conventions act as definitions of fundamental concepts. In the present instance,
that would mean that we are defining the geometrical concept of straight line by means of the physical
concept of path of a ray of light, such as the path that the light from the distant star
follows when it reaches the Earth. But we can change our definitions as freely as we
can adopt new conventions. Simplicity and convenience might be our only constraints.
Suppose now that instead of assuming that light from that distant star follows a straight
line path, we assumed that it followed a curved path. In that way, by adopting a different
convention about the paths of light rays, we could still hold that Euclidean geometry
was true of physical space and that the observed cosmic triangle wrongly appeared to have angles
summing to more than 180 degrees only because we overlooked the curvature of the light rays
entering our telescope. Which convention should one choose, straight
or curved paths for light? Paul Garay's answer was that one should choose the convention
that produced the simplest geometry. And since Euclidean geometry is simpler than its rivals,
a reasonable person would always adopt the convention that light rays followed curved
paths in a fundamentally flat space. In effect, one thus makes Euclidean geometry true by
definition. Even though Einstein would eventually
disagree with Poincare's line of argument, he was impressed by it. For as we will see
in the next lecture, it forced Einstein to think long and hard about the big question
of how in general scientific theories are related to the evidence produced by observation
and experiment. Is theory simply deduced from experiment? Must theory always bow to experiment?
Is it ever permissible to reinterpret experimental results, perhaps in the way Poincare recommended,
in order to square them with a theory to which one is still strongly attached?
As we will see, Einstein was helped in thinking about these questions by the opportunity to
thrash them out in frequent, deep, wide-ranging and sophisticated discussions with philosophers
of science associated with the historically most important philosophical reaction to the
new physics, the movement known most commonly as logical positivism. We'll use the movement's
own preferred name, logical empiricism. Most of the prominent figures associated with
logical empiricism, Moritz Schlick, Rudolf Karnapp, Hans Leichenbach and Philipp Frank,
started their careers as physicists or with a technically sophisticated engagement with
the philosophical implications of relativity theory. Frank, whom you will recall as Einstein's
successor in Prague, was a physicist by training and profession and was a protégé
of Ernst Machs. We met Reichenbach in the previous lecture, studying relativity with
Einstein in Berlin. Schlick had been a physics student in Berlin a decade earlier, writing
his dissertation under the direction of Mach's Planck before retooling as a philosopher.
Karnapp's 1921 doctoral dissertation at Jena was on the problem of space.
He knew most of these philosophers well. Some he counted among his friends. He warmly recommended
Frank as his replacement in Prague in 1912. He and Planck created a chair in philosophy
of science for Reichenbach in the Berlin physics department in 1926. Schlick was the earliest
important philosophical interpreter of the implications of relativity. His writings on
relativity between 1915 and 1917 deeply impressed Einstein, who corresponded extensively with
Schlick, was a guest in Schlick's home and enthusiastically promoted Schlick's appointment
to Ernst Mach's old chair in Vienna in 1922, from which position Schlick became the leader
of what is known as the Vienna Circle, the headquarters, as it were, of the logical empiricist
movement. Starting in the mid 1910s and early 1920s, logical empiricists sought a philosophical
understanding of modern physics that respected both the old empiricist principle, that experiment
and observation are the ultimate arbiters of truth for scientific theories, and the
Kantian and conventionalist insight that the knower contributes something to cognition,
either in the form of a priori principles or conventional definitions. But most importantly,
they wanted to show why one should think that there are compelling empirical reasons for
accepting the relativity theory's radical claims about the non-Euclidean character of
space time. To paraphrase their own words, they sought a new kind of empiricism that
respected and explained the empirical integrity of Einstein's theory of relativity. Kant had
sought a philosophical theory of science that would help us to understand what made Newton
possible. The logical empiricists wanted a theory of science that would help us understand
what made Einstein possible. Different thinkers set about the task in different ways, and
their thinking evolved over the course of the decade from roughly 1915 to 1925, before
it finally coalesced in the body of doctrine ever since firmly associated with the name
logical positivism, a body of doctrine which I want to repeat Einstein eventually and ironically
repudiated. Consider first the case of Reichenbach. His first book on relativity was published
in 1920. Relativitates theory on der Kentness a priori, relativity theory and a priori knowledge.
At this point, Reichenbach thought of himself as still defending Kant, but it was Kant modified
in a crucial way. Reichenbach like Kassir thought that one could still identify within
the theory of relativity certain principles that played an a priori role, which is to
say that these principles gave structure and form to the content of the theory. As with
Kassir, Reichenbach's a priori was weaker than Kant's. But unlike Kassir, and here comes
Reichenbach's radical innovation, Reichenbach argued that these a priori structuring principles
were no longer necessary. He held them to be as one says contingent, which is to say
that they could be revised in the light of new scientific evidence. Some people might
regard the expression contingent a priori to be a contradiction in terms. How can principles
that are prior to experience be revised in response to new experience? This idea of the
contingent a priori was not nonsense. It's not silly to argue that knowledge is possible
only if the knower has some rule for organizing raw experience, even if those organizing rules
are changed, developed and refined as science progresses. The idea, which is actually enjoying
a bit of a renaissance in recent years, is that if one has no rules for organizing raw
experience, then it either remains a blooming, buzzing confusion, as William James called
it, or the way to organize it is left to individual whim, which would make it hard to understand
how scientists ever reach agreement. On the other hand, science develops over time in
ways that can challenge even our most firmly held beliefs. An a priori that's old and
stiff, incapable of change, cannot adapt. Still, if the rules can change, along with
the more specific content of our theories, it can be a challenge to explain the difference
between the changing rules and those changeable, more specific scientific claims.
One philosopher who thought Reichenbach's idea of the contingent a priori to be a bit dodgy
was Moritz Schlick. Schlick's philosophical views and relativity were extremely well known
after the publication in 1917 of his widely read book, Space and Time in Contemporary Physics,
whose English translation, you will recall, Einstein had helped to arrange. Schlick's
study of the theory of relativity had reinforced his sympathy for his own version of conventionalism.
When Schlick read Reichenbach's 1920 book and found there the idea of the contingent a priori,
he said in effect, wait a minute, what you Reichenbach are calling the contingent a priori
is functionally exactly the same thing that Poincare and I call a convention. What are
these supposedly a priori but changeable organizing principles if not conventional definitions
like the definition of straight line as path of array of light? When you make the a priori
into something contingent, you've wandered too far from Kant to keep the a priori label.
After all, it was vitally important to Kant that the a priori principles upon which science
is based be necessary principles, which means absolutely certain in a way that puts them
beyond the reach of empirical refutation. That's not true of your contingent a priori,
Schlick says to Reichenbach. Wouldn't it be more honest just to call them conventions
and leave it at that Reichenbach quickly conceded Schlick's point where they found themselves
in deep agreement was on this other philosophical insight, which became the bedrock principle
upon which modern logical empiricism was built. Whether you call them a priori principles
or conventional definitions, the crucial thing is that those principles or definitions make
crystal clear the unambiguous lengths between theory and experience. The genius of modern
science as understood by empiricists from Locke to Mach and by physicists from Newton
to Einstein is that it knows how to revise itself in the face of new data, new observations,
new experimental results. Dogma has no place in modern science. We open our eyes and ears,
we read the book of nature, we listen to the song that nature sings, and then we rewrite
our theories to reflect new learning as we probe deeper and wider into the heart of the
atom and out to the edge of the universe. But to know how to rewrite our theories, we
need clear rules to guide us in interpreting what we read and hear. Clarity in the empirical
definitions upon which science rests is the key. It's a sad irony of 20th century philosophy
of science that anti-dogmatic logical empiricism itself evolved all too quickly into a new
philosophical dogma. By the mid-1920s, logical empiricist philosophy of science started to
ossify around a few central doctrines, foremost among which was the so-called verifiability
criterion of meaningfulness, also known as the verificationist principle. It asserts
that the only meaningful statements are those that are true or false for reasons of logic
alone, like the basic principles of mathematics, or those that are demonstrably true or false
on the basis of experience alone, like the central claims of a theory of relativity.
And it was held that the meaning of empirical statements was nothing more than the experience
that confirms or disconfirms them. The logical empiricist granted Poincare's
point about the conventional choice of light ray paths or equivalently a conventional stipulation
about the yardsticks and clocks that we use to measure spatial and temporal relations
directly. For example, it's a matter of convention when I stipulate that by one second I mean
one tick from this specific kind of machine like an atomic clock, or that by one centimeter
I mean the distance between two adjacent marks on this particular kind of ruler, say the
standard platinum meter stick once housed in Paris. So they granted that in a trivial
sense, one could save Euclidean geometry by choosing different conventions regarding
yardsticks and clocks. But they argued that since two such theories were based on the
same observations, and since the only meaning is empirical meaning, the difference between
two such theories could be no more significant than the difference between two languages
or two systems of measuring units. The same empirical truth was expressed in two different
ways. Choosing a different definition cannot change the physical reality described by the
words thus defined. But the logical empiricists disagreed with
Poincare about how to apply the criterion of simplicity in choosing between empirically
equivalent theories. The logical empiricists said that simplicity was a question not just
about geometry alone, but about geometry and physics taken together. Judging in that way,
they argued, relativity theory, even with its implications about the non-Euclidean character
of space, was the hands down winner. On this point, by the way, Einstein wholeheartedly
agreed with Schlick and Reichenbach. It's hard to object to the verifiability criterion
of meaningfulness if all that is meant is that in this way, good science has to be science
that is nimble in responding to new empirical discoveries. It's easy to object when one goes
one step further, as Rudolf Carnap did famously in the early 1930s, arguing that statements
that are not either logically or empirically true or false are therefore cognitively meaningless.
That fully intended the consequence that all that we say when we talk about ethics, about
politics, about art, about religion, that all of this is literally cognitively meaningless.
Such talk might still be valuable, Carnap said, by way of expressing emotional attitudes.
But since such chatter lacked cognitive meaning, it had no bearing on science and was not the
sort of thing about which one could have a truly rational argument. On fairness to
Carnap and those with whom he agreed, what they meant to be saying was that one should
not mistake the ravings of a Hitler about such things as airy and racial purity for
scientific claims. They meant to be opposing irrational dogma with scientific reason and
not demeaning the significance of art and morality. But in the eyes of those who think
that there might be truth to be found in the moral life, the logical empiricists took
a noble quest a bit too far. One of those who already by the mid-1920s thought that
Schlich, Reichenbach, and Carnap were going too far down the wrong path was Einstein.
As we'll see in later lectures, Einstein cared deeply about morality and the aesthetic side
of human experience. He was also far more sympathetic to the place of metaphysics in
science than was Carnap. The intensity of his disagreement with Carnap and positivism
more generally is clear in a letter he wrote in May of 1953 to the editor of a planned
volume of essays on Carnap, a letter in which Einstein declines the invitation to contribute.
The letter is another one of those classic pieces of Einstein prose and so deserves to
be quoted at length. Einstein wrote,
It is a good idea to devote a volume of your collection to Carnap's life's work, but I
cannot comply with your request. That is to say, I have come to terms with this slippery
material from time to time only when my own problems made it urgently necessary. But even
then I have studied only a little literature so that I cannot do justice to the swarm of
incessantly twittering positivistic birdies. Between you and me, I think that the old positivistic
horse, which originally appeared so fresh and frisky, has become a pitiful skeleton
following the refinements that it has perforce gone through and that it has dedicated itself
to a rather arid hair splitting. In its youthful days it nourished itself on the weaknesses
of its opponents. Now it has grown respectable and is in the difficult position of having
to prolong its existence under its own power. Poor thing.
Why Einstein felt so strongly about the direction in which logical empiricism was headed by
the late 1920s, why Einstein parted company with former philosophical friends, and what
philosophy of science he offered instead will be the topic of our next lecture.
