Hello, in this lecture 12 of our Einstein series, we turn our focus away from the physics
and philosophy that have so far been our main concern and look instead at Einstein's engagement
with various of the social and political issues that were to become an ever more prominent
part of his life and work after his arrival in Berlin on the eve of World War One.
As Einstein's growing physics reputation drew him on to a larger public stage, his social
and political involvements expanded as well, encompassing a lonely protest against German
war aims during World War One, an embrace of the Zionist cause in the early 1920s, and
strident advocacy of pacifism and internationalism throughout the 1920s.
Einstein campaigned vigorously on behalf of all of these causes through speeches, writings
and personal involvement in many groups and organizations.
Einstein's commitment to pacifism was put to a test by the rise of fascism in Germany.
Fortunate to be in the United States when Hitler took power in 1933, Einstein never
returned to Germany declaring that he would not live in a country where basic democratic
rights and liberties were not respected.
The once famous pacifist was so appalled by Hitler that he urged resistance from a very
early date.
Einstein's social conscience was awakened early.
In lecture one, we learned about his voluntarily renouncing his German citizenship at the age
of 16 because of his hatred of German militarism.
He eagerly sought Swiss citizenship and proudly kept it to the end of his life, partly because
he so prized the Swiss traditions of neutrality and tolerance.
Liberal political tendencies were no doubt reinforced during Einstein's student life
in the Bohemian cultural environment of Zurich, long a home to political refugees and avant-garde
culture.
Remember that his Zurich friends included the likes of Friedrich Adler, son of the co-founder
of the Austrian Social Democratic Party, and himself later a leader of the party after
his release from prison for assassinating the Austrian minister-president, Count Sturck,
as an active protest during World War I. When Adler was on trial, by the way, Einstein provided
supporting testimony by letter.
In Zurich, Einstein also knew well an old friend of his father, Gustav Meier, who was
the founder and chair of the Swiss Ethical Culture Society and was the person who arranged
for Einstein to take the Athe Ha entrance examination in 1895.
The Ethical Culture Movement was started in New York in 1876, strongly liberal and humanist
in orientation and drawing membership especially from among assimilated, non-religious Jews,
the movement served for many as a kind of surrogate religion with regular Sunday morning
meetings.
It emphasized the role of ethics in individual and public life and encouraged its members
to develop their own individual ethical perspectives.
An often cited example of the movement's influence in the United States is the fact
that the Ethical Culture School in New York City counted among its many famous graduates
J. Robert Oppenheimer, director of the American Atomic Bomb Project and a thinker well known
like Einstein for bringing a deep moral perspective to his scientific work.
In Switzerland and Central Europe, Einstein's friend Meier was one of the more prominent
figures in the Ethical Culture Movement.
While it would be rash to suggest Einstein's having been directly shaped by his relationship
with Meier, the larger context of Meier's friendship with Einstein's father and his
patronage of the young Einstein does tell us something about the moral and political
milieu out of which the young Einstein emerged.
But it was only after Einstein's move to Berlin and the outbreak of World War I in 1914 that
Einstein began to express himself publicly on social and political issues.
Einstein was appalled to find himself back in a Germany at war and he was dismayed to
see even morally principled colleagues like Planck supporting German war aims.
As we learned in lecture nine, it was in late 1914 that Einstein took the somewhat risky
step of co-signing a manifesto to the Europeans, that was its title, that opposed German rationalizations
of the war and upheld a vision of a common European culture.
A few months later, Einstein also joined the Bunt Neues Vaterland, the New Fatherland League,
an organization espousing the cause of internationalism, and he used his Swiss connections to make
contact with other pacifists, such as the French writer Romain Roland, who was living
in exile in Geneva and whom Einstein visited in Switzerland in September 1915 while on
a trip to see his sons.
Einstein knew how to be discreet, but these activities still caught the eye of the Berlin
police.
Fortunately, they judged him to be no serious threat.
The German collapse in November 1918 unleashed radical political change in Germany.
The Kaiser abdicated, a republican government took his place, and short-lived communist-led
revolts broke out in places like Berlin and Munich.
At the same time, right-wing Germans seeking an excuse for Germany's having lost the war
turned their attention to Germany's Jews, sowing the seeds of the virulent anti-Semitism
that would bear such bitter fruit a few years later.
In Lecture 9, we touched upon one curious form that this racial hatred took in the development
of the so-called German physics movement, which vilified Einstein and relativity as
epitomizing the worst tendencies of what was termed Jewish physics.
After the 1922 assassination of Walter Rottenau, a Jewish industrialist who was Einstein's
friend and foreign minister of Germany's new Weimar Republic, the situation grew so grim
that Einstein was forced to retreat from public view for a while.
But Einstein was not intimidated.
If anything, such experience has only reinforced his rapidly developing appreciation for how
he could use the fame his physics earned him to promote the peace and justice he so very
much desired.
After Eddington's Eclipse expedition yielded confirmation of general relativity in the
fall of 1919, there was little that Einstein could really do to stay out of the public
eye.
He had become a truly world-famous figure, not just among scientists, but among the
public at large.
The leaders of the Zionist movement saw here an opportunity.
Einstein had never been a devout Jew, but finding himself part of a vibrant, progressive
Jewish cultural world in a Berlin that was being flooded with Orthodox Jewish refugees
from the East and was seething with anti-Semitic agitation, Einstein for the first time became
acutely aware of himself as a Jew, and he realized that he could use his fame to help
promote the cause of constructing a safe haven for displaced Jews in Palestine.
That is why he said yes when Keim Weizmann asked Einstein to accompany him to the United
States in 1921 on a fundraising tour for the new Hebrew University of Jerusalem whose
cornerstone Einstein was to lay in 1923 during a visit to Palestine.
The roots of the Zionist movement go well back into the 19th century, but in its modern
form the Zionist movement dates from the 1890s and owes its existence to the work mainly
of the Austro-Hungarian journalist Theodor Herzl.
Radicalized by the Dreyfus Affair in France, in which the Jewish Army officer Alfred Dreyfus
was wrongly prosecuted for treason, Herzl published in 1896 an influential book entitled Der Judenstadt,
the Jewish State, and in 1897 he helped to organize the first world Zionist Congress
in Basel, Switzerland.
From that point on the movement actively promoted Jewish immigration to Palestine with the goal
of establishing there a Jewish national state.
Einstein's companion on the 1921 trip Weizmann belonged to the next generation of the Zionist
leadership.
He was born in Russia, educated in Switzerland, and then worked as a chemist in England becoming
well known for the development of industrial fermentation.
In 1917 Weizmann was the behind the scenes architect of the Balfour Declaration, which
committed Great Britain to the establishment of a Jewish national home in Palestine.
In 1919 he negotiated an important agreement on Jewish Arab relations with King Faisal of
Iraq.
He was elected president of the world Zionist Congress in 1920, just one year before accompanying
Einstein to the United States.
The trip to the U.S. was a mixed success from a fundraising point of view.
But the intense publicity surrounding the trip firmly established in the public mind
Einstein's image as not just a physicist, but as a public intellectual speaking out
on behalf of peace and international justice.
The trip was important in other ways as well, and not just because Einstein got to meet
President Harding.
He got to know America a bit, traveling to cities like Boston and Cleveland.
In Princeton, Einstein delivered the lectures that were published in English as the meaning
of relativity.
One of the most important personal rewards of this trip had to be his meeting for the
first time in almost 30 years, his teenage friend and mentor Max Taume, then a physician
practicing ophthalmology in New York.
You'll remember that it was Taume who, while a student in Munich introduced the 12 year
old Einstein to the writings of Kant.
While Einstein never became a formal member of the Zionist movement, for the rest of his
life he lent his support to Zionism, in spite of the possible tension between his endorsement
of Zionist aims and his steadfast opposition to nationalism in any form.
A deep aversion to nationalism was the reason why Einstein was always careful to explain
that he supported what is called cultural Zionism, not national Zionism.
That meant support for Jewish refugees in Palestine and institutions like Hebrew University,
but not support for a Jewish national state.
What Einstein preferred was a moral and spiritual home for Jews in Palestine.
Einstein's sensitivity to the dangers of nationalism sensitized him in particular to the situation
of the Palestinians, as well as that of the Jews in Palestine.
Early in the mid 1920s, Einstein worried that pursuit of a Jewish national state would lead
to conflict with Palestinian Arabs, a worry that was confirmed when serious rioting broke
out in August of 1929, with more than 100 dead and hundreds more injured on each side.
Always the peacemaker, Einstein urged restraint and even interceded on behalf of some Palestinians
whom he thought had been unfairly jailed.
At the same time, he was bluntly critical of Arab leaders whose words and actions had
inflamed an already tense situation, and he had the good sense to direct much of his criticism
toward the British colonial administration in Palestine.
Not only were the British unprepared to deal with conflict on this scale, in the opinion
of Einstein and many others, their policies had made things worse rather than better.
Although Britain had committed itself to the establishment of a Jewish national home in
Palestine in the 1917 Balfour Declaration, Weizmann and other Zionist leaders complained
that there was no consistent and coherent British policy for achieving such a name,
as evidenced by the low quotas the British imposed on Jewish immigration to Palestine.
Political circumstances and a strategically important part of the world left the British
wanting good relations with Abdullah, the emir of Transjordan, and with the dominant Hussaini
clan in Palestine, which perhaps explains the perceived tilt of the British toward the
Arab side in the conflict.
Nazi persecutions after 1933 made still more obvious the need for a Jewish refuge in Palestine.
While himself a refugee, Einstein declined an offer of a position in Jerusalem in 1933,
arguing that such openings should be reserved for more needful younger scientists and scholars.
From his new home in the United States, he continued to do what he could to raise money
and to speak out on behalf of Europe's displaced Jews.
After the partition of Palestine and the establishment of the State of Israel in 1948, Einstein recognized
a feticon plea, but he continued to preach toleration and to focus his energies on growing
the cultural institutions of the new Jewish state.
When Keim Weizmann by then the President of Israel died in 1952, the presidency was offered
to Einstein.
It is no surprise that Einstein, old and in ill health, declined to the relief of many
in Israel, but in declining the offer, he also mentioned his concern that his own reservations
about national Zionism might conflict with the duties of the presidency.
At the time of Einstein's death in April 1955, literally the very last document on which
he was working, it lay unfinished on his desk, was yet another plea for understanding between
Jews and Arabs.
Another cause that Einstein realized his fame would serve was pacifism.
By the late 1920s, he had become the worldwide pacifist movement's most prominent public
voice.
One indication of Einstein's prominence within the pacifist movement is that when he suggested
in a speech in New York in 1930 that the war aims of the major nations would all be thwarted
if but two percent of each nation's citizens refused military service, the custom then
quickly spread of pacifist's wearing buttons that said just that, two percent.
Considering that, since Einstein had introduced the idea, everyone would know what the two
percent slogan meant.
The scale of the pacifist movement in the 1920s might be hard for us to imagine today,
in a world since jaded perhaps desensitized by decades of still more horrific war.
What we today might think of as a naively romantic yearning for a peace that never was
and never could be was viewed by many in the 1920s as the only sane response to the arms
and policies of nation states that had given that generation a vivid lesson in the suffering
wrought by the marriage of old hatred and new technology.
Complete disarmament was the goal of many pacifists.
As late as May of 1932, on the occasion of a disarmament conference in Geneva, Einstein
could be heard saying to the press, quote, war cannot be humanized, it can only be abolished.
In that same year, Einstein and Sigmund Freud prepared a pamphlet entitled Varum Krieg,
Why War?
It contained a correspondence in which Einstein and Freud shared their hopes and fears about
the human nature upon which peace and war are built and discussed the concrete political
steps that would be needed to protect us all from humankind's darker side.
Einstein's sympathy for pacifism was strong and sincere, but he was no fool.
And when Hitler became Chancellor of Germany in 1933, Einstein realized far earlier than
did many world leaders that only a strong military response would protect the world
from Hitler's madness.
Many of Einstein's pacifist allies were deeply disappointed, but Einstein explained that
under the circumstances prevailing after Hitler's ascension to power, the larger causes of peace
and security were now best served by arming for defense.
As we shall see in Lectures 19 and 20, it was this same logic that led Einstein in 1939
to write the letter to President Roosevelt that resulted in the creation of the Manhattan
Project and the atomic bomb.
It's important to stress that in urging armed resistance to Hitler, Einstein did not think
of himself as abandoning his pacifist principles.
He had little faith in the capacity or willingness of German citizens to restrain Hitler.
Remember that at the outbreak of World War I, he had watched in dismay as otherwise reasonable
and decent people like Planck let their loyalty to Germany lead them to endorse propagandistic
pronouncements that Planck, at least, would later regret.
Einstein knew that for peace to prevail, the other nations of Europe and the world would
have to confront Hitler early and that they would have to do that with all necessary military
might.
Worst of all would be the threat to the world if Hitler were to get the atomic bomb before
the Allies had a credible deterrent.
Einstein did not make the same argument after World War II when, in the eyes of many in
the United States, the threat from Hitler's Germany was replaced by the threat from Stalin's
Soviet Union.
In Einstein's eyes, the threat posed by Hitler was unique.
Einstein was not a dupe.
He was under no illusions about life in Stalin's Russia.
But he judged that in the very different circumstances of the Cold War, the cause of peace was better
served not by aggressive military posturing and arms race and the promise of mutual nuclear
annihilation, but by diplomacy, by talking with one's adversaries and by building trust.
Einstein championed pacifism because he wanted to live in a world at peace.
But he knew that world peace also required the establishment of new institutions transcending
the local concerns of individual nations.
Einstein was saddened by how quickly the ideal of an international community of science
died after the outbreak of World War I, and he used his name and influence to try to rebuild
that community after the war ended.
For example, as mentioned in Lecture 9, Einstein was the first prominent German scientist to
make a highly publicized official visit to France after the war in 1922.
With lingering controversy and resentment on both sides, Einstein met with physicist
colleagues and lectured at the Collège de France, but he also asked to visit still
devastated battlefields, an experience that moved him deeply and reconfirmed his opposition
to war.
It was also in 1922 that Einstein joined the new Committee on Intellectual Cooperation
associated with the League of Nations.
This organization was to sponsor scholarly conferences and other commendable initiatives
like the Einstein-Freud correspondence, Why War, mentioned a few moments ago.
Einstein's relationship with the Committee was an on-again, off-again affair.
At first, Einstein was reluctant to join an organization dominated in its early years
by the French.
Einstein worried that his participation might be misperceived at a time of still simmering
tension between Germany and its former enemies.
Einstein accepted the invitation in April 1922 only after his friend, the German Foreign
Minister Walter Rottner, persuaded him that his participation would further the aim of
Germany's reintegration in the community of European nations.
Mind you, this was just two months before Rottner was assassinated.
But less than one year later, in March of 1923, Einstein resigned from the Committee
as a gesture of protest after France and Belgium occupied the Rurr district of Germany,
a coal mining region dense within industry, in January of that year.
Germany's failure to keep up with the huge war reparations payments mandated by the Treaty
of Versailles was the excuse, though it must be remembered that this was the time of the
most severe hyperinflation in Germany, meaning that the German economy was even less capable
of sustaining what would have been ruinous reparations payments, even in better economic
circumstances.
This would not be the last time when the League of Nations proved itself incapable of preventing
member nations from violating the League's own rules, nor would it be the last time when
Einstein expressed his disappointment with the League's failures.
The League's inaction in the face of Japan's invasion of Manchuria in 1931 would provide
Einstein and others with even clearer proof of its inability to prevent war.
The League issued a report condemning the invasion, and Japan withdrew from membership
in the League, but otherwise the world community seemed to favor appeasement rather than resistance.
A new German government in the fall of 1923, a relaxation of the tension between France
and Germany, and Einstein's continuing deep personal commitment to the cause of the international
intellectual community led to his rejoining the Committee on Intellectual Cooperation in
June of 1924.
As it turned out, the occupation of the Roar proved as much a burden as a boon for France,
which withdrew its troops in August of 1925.
But national politics continued to intrude upon the Committee's work, and in 1930, Einstein
resigned for good, having learned an important lesson about the place of idealism in international
affairs.
Disappointed again and again by the failure or inability of the League of Nations to prevent
aggression, by the early 1930s, Einstein had concluded that the only effective way to overcome
the dangers of excessive nationalism was through a world government commanding sufficient military
strength of its own so as to be able to enforce international law.
Advocating such a supranational legislative and judicial structure was a major focus of
Einstein's own contribution to his published correspondence with Freud in 1932.
Einstein understood from the start that effective world government implied the renunciation of
individual national sovereignty.
However radical such an idea might have been at the time, it was consonant with Einstein's
own longstanding aversion to nationalism, and his sense of himself as not being attached
to any particular state or nation.
However unpopular the idea might have been in a world once again steering a steady course
toward war, Einstein was not shy about promoting such a vision.
Einstein's insistence that a transnational authority have sufficient police and military
power to enforce its laws and rulings implied limits to his pacifism even before he surprised
and dismayed his pacifist allies by urging forceful resistance to Hitler.
What happened in 1933 does not therefore represent a dramatic change in Einstein's thinking about
peace and war.
The ground had been prepared by Einstein's already having seen the limitations of a weak
system of international law and is having seen the necessity of force in the service
of peace.
Einstein was surprised as were so many others by the rapid rise to power of the Nazi party
in Germany, but he was not surprised to find the world confronting another challenge to
peace the answer to which might have to be a military one.
Einstein was in fact consistent in his pacifism.
Peace among nations was the paramount concern.
If that could be achieved best by urging resistance to the draft, thereby depriving individual
nations of the military force necessary to impose their individual ambitions on neighboring
states, then urge resistance to the draft.
If marshalling the might of many nations were necessary to check the ambitions of a Hitler,
then urge that course of action.
During the 1930s and early 1940s, Einstein's advocacy of world government was more muted.
Stopping Hitler was obviously a more immediate and overriding task.
But as soon as World War II ended, as the structure of the new United Nations was being
discussed amid high hopes that successful wartime collaboration among the allies could
be a model for a new, more effective world organization, Einstein resumed the argument
for an end to national sovereignty and for equipping a world organization with far more
authority and power than was contemplated by planners of the new United Nations.
Einstein's post-war advocacy of world government found its clearest expression in his promotion
of a new book, The Anatomy of Peace, by Emery Reeves.
Einstein had known Reeves already in Berlin in the early 1930s, when under his original
Hungarian name, Imre Reves, he ran a remarkable organization known as the Cooperation Press
Service.
The idea behind the Cooperation Press Service was to recruit a group of political and intellectual
leaders from all around the world to write articles on the major issues of the day for
publication in newspapers in other countries.
In this way, it was hoped the cause of international understanding could be advanced by bringing
the views of prominent and influential figures to readers outside of their home countries.
To us today, the idea might seem naively idealistic.
At the time, it was a successful enterprise.
Reeves had indeed recruited distinguished authors such as Britain's later wartime prime
minister Winston Churchill and the German novelist Thomas Mann.
Einstein and Reeves seemed first to have met in connection with the 1932 Geneva Disarmament
Conference, and Reeves was later Einstein's guest at his summer house in Kaput.
Reeves sent Einstein a copy of The Anatomy of Peace in the summer of 1945.
Einstein was deeply impressed, finding in the book a compelling argument for exactly
the same form of world government he had been espousing for more than a decade.
He volunteered his energies in promoting the book and its plan.
In private correspondence and in concert with others, he urged that the book be read as
widely as possible.
Most conspicuous in this publicity campaign for Reeves' book was a letter to the New York
Times on October 10, 1945 that Einstein signed along with 19 other prominent individuals,
including former Supreme Court Justice Owen Roberts, Congressman J. William Fulbright,
Senator Claude Pepper, University of Chicago philosopher Mortimer Adler, and Thomas Mann.
In Einstein's eyes, the publication of Reeves' book was especially timely given the debate
then gathering momentum over the post-war control of atomic energy and atomic weapons.
Would the United States and its allies seek to maintain a monopoly on atomic weapons technology?
Would a system be devised for international control of atomic energy?
We will discuss Einstein's central role in that debate more extensively in lecture 20.
In the context of our present discussion, what is important is that, from Einstein's
point of view, nothing demonstrated the need for world government more than the power inherent
in the possession of the atomic bomb.
In 1945, even the sharing of knowledge and control among nations was for Einstein inadequate
since it still deferred to the old model of sovereign nations.
Einstein thought that in the atomic age, peace and security were achievable only if atomic
energy were under the control of a truly supranational government.
Advocating world government was only one of many issues to which Einstein the humanitarian
devoted himself after his arrival in the United States.
As we will see in lecture 21, a new country confronted Einstein with new challenges ranging
from racism and the struggles of the labor movement to the persecutions of the McCarthy
era.
But to these new challenges, Einstein would bring the same basic moral outlook and the
same clear-headed sense of his power to persuade achieved through the fame that his science
had brought him.
