Music
Welcome back.
As we reach the halfway point
in our lectures on Einstein, we pause,
turning our attention away from Einstein
the well-known public figure,
the physicist, the philosopher,
the humanitarian,
and take a look at two somewhat more
private enthousiasms,
invention and music.
Both are interesting in their own right
and important for forming a complete
picture of Einstein the whole person.
But as we will see,
there is something of the inventor
and the musician also in Einstein
the theoretical physicist.
Invention and music were significant
parts of Einstein's life from a very
early age.
We talked earlier about Einstein's
having grown up among machines and
engineers. The electrotechnical
firm run by his father and uncle
made electrical power generating
and distribution systems.
For part of the family's time in Munich,
their home was on the grounds of the factory,
meaning that the young Einstein
had easy access to the machine shop
and studio.
Einstein's uncle Jakob, the engineer,
was a patent holder.
Already in his teens, Einstein himself
was occasionally asked for help in solving
technical problems with which the firm
was wrangling. And once or twice,
he surprised even uncle Jakob
with his quick technical intelligence.
A job in a patent office
was not at all unsuited to a young
man with such experience.
And this earlier immersion in engineering
shows us that it wasn't just
what Elon Einstein had in the patent
office that aroused his interest in
invention.
The young Einstein also grew up with
music, mastering the violin
at an early age. It was his mother
Paulina, especially, who encouraged
his study of music and made music
an important part of the household.
It can't all have been as bad as
might have been suggested by that
story of his throwing a chair in
anger at his violin teacher.
For as we shall see in later years,
nothing gave Einstein as much joy
as his violin.
Even as a young student in Zurich, Einstein
turned to his violin for diversion from
his studies, and for the rest of his life
he sought the company of people who shared
his passion for music.
Let's now take a closer look
at both of these extra
curricular passions starting
with Einstein, the inventor.
In the popular
mind, Einstein is the epitome
of the ivory tower intellectual.
We all know those pictures of Einstein
in later years with the wild, white
hair and often a faraway look in his
eyes, add his simple
clothes and unassuming manner,
and one can easily think that
if ever disembodied intellect
took a human form,
this is how it would appear.
One sometimes sees him chalk in hand
at a blackboard, but one almost never
sees an image of Einstein in which
he's associated directly with technology.
Legendary
to say, Einstein was
famous for disregarding instructions
and doing things his own way,
sometimes with literally explosive
consequences.
I'd like to think that he was as much
of a klutz in the laboratory as I was
when I was a student.
But let's stop and think a minute.
Surely the important thing to note
is that Einstein wanted to do
those experiments his own way,
and that his occasional missteps
did not always do well in
his ability to invent his own approach.
However lacking
in skill he might have been,
Einstein loved to tinker.
Examples of Einstein's
love of inventiveness abound
and from an early date.
While still working at the patent
office in Bern, Einstein joined
with Conrad Hobbitt, his
Olympia Academy friend,
and Conrad's brother Paul
in the design and construction
of a device they called the
Machinchen, the little machine
in German, this for the
amplification and measurement
of small electrical potentials.
Einstein wasn't just the theorist
in this collaboration, he cared
about the tiniest engineering details
and fussed about the precise properties
of different materials
employed in its manufacture.
A 1910 paper about the device
published by the Hobbitt brothers
in the Physikollische Zeitschrift,
a major German physics journal,
credits the design to Einstein.
The Machinchen was not a commercial
success, quickly superseded
by more accurate instruments,
and only three examples are known
still to survive. But ironically
an Einstein Hobbitt
Machinchen was employed around 1920
by the German experimental
physicist Walter Gerlach
in an experiment suggested by Einstein
himself, an experiment related
to the photoelectric effect.
One of Einstein's next
inventions surprises everyone
upon first hearing about it.
During World War I, Einstein
the famous pacifist, the Einstein
who was meeting other pacifist clandestinely
in Switzerland and signing
manifestos opposing German war
aims, that same
Einstein had an idea for a new
airfoil design, a new aircraft wing
that he shared with the German military.
It was an odd shape
with a kind of a hump in the middle of the wing.
A prototype of the Einstein
wing was actually tested, but nearly
killed the test pilot, to whom
Einstein apologized in a note
in which he blamed his error on
thinking too much and reading too
little, by which he presumably meant
that he was not well read in aerodynamics.
From a
financial point of view, Einstein's
most successful venture into the realm
of invention, grew out of his
work at the patent office.
In 1914, the German firm
of Amschutz-Kenthe, remembering
Einstein's earlier patent work,
recruited Einstein as an
expert witness in a patent
infringement suit involving
the American firm of Elmer Sperry
over the design of the gyro compass.
Amschutz-Kenthe
later retained Einstein as a consultant,
a relationship that provided
Einstein with much needed extra
income during the lean times
of hyperinflation in Germany
in the early 1920s.
But Einstein returned the favor
with a crucial suggestion about an
electromagnetic means for floating
the gyro compass in a friction
free manner. This design
found a worldwide market.
There is here the same irony
as with the Einstein wing, in that
one of the principal employments of the
Amschutz-Kenthe gyro compass
is the inertial guidance of submarines
and other ships of war
at sea.
During the 1920s, Einstein also
did consulting work and provided
a testimony in patent cases for
A. A. Gay, the
Allgemeine Elektrischegesellschaft
the German General Electric Company.
A. A. Gay had been founded
in 1883 by Amiel Eratenau,
father of Einstein's
friend, the German Foreign Minister
Walter Eratenau, who had
himself succeeded his father as the
head of A. A. Gay shortly before
his assassination in 1922.
An irony in Einstein's
association with A. A. Gay
is that it was one of the firms whose
competition drove the
Einstein Brothers Company out of business
in Munich 25 years
earlier.
Another one of Einstein's inventions in the
1920s had no obvious
military application.
Starting in 1927
Einstein and Leo Zallard,
the man who would later prod Einstein
into signing the letter to President
Roosevelt that inaugurated the American
Atomic Bomb Project,
Einstein and Zallard took out a series
of joint patents
for an innovative refrigerator design
with no moving parts.
An electromagnetic pump
was used to generate the pressure
changes that drove the refrigeration
cycle, with butane as
the refrigerant. The chief advantage
of the Einstein-Zallard design
was that it was quiet, especially
by contrast with the clunky mechanical
refrigerators then dominating
the market. In 1931
Einstein and Zallard pitched their design
to an American firm, and then
they sold the rights to A. A. Gay
which built a prototype.
But in the end, the Einstein-Zallard
refrigerator was even less successful
commercially than the Einstein
hobbit machinist had been.
By the way, in lecture 19
I'm going to tell you about a truly
remarkable patent that Zallard
took out himself in the 1930s.
Forgive my being a bit coy for now,
but stay tuned.
Even less well known
than the Einstein-Zallard refrigerator
patent is the patent
awarded in 1936
to Einstein and his friend, Dr.
Gustav Bucky, for the design
of a light intensity
self-adjusting camera.
Bucky and Einstein had met earlier
in Berlin, where Bucky trained as a physician,
had become well known
for research on medical x-ray techniques.
The camera that he invented
with Einstein uses a photoelectric
cell to gauge the intensity
of incoming light
and then move a celluloid screen
of variable transparency
behind the aperture so as to
regulate the intensity of the light
reaching the film.
The photo cell was in wide use by this time
in devices such as light meters.
The Einstein-Bucky innovation
concerned the photo cells being used
to control the positioning of the celluloid screen.
Remember, of course,
that it was Einstein who in 1905
first gave the correct theoretical
explanation of the photoelectric effect
and recall our talking about
the fact that even back then
it was the needs of industry that
largely drove laboratory work
on phenomena like the photoelectric effect.
We come full circle
as Einstein, the theorist,
himself now puts to practical use
a phenomenon he had explained
31 years earlier.
The same engineer's
mentality that Einstein
brought to his work as an inventor
also helped him in his collaborations
with experimentalists.
This is yet another side of Einstein
that must be kept in view to counter
the misleading image of him as just ahead
in the cloud's theoretical physicist.
Let's consider some examples.
Remember the story of Erwin Freundlich's
planned eclipse observations
in 1914 to test
General Relativity's prediction
of the bending of light near the sun.
Remember that those observations
never occurred because Freundlich was
interned by the Russians as an enemy
alien at the outbreak of World War I.
Einstein was deeply
involved in the preparations
for Freundlich's expedition.
Einstein had helped raise funds for the project
but he also worked closely
with Freundlich beforehand
to get clear about many of the
fussy technical details
of what was actually a rather complicated
observation.
A couple of years later
Einstein worked closely
with Wander Johannes De Haas,
the son-in-law of Hendrik Lorenz
to demonstrate a remarkable phenomenon
now called the Einstein-De Haas effect
for which the two of them received a prize
from the Vienna Academy of Sciences
in 1917.
In the Einstein-De Haas effect
one induces rotation
in a ferromagnetic material
such as an iron bar
suspended on a thread
by sending an electrical current
from the coil surrounding the bar.
A correct theoretical understanding
of the effect had to await
the quantum theory's revelation
10 years later of a deep connection
between mechanical angular momentum,
the momentum of the spinning body
and the property of electrons
and other subatomic particles
called spin, now just a metaphor
or intrinsic angular momentum.
But there is a sense
in which Einstein was here
still extracting lessons
from the electrical engineering thought experiment
that opened the 1905 Relativity paper
where Einstein wondered
why it should make a difference
whether one generated a current in a coil
by turning the coil
or turning the magnet it surrounded.
Remember Einstein arguing
that all that mattered was the relative motion
of the magnet and the coil?
Well, here we have sort of the converse
of that effect.
Apply a current to the coil
that generates a magnetic field
of the electrons in the iron bar
and then sets the bar spinning.
Yet another experimental collaboration
will be important in connection
with our discussion in lecture 15
of Einstein's ever more critical attitude
toward quantum mechanics
in the later 1920s.
Remember it's being mentioned in lecture 3
that Einstein's misgivings about the quantum theory
had to do with the phenomenon
now called entanglement,
the curious property of photons
and elementary particles
that has them behaving as if they weren't
really independent of one another.
We now know that entanglement
shows itself most clearly
in the unexpectedly strong correlations
between elementary particles
first exhibited in the 1960s
in what's called Bell's theorem.
We'll talk about that briefly in lecture 17.
But the first hints
of these unexpectedly strong quantum correlations
were already emerging in the mid-1920s.
It was then that Einstein worked with Walter Bota,
his colleague in Berlin,
and a master of precise electronic coincidence
counting techniques
on the design of experiments to probe correlations
between interacting quantum mechanical systems.
If Einstein and Bota had possessed the needed tools
for a correct theoretical understanding
of quantum correlations,
these experiments could have been downright revolutionary.
As it was, the experiments still revealed
Einstein's keen sense of,
to use an expression I used once before,
where the bone is buried,
and they yielded other more modest dividends
in helping to rule out some early alternatives
to what would emerge as the new quantum mechanics
of Schrödinger and Heisenberg.
Einstein's long history of engagement
with invention and experiment
should prepare us not to be surprised
when, prevented from working on the atomic bomb
in World War II by unfounded doubts about his loyalty,
Einstein was instead approached by the U.S. Navy
to consult on problems of torpedo detonation.
It wasn't just Einstein's eagerness to do his part
in defeating Hitler that led him to say yes.
Here was another opportunity
to let his engineer's brain get some exercise.
One might be tempted to regard Einstein's tinkering
as a kind of mental recreation,
having little or nothing to do with his serious work in physics.
But might that be a mistake?
Might there be a deeper relationship
between Einstein's extraordinary inventiveness
in fundamental physics,
and the habits of mind of the inventor?
When one digs deeply into an episode,
like Einstein's eight-year quest
for a general theory of relativity,
where his decades-long struggle
to understand the riddle of the quantum world,
one sees Einstein the tinkerer there, too.
He tries this, he tries that.
Very this assumption, very that assumption.
See what the consequences might be.
Does one lack a first principle's understanding of something?
Very well.
Borrow a partial analogy from elsewhere.
And above all, always start with a clear picture.
If we wrongly think that the mind of the engineer
is so very different from the mind of the theoretical physicist,
even more so might we think
that the mind of the musician works differently.
But we'll find that the musician's mind
was as much involved in Einstein's physics
as was the inventor's mind.
Einstein could play the piano, his mother's instrument,
but his favorite instrument was the violin.
He was not good enough to have had a concert career,
but he was good enough to impress many people,
including a visiting music inspector
at the Cantonal School in Aarau,
who heard Einstein play an adagio
from a Beethoven sonata.
He gave charity performances,
and he loved playing music with friends.
It was through an amateur music group in Zurich, for example,
that Einstein first met his lifelong friend Michele Besso.
Mozart was said to be his favorite composer,
but he also liked Bach and Beethoven.
Intimate chamber music of the kind he could play by himself
or with a small group of friends
gave him the greatest pleasure.
Music for violin and piano filled the air
in the Leidenholm of Einstein's closest physicist friend,
Paul Ehrenfest, where Einstein was a frequent guest.
It has been said that the one piece of music
he enjoyed more than any other
was Mozart's E minor sonata for violin and piano.
Would you like to hear a little bit of it?
Try to picture Einstein on the violin
and Ehrenfest at the piano.
Music
Isn't that sublime?
We were listening to a 1937 Columbia recording
where the famed Hungarian violinist Josef Ziggity
and the pianist Nikita Magalov.
Einstein always brought his violin with him wherever he traveled.
He played with other passengers on transatlantic cruises.
Playing music together is what cemented the friendship
between Einstein and the Queen of Belgium,
the relationship that made possible his finding a refuge
in Belgium in the summer of 1933 after Hitler took power.
Music opened many such doors for Einstein
and gave him many friends.
For example, it was music that led to Einstein's friendship
with the African-American soprano, Marian Anderson,
about which we'll talk in lecture 21.
Music provided Einstein with images and metaphors.
A precious example, given the long and tough debate
between Einstein and Niels Bohr over quantum mechanics,
came in 1949 when, in his intellectual autobiography,
Einstein said of Bohr's work, quote,
the highest form of musicality in the realm of thought.
Some might have read that as a subtle dig,
especially those who pretended to find Bohr's writings obscure
and the verbal style of his scientific lectures off-putting.
But music was too important to Einstein
to be used in a way that demeaned the music
as well as the target of presumed attack.
Einstein was always straightforward in his criticisms,
but more than once he praised Bohr's insight
and respected his achievements.
For Einstein to compare Bohr's work to the highest form of musicality
is the highest form of praise.
Like the ancient Pythagoreans,
who taught that the numerical harmonies embodied in music
were the basis of all reality,
Einstein was tempted to think, as we've already discussed,
that an essentially musical or aesthetic notion
of harmony or simplicity was the surest guide to truth
in Reckondite realms of fundamental physics.
The late 16th and early 17th century astronomer Johannes Kepler
made popular the Pythagorean idea of the harmony of the spheres
as an image for the precise mathematical regularities
that were being revealed in the motions of the planets
at the threshold of the modern era.
With equal justice, one can see Einstein as a thinker
who hears the celestial music
as he writes the new symphony of time, space and gravitation.
There might even be a spiritual dimension
to Einstein's appreciation of music.
In lecture 22, when we discuss Einstein's notion of cosmic religion,
we'll ponder the influence on Einstein
of the 19th century neocontain, Arthur Schopenhauer,
who will also make an appearance
when we resume our discussion of Einstein and quantum mechanics.
But now's the time for our first serious introduction
to one of Einstein's favorite philosophers.
Schopenhauer was, by some accounts,
the single most widely read philosopher
of the latter 19th and early 20th centuries.
Schopenhauer was frustrated
with a world that denied him the career for which he yearned.
Hegel's lectures in Berlin
have improved far more popular than Schopenhauer's.
His steadily deepening alienation
seeped into his writings and made him a voice,
especially for alienated middle-class young people.
The list of thinkers, artists and writers
for whom Schopenhauer was important is a long one,
including the likes of Friedrich Nietzsche,
Ludwig Wittgenstein and Thomas Mann.
Scientists were equally numerous among Schopenhauer's fans.
Two of those fans were Erwin Schrodinger,
the discoverer of wave mechanics,
and Wolfgang Pauli, who discovered atomic spin,
which was mentioned a moment ago
in connection with the Einstein-De Haas effect.
Among Schopenhauer's many legacies
was his having been the person who did the most
in the 19th century Europe
to popularize the ancient Indian religious
and philosophical tradition known as Vedanta.
It is said that after reading Schopenhauer,
Erwin Schrodinger taught himself Sanskrit
so that he could read the Upanishads,
the basic Vedantic scriptures, in the original.
Schopenhauer's own philosophical borrowings
from the Vedanta are crucial to our story.
Central to the Vedantic tradition
is the idea that the world of our everyday experience
is a world of illusion separated from a deeper reality
by a barrier described metaphorically as the veil of Maya,
Maya being the Indian deity who maintains this world of illusion.
On this side of the veil of Maya
reigns division and duality.
On the other side, all is one.
Schopenhauer grafted this Vedantic notion
onto Immanuel Kant's distinction
between what Kant called the phenomenal and numinal realms.
In Kant's philosophy, the phenomenal realm
is the world as it appears to us.
The structure of that appearance being fixed
by necessary a priori forms
and categories like space, time and causality.
For Kant, the numinal realm, the world in itself
is not an object of possible knowledge,
though it is the realm of ultimate reality.
To this mix of Kant and Vedanta,
Schopenhauer added his most important idea
that the only way in which one might have a chance
of catching a glimpse into the numinal realm
or behind the veil of Maya was through aesthetic experience.
Ordinary scientific rationality
and everyday perceptual experience
are constrained to work only on this side of the veil
in the phenomenal realm of division and disunity.
Only aesthetic experience has a chance
of giving us a fleeting look at the deeper unity beyond.
And for Schopenhauer, it was music above all
that had this power.
Of course, there is a strongly mystical aspect
to Schopenhauer's thinking at this point,
but it's not the rationalistic mysticism of the Gnostics,
for whom the path to divine truth
led through rigorous mental discipline
and the highest possible development of one's powers of reason.
Schopenhauer's mysticism is that of a romantic.
Einstein was reading Schopenhauer already as a young man.
In September 1901, in a letter to his friend
and future collaborator Marcel Grossmann,
he strongly recommends Schopenhauer's
aphorismensurlabensvaiheit, aphorisms on life's wisdom.
And a few months later, in a December letter to Malava,
written at what had to be one of the lowest points
in his young life, about to lose a temporary job
and about to become the father of an illegitimate daughter,
Einstein wryly compares his own situation
to that of the miserable and misanthropic Schopenhauer.
Many of Einstein's later writings
resonate with hallmark Schopenhauerian images,
like the lonely wanderer on the mountaintop.
Friends and acquaintances recall Einstein's reading
and rereading his favorite well-thumbed edition
of Schopenhauer's collected writings.
There are many reasons why Schopenhauer would have appealed
to both the young and the old Einstein.
Einstein's notion of cosmic religion
borrows from Schopenhauer,
as do his more basic views on the nature of morality.
In brief, a rigid determinism absolves us of moral guilt
in our everyday lives on this side of the Vale of Maya,
whereas ultimately we are all part of one deep unity
on the other side.
But more than anywhere else,
it is in his offering a way to theorize the place
of music and human experience
to see Schopenhauer's greatest service to Einstein.
It is music, more than any other human activity,
that can carry us beyond the Vale of Maya
to ultimate reality, where the deepest unity is to be found.
When then we find Einstein turning to metaphors
of harmony and interperfection
to talk about that ultimately ineffable quality of simplicity
by which we choose a scientific path
at those points beyond which scientific reason
and experience cannot take us.
At these points, do you hear the voice of Schopenhauer?
When Elsa Einstein recalls the way in which Albert,
deep in thought, would wander out of his study,
play a few chords on the piano,
and then wander back to his scientific work,
I see the Einstein for whom music,
as Schopenhauer understood it,
was not just a hobby or a diversion,
but was in fact the center of it all.
How important was music to Einstein?
He said it best himself in a 1929 interview,
quote, if I were not a physicist,
I would probably be a musician.
I often think in music.
I live my daydreams in music.
I see my life in terms of music.
I get most joy in life out of my violin.
I often think in music.
What does that mean?
Earlier when talking about Einstein's habit
of working from vivid, visualizable thought experiments,
we talked about his reporting that he usually first thought
about a scientific problem in pictures,
and only later translated the pictures into words.
Now he reports that he thinks in music.
If we wish, we can brush this all off
as proof of what happens even to a great mind
when it strays beyond the boundaries of its competence.
Be quiet, Einstein.
Stick to your physics.
But I choose to do otherwise.
I choose to take Einstein seriously
as I think he wanted us to understand him.
I have something of an idea of what it means
to think in pictures.
You do too.
Think about how you imagine the chess board,
two or three moves further along.
You're not calculating all of the probabilities
with their associated risks and gains
like IBM's champion chess playing computer Deep Blue.
You're looking at a picture with your mind's eye.
You're watching the chess pieces move.
You see that incautious night being taken by a lurking pawn.
Yes, I have something of an idea
of what it means to think in pictures.
I have less of a grasp on what it means to think in music.
But there are moments when I lose myself
in contemplating an image that I associate
with Einstein's universe.
What does it feel like to try to catch a beam of light?
How do two photons feel one another's presence
over a vast distance in such a way
to lose their separate identities?
What would I see and feel
if I passed through an event horizon
into a black hole from which I could never emerge again?
Sometimes, when I let my mind wander in such an image,
there will come a moment when, not literally,
but with my mind's ear,
I'll hear the music of the spheres,
and then it's gone.
The highest form of musicality in the realm of thought.
That's how Einstein described Bohr's achievements
in understanding the world of the quantum.
Let's all listen for that music
when, in the next lecture,
we take up again our long-deferred discussion
of Einstein's own struggles
with the puzzles of the quantum world.
