Hello, and welcome to lecture 14 in our Einstein series.
Way back in lecture 3, we began our discussion of Einstein's contributions to the development
of the quantum theory, which, along with relativity, is the other truly revolutionary
new theory upon which all of 20th century physics was to be based.
Up to a point, one can distinguish them by thinking of the quantum theory as our framework
for understanding the micro world, from atoms and photons to quarks and the elusive Higgs
boson, whereas relativity is our framework for understanding the world on a cosmic scale,
from black holes to the Big Bang.
In lecture 3, we focused on Einstein's 1905 paper on the photoelectric effect, where he
introduced the concept of light quantum, or photons, and its immediate aftermath.
Most importantly, Einstein's early musings about wave particle duality as a way to explain
two or more photons failing to behave exactly like mutually independent atoms of light.
Now we resume the story of Einstein and the quantum.
This lecture focusing on Einstein's pivotal contributions between 1905 and 1927, by which
time quantum mechanics had finally been given its modern mathematical formulation in Werner
Heisenberg's Matrix Mechanics and Aaron Schrodinger's Wave Mechanics.
We will pay special attention to Einstein's efforts to understand this curious way in
which two identical quantum systems, such as two photons, lose their separate identities
in a phenomenon now understood as a species of the more general feature of the quantum
world known as entanglement.
The clue to solving the riddle came in 1924 in a paper by a previously unknown Indian
physicist, S. N. Bose, who showed that elementary particles like photons obey a new quantum
statistics, meaning that literally one must count elementary particles in a different way
from the way in which classical physics counts things.
When Einstein realized in 1927 that quantum entanglement would be such a deep and lasting
feature of the quantum theory, he shifted from being a supporter of the new theory to
being its most thoughtful critic.
Those criticisms will be among the subjects discussed in Lectures 15 and 17.
Let's start by recalling some of what we discussed toward the end of Lecture 3.
While that, as soon as Einstein introduced the idea of independent light quanta in 1905,
he noted that this way of modeling radiation was strictly valid only for the limiting case
of very high frequency radiation.
In general, therefore, the assumption of the mutual independence of light quanta would
not be strictly valid.
Here was yet another fact about the micro world that made no sense from a classical
point of view, because it violated the classical principle of separability, according to which
two physical systems situated in different parts of space always possess their own separate
and independent physical realities in such a way that combining them yields a whole that
is nothing but the sum of its parts.
The failure of independence of two photons, first glimpsed in 1905, hinted at the quantum
world's being very different from the world of classical physics.
In the quantum world, there would be holes, like pairs of photons that are importantly
different from the sum of their parts.
The problem was how to explain the manner in which quanta would fail to exhibit mutual
independence.
In 1909, Einstein borrowed the idea of the interference of waves from field theories
like Maxwell's Electrodynamics.
He suggested that each photon was accompanied by something like a wave field, like ripples
in a pool, and that the interference of two such wave fields, when they overlapped, accounted
for the non-classical failure of independence of quanta.
The result was a picture of photons as being, as it were, two-faced.
The higher the frequency of the photons, the more they appear independent of one another,
hence more particle light.
The lower the frequency of the photons, the more they appear to interfere with one another,
hence more wave-like.
Not until after the development of Schrödinger's wave mechanics and Heisenberg's matrix
mechanics in the mid-1920s would the precise nature of this non-classical two-faced behavior
become clear when Bohr introduced in 1927 the concept of complementarity in quantum
mechanics, about which we will speak in the next lecture.
But already in 1909, Einstein had invented the idea that would later be known as wave
particle duality.
In 1913, Niels Bohr introduced the quantum model of atomic structure.
According to Bohr, electrons revolve around a tiny nucleus in discrete orbits, sometimes
jumping instantaneously from higher, more energetic orbits to lower, less energetic orbits,
or vice versa, with the emission or absorption of photons whose frequency or energy corresponds
to the difference in energy between those orbits.
Once again, the emerging picture of the quantum world was inconsistent with classical physics,
which had no place for discontinuities like discrete electron orbits and instantaneous
quantum leaps.
But the Bohr model of the atom explained atomic spectra so accurately that there had
to be some truth in it.
The term atomic spectra refers to the characteristic colored bands at specific wavelengths that
appear when, say, one burns a substance.
This is called an emission spectrum, or the dark bands that appear when one passes white
light through a vapor of that substance.
This is called an absorption spectrum.
The dark bands in the absorption spectrum for a substance appear at exactly the same
places in the spectrum, exactly the same wavelengths as the colored bands in an emission
spectrum.
That the spectral lines, as the darker colored bands are called, always appear in exactly
the same place in the spectrum, and that each element has its own distinctive set of such
spectral lines were facts too striking to be accidents.
They had to be signs of some deep reality inside the atom.
Bohr explained the spectra by showing that each spectral line, each colored or dark band,
corresponded to one of the possible transitions when an electron jumped to a higher orbit
upon absorbing a photon with a specific frequency, or emitted a photon of the same frequency when
jumping down again.
The Bohr model of the atom also explained how, in the photoelectric effect, light striking
a conducting metallic surface could liberate electrons, thereby producing an electrical
current.
Thanks to Bohr, we now understood that when an electron in an atom absorbed a photon
of a sufficiently high frequency, which meant a sufficiently energetic photon, it could
jump not just to a higher orbit, but out of the atom altogether.
And yet, Bohr's idea of quantum jumps, these electrons just suddenly hopping from a higher
to a lower or lower to a higher orbit, caused as many problems as it cured.
For again, it made no intuitive sense.
But that Bohr was on to something here, was demonstrated yet again when he and other physicists
refined the model by such tricks as introducing not just circular but elliptical electron
orbits, and so explained even more subtle details of atomic spectra.
It was Einstein who first pointed physicists toward a clearer understanding of what was
really going on in what we call the Bohr atom.
And what he suggested was, once again, something revolutionary.
What was so puzzling about quantum jumps in the Bohr atom is that there was no rhyme or
reason to them, exactly why they happened, when they happened, for that Bohr could give
no reason.
But in July of 1916, just eight months after completing his work on general relativity,
Einstein's ever fertile mind made one of those brilliant moves that tempt us to talk
of genius.
In effect, Einstein took the very feature of the Bohr model that was most puzzling,
the seemingly random nature of quantum jumps, and made that a fundamental principle.
More specifically, Einstein associated a numerical coefficient with each kind of possible transition,
the spontaneous emission of a photon, the spontaneous absorption of a photon, and emissions
stimulated by absorption.
He interpreted these transition coefficients as representing the probability of that kind
of transition.
And then he showed in a stunningly elegant and brief derivation that simply assuming
these transition probabilities was enough to derive the Planck formula for black body
radiation.
Remember that was the challenge, explaining the black body radiation spectrum that first
led to Planck's introduction of the quantum hypothesis in 1900.
It was another Einstein tour de force.
It was revolutionary in that it was the first time in the history of physics when probability
was taken to be something fundamental.
Of course, probability had been playing an ever greater role in physics since Maxwell
and Boltzmann used statistical methods to such advantage in explaining thermal phenomena.
But this was different.
Maxwell and Boltzmann thought about probability and statistics the way most of us do, as expedience
to which we turn when we're ignorant of the micro-physical details.
Boltzmann would have said that a superhuman intelligence, one capable of knowing the positions
and momenta of each of the billions of molecules in a gas, and one capable of doing lightning
quick calculations would have no need for statistics.
We finite minds use probability and statistics to paper over our ignorance.
But Einstein was suggesting that probabilities themselves might have to be regarded as fundamental
basic physical properties of atomic systems.
To be really careful about the history, one must note that it was still an open question
whether a still deeper physical explanation of those transition probabilities could be
given.
After Schrödinger and Heisenberg gave quantum mechanics its classic mathematical formulation
in 1925 and 1926, most physicists would say that the answer is no, that quantum mechanics
has taught us that nature is objectively indeterministic at the most basic level, such
that even a superhuman intelligence would be forced to think in terms of probabilities.
While that was not known for sure in 1916, Einstein's transition probabilities stood
there nevertheless as seemingly fundamental, brute facts about the behavior of the Bohr
atom.
As you probably know, there's irony here, for as we will discuss in the next lecture,
Einstein was quickly to become famous for denying that quantum mechanics could be a fundamental
physical theory, in part precisely because it was indeterministic, precisely because
it did take probability as a physically basic feature of nature.
But that was ten years later, Einstein was not yet done with inciting revolution.
A still more radical idea emerged from Einstein's restless mind in 1924 with the introduction
of Bose-Einstein statistics.
The Indian physicist, S. N. Bose, surprised Einstein when he sent him an original and
elegant derivation of the Planck-Blackbody radiation formula based upon a new kind of
statistics for photons.
Einstein was so impressed that he arranged for the paper's translation into German and
its publication in the Zeitschrift Physik, the Journal of Physics, one of the premier
German physics journals.
Einstein also realized, more or less immediately, that Bose's idea could be extended to material
particles like electrons, and he saw that it offered the first real clue about how both
photons and now even material particles are not strictly independent in the quantum realm.
The basic idea is best illustrated with a diagram or picture simple enough so that you
can construct it with your mind's eye.
Think about two particles and two places where each or both together can be located.
The technical term for these places is called as cells in a phase space, but don't worry
about the technical vocabulary.
It will do for now to think about just two boxes.
For the moment, we'll name the particles Particle A and Particle B, and we'll call the boxes
Box 1 and Box 2.
Now we ask how we can distribute the two particles among the two cells or boxes.
According to classical physics, as in Boltzmann's statistical mechanics, there are four possibilities.
You can put both particles in either one of the boxes, or one each in both boxes.
More specifically, the four possibilities are these.
Both particles A and B can go in Box 1.
Next possibility, we can put A in Box 1 and B in Box 2.
Third possibility, we can reverse that.
We can put B in Box 1 and A in Box 2, and then the fourth possibility, we can put both
particles A and B in Box 2.
Got that?
Okay.
What next?
Second practice is to assign equal probabilities to those four possibilities, which means
assuming that each of the possibilities has a one in four chance of being realized.
Or as we say, the probability of each of these four cases is one fourth.
Okay.
Now for the crucial question, if each of the possibilities has a one in four chance of
being realized, what is the probability that we find both particles in one of the boxes
without bothering about which of the boxes that is?
That's actually a simple problem, the answer to which you can work out in your head.
There are two options.
Both particles can be in Box 1, or both particles can be in Box 2.
Each of those options has a probability of one quarter.
To get the probability of the two particles being found in one or the other of the boxes,
add those two single case probabilities together.
The answer is one half.
That is to say that there is a one in two chance of finding the particles together in
one or another of the two boxes.
That was an easy calculation of exactly the same kind you make when you figure the odds
of rolling a seven in craps or drawing two cards to fill out an inside straight in poker.
What can any of this possibly have to do with the secrets of the quantum realm?
Here comes the kicker.
Rosa and Einstein noticed that this way of arranging the cases to which we assign our
probabilities is based on the assumption that the two particles are distinguishable, as
we say.
To say that the two particles are distinguishable is to say that one can, as it were, attach
labels to them that allow us to follow them around individually, as we did when we named
them particle A and particle B.
What if we assume that the particles are indistinguishable and take away the labels?
If we can't name the particles, if the particles are indistinguishable, then it turns out that
we are left with only three possibilities, not four.
Those possibilities are as follows.
Two particles can be in box one.
Notice I'm not using the names or labels anymore.
Two particles can be in box one.
Third possibility, one particle in box one and one particle in box two.
Third possibility, two particles in box two.
Did you follow that?
If we can't distinguish the particles, then we can't tell the difference between the case
of A's being in box one and B's being in box two, and the opposite case of B's being in
box one and A's being in box two.
Those two cases collapse into just one case with one particle.
One can't say which in each box.
Now we proceed as before to assign equal probabilities to the three cases.
But since we've got three cases, that means that each possibility now has a one in three
chance of being realized or a probability of one third.
As before, ask about the chance of finding both particles together.
As before, that can happen in two ways.
Both of the particles in box one or both of them in box two.
But now we're dealing with indistinguishable particles, so each of those possibilities
has a probability of one third.
As before, add those probabilities.
But wait a minute.
Now when we add, we get a probability of two thirds, not one half, two thirds.
We should be surprised for this is a remarkable result, one that astounded Einstein and others.
What we've just discovered is this.
Simply assuming that quantum systems like photons are indistinguishable particles leads
to the conclusion that two such particles are more likely to be found near one another
than would be the case classically, where we always deal with distinguishable particles.
Basically, the probability is one half.
For indistinguishable particles obeying these new quantum statistics, the probability is
two thirds.
At first, Einstein thought that this was evidence of some strange new attractive force pulling
the particles together, and physicists still often use the misleading expression exchange
forces to talk about the phenomenon.
In fact, what Einstein and Bose had discovered was a special case of the strangest of all
facts about the quantum realm, the feature that we now call quantum entanglement.
Einstein now understood the deep reason why the photons he had postulated in 1905, but
also other elementary particles, including massive particles like electrons, do not behave
like the mutually independent particles constituting a classical Boltzmann gas.
They fail to be independent of one another because they are indistinguishable.
These new quantum statistics are called today Bose-Einstein statistics.
They are the statistics obeyed by elementary particles like photons.
It was soon discovered that there is yet another but related quantum statistics for indistinguishable
particles like electrons, which we now call Fermi-Durac statistics.
The difference between Bose-Einstein and Fermi-Durac statistics has to do with that
novel property of elementary particles we talked about in the last lecture in connection
with the Einstein-De Haas effect, the property called spin or intrinsic angular momentum.
That there are these two different kinds of quantum statistics and that electrons obey
one while photons obey the other, that's important.
Exactly why there are two species of quantum statistics and what exactly these other Fermi-Durac
statistics are, those are topics of less importance for our present purposes and so
she'll be left as homework for the still more Bencherson.
The take home lesson is this, when in 1924, Einstein finally got to the bottom of the
problem of photons not behaving like mutually independent particles, what he found was a
revolutionary new way of counting elementary particles and building up their statistics.
They all derived from the single fact of their indistinguishability, whoever would have
imagined that it would all come down to something as simple as saying that I can't tell which
of a pair of identical twins is which.
Many people quickly grasped some of the profound and radical implications of the new statistics.
For example, Einstein's extension of Bose's statistics to material particles stimulated
a young French physics student Louis de Broglie to postulate the wave nature of material particles.
Remember that Einstein had appropriated the wave model in 1909 to try to explain interference
effects, the failure of mutual independence among photons.
De Broglie now reasoned that if material particles like electrons were indistinguishable, they
too should exhibit interference and thus a wave like nature.
De Broglie's bold conjecture was soon confirmed by experiments done at the University of Aberdeen
in Scotland by G.P. Thompson and at Bell Labs by C.J. Davison and L.H. Germer, experiments
that demonstrated what we call electron diffraction.
For his role in this, De Broglie received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1929.
Thompson and Davison shared the 1937 Prize.
Another person stimulated by Einstein's work on quantum statistics was Aaron Schrodinger.
In 1924, Schrodinger had Einstein's old job at the University of Zurich.
In 1927, he would move to Berlin as Planck's successor and Einstein's colleague.
He and Einstein corresponded extensively from late 1924 through January of 1926 on Schrodinger
published one of the two standard modern mathematical formulations of quantum mechanics called wave
mechanics.
For his labors, Schrodinger was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1933.
Schrodinger quickly got the point about wave-like interference as a manifestation of the curious
new quantum statistics of indistinguishable particles.
He thought his way to quantum mechanics by asking whether, starting with a classical
wave equation, one could modify it so as to yield a new wave equation, we now call it
the Schrodinger equation, that would work for quantum systems.
So essential changes were required.
One change was that at crucial places in the wave equation, what are mathematical variables
in representations of classical waves had to be replaced by more complicated structures
called differential operators.
If that doesn't mean much to you, don't worry, it's not that important for now.
What's important is the result, an elegant mathematical theory that was capable of explaining
all manner of different quantum phenomena.
For example, in a more rigorous and fundamental way than de Broglie, Schrodinger was now able
to solve the mystery of discrete electron orbits in the Bohr model of the atom.
Each allowable orbit turned out to have a circumference that was a precise whole number
multiple of the wavelength associated with the electron in that orbit.
Even better, it took only a little bit of mathematics to show that the energy difference
between any two such orbits was exactly what it should be if the frequency new of the photons
emitted and absorbed in transitions between those orbits was calculated according to Einstein's
old rule, E equals H nu.
Remember that H is Planck's constant.
Almost simultaneously with Schrodinger, the brilliant young Werner Heisenberg set out
to the same goal of developing a full-blown mechanics of the quantum world, but he followed
a different path.
Born and educated in Munich, in 1924 and early 1925, Heisenberg was working with Niels Bohr
and Copenhagen.
Like his teacher in Munich, Arnold Zummerfeld, Heisenberg had been trying for several years
to provide a fundamental quantum theory by tinkering with the Bohr model of the atom,
adding more and more refinements in the hopes of being able to generate all of the fine
structure that atomic spectra revealed, but it never really worked.
Then, as Heisenberg recalls, he got a different kind of inspiration from Einstein.
He recalled Einstein's resolving in the 1905 special relativity paper to allow into the
theory only what could be observed.
Remember Einstein's saying that if we can't observe absolute distance simultaneity, then
we shouldn't assume it.
Now Heisenberg resolved to do the same.
Start with what's observable, namely the frequency, the color, and the intensity, the brightness.
Just forget about all of the hypothetical internal atomic structure that we can't directly
observe.
Instead, play with the numbers representing frequency and intensity to see whether one
can find mathematical regularities within those numbers.
Heisenberg's extraordinary mathematical intuition led him to find such regularities.
At first, the mathematical form of these regularities was quite new and mysterious, but this mathematics
was soon identified by Heisenberg's former supervisor at the University of Göttingen,
Moxborn, as a kind of mathematics that was well known, but just not in physics.
It was the matrices and determinants that you might have learned at high school algebra
for problems like solving systems of linear equations, and thus was created the other
standard modern mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics called matrix mechanics.
Heisenberg won the Nobel Prize in 1932 for this work.
Schrödinger quickly demonstrated that his wave mechanics and Heisenberg's matrix
mechanics were, appearance is notwithstanding, mathematically equivalent formalisms, two
different ways of doing one and the same quantum mechanics.
Wave methods were easier to deploy on some problems than matrix methods on others.
Some thought that wave methods were more intuitive than matrix methods, but all that
really meant was that wave methods were more familiar in mathematical physics.
Only one more idea was wanting, and this was supplied by Einstein's old friend, Moxborn,
who showed that the way one connected either formalism with observation and experiment was
by manipulating, say, a Schrödinger wave function to give one the probability for finding the
electron in a specific place or possessing a specific momentum.
Other formalism could make specific predictions about specific values.
All one could extract from the wave or matrix formalisms were these probabilities.
In one fell swoop, Born had at last shown us why the transition probabilities that Einstein
introduced in 1917 worked as they did, and he showed that those probabilities were indeed
brute fundamental features of a new quantum world now proven to be, at its heart, indeterministic.
Born was awarded part of the 1954 Nobel Prize for his work.
De Broglie on wave particle duality, the 1929 Nobel, Heisenberg on matrix mechanics, the
1932 Nobel, Schrödinger on wave mechanics, the 1933 Nobel.
Born on quantum probabilities, the 1954 Nobel.
The basic framework of quantum mechanics finally established.
Four great discoveries, four Nobel Prizes, and all of it stimulated directly by Einstein.
But then, starting in 1927, to the surprise and dismay of many of his contemporaries, the
Einstein who had done as much or more than anyone else to inaugurate the quantum revolution.
The Einstein to whom the whole community looked for inspiration and guidance.
The Einstein who was the world's most famous physicist, that Einstein turned his back on
his own creation and became the quantum theory's most penetrating and persistent critic.
He first discovered entanglement.
He first gave probabilities, a fundamental place in the quantum realm.
Now, as the quest was reaching its goal, he decided that he couldn't accept any of it.
He couldn't abide a universe ruled by chance.
He couldn't comprehend a world in which indistinguishable particles lose their separate identities
just because we can't give them names.
Why Einstein had this change of heart?
Why for the last 28 years of his life, he repeatedly, but always respectfully, clashed
with boar, born and others over the adequacy of quantum mechanics as a framework for fundamental
physical theory.
All of that we will take up in our next lecture.
