Welcome to lecture 15 in our Einstein series.
We've been discussing Einstein's pivotal role in the development of the quantum theory
from his first introduction of the photon concept in 1905
to his introduction of quantum transition probabilities in 1916
and his co-discovery of Bose-Einstein statistics in 1924 and 1925.
We talked about the way in which his work directly stimulated the development
of the modern formal apparatus of quantum mechanics in the form of Schrodinger's wave mechanics
and Heisenberg's matrix mechanics.
Several times we've peeked ahead to Einstein's becoming, after the mid-1920s,
the most perceptive and persistent critic of quantum mechanics.
Now we're ready to focus on that critical turn in Einstein's thinking.
Two features of the quantum theory especially bothered Einstein.
One was its implication that indeterminism was an objective, fundamental feature of the physical world.
The second was the quantum theory's implication that spatially separated systems,
like two photons, did not always behave like mutually independent systems.
As we now say, they form an entangled pair.
We'll look at both of Einstein's concerns.
But the final chapter in the story of Einstein's struggle with the second entanglement
will come only in lecture 17 when we examine in some detail
the famous and influential Einstein-Pedolsky-Rosen or EPR argument
which purported to prove that quantum mechanics was an incomplete physical theory.
But first we need to talk a little bit more about the history of the quantum theory.
The basic formalism of quantum mechanics was firmly established by the beginning of 1927
in the dual form of Schrodinger's wave mechanics and Heisenberg's matrix mechanics.
Einstein's friend, Moxborn, had added the probability interpretation of the quantum mechanical wave function.
But in 1927, Heisenberg added one hugely important additional footnote
when he derived from quantum mechanics the Heisenberg uncertainty or indeterminacy principle.
The Heisenberg indeterminacy principle says that in the quantum realm
there are fundamental limitations on the precision with which one can describe quantum systems.
In more mathematical terms, we say that the product of the uncertainty or indeterminacy
in a measurement or description of a system's position times the uncertainty in its momentum
must always be greater than a specific minimum value that depends on Planck's constant.
By the way, remember when we talk of momentum that momentum is mass times velocity.
So the uncertainty principle really concerns limitations on our talking about position and velocity at the same time.
The uncertainty principle does not assert merely that there are limitations on the precision
with which we can perform measurements.
It asserts that quantum systems literally do not possess simultaneously sharp values
of so-called conjugate parameters like position and momentum.
However surprising were some of the other novelties of the quantum realm like quantum jumps,
Heisenberg indeterminacy was a real affront to many people's classical intuitions.
Surely the skeptics argued an electron has a definite position and a definite velocity
even if for practical reasons we can't measure both simultaneously.
But the Heisenberg indeterminacy principle, when given its most natural and literal meaning,
said no. We are dealing here not just with practical limitations on what we can measure,
but with deep physical limitations in principle on a physical systems being able to possess
simultaneously sharp values of such parameters.
Einstein was one of the skeptics, by the way.
We'll talk about his particular reservations in just a moment.
Another important footnote was added when, also in 1927, the Vienna-born and Munich-educated
Wolfgang Pauli, then teaching at the University of Hamburg,
explained that curious new fundamental property of elementary particles called spin,
or intrinsic angular momentum.
We talked about this before as being the basis for distinguishing Bose-Einstein statistics,
the statistics of particles like photons, and Fermi Dirac statistics,
the statistics of particles like electrons.
Part of Pauli's achievement, he won the Nobel Prize in 1945,
part of his achievement had to do with his showing that spin has a deep and still poorly understood
relationship to relativity theory.
Far, far more than just a footnote was another major development that was getting off the ground by 1927,
the development of what's called quantum field theory.
There are different roots to quantum field theory.
Especially interesting is the root that starts from the fact that the Schrödinger equation is not relativistically invariant.
Remember our talking earlier about its being desirable that fundamental physical equations have the property
that they keep the same mathematical form when we transform from one inertial frame of reference to another?
Well, surprising as it might seem, given Einstein's personal role in the genesis of quantum mechanics,
the Schrödinger equation, the fundamental equation describing how the wave functions representing electrons, photons, or whatever,
evolve over time.
This Schrödinger equation lacks that property of keeping its form when we transform to another inertial frame.
It was an obvious question whether one could find a different equation that as it were contained the Schrödinger equation
but had the desired invariance properties.
The answer was yes, as physicists like the British whiz kid Paul Dirac was soon to show for systems like electrons.
But it was something of a surprise when people realized that this theory, this new relativistic theory of the electron,
was naturally interpreted as representing electrons not really as particles in the traditional sense,
but as structural aspects of something more like a field, a little bit like the fields of old Maxwellian electrodynamics.
One shouldn't have been too much surprised by this, for Einstein and De Broglie had been thinking about wave particle duality,
the simultaneously field and particle-like aspects of elementary particles for some time.
That a more general and deeper theory should make the field-like aspect of electrons manifest made sense.
One had a right to be surprised that the way this field-like aspect of the quantum description of electrons emerged
was by writing down a thoroughly relativistic analog to the Schrödinger equation.
Still, something had to be correct about the new theory, as was soon demonstrated when Dirac's prediction of the existence of positrons,
particles otherwise identical to electrons but with a positive charge, was confirmed experimentally.
The positron was the first of the so-called antiparticles, which we now talk about as forming the antimatter,
which among other things is supposed to drive the Starship Enterprise.
Obviously something deep is going on here in Dirac's quantum electrodynamics, and it would be fair to say that to this very day,
we don't really understand why marrying relativity in quantum mechanics was the root to the quantum field theory
that has reigned supreme for more than 50 years as the framework for the fundamental physics of the micro world.
But our not understanding these deep issues was no obstacle to Dirac's sharing the 1933 Nobel Prize with Schrödinger.
Quantum field theory is now the framework for all of elementary particle physics, and it brings with it some puzzles of its own.
But the puzzles that were the focus of Einstein's attention, the puzzles that were debated intensely from the late 1920s until Einstein's death in 1955 and beyond,
were all there in the so-called non-relativistic quantum mechanics of 1927, the quantum mechanics of Schrödinger and Heisenberg.
Let's now talk about Einstein's role in those debates.
Einstein's most famous objection to quantum mechanics was that it implied a denial of the determinism that was a bedrock feature of all classical physics.
Yes, Einstein first introduced transition probabilities in 1916, and it was his friend, Max Born, who showed that the quantum mechanical wave function gives us at best
only the probability for finding a system in possession of some specific value among a range of possible values for a parameter like position or momentum.
It was as much Einstein's doing as anyone's, but Einstein didn't like it.
He made this crystal clear in December of 1926 when he wrote in a famous letter to Born, and I quote now,
The quantum mechanics is very worthy of regard, but an inner voice tells me that this is not yet the right track.
The theory yields much, but it hardly brings us closer to the old one's secrets.
I in any case am convinced that he does not play dice.
Transformed in its frequent retelling, that remark now commonly appears as Einstein saying that God does not play dice with the universe.
However accurate the quotation, the sentiment is clear.
Why did Einstein react so strongly and so negatively to the indeterminism that then and now is almost universally accepted as a fundamental fact about the quantum world?
Part of the answer takes us back to our earlier discussions of the philosophy of Immanuel Kant.
Einstein's attitude toward Kant was complicated and ambivalent.
As we've seen, the general theory of relativity challenged Kant's claim about the necessary a priori truth of Euclidean geometry.
And Einstein's own philosophy of science was designed in part to show why it was unreasonable for Kant and his followers to try to impose such a priori constraints on our way of knowing about the world.
But the same Einstein who challenged Kant's views on the geometry of space seems at times almost to agree with Kant about the necessary a priori status of causality.
By the early 1950s, Einstein was ready to concede that indeterminism might be with us to stay, but for a long time he seemed to think that objective scientific knowledge was possible only if it described phenomena in a deterministic way.
What might be the argument for such a view? The argument might run like this.
If an event appears to us to be random, that can only be because we haven't yet understood enough about the event.
That the die comes up with a 6 seems like a random event. It could just as well have been a 5 or a 4.
But we all know, don't we, that if we had enough detailed information about the shape of the die, its weight, the exact position in which we initially held it, the exact forces at work on it when we released it, the geometry and physics of the surface on which it would bounce, then we could reliably predict how the roll would turn out.
That intuition, according to which randomness reflects only our ignorance, had been vindicated again and again in classical physics.
Shouldn't things turn out the same in the quantum realm?
If one believed what the philosopher Gottfried Leibniz had called the principle of sufficient reason for everything there is a reason, then the quantum world should be no exception.
Einstein was so convinced by this kind of argument that he spent some of his time in the winter and spring of 1927 pursuing it as a research program of his own.
He was one of the first physicists to ask whether the quantum mechanics of Schrödinger and Heisenberg could be developed further by adding what today we call hidden variables,
which are just here to four unknown properties of quantum systems, a knowledge of which might enable us to make completely deterministic predictions of the system's behavior.
In effect, Einstein was guessing that we could learn more, at least in principle, about electrons and photons, that we could in principle replace ignorance by still deeper knowledge.
That there might be such new, as yet unknown, properties of elementary particles was not a silly idea.
Pauly was about to introduce precisely such a new property in his work on spin, but Einstein's own attempt at a hidden variable theory failed.
Why is something we'll discuss in a moment?
There's another place to go looking for the roots of Einstein's commitment to determinism.
Prepare yourselves now for a bit of a surprise.
The deep reason for Einstein's commitment to determinism might be found not in his physics, but in his theology and his moral philosophy.
Einstein's theology, his idea of cosmic religion, and his moral philosophy will be our focus in Lecture 22.
For now, let's leave it at this.
Einstein's God, the God who does not play dice, designed a universe in which chance plays no role.
One very important consequence of our inhabiting such a universe would be that our own actions are as rigidly controlled by iron laws of nature as is the behavior of atoms and electromagnetic fields.
And that might be taken to mean that you and I, and a morally imperfect Einstein, Einstein the heartless husband, Einstein the philanderer, are not responsible for our actions.
This theology, this moral metaphysics of determinism, is a view well known from the writings of the 17th century Dutch Jewish philosopher Baruch Spinoza, another thinker who exerted a great influence on Einstein.
Should we find it odd that a scientist's deepest philosophical and scientific principles sometimes have their roots in theology?
No. Newton's view of absolute space makes sense only in the context of his theology.
It might be less a matter of logical implication and more a matter of psychological motivation, but why should Einstein not be allowed the same latitude we grant to a thinker like Newton?
Should we find it odd that a scientist's deepest philosophical and scientific commitments are sometimes driven by a moral philosophy or even by anxiety about moral imperfection?
One shouldn't construct a whole physics just for the sake of rationalizing one's failings, but otherwise, is it not true that even the most brilliant scientist is also a human being with all that our humanness implies?
Einstein the physicist was also Einstein the husband, father, and friend. Einstein was a whole person.
Einstein was troubled by quantum indeterminism. He was even more deeply troubled by the quantum entanglement that he now recognizes a fundamental and unavoidable feature of the quantum mechanical description of nature.
We've used the word entanglement several times already to talk about the way in which quantum mechanical systems like photons and electrons fail to behave like the mutually independent particles of classical physics.
The word entanglement itself was not yet used in 1927. It was first introduced by Schrödinger in 1935 in the wake of the Einstein-Pedolsky-Rosen argument, which is to be discussed in lecture 17.
But the feature of quantum mechanics named by the word entanglement was well understood in 1927.
Especially after Schrödinger's development of wave mechanics, it was easy to describe entanglement in a crisp, clean, formal way.
We use a mathematical function called a wave function or state function to represent the physical state of something like an electron or photon.
Remember from lecture 3, the principle of separability that is fundamental to all classical physics, the principle that says that two spatially separated systems always possess separate, independent, real states,
and that the joint or composite state of any two or more systems is just the aggregate of those separate states.
Remember our saying that this means that in classical physics, the whole is just the sum of the parts.
Well, in the language of wave mechanics, we would say the same thing by saying that the total or joint or composite state of any two photons say would be just the mathematical product of their separate states.
Yes, it's that simple. I'll say it again.
If the separability principle applied in quantum mechanics, which it does not, then you would just multiply the state function for one system by the state function for the other system to get the state function for the composite system.
The kind of product involved here, by the way, is special to quantum mechanics. It's called a tensor product, but that's not important for now.
What is important is that in general in quantum mechanics, if there has been any kind of interaction whatsoever between the particles, or if they just happen to be two indistinguishable particles,
then this way of finding the joint or composite state, this classical way, doesn't work because the separability principle does not, in general, work in quantum mechanics.
To find the joint state in quantum mechanics, one has to follow more complicated rules that we don't have the time to spell out now.
But remember again this absolutely essential point. In quantum mechanics, the joint state is not the product of the separate states.
In quantum mechanics, in a very clear way, the whole is more than the sum of its parts.
Einstein had seen this coming since 1905, that it was going to be a really fundamental feature of the quantum theory became even clearer with Einstein's elaboration of Bose-Einstein statistics in 1924 and 1925.
But after the work of Schrödinger and Heisenberg, the conclusion could no longer be avoided that quantum entanglement would violate the classical principle of separability.
As it happened, Einstein still tried to avoid this conclusion. A few minutes ago we talked about Einstein's attempt in 1927 to construct a hidden variable theory that would restore determinism by postulating new,
here to fore unknown or hidden variables whose values would fix the course of quantum mechanical events exactly.
Remember it's being said that Einstein's efforts failed. Why? It's an interesting story.
In the spring of 1927, Einstein gave a lecture about his hidden variable theory to the Prussian Academy of Sciences.
He wrote up the talk with the intention of having it published in the Academy's proceedings.
But at the very last minute, while checking the proofs, Einstein discovered something that forced him to withdraw the paper, which was never published.
What did he discover?
What he found was that his hidden variable theory violated his cherished principle of separability just as Schrödinger's wave mechanics did.
And that alone was enough to make Einstein abandon, once and for all, his efforts to fix the quantum theory.
This experience confirmed in Einstein's mind the impression that because of entanglement, because it violated the separability principle, quantum mechanics was a theory that was so badly broken as to be incapable of being fixed.
Why was Einstein so deeply attached to the principle of separability?
In this case, the answer has nothing to do with theology or Einstein's moral weaknesses. In this case, it was mainly a matter of physics.
We're going to talk about this a bit more in the next lecture, and again in lecture 17. For now, let's just put it this way.
Einstein's general theory of relativity was a field theory. Each point of spacetime has associated with it a value of the metric tensor that fixes the strength of the gravitational field at that point.
Each of these spacetime points that together make up the gravitational field was, in Einstein's eyes, like an independent bit of ultimate physical reality.
In general relativity, for that reason, the separability principle is built right into the basic ontology, the basic stuff of the universe.
Being committed to the essential rightness of his own general theory of relativity, which therefore meant being committed to the separability principle, implied that Einstein could not accept a quantum theory that contradicted that basic principle.
So Einstein's thought that quantum mechanics was a deeply flawed theory because entanglement contradicts separability.
Just how deeply flawed was proven more clearly, again in Einstein's view, by the next major development in the quantum theory, which was Niels Bohr's introduction of the so-called complementarity interpretation of quantum mechanics.
Bohr introduced his complementarity interpretation at a major scientific congress in Como, Italy in September of 1927.
Bohr was deeply impressed by Heisenberg's discovery of the uncertainty principle a short time earlier in 27.
But he worried that people might think wrongly that uncertainty concerned only practical limits on what we can measure.
Bohr thought that uncertainty reflected a much deeper physical fact about quantum systems, a limitation in principle on the values of parameters possessed by quantum systems.
Bohr realized that physicists therefore needed a deeper explanation of quantum uncertainty.
Giving that deeper explanation was one of the main aims of the complementarity interpretation.
Bohr's complementarity interpretation goes beyond the uncertainty principle and asserts that such limitations are generic features of scientific knowledge in the quantum domain.
According to Bohr, one can speak meaningfully of a property of a quantum system only in situations where, in principle, it is possible to measure or observe that property.
The measurement context, as Bohr would say, fixes the bounds of that about which one can speak objectively.
Context here means literally the physical apparatus suitable for measuring something like position.
In the context of a position measurement, position may be regarded as an objective property.
Momentum, its so-called conjugate parameter, is not objective in such a measurement context.
Conversely, in the context of a momentum measurement, position is not objective.
Position and momentum are complementary in the sense that while both are part of a complete description of a quantum system, they are mutually exclusive aspects of that complete description.
The ultimate reason for this curious state of affairs is that in the quantum realm, the system being observed or measured and the system responsible for the measurement, including perhaps a human observer,
cannot be represented as mutually independent systems. They form an entangled joint system.
The measuring instrument and the object being measured are entangled because, according to the quantum theory, all interacting physical systems are entangled and measurement is just one kind of physical interaction.
Needless to say, when Einstein heard about complementarity and saw that quantum entanglement was now wreaking even more havoc, he was not amused.
One can well imagine him shaking his head in dismay thinking, how can Bohr possibly believe that it makes no sense to talk about the momentum of an electron simply because one has chosen to measure the electron's position?
Are these guys nuts? Just for the record, that's me putting words into Einstein's head, but they could very well have been Einstein's own words.
By now, Einstein had had enough. He was ready to go on the attack.
The attack began one month later, in October 1927, when Einstein met Bohr at the Fifth Solvay Congress in Brussels.
It was the first of two major showdowns between these two giants, the next occurring at the 1930 Solvay meeting.
On each occasion, Einstein sought by the use of clever thought experiments to exhibit what was to him so deeply troubling about quantum mechanics,
but on each occasion, after long hours of debate, Bohr was able to find a flaw in Einstein's reasoning.
The most important of these thought experiments was the one Einstein produced at the 1930 Solvay meeting.
It's called the Photon Box Thought Experiment.
To understand how it works, one must first know that there's a second form of the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle relating energy and time.
This version of the Uncertainty Principle says that the uncertainty in the energy involved in some event or process,
multiplied by the uncertainty in the time when that event or process occurs, is always greater than some minimum.
Keep this version of the Uncertainty Principle in mind. Here's how the Photon Box Thought Experiment works.
Einstein imagined that a box is filled with electromagnetic radiation, which is just to say photons,
that this box was suspended by a spring so that it could be weighed.
The box was equipped with a shutter that could be opened by a timer attached to a clock.
When the shutter is briefly opened, a photon escapes whose energy or time of arrival could be measured at some distant location.
When we say that the escaped photon's energy can be measured,
remember the relationship between energy E and frequency nu that Einstein discovered in the 1905 photon hypothesis paper,
E equals H nu. The energy is just the frequency times Planck's constant.
Given this relationship, measuring the energy of the escaped photon means literally seeing what color it is.
Okay, so we can measure either the escaped photon's energy or its time of arrival.
Einstein then argued, so Bohr recalled, that after the photon escapes,
we have the option of either opening the box, reading the clock,
and thus determining with arbitrary precision the time when the photon was emitted,
or leaving the box closed, weighing it, and thus, by his own principle of mass energy equivalence,
E equals mc squared, determining with arbitrary precision the energy of the emitted photon.
But this means that we could predict exactly either the energy of the escaped photon at some distant detector,
or the time when it arrives at that distant detector,
all of this without in any way interfering with that photon.
It would appear that one has a violation of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
Bohr is said to have worked through the night,
but finally to have found that Einstein's mistake this time was his forgetting another one of his own important discoveries,
namely the effect of a gravitational field on clock rates.
After the photon escapes, the box is a bit lighter and so rises a bit,
meaning that it's a little bit further away from the Earth's surface,
and so experiences an ever so slightly weaker gravitational field,
causing the clock inside the box to speed up by a tiny amount.
The effect is minuscule, but just enough to save the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
Legend has it that Einstein hoist on his own patard was so stunned by Bohr's refutation of the photon box argument
that he forever after gave up trying to disprove the Heisenberg uncertainty principle
and sought instead to prove that quantum mechanics was not an incorrect theory, but an incompletement.
The 1935 Einstein-Pedolsky-Rosen argument for the incompleteness of quantum mechanics will be a focus of lecture 17.
That's the legend. It's really a nice story.
How can you not enjoy the moment where Bohr nails Einstein by invoking Einstein's own general theory of relativity?
But not all legends are true.
What's wrong about this legend is that Einstein didn't propose the photon box thought experiment
in order to try to disprove the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
Just two months after the 1930 Solvay meeting, Einstein explained to his friend Paul Ehrenfest
that Bohr had misunderstood what Einstein was trying to do.
Einstein said to Ehrenfest that he had long before realized that there was no point in disputing the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
Instead, the whole point of the photon box thought experiment, so Einstein now tells Ehrenfest,
was supposed to have been exactly the same as the 1935 Einstein-Pedolsky-Rosen argument would be,
namely to prove that quantum mechanics is incomplete.
And get this, the really crucial point at the heart of the whole argument was supposed to have been yet again
to show what kind of mischief is done in Einstein's eyes when you assume the truth of quantum mechanical entanglement.
But showing why entanglement is thus related to the alleged incompleteness of quantum mechanics
is something best left until we can talk at length about the Einstein-Pedolsky-Rosen argument in Lecture 17.
Between the 1930 Solvay meeting and the 1935 Einstein-Pedolsky-Rosen paper, a lot happened.
Einstein left Germany as a refugee from Nazism and settled into his new American home.
He also completely reoriented his research program in physics, precisely because he had finally given up on the quantum theory,
setting out on the long, lonely and ultimately failed quest for a unified field theory,
the quest that was to occupy him for the rest of his life.
Next, take a break to talk about Einstein's life in Princeton and that lonely quest.
