Welcome back! This is lecture 16 in our series on Einstein. We followed Einstein to his arrival
in Princeton in October of 1933. We've spoken about how he never again returned to the
Europe of his birth and never left the United States but for that one quick trip to Bermuda
in 1935 that was necessary to make possible his later U.S. citizenship application. We've
spoken about how his anger over Germany's treatment of the Jews and the failure of
Germans to oppose Hitler led him to sever almost all ties with his old German colleagues
whom he could not forgive. We've also now spoken about how, in the early to mid 1930s,
Einstein was turning his back on the quantum theory that he had done so much to create,
convinced that it was deeply flawed because of indeterminism and entanglement. There's
a sense in which, arriving in America, Einstein was distancing himself literally and figuratively
from the people, places and science of his first 50 years. One doesn't want to exaggerate
for during Einstein's last 22 years in America, he was still very much engaged in the world
of physics and he built for himself in Princeton a cozy new circle of friends and colleagues
and yet the life and work of Einstein during these last 22 years has a different feel.
While that famous face was still a frequent front page presence and was now also to be
glimpsed on television, there was a retreat into a more private sphere. Einstein, the
former world traveler, never strayed far from his new American home in Princeton and in his
physics, Einstein now more than ever before, followed his own course. He struck out on
a path that he hoped would lead him to the promised land of a unified field theory that
would show both electromagnetism and gravitation to be structural aspects of an underlying
continuous field with elementary particles like the electron being explained as just
structural modifications of this field. But this was a path that others feared would lead
only into a scientific wilderness. When Einstein settled in Princeton in October of 1933, his
household consisted of himself, his wife Elsa and Helen Dukas, who had been Einstein's secretary
since 1928. Einstein's stepdaughter, Ilse, died in Paris in 1934. Elsa traveled back
to France to nurse her dying daughter. She returned to Princeton with her other daughter
Margot, who was to outlive Einstein by many years, as was Helen Dukas. Elsa Einstein seems
to have been deeply affected by daughter Ilse's death, and she too died just two years later
in 1936. Helen Dukas then took over most duties as housekeeper. In 1938, Einstein's sister
Maya Vintler Einstein arrived, life in Mussolini's Italy with her husband Paul, having grown
increasingly risky, and she lived with Einstein until her death in 1951. Einstein's elder
son, Hans Albert, brought his family to the United States in 1938, eventually settling
into a successful career as a professor of hydraulic engineering at Berkeley. Malava
died in Zurich in 1948, leaving her second son by Einstein, the long troubled Tete, or
Edward Einstein, institutionalized in Switzerland, where he lived until 1965, generously looked
after by Einstein's Swiss biographer, Carl Zeilig. Einstein's simple daily routine was
but little disturbed by visitors and various political crusades. There were a few hours
work every day after a walk to his office at the Institute for Advanced Study, where
in the 1950s his boss was J. Robert Oppenheimer, former director of the Manhattan Project.
There was the company of a small circle of intimate friends. There were summer vacations
in upstate New York or on Long Island Sound. Helen Dukas screened a growing flood of correspondence
and the many people who wished to meet Einstein. At the Institute for Advanced Study, Einstein
worked steadily, always with an assistant. One of them, Leopold Infeld, was co-author
with Einstein in 1938, a lovely historical book, The Evolution of Physics, a book that
still retains its appeal. But mainly, of course, Einstein's assistants worked with him on
unified field theory. More on that in a moment. Einstein's colleagues at the Institute for
Advanced Study were a distinguished group that included world-famous physicists and
mathematicians like John von Neumann and Hermann Weill. Other famous figures came to visit
the Institute, including Niels Bohr. Einstein's best friend on the Institute faculty was the
brilliant, intensely private, and eccentric, logician and mathematician Kurt Gödel. It
was Gödel who, of course, had proved in 1931 that arithmetic is incomplete in the sense
that no set of axioms for arithmetic could yield all arithmetic truths as theorems, or
as we sometimes say that truth outruns proof. In logic and mathematics, Gödel's discovery
of this fundamental limitation on what could be rigorously demonstrated was as revolutionary
as Einstein's theory of relativity. Gödel's genius extended to physics. He surprised
even Einstein in the late 1940s with his discovery of solutions to Einstein's field equations
for general relativity that described rotating universes containing what we call closed,
time-like trajectories, literally universes in which travel backwards in time as possible.
Einstein and Gödel were to be seen regularly walking to and from the Institute, talking
mainly about the philosophical issues that both loved. Late in life, he died in 1978,
Gödel's accelerating mental illness grew so severe that he more or less starved himself
to death out of an insane fear that people were trying to poison him.
Einstein had friends at Princeton University as well. Most important was Einstein's extremely
close relationship with the economist Otto Nathan, who was teaching at Princeton when
Einstein arrived there in 1933 and later taught at NYU, Vassar, and Howard University.
Einstein and Nathan shared many interests and many deep convictions. It was Nathan who
in 1960 co-edited with political activist Heinz Norton the book Einstein on Peace, which
even today lives as a moving testament of and to Einstein's most heartfelt political convictions.
The surest measure of Einstein's deep affection for Nathan is the fact that Einstein made him,
along with Helen Dukas, the co-trustee of his literary estate.
Einstein's relationship with the larger Princeton community was somewhat complicated.
In many ways, the Princeton of that era had the feel of a cultured, but rather conservative,
small town. Some even recall it as having a bit of the feel of a southern town. Princeton
University had long been the ivy of choice for the sons of the southern Protestant elite.
When Einstein arrived in 1933, the university was still an all-male and all-white institution,
and there were limits on the number of Jews who could be accommodated on the faculty
and within the student body. To many in the town of Princeton, this unconventional, woolly-headed,
German-speaking Jewish physicist had to seem an exotic flower. Einstein returned the compliment
with complaints about staid and stuffy Princeton blue noses. A really interesting counterpoint
to white upper and middle class Princeton was the African-American community in Princeton,
which the unpretentious Einstein got to know surprisingly well, developing more than a few
friendships with its members. Einstein, his stepdaughter Margote, and Helen Dukas became U.S.
citizens in 1940, and Einstein took the responsibility of citizenship very seriously. A bit later in
these lectures, we'll discuss the new political causes that Einstein championed during his years
in Princeton, from civil rights to banning the bomb, but the occasional radio interview or the
latest manifesto to sign did little to disrupt the quiet rhythm of Einstein's life, which was
still focused, for the most part, as it has always been, on physics. As we've noted, physics for
Einstein in these Princeton years meant almost exclusively Einstein's lonely and ultimately
unsuccessful quest for a unified field theory. The hope for a unified theory of everything
was not new and was not exclusively Einstein's. In lecture three, we talked about the fact that,
at the end of the 19th century, just before the quantum and relativity revolutions,
hope was high that Newtonian mechanics and Maxwellian electrodynamics were soon to be
combined in one comprehensive theoretical framework. Of course, that did not happen,
in part, thanks to Einstein's own assault on some core doctrines of classical physics.
But the dream of unification did not go away, and within just three years of
Einstein's finishing work on the general theory of relativity, the hope revived among thinkers
who once again felt the pull of the idea that fundamental unity is the sign of deepest truth
in physics. The first serious attempt at a unified theory after general relativity
was the work of Hermann Weyl. Weyl had studied both mathematics and physics at Göttingen,
where he took his degree under the mathematician David Hilbert, whom we met earlier as the person
who discovered the field equations of general relativity at virtually the same time as Einstein
in 1915. Weyl went on to teach mathematics at the Atheha in Zürich, where he and Einstein
were colleagues for a brief time before Einstein moved to Berlin. Weyl and Einstein were again
colleagues at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, Weyl like Einstein, arriving there
in 1933. In 1918, Weyl discovered a clever way to generalize the Einstein field equations still
further, with the introduction of new terms that could be made to behave like the electric and
magnetic potentials of Maxwell's electrodynamics. He thereby united gravitation and electromagnetism.
Weyl abandoned his own theory when in the 1920s the new quantum mechanics made it irrelevant,
but he had stumbled upon a new deep principle of symmetry called gauge invariance that would
resurface in a changed form some years later as a fundamental part of modern particle physics and
quantum field theory. One might have expected Einstein to be enthusiastic about Weyl's unification
of gravitation and electromagnetism, but in fact Einstein rejected it mainly on methodological
grounds. What bothered Einstein was a fundamental feature of Weyl's theory called the path dependence
of length. However surprising the result and however arcane the reasons for it, the concept is easy
to understand. Let's say that you and I have identical yardsticks. You fly off in one direction,
I fly off in another, and sometime later we meet again. In everyday life, and even in the
universe as described by Einstein's general theory of relativity, when you and I meet again,
our yardsticks will be the same length. Our clocks would also be ticking at the same rate,
not so in a Weyl universe. In Weyl's theory, how long the yardstick is when I examine it at some
specific place and time, how long it is depends on what path it followed to get there. No joke,
this is not just some accidental and unimportant fact about Weyl's theory. It is deeply related to
the theories being able to unify gravity and electromagnetism. Einstein was bothered by the
path dependence of length for two reasons. The first is that he thought it was simply not true
that yardsticks did not behave that way in the real world. He thought that proof of their not
behaving that way was provided by atomic spectra. The idea is simple. The spectrum of a given element
always contains light and dark bands at specific wavelengths, that is, wavelengths, regardless
of the past history of the atoms of that element we're studying. That wouldn't be true if lengths,
including wavelengths, were path dependent. Einstein's second and deeper objection was
straightforwardly philosophical and methodological. He said that if my yardstick's length varied
depending upon its path through spacetime, then I couldn't use the yardstick to provide an objective
measure of the metrical properties of spacetime, such as the degree of curvature in some specific
region. Remember, by the way, that degree of curvature is given by the so-called metric tensor.
And if I can't measure curvature objectively, then I cannot objectively test a theory like
general relativity or Weyl's unified theory, which makes crucial predictions about spacetime curvature.
For these reasons, Einstein repudiated Weyl's theory, but it stimulated Einstein to take up
the task himself, though at first only in an episodic way. Others joined the hunt as well.
Theodor Kaluza and Oscar Klein discovered a different way of marrying electromagnetism
to gravitation by adding a fifth dimension to spacetime. This is another idea that was wrong
in its original form, but reappeared later as the idea of higher dimensions and contemporary string
theory. So Einstein's interest in unification was aroused by his debate with Weyl and reinforced
by the other early attempts at unification by thinkers like Kaluza and Klein. But as noted,
it was especially after his doubts about quantum mechanics and entanglement coalesced in the
mid to late 1920s that Einstein focused his efforts on the search for a unified field theory.
It's worth pausing to think more carefully about why Einstein's disenchantment with quantum
mechanics led him to reorient his research in this way. The reasons are deep and important,
but we can get a handle on them. The problem was again this remarkable but to Einstein annoying
feature of quantum mechanics according to which quantum mechanical systems aren't mutually independent.
They're separate realities merging into holes that are more than the sums of their parts.
Remember from our last lecture that Einstein finally gave up on quantum mechanics for good
in 1927 when he discovered that the theory he constructed as an attempt to supplement
quantum mechanics with hidden variables turned out to display the very same kind of entanglement
that one finds in Schrodinger's wave mechanics. As we noted, one of the main reasons why entanglement
was a problem for Einstein was that it contradicted a deep and important feature of the general theory
of relativity. How so? We touched upon this in the last lecture, but now let's discuss it
more carefully. General relativity is a field theory. Spacetime itself is the field
in general relativity. Every point of spacetime has assigned to it a specific value of the metric
tensor. Actually several numbers are required to fix the metric tensor, just like a vector in space
has three components, but let's gloss over that. It's the value of the metric tensor that determines
the curvature of space at any specific point in spacetime and thereby determines the gravitational
field strength at that point. If you want to describe the physics of a whole region of spacetime,
then in effect you just add up the information from each individual point in the region.
From Einstein's point of view, it was as if each individual point of spacetime were an
independent physical system with its own independent physical state encoded in the metric tensor.
And from Einstein's point of view, in general relativity, it is as if a whole, a region of
spacetime, is always just the sum of its parts, the individual spacetime points within that region.
Back in lecture three, we call the underlying principle involved here the principle of separability.
Einstein called it in German the Trenungsprinzip, which means more or less exactly the same thing.
More specifically, and to repeat an earlier formulation, it says that difference in spatial
location, separation in space, is all by itself sufficient to render two physical systems independent
of one another in the sense that the real state of the two taken together is just the law of
logical sum of their separate real states. Einstein explained that a field theory like
general relativity is the most radical possible embodiment of this principle, precisely because
it takes each infinitesimal point of spacetime to be an independent physical system, and so
takes even infinitesimal, that is infinitely small, spatial separation to be enough to make
two neighboring parts of spacetime independent in this way.
One would be right to interrupt at this point with the question. You might be thinking,
okay, so quantum mechanics and general relativity contradict one another over this very deep question
of separability entanglement. Both quantum mechanics and general relativity have been
confirmed by experiment, but perhaps this contradiction over separability and entanglement
shows us that both can't be right. Sure, but what reason does Einstein have for thinking that the
flaw has to be in quantum mechanics and not in relativity? Good question. We sure hope that
it's more than just a prejudice in favor of Einstein's own theory. As it turns out, Einstein
does have more of an argument to offer. It's another philosophical argument having to do with
the general conditions under which a scientific theory can pretend to be objective. But understanding
that argument will require still more attention to Einstein's detailed criticisms of quantum
mechanics to which we're going to return in the next lecture. So be assured that it's not just
Einstein's selfish desire to defend his own theory and stay tuned. When in 1927, Einstein finally
turned his back on quantum mechanics and committed to the unified field theory program. His particular
goal was to unite electrodynamics and gravitation in a framework defined by a field theory-like
general relativity, one that embodied the principle of separability. That's why the
goal was called a unified field theory. Remember that Einstein also preferred deterministic theories.
So what Einstein commits himself to is the idea of continuous field-like structures
evolving deterministically in a space-time embodying the principle of separability.
The contrast with entangled, non-deterministic quantum mechanics was intentional. No discreteness,
no quantum jumps, and elementary particles as separate entities were to disappear,
their place taken by modifications in the structure of space-time.
Over the next 28 years, Einstein and his collaborators tried many ideas. One idea involved
modifications of the symmetries in general relativity. Another idea involved the introduction
of complicated topological structures in space-time called now Einstein-Rosen bridges.
These bridges were the precursors of today's wormholes, which are so popular in science fiction,
being sort of backdoor connections between otherwise distant-seeming regions of the universe.
A public accustomed to Einstein's hitting one scientific homerun after another paid close
attention as all these different ideas emerged. More than once, news of a soon-to-be-published
Einstein paper on unified field theory made headlines around the world as newspapers competed
with one another to scoop the competition with the first announcement of the next great
Einstein revolution. Einstein's always fertile mind kept coming up with new ideas and he was
still working on unified field theory at his death in 1955. Literally the last calculations he did
in his hospital room in April of that year concerned this problem. Most physicists thought
that Einstein was wasting his time because he was basing his quest on the kind of physics inherent
in general relativity rather than the physics of quantum mechanics and history has judged them right
in their skepticism. But Einstein, who was always proud of being a loner, was unaffected by those
criticisms. He would say that it might be a mistake for a younger physicist to pursue such a risky
and improbable dream, but since he was already an old man with a secure reputation, he could afford
the risk. He also continued to trust the physical intuition that had so far been for him such an
unerring guide, but this time his intuition was leading him down the wrong path. The goal
as Einstein defined it was an impossible one. If only because of the fact that by the mid 1930s,
it was becoming clear that there were additional fundamental forces in nature
beyond gravity and electromagnetism. Physics was beginning to tease out the secrets of the forces
that hold the nucleus together and explain nuclear decay, what we now call the strong and weak
nuclear forces. And it was quantum field theory that was providing the technical tools needed
for describing these new forces. Most physicists thought that Einstein's quest was wrongheaded,
betraying a failure to understand the new quantum mechanics and its extensions into Paul Dirac's
relativistic theory of the electron or quantum field theory. That Einstein was attacking the
quantum theory in debates with Bohr at the Solvay Congresses and in articles like the
Einstein-Pedolsky-Rosen paper, this only reinforced their suspicions that their former leader was
now out of touch with the best new physics. As we'll see in the next lecture, that specific
concern that an aging Einstein just didn't get it or worse couldn't get it, that specific concern
was totally unfounded. The fact is that the Einstein who was criticizing the quantum theory,
the Einstein whose criticisms turned out to be wrong, that Einstein nevertheless understood
quantum mechanics as well as anyone and saw more deeply into the foundations of the theory than
almost anyone else, accepting perhaps Neil's Bohr, for whom Einstein had such great respect
and just a handful of other physicists. A further problem bedeviling Einstein in his quest for a
unified field theory was that he was doing physics at such a deep level and so far out on
the edges of our understanding that it might be impossible in principle to extract from such a
unified theory any implications testable by ordinary laboratory or observational means.
This is a question that we should also think about a bit more carefully.
Einstein himself noted that he was having trouble extracting from various of his proposed unified
field theories any testable predictions. Today, exactly the same concern is regularly expressed
about the currently fashionable string theories, which take vibrating strings and closed loops
and multi-dimensional space times as the basis for constructing all elementary particles and
perhaps even space time itself. String theorists have almost no testable predictions to which
they can point at the moment. That's not to say that string theory is untestable. Some stunning
new testable prediction might well emerge tomorrow in an area of research such as this,
which is evolving constantly. And yet the difficulty of linking either Einstein's unified
field theories or string theory with experience forces us to ask how one does physics in domains
so far removed from the realm of our immediate experience.
Remember that the young Einstein, inspired by his reading of Mach and Hume, was always asking
about such things as absolute distant simultaneity. Is it observable? Can it be tested?
Einstein was right to push that question. But now Einstein is himself venturing far,
far beyond the realm of the immediately observable. Where is one to look for guidance?
Well, one answer you've heard before. Perhaps in such esoteric realms of fundamental physics,
one is forced, even more than elsewhere, to rely on those aesthetic criteria of theory choice,
like simplicity, elegance, harmony, and inner perfection. That was definitely Einstein's view,
and it's a view one encounters today with increasing frequency. Einstein never abandoned
his strong empiricist convictions, and no serious physicist today would do so either.
But until we can find those elusive links to the world that we can see, hear, touch, smell,
and feel, until we can do experiments, perhaps we should listen at least a little bit to the music
of the spheres. The music that Einstein's Schopenhauer told us offered our only glimpse
into that deepest reality. Einstein's particular conception of a unified field theory
no longer attracts a following, but the larger dream of unification, of a theory of everything,
is once again very much alive. Important progress has in fact been made in the form of what we call
electro-weak theories, which show how to unify electromagnetism and the so-called weak nuclear
force, the force responsible for the process of beta decay, whereby a neutron transforms into a
proton with the release of an electron, a beta particle. Still further unification is promised
by what's called now the standard model in particle physics, which unites electromagnetism
and the weak nuclear force with a strong nuclear force, the force that holds the nucleus together.
The standard model has proved quite successful. A test of its most elusive prediction, the Higgs
boson, which among other things would explain the origin of mass, is about to start at CERN,
the European Center for Nuclear Research in Geneva, where the most energetic particle accelerator
ever built, the Large Hadron Collider, will begin operation in 2008. Gravity is still not
part of the picture in the standard model, but there are exotic new ideas for how to add it to
the mix from string theory to what is called loop quantum gravity. Again, this is not Einstein's
preferred way of constructing a theory of everything, but I would bet that were he
still with us, Einstein would be awaiting the results from the Large Hadron Collider
with as much anticipation as you or I. In his quest for a unified field theory,
Einstein stood apart from most of the physics community. As we will see in some of the remaining
lectures in this series, he was likewise something of an outsider in crusades like that to ban
nuclear weapons or promote the cause of world government. But on the outside is where Einstein
wanted to be. In the 1920s in Berlin, he might have appeared to settle into a comfortable
middle-class way of life, a member of the cultural and scientific establishment. In the 1930s, 1940s
in Princeton, while he created for himself a quieter academic life ornamented with endearing
eccentricities like wearing no socks and letting his hair grow ever more untamed, he was still a
well-known public figure. In his heart and mind, however, Einstein was always alone. He set it
himself in a kind of credo penned in 1930. I quote, I am truly a lone traveler and have never
belonged to my country, my home, my friends, or even my immediate family with my whole heart.
In the face of all these ties, I have never lost a sense of distance and a need for solitude.
