Welcome to lecture 17 in our Einstein series.
We've already learned a lot about Einstein's contributions to the quantum theory and about
his growing misgivings during the late 1920s as modern quantum mechanics emerged from the
work of Schrödinger, Heisenberg and Bohr, a quantum mechanics portraying nature as both
indeterministic and entangled.
In this lecture, we'll bring to a close our discussion of Einstein and the quantum.
As we examine carefully, Einstein's very famous and influential argument from 1935 to the
effect that, while quantum mechanics might not be an incorrect theory, it is, as Einstein
said, incomplete.
That argument is best known in the form in which it appeared in the classic Einstein-Pedolsky
and Rosen, or EPR, paper of 1935.
But as we'll see, a simpler and more lucid version of the argument makes clear that,
as Einstein already sought to show with his photon box thought experiment at the 1930 Solvay
meeting, quantum entanglement is really the crucial issue because it violates the principle
of separability that Einstein believed to be almost a necessary part of any future fundamental
physics, such as his own unified field theory.
In the eyes of most physicists, then and now, Einstein's critique of the quantum theory
was mistaken.
But as mistakes go, this is a profound and insightful one, revealing not that Einstein
was out of touch with the newest physics, but that ironically he saw deeper into the foundations
of physics than did many of the defenders of quantum mechanics.
We'll be swimming in deep waters in this discussion, but we'll keep the focus on the conceptual
questions, not the mathematics, and as with many of the other physics questions we've
addressed, we'll trust Einstein's own vivid visual imagery to help us through the turbulence.
In lecture 15, we examined the beginnings of the decades-long struggle between Einstein
and Bohr over quantum mechanics, culminating in the showdown at the 1930 Solvay conference.
Bohr recalled having refuted Einstein's last best effort to exhibit the possibility of
violations of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle by means of the photon box thought experiment.
But as we saw, disproving this central principle of quantum mechanics seems not to have been
the intended point of Einstein's critique.
What that point was started to emerge more clearly when, in 1935, Einstein and two collaborators,
Boris Podolski and Nathan Rosen, published what has since become the most frequently
cited paper ever to appear in the leading American physics journal, The Physical Review.
A paper entitled, Can Quantum Mechanical Description of Physical Reality Be Considered Complete?
The paper has since become known simply by the initials of the three authors' names,
the EPR or Einstein-Podolski and Rosen paper.
The EPR paper starts with two general principles.
The first is the completeness principle.
It says that for a physical theory to be complete, it must include an element corresponding
to every element of the physical reality the theory aims to describe.
The idea here is that we want scientific theories to give an exhaustive account of nature, or
at least of those aspects of nature that a theory pretends to describe.
But we can't decide whether a theory is complete in this sense unless we have some way of knowing
what are those elements of physical reality that the theory ought to describe.
Picking out those elements of physical reality is the point of the second principle.
The reality principle, the second principle, says that if one can predict with certainty
the value of some physical quantity for a system without disturbing the system in any
way, then there exists an element of physical reality corresponding to that quantity.
This is a rather intuitive idea.
If I can make absolutely certain predictions about what I'll find when I measure the position,
speed, mass, or energy of some system without myself having done anything to that system
without having disturbed it, then surely that must be because those predicted properties
are objective and real.
Just as surely a complete theory should account for the presence of those properties.
The strategy of the EPR paper is then to try to show that there are elements of physical
reality not accounted for by quantum mechanics, which would mean again that quantum mechanics
is incomplete.
They do this by means of a thought experiment whose technical details will ignore.
The general idea of the thought experiment is simple.
We have two particles, two electrons perhaps, that somehow interact with one another.
A collision or an electrostatic repulsion will do.
Because of the interaction, the positions and momentum of the two particles become correlated,
perhaps because of a law like the conservation of momentum.
Thanks to those correlations, if I measure the position of particle A, then I can predict
with certainty the position of particle B. And likewise, if I measure the momentum of
particle A, I can predict the momentum of particle B.
We use quantum mechanics itself to construct the thought experiment, but there's really
nothing more involved here than the skill of a good billiards player who knows that
if the cue ball strikes the eight ball and moves off in one direction with a specific
speed, then the eight ball will go straight into the side pocket.
Since a good quantum billiards player knows for sure that the quantum eight ball is going
into the side pocket, the speed, direction and final position of that eight ball have
to be real, and a complete quantum mechanics of billiards would have to account for that.
The quantum billiards is unlike classical billiards because of the Heisenberg uncertainty
principle, which says that even though one can predict either the position or momentum
of the eight ball after the collision, those two properties of the quantum eight ball cannot
be simultaneously definite.
The quantum theory can account for one or the other, the position or the momentum, but
it cannot account for both simultaneously.
Which follows, so say Einstein, Podolski and Rosen, that quantum mechanics is incomplete.
When the EPR paper appeared in the May 15, 1935 issue of the physical review, it was
like an atomic bomb had gone off.
Here was the world's most famous physicist, Albert Einstein, writing in one of the world's
leading physics journals, the physical review, arguing that our most important physical theory,
quantum mechanics, the theory most central to the revolutionary new physics of the still
young 20th century, was seriously flawed.
It wouldn't be an exaggeration to say that other physicists reacted with panic.
In a private discussion with colleagues, for example, Niels Bohr accused Einstein of committing
an act of, quote, high treason.
Wolfgang Pauley wrote immediately to Werner Heisenberg and pleaded with him to write a
reply to the EPR paper.
Pauley was especially worried that since the physical review was published in the United
States, impressionable young American physics students would be led astray by Einstein's
critical assault on quantum mechanics.
In the end, it fell to Bohr himself to publish a kind of official reply on behalf of the
larger physics community.
But instead of looking in detail at Bohr's answer to Einstein, an answer that's not
easy even for many experts to follow, we'll first look at what happened when Erwin Schrodinger
wrote to Einstein to congratulate him on the EPR paper.
Although Schrodinger invented wave mechanics and proved that it was equivalent to Heisenberg's
matrix mechanics, he had his own reservations about things like discontinuous quantum jumps,
indeterminacy, and especially Bohr's complementarity interpretation of quantum mechanics.
He preferred wave mechanics because it represented quantum phenomena in terms of continuous wave
functions.
But his letter of June 1935 congratulating Einstein on the success of the EPR paper elicited
an unexpected reply.
Einstein wrote back saying that Podolski had actually written the paper, quote, for reasons
of language, and that the paper had not turned out as he Einstein had intended.
The main point he said got buried, that's his word, buried by all of the formalism.
And indeed, the argument he then sketched for Schrodinger and repeated in all subsequent
publications about the issue differed strikingly from the EPR paper.
Einstein's own argument also starts with two previously interacting systems whose properties
become correlated thanks to principles like the conservation of momentum.
And in place of the completeness and reality principles, Einstein asserted just one principle
which he called the separation principle.
It says simply that if A and B are spatially separated, then there are separate real states
of affairs pertaining to systems A and B, and that the real state of system B cannot
be influenced instantaneously by anything that one does to system A, or vice versa.
Well that special relativity assumes that the speed of light is an upper bound on all
physical processes.
Einstein then argued as follows, since system B possesses its own independent real physical
state that is not influenced by anything I do to system A, then in particular, whatever
choice I make for a quantity to measure on system A can have no effect on B's physical
state.
But quantum mechanics assigns a different state description to B, a different wave function
say, depending upon what quantity one chooses to measure on A, even before one actually
does the measurement.
This is just one of the many curious features of quantum mechanics.
Thus, quantum mechanics assigns more than one different theoretical description to one
in the same real state of system B, which could be so only if the state descriptions
that quantum mechanics assigns are incomplete.
If a wave function were a complete description of reality, the whole truth as it were, then
one could not have genuinely different descriptions for one in the same real state of affairs.
One can have two different descriptions only if they are in some way just partial descriptions.
If you found that argument a bit hard to follow, take comfort from the fact that Einstein seems
to have worried that Schrodinger might have had trouble getting the point as well.
That's why Einstein interpreted the main point of the argument for Schrodinger by means of
yet another simple visualizable thought experiment.
Einstein asked Schrodinger to consider two boxes and a ball that has to be in one or
the other of the boxes.
If I look in one box, then I know immediately what's in the other box, meaning that by doing
a measurement on the one box, I can, as it were, predict with certainty what's in the
other box.
Einstein now asks Schrodinger to consider the situation before I look in either box, when
the best I can say is that there's a 50-50 chance of the balls being in box A and likewise
for box B.
Question, is that statement 50-50 chance?
Is that statement a complete description of reality?
By Einstein's lights, the answer is surely not, and most of us would likely say the same
given our classical intuitions about boxes and balls.
But then Einstein points out to Schrodinger that those classical intuitions depend crucially
upon our assuming the separation principle.
Why?
Because if we denied the separation principle, if we allowed for the possibility that what
I do with respect to box A can instantly change, not just my knowledge, but the actual
physical reality of box B and its contents, then before I look inside box A, it might
not just be my knowledge of its contents that's indefinite, it might be even the physical
reality itself.
That is to say, if boxes A and B and their contents are not independent of one another
in the manner stipulated by the separation principle, if there is not a determinate real
state of affairs pertaining to each before I look, a reality that is unaffected by what
I do to the other, then that 50-50 description could accurately and completely describe a
real indefiniteness in nature.
But of course quantum mechanics denies the separation principle, and that was the main
point that Einstein was trying to emphasize.
If like Einstein, one assumes that the separation principle must be true, then quantum mechanics
cannot be a complete picture of micro-physical reality.
At least since his invention of the photon box thought experiment, Einstein had been
trying to drive home that one fundamental point.
On the other hand, if one denies the separation principle as quantum mechanics does, then
quantum mechanics can be viewed as a complete physical theory.
In effect, this latter is exactly what Bohr said in his reply to Einstein that quantum
mechanics is complete because it denies the separation principle.
So who's right, Einstein or Bohr?
Well, before we can answer that question, it would help to be as clear as possible about
the point at issue.
That's why immediately after getting Einstein's letter, Schrödinger set to work on a series
of three papers that spelled out in the clearest terms yet exactly how and why quantum mechanics
violates the separation principle.
Schrödinger wasn't developing any new physics at this point.
He was just explaining more clearly than anyone had done before how, in the most rigorous
possible way, quantum mechanics describes the behavior of interacting systems.
And it was in these papers that Schrödinger introduced for the first time the name entanglement,
for this now famous feature of quantum mechanics, the distinctive feature of the quantum world
about which Einstein had been fretting for 30 years.
We've talked about this before, but let's remind ourselves that what entanglement asserts
is that according to quantum mechanics, the joint physical state of two previously interacting
systems cannot be represented as a logical product or sum of separate physical states
for the two separate systems.
In quantum mechanics, the whole is more than the sum of the parts.
So again, who's right, Einstein or Bohr?
It would take another 30 years before anything like a definitive experimental answer would
settle the question more or less in Bohr's favor in what are called the experimental
tests of Bell's theorem, about which I'll say more in a moment.
But Einstein tried hard over the next 20 years to explain why entanglement had to be wrong
and the separation principle had to be right.
One of Einstein's reasons we talked about in our last lecture, Einstein stressed that
separation principle was deeply interwoven in the foundations of all classical field
theories like his own theory of general relativity or his unified field theories.
This is because in effect, a field theory of the classical kind treats every point of
space time as a separate independent real physical system.
But Einstein now adds a deeper philosophical argument for why that has to be the way to
construct the foundations of a fundamental physical theory.
We find this argument in published papers and private letters.
We find it in the intellectual autobiography that Einstein wrote in the late 1940s.
It is clearly an issue about which Einstein felt more strongly than just about any other
issue of fundamental philosophical and physical significance.
I warn you that we're now going to enter the deepest waters yet, but it's important to
go slowly and to try to understand Einstein's reasoning.
Here's how Einstein's argument goes.
Einstein first says that if we're going to do physics at all, we must begin by dividing
nature at its joints, carving nature up into the individual bits and pieces, the systems
of which the physicist is always speaking, whose properties, behavior and interactions
will be described by physics.
Those bits and pieces might be particles like photons and electrons.
They might be fields and waves, but somehow or another we've got to divide nature into
independent parts so as to have something definite about which to speak.
How we do the dividing will always be somewhat arbitrary, depending on the task at hand.
Do I regard the billiard ball as one thing or do I regard it as a collection of billions
of individual atoms and molecules?
Well, it depends on the purpose.
If I'm playing billiards, then I should regard it as one object.
If I'm trying to make a billiard ball, then I'd better think about the physics and chemistry
of its constituent parts.
So how I carve up nature is somewhat arbitrary.
Now here comes the really deep and subtle point.
If I assume that the separation principle is true.
If I assume that spatially separated systems always have separate independent real states
of affairs that cannot be changed instantaneously by what happens in some other region of space
or spacetime, then it doesn't make any difference how I carve up nature, since any way of carving
nature will produce an objective carving into mutually independent parts.
In effect, Einstein is saying that potentially there are joints everywhere in nature.
This is if everywhere I look there are potentially little dashed lines next to which stand a
scissors icon and the words cut here.
It's like the ancient idea of atomism taken to the ultimate extreme.
Should we believe it?
Einstein says that he cannot imagine any other objective way of carving nature at its joints.
A measure of the strength of Einstein's conviction on this point is that by the early 1950s,
he was willing to give up even his desire for determinism if that was the price to pay
to save his separation principle.
Einstein was willing to acknowledge a dice playing God if that was the way to save what
for him was the only imaginable objective scheme for dividing nature into parts.
The only imaginable basis for a truly objective science of nature.
Should we believe it?
Einstein had one other reason for believing it, or at least there was one other influence
at work in his thinking.
Remember the Arthur Schopenhauer, who was one of Einstein's favorite philosophers?
We met him back in lecture 13 when we were discussing the place of music in Einstein's
life.
We remember that Schopenhauer taught that the human condition was one in which on this
side of the veil of Maya, in the universes we know it and experience it in the ordinary
human way, everything is presented to us as divided up into parts.
On the other side of the veil of Maya stands a deep reality accessible, if at all, only
through aesthetic experience, through music especially, and in the realm of that deep
reality, all is one.
But we live and we do physics on this side of the veil of Maya.
And here said Schopenhauer, the division of nature into its parts is based on the divisions
of space and time.
As Schopenhauer said, using a bit of Latin, space and time are the principium individuotionis,
the principle of individuation.
There is radical metaphysical holism on the other side of the veil of Maya, but on this
side in the realm of nature as we are constrained to know it and perceive it, holes are always
nothing more than a sum of parts.
If Einstein is thinking about physics as Schopenhauer would have us do, then it is as if quantum
mechanics with its holism and entanglement is asserting about the world as we ordinarily
know and perceive it, but can only be true of that other realm beyond the veil of Maya,
the realm accessible according to Schopenhauer only via aesthetic experience, especially
music again.
Is that perhaps why Einstein said of Bohr's physics, the physics that does assume holism
and entanglement, that it was quote, the highest form of musicality in the realm of thought?
Should we believe it?
What Schopenhauer said it was so is by itself no more a reason for believing the separation
principle than is Einstein saying that he cannot imagine another objective basis for
carving nature into parts.
As we shall see, the limits of Einstein's imagination and the imagined limits of Schopenhauer's
veil of Maya might not be the limits of a still bolder scientific imagination.
For almost 30 years after the appearance of the EPR paper, debates about completeness
and entanglement remained largely theoretical.
New arguments aiming to show quantum mechanics to be incomplete were produced, the most famous
one after EPR being Schrodinger's cat paradox, which appeared first in the same paper in
which Schrodinger introduced the term entanglement in 1935, and it seems to have been inspired
by a very similar argument first proposed by Einstein in one of his letters to Schrodinger.
In the cat paradox argument, Schrodinger tries to make vivid the possible macroscopic implications
of the quantum theories being incomplete at the micro level.
Schrodinger asks us to picture a cat in a closed chamber that also contains a canister
of poison gas whose valve opens if a geiger counter to detect the decay of a radioactive
atom, thus poisoning the cat.
Einstein's version of the thought experiment, by the way, involved not a cat, but a pile
of gunpowder that either has or has not exploded.
The animal lover in me prefers Einstein's version of the argument.
Though almost exactly half of a large number of identical radioactive atoms will always
decay in a time interval known as the half-life of that isotope, one can never predict exactly
when a given individual atom will decay.
Let's say we let a little time pass.
Before looking inside the chamber to see whether the cat is dead or alive, we ask how quantum
mechanics would describe the situation.
According to quantum mechanics, there would be a probability for the atoms having decayed,
let's say that it's one-half, and a probability for the atoms not having decayed, which must
then also be one-half, because probabilities always have to sum to one.
It follows that there's also a 50-50 chance that the cat is alive or dead, but we all
think that whether the cat is alive or dead is already a matter of settled fact, even
if not having looked inside the chamber, we don't yet know.
Doesn't it follow that quantum mechanics must be an incomplete theory if it can't account
at the macroscopic level for a settled fact like the cat's being dead or alive?
Cats don't exist in states somehow suspended between two such possibilities.
Cats are either dead or alive.
If quantum mechanics can't tell us which it is, then quantum mechanics isn't a complete
theory, no?
As compelling as those classical intuitions about living and dead cats might be, it's
actually not obvious that Schrodinger's argument does prove quantum mechanics to be incomplete.
For example, one might legitimately worry that the thought experiment isn't well described
since there might not be quantum mechanical states corresponding to cat alive and cat
dead.
But Schrodinger's argument was compelling enough to embolden a growing number of skeptics
about quantum orthodoxy to take up a fresh Einstein's old quest for a hidden variable's
interpretation of quantum mechanics, where the idea is again that there might be here
to fore unknown, hence hidden variables whose values would fix precisely the behavior of
quantum systems left indeterminate by ordinary quantum mechanics.
It's as if these extra variables would complete the story left incomplete by ordinary quantum
mechanics.
An added benefit is that one would also expect these hidden variables to eliminate entanglement
from our picture of nature.
If hidden variables fix all of the properties of system A and all of the properties of system
B, then how can the joint state of A and B be anything other than the sum of those separately
fixed properties of the two taken individually?
But now remember that Einstein's attempt to construct such a hidden variable's theory
was abandoned when he found that it too contained the same kind of entangled joint states that
Einstein was trying to avoid in regular quantum mechanics.
The failure of Einstein's own best attempt at a hidden variable's theory might explain
why he did not display much enthusiasm for later efforts along the same lines.
As he said more than once, he thought that fixing the problems with quantum mechanics
would require changes far more drastic than just adding some new variables.
But it was thanks to work on the revival of hidden variables theories that progress was
finally made toward turning a purely theoretical question about completeness and entanglement
into a question that might be settled in the laboratory.
The first step was taken in the early 1950s by the American physicist David Bohm who was
soon to become a great champion of hidden variables theories.
Bohm's first contribution was to invent a new version of the EPR thought experiment
that involved not position and momentum correlations between interacting particles, but correlations
between easily measurable properties of elementary particles like the directions in which two
photons produced by a two-step atomic decay are polarized.
In classical electromagnetism polarization is roughly the direction in which electromagnetic
waves oscillate.
The electrical part of an electromagnetic wave might for example oscillate up and down
in a vertical direction or it might oscillate in a horizontal direction.
If two photons emerge from two subsequent jumps of an orbital electron to successive
lower orbits, then the direction of polarization of one photon will be strongly correlated
with the direction of polarization of the other one.
The next step came in 1965 when John Bell, a theoretical physicist at CERN, the European
Center for Nuclear Research proved that any so-called local hidden variables theory would
yield predictions for such things as polarization correlation that necessarily fall below some
threshold value.
To say that a hidden variables theory is local is to say more or less that the hidden variables
of the two spatially separated systems such as two photons flying away from one another
can't secretly trade information with one another in a faster than light way prohibited
by special relativity.
If you're trying to fix the defects in quantum mechanics by adding hidden variables then
making your theory compatible with special relativity seems highly desirable.
For a hidden variables theory to be local would therefore be a good thing.
So again Bell proved that all such local hidden variable theories would predict polarization
correlations weaker than some threshold value.
But Bell also showed that quantum mechanics necessarily yields predictions for photon
correlations that rise above that same threshold or as we say violate the bell inequality.
And those quantum mechanical predictions violate the bell inequality precisely because of the
entanglement that is central to quantum mechanics.
Well one can easily measure polarization and with fairly simple technology one can measure
the strength of the correlations between spatially separated photons.
It was my own dissertation director, Abner Shimonie, working then at Boston University
who showed in 1969 together with John Clouser, Michael Horn and Richard Holt how one can
actually do the experiment and three years later in 1972 Clouser and his collaborator
Stuart Friedman finally did the experiment at Berkeley.
Friedman and Clouser found that the predictions of orthodox quantum mechanics were confirmed
to a high degree of precision and that the predictions of local hidden variable theories
were wrong.
There's was only the first in a very long line of experimental tests of Bell's theorem
that consistently confirmed orthodox quantum mechanics in ever wider variety of situations
and in ways that gradually foreclosed more and more ingenious tricks for trying to salvage
local hidden variable theories.
After more than 35 years of experimental tests of Bell's theorem it now seems clear that
unless one is willing to give up on relativity theory at the micro level and make one's hidden
variable theory non-local as David Bohm famously did then one has little recourse but to accept
the conclusion that quantum mechanics is complete and that entanglement is a real fact about
the deep physical reality of the quantum world.
On this point it seems Einstein was just playing wrong.
But as mistakes go this has to have been one of the most fruitful mistakes in the entire
history of physics because Einstein's dogged assertion of his deep doubts about quantum
mechanics triggered the later research of Bohm, Bell, Shimoni, Clouser and others.
Research that has now pretty firmly established the truth of entanglement and in recent years
research into quantum entanglement has crossed the divide from physics to engineering.
Today quantum entanglement is the basis of a steadily growing array of new technologies
in areas like super high speed quantum computing, absolutely unbreakable quantum cryptography
and highly accurate high capacity quantum information processing and transmission.
Still more exotic almost science fiction like technologies employing entanglement loom
on the horizon.
The most remarkable might well be the trick known today as quantum teleportation, yes
the name was deliberately borrowed from Star Trek whereby an assemblage of atoms in one
location can be reassembled almost instantaneously in a distant location though only if the two
locations had previously shared a decoding key as it were.
We're still a long way from teleporting an assemblage of atoms as complicated as Captain
Kirk but it's likely that teleporting simple molecules will be a matter of routine within
just a few years and for all of this we have to thank Einstein and his persistent critical
skepticism about the deepest foundations of the quantum theory.
Einstein quantum entanglement was not the only fertile mistake that Einstein made and
it wasn't only in quantum theory that Einstein's intuitions led him astray.
In the next lecture we'll turn our attention back to relativity and its applications to
cosmology.
There Einstein's big mistake was thinking that the universe could not be expanding and
what is surely one of the greatest ironies in the history of physics the ad hoc device
that Einstein introduced to block the possibility of expanding solutions to his gravitational
field equations, a device called the cosmological constant, a device Einstein was forced to
repudiate when the observational evidence for expansion became undeniable by the early
1930s.
That very same device has now reappeared, get this, as part of attempts to explain why
and how the universe is expanding faster than standard Big Bang cosmology predicts.
But again, that will be a topic for our next lecture.
