In our previous lecture, we brought to a close our long discussion of Einstein and the quantum
theory where the main focus is on understanding the mysteries of the micro world, like entanglement.
In this, lecture 18, we turn our attention back to physics on a grand scale, to cosmology,
the arena in which Einstein's general theory of relativity wrought the greatest changes
in our understanding of nature.
We will survey the development of relativistic cosmology up to the present day as it reshapes
our picture of the universe in ways that, in some instances, even Einstein almost surely
never imagined.
Einstein's general theory of relativity is the theoretical framework for all contemporary
work in cosmology.
Black holes, the big bang, and expanding universe, all of these surprising ideas were implicit
in the fundamental equations of general relativity, the so-called Einstein field equations.
But a recurrent theme will be the reluctance of Einstein and other physicists to take seriously,
at first, various of the possibilities suggested by general relativity.
That there could be so many surprises, and such reluctance to accept some of them is
noteworthy, and draws our attention to an important feature of the way a theory like
general relativity works.
Let's talk for a moment, and in a general way, about this philosophical or methodological
question before we start our survey.
At the heart of any scientific theory are what we often call laws of nature.
A law is a statement of a regularity in nature, and nearly all laws have the form of conditionals,
or if-then statements.
Most laws don't say categorically that thus and such is true.
Instead, they say that if such and such circumstances arise, then this and that must happen.
Newton's laws of mechanics don't all by themselves tell me how a billiard ball moves.
Instead, they say things like this.
If the cue ball strikes the eight ball from this direction with that speed, then the eight
ball recoils in this other direction with that other speed.
What fills in the blanks in the if clause are what scientists call initial conditions
or boundary conditions.
The same is true in general relativity.
Remember from lecture eight how Einstein's field equations work.
First tell me how matter and energy are arrayed in some part of the universe, as represented
by what's called the stress energy tensor on the right-hand side of the field equations.
That's the if clause.
Then solve the equations to get the metric tensor, which tells me how spacetime is shaped
in that region of the universe.
That's the then clause.
Different initial distributions of matter and energy give rise to different solutions
to the field equations.
Some of the surprises that arose in relativistic cosmology came from considering solutions
of the field equations for unusual initial distributions of matter and energy, such as
matter with densities far higher than we ever see in our immediate environments, which
is what triggers black hole formation.
One might well be reluctant to accept such surprises if one has good reason to doubt
that such unusual matter distributions actually exist anywhere in the universe.
Just because a solution is possible doesn't mean that it corresponds to anything real
in the universe, because the matter distribution giving rise to the surprising solution might
not exist.
Remember, for example, from lecture 16, the solutions discovered by Einstein's friend
Kurt Gertl, the ones including closed, time-like trajectories, literally travel backwards in
time?
No one thinks that those solutions correspond to anything real in nature, because no one
thinks that the necessary cylindrical rotating initial matter distributions are realized
anywhere in the universe.
But who knows?
It was also long thought that black holes didn't exist.
People thought that they were just too weird to be real.
Now, however, we think that black holes are commonplace.
One of them, a real monster of a black hole, once sucking in matter and energy at a prodigious
rate, lurks right at the center of our own Milky Way galaxy.
The story of black holes begins early in 1916, only a few months after Einstein had completed
his work on general relativity, when the first exact solution of the gravitational field
equations was worked out by the German physicist and astronomer Karl Schwarzschild.
This solution represented the structure of space-time in the vicinity of a centrally
symmetric mass such as the Sun or the Earth.
Einstein had already produced approximate solutions for such matter distributions when
he calculated the anomalous procession of Mercury's perihelion according to general
relativity, but Schwarzschild produced an exact solution with no approximations, an
impressive achievement in view of the inherent complexity of the field equations.
Schwarzschild did this work under unusual circumstances.
Before World War I, Schwarzschild had become a prominent figure in German science.
He was the director of the Potsdam Observatory just outside of Berlin, and like Einstein,
a member of the Prussian Academy of Sciences.
So when the war broke out, Schwarzschild joined the army.
In the spring of 1916, when he did his work on general relativity, he was serving as an
artillery lieutenant on the Russian front, and he was already suffering from the rare
autoimmune skin disease, Pemphidius, that would kill him in May of that year.
One curious feature of the Schwarzschild solution was immediately evident.
It was that if a sufficiently large mass were confined within a sufficiently small
radius, the resulting curvature of space would be so great as to cause that mass to
collapse in upon itself, and any other matter or radiation coming near enough would be sucked
into the resulting cavity and spacetime with no chance of ever emerging again.
That even light cannot reemerge is why such structures are now called black holes.
For a long time, no one, including Einstein, took this possibility seriously.
It was only in 1939 that interest was revived by a careful study by J. Robert Oppenheimer
and his student, Hartland Snyder, demonstrating that sufficiently massive dead stars, stars
in which thermonuclear energy sources had been exhausted, could undergo such a collapse.
Still, to many people, it seemed too bizarre to be real.
For example, the mathematics implied that from the point of view of an observer well outside
the collapse, the in-falling matter and radiation would appear to accumulate at the edge of
the collapsing region, giving rise to the name frozen stars that was commonly used until
the late physicist John Wheeler came up with the name black holes in 1967.
It's odd enough that black holes trap all matter and radiation that comes within their
grasp.
What is still is the fact that at the center of every black hole is what's called a singularity,
a place where, as curvature goes to infinity, basic physical quantities are no longer well
defined and the field equations of general relativity are no longer valid.
That our best physics fails in the centers of black holes is surely reason enough for
scientists who prized reasons mastery over nature to have doubted that anything so strange
could be real.
But the doubters, including Einstein, were wrong.
It took decades before the first strong observational evidence of black holes was obtained.
And only very recently, within the last 20 years or so, have sophisticated new instruments
like the Hubble Space Telescope provided convincing evidence that black holes are in fact quite
common in our universe.
We now think that a supermassive black hole lies at the center of every galaxy, including
our own, and that smaller, so-called stellar mass black holes are regularly formed by the
collapses of massive stars that we witness in the form of supernova.
And the more we learn, the more surprising still do black holes appear.
For example, we now know that, thanks to the rotation of the in-falling matter, supermassive
galactic black holes produce remarkable jets of highly charged radiation perpendicular
to the plane of galactic rotation.
You might well have seen a NASA artist's rendition of such jets, and the Hubble has
been taking photographs of the real thing.
In 1917, only one year after the discovery of the Schwarzschild solution to the field
equations, the Dutch physicist and astronomer, Willem de Sitter, produced the first exact,
so-called cosmological solutions for the Einstein field equations.
Cosmological solutions represent not the structure of some limited region of space-time, but
the structure of a whole universe.
In its own way, the De Sitter solution was surprising, too, because it pointed to the
possibility of non-static universes, universes that expand or contract.
Einstein thought that the plane evidence of the senses, we don't see the universe expanding
or contracting.
The plane evidence of the senses made it obvious that ours was a static universe.
But the De Sitter solution suggested that if the Einstein field equations were correct,
and if the universe were more or less homogenous, meaning the same average density in every
region, then a static universe would be the exception, not the rule.
Less than two years after its birth, here was something of a crisis for Einstein's new
theory of general relativity.
To save the theory from the embarrassment of being contradicted by the seemingly obvious
fact that the universe was static, Einstein felt himself compelled to modify the field
equations precisely so as to block the non-static solutions by adding a term called the cosmological
constant.
Einstein did this reluctantly, seeing the cosmological constant as a blemish on the pristine mathematical
beauty of an otherwise simple and elegant theory.
He knew that the cosmological constant was nothing more than an ad hoc device for saving
a threatened theory, a sort of maneuver that offended his philosophical and aesthetic sensibilities.
But cosmic expansions seemed to him such an absurd idea that he had no choice.
Once again, Einstein would turn out to have been mistaken.
This proved to be one of those cases where one cannot in fact trust the plain evidence
of one's senses.
As it happens, the evidence that ours is not a static universe have been accumulating for
a long time, though no one had yet appreciated its significance.
As early as 1848, astronomers had begun to notice that the spectra of light from some
distant stars was shifted a bit toward the lower frequency red end of the spectrum, and
it was speculated that this red shift might be related to the velocity of a star's motion
away from an earthbound observer, in the same way that the pitch of a train's whistle falls
as it passes by, a phenomenon known as a Doppler shift.
By 1917, the American astronomer, Vesto Sleifer, working at the Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff,
Arizona, had shown that all so-called spiral nebulae exhibited very large red shifts, suggesting
that they were receding from us at rather high speeds.
But in 1917, it was still not known that these nebulae were in fact galaxies in their own
right, far outside our own Milky Way.
It was only in 1919 when the American astronomer, Edwin Hubble, began using the new 100-inch
Hooker telescope at California's Mount Wilson Observatory that the true galactic nature
of the nebulae began to emerge.
But once the immense distances to other galaxies, like even our near neighbor, the Andromeda
Galaxy, was confirmed, Hubble also started to find a strong correlation between distance
and redshift, a relationship finally established in 1929 and ever since known as Hubble's law.
At the same time that Hubble was mapping the relationship between cosmic distance and redshift,
theorists like the Russian Alexander Friedman and the Belgian priest Georges Lemaître had
been studying more carefully the non-static solutions to Einstein's field equations and
were growing more and more convinced of the reality of cosmic expansion.
Hubble's observations provided the evidence confirming the analyses of Friedman and Lemaître.
What Hubble was seeing at Mount Wilson was exactly what one ought to see in a uniformly
expanding universe.
The farther a galaxy is from us, the faster it should seem to recede, and the more its
light should be redshifted.
It's a simple consequence of the geometry, and one that you can demonstrate for yourself
with a balloon and a marking pen.
Inflate the balloon partially, make a pattern of dots more or less evenly dispersed over
all of the balloon, and pick any one of them as representing our Milky Way.
As you inflate the balloon further, all of the dots grow farther apart, and those more
distant from the dot we dubbed the Milky Way do so at a more rapid rate.
Some are helped more by a three-dimensional analogy, pictured to yourself the way as the
loaf rises and bakes, the raisins in raisin bread all move farther apart.
The combination of Hubble's careful observations and the detailed theoretical work of Friedman
and Lemaître were enough to convince Einstein that he should have trusted his musician's
aesthetic instinct more than his eyes.
Shortly after his first personal meeting with Hubble during his visit to Caltech in the
spring of 1931, Einstein published a retraction of the cosmological constant, remarking a
little bit later that it had been his biggest blunder.
Cosmic expansion is now one of the fundamental principles of relativistic cosmology.
But nature and history are both full of irony, and as we shall see in a moment, Einstein's
biggest blunder isn't totally dead.
Very recent discoveries about cosmic expansion have led to its exhumation, and it's being
used now not to block expansion, but again ironically, to explain why the universe is
expanding more rapidly than a simple Friedman-Lemaître model would predict.
As if black holes in cosmic expansion weren't surprising enough, still more surprising implications
of general relativity were waiting to be noticed.
Two were spotted by Einstein himself, gravity waves and gravitational lensing.
Einstein first called attention to gravity waves in the spring of 1916, a few months
after completing work on general relativity the previous November.
Gravity waves occur when, for example, there's a sudden change in the distribution of matter
in some region of the universe, as with a stellar collapse or a supernova.
Just like the waves produced on the surface of a pond when a stone is thrown in, gravity
waves radiate outward through space.
They travel at the speed of light.
For a long time, it was thought that detecting gravity waves would be a very difficult challenge.
One reason is that gravity waves would have extremely low frequencies, which is to say
extremely long wavelengths.
A still bigger problem is that since the strength of gravity is so much weaker than other forces,
such as electricity and magnetism, the effect of a passing gravity wave would be hard to
disentangle from all of the other influences at work on a detector.
But a hard problem is just a stimulus to clever experimentalists, and the detection of gravity
waves is today one of the most important tasks on the experimental physics agenda.
An old and as yet unsuccessful idea from the 1960s has been to look for resonances from
passing gravity waves in very large masses, like huge aluminum cylinders.
We already learned about the biggest experiment to detect gravity waves back in lecture four,
called LIGO for Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory.
It employs a miles long, modern version of the old Michelson Interferometer.
Recall the theory behind that experiment.
Passing gravity waves from events like supernova are supposed to deform the two arms of the
interferometer in different ways, and so produce an interference pattern when the laser beams
traversing the two arms are recombined.
Far more exotic experiments have also been proposed, employing the quantum mechanics
of superfluid helium or superconducting circuits to link gravity and magnetism in a phenomenon
known as Gravitomagnetic Induction.
The question at this time is not whether gravity waves exist, almost everyone believes
that they do, but which of the competing experimental groups will first succeed in finding them?
Gravitational lensing, on the other hand, has already been found.
Gravitational lensing was first discussed, again by Einstein, twenty years after gravity
waves in 1936.
For a long time, it too was just an interesting theoretical possibility.
But lensing is now a well-established phenomenon, examples having recently been detected all
over the universe.
Gravitational lensing occurs because of gravity's ability to bend light rays and other forms
of electromagnetic radiation, just as a glass lens can refract light and thereby magnify
an image in a telescope so too gravity can bend light and create curious images.
Of course, one can't go out and manufacture a gravitational lens, instead, one has to
be lucky enough to find some distant object, such as a star, with just the right mass and
shape and precisely interposed between us and some still more distant object so that
the former functions as a lens for the latter.
As it happens, thanks to powerful new instruments like the Hubble Space Telescope, we have recently
proven to be very lucky finding lots and lots of examples of lensing.
Depending on the details, some very strange things can happen.
Sometimes the lensing simply magnifies the image of the more distant object.
Sometimes the lens produces a doubled mirror image of one in the same object.
Sometimes the lens breaks up the image into a ring-shaped structure, a kind of halo surrounding
the lens.
In cases where the lensing gravitational mass is itself dark, like a dead star no longer
radiating its own visible light, its effect as a lens is our only evidence of its existence.
In many cases, the lucky accident of gravitational lensing extends our view of the universe well
beyond the limits of ordinary optical or radio astronomy.
It's as if gravitational lensing, only recently proven to be real, has itself quickly become
a new technology.
Of all of the surprising implications of general relativity that we've just discussed, black
holes, cosmic expansion, gravity waves, and lensing, it's cosmic expansion that has most
radically changed our understanding of the universe we call home.
Up through the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, the prevailing view was that the celestial
and terrestrial realms were made of fundamentally different kinds of stuff.
Earth, air, fire, and water were the elements making up our planet and its immediate atmosphere.
The rest of the universe, out to the sphere of the unmoved mover, was made up of a special
kind of stuff called ethereal substance.
Different kinds of physics prevailed in the heavens and on the earth.
Birth, death, growth, decay, change of all kinds was confined to the earthly realm.
The only motions allowed in the heavens were the perfectly cyclical, at root circular motions
of the planets and the stars.
Galileo and Newton overturned that view by showing that real change, like comets, sunspots,
and supernova, could occur in the heavens as well as on earth, and by showing, in Newton's
case, that one in the same law of universal gravitation held sway everywhere.
But even for a long time after Newton, the view prevailed that while the stars might
move a tiny bit this way or that, and while new planetary systems might once in a while
congeal out of swirling clouds of dust, the basic macro structure of the cosmos was fixed
and static.
Indeed, this last vestige of the old medieval view of the unchanging heavens posed something
of a puzzle for Newton, because it was easy to show that, according to Newton's law of
universal gravitation, even a small perturbation in the average distribution of the stars was
enough to make the whole configuration unstable, as nearer stars drew nearer still.
And yet that old yearning for a stable cosmos, combined with more than 2,000 years of observed
stability, convinced everyone that we did indeed inhabit an essentially static universe.
All of that was changed, however, within 15 years of the discovery of general relativity
through the work of Einstein, De Zitter, Friedman, Lometra, and Hubble.
By 1931, it was basically an accepted fact that our universe was a dynamic place, not
a static one.
We had entered a fundamentally new phase in the long history of humankind's efforts
to understand our world.
But knowing that the universe is expanding doesn't settle all of the important questions.
Was there a beginning to the expansion?
How long has it been going on, and will it go on forever?
Will the rate of the expansion always stay the same?
Might there be a limit to expansion, after which the universe will start to collapse?
Up through the mid-1960s, there was much debate about all of these questions.
It wasn't only those seeking scientific confirmation of the biblical story of creation who favored
what came to be called the Big Bang View, according to which the universe originated
in a singular event some billions of years in the past.
And it wasn't only atheists and Marxists seeking to deny such a creation scenario who favored
what came to be called the Steady State View, according to which the universe was infinite
in time, expansion having always proceeded with a steady creation of new cosmic matter
to keep stable the average density of the universe.
The Big Bang Picture won the argument in 1965 when Arno Penzius and Robert Wilson detected
what is known as the Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation, an important predicted consequence
of the Big Bang Picture, a kind of cosmic white noise static that is a remnant of the
intense explosion in which the universe is supposed to have begun.
But confirming the Big Bang left many other questions still unanswered.
The next 30 years saw intense efforts to gauge the rate of expansion and to measure the average
density of the universe so as to determine whether the expansion would go on forever
or eventually slow down, perhaps leading to a recollapse.
Many of the details of the Big Bang model lacked strong theoretical motivations, but
an important refinement called inflationary cosmology sought to remedy that defect by
postulating a super rapid short burst of astonishingly great expansion at a very early date in the
history of the universe.
At first regarded by many as nothing less than a harebrained speculation, the inflationary
model has recently enjoyed stunning confirmation through ever more detailed observations of
the fine structure of the Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation.
Inflation is certainly not the last word in cosmology, but the evidence for it is now
so strong that its basic picture is probably fit to join expansion in the category of settled
cosmological fact.
But as has been the case throughout the physics revolutions of the past century or more, every
new fact seems to bring with it a new surprise, and there are surprises aplenty in the most
recent observations of the heavens.
Just within the past 10 or so years, two discoveries have rocked cosmology to its very foundations.
The first is the discovery of what is called dark matter.
We call it matter because it's known to interact gravitationally with ordinary matter made
up of protons, neutrons, and electrons.
We call it dark because as far as we have yet determined, it only interacts gravitationally.
That's to say it doesn't interact electromagnetically and seems not to emit electromagnetic radiation.
That it must be there is clear from many different kinds of independent observations and theoretical
arguments.
If there were no dark matter, then many galaxies should not rotate at the speeds we have observed.
We've seen examples of gravitational lensing by what we think is dark matter.
And we think that some of the irregularities in the fine structure of the cosmic microwave
background radiation are due to the presence of dark matter.
Dark matter is here to stay.
Moreover, all of the evidence suggests that dark matter makes up roughly 22% of the entire
contents of the universe.
But get this, we don't really know what this stuff is, even though it constitutes almost
a quarter of the whole universe.
We have some hypotheses.
For example, some extensions of the standard model of elementary particle physics predict
the existence of candidates for dark matter in the form of WIMPs, which is an acronym
for Weekly Interacting Massive Particles.
And experiments are underway to try to detect them.
And still, we don't know what this dark matter really is.
Okay, you think that's bad news.
It's not the half of it.
The most recent studies of expansion, studies dating back no more than 10 to 15 years, show
that the universe is expanding at a rate that would be impossible if the universe consisted
only of ordinary matter and dark matter.
In order to explain the observed rate of expansion, we have to postulate still more.
Because something more now goes by the name of dark energy.
We call it energy because of the way in which, if present, it enters into the Einstein field
equations, sort of like the way in which ordinary energy comes into play.
We call it dark for a different reason than we call dark matter dark.
We call dark energy dark because we're completely in the dark with respect to what it might
be.
And you know how much of it there must be in the universe?
The best current estimates are that about 74%, about three quarters of the entire universe
must consist of dark energy.
And we don't have a clue about what it might be.
I just said that we call it dark energy because of the way it enters into the Einstein field
equations.
Well, from a purely formal mathematical point of view, dark energy is inserted into the field
equations in a manner strongly analogous to Einstein's old cosmological constant.
And so that term and the symbol, the capital lambda that represented it, have been revived
to what a brave Einsteinian face on our ignorance.
Of course, the irony is deliberate.
Einstein introduced the cosmological constant to block non-static solutions of the field
equations.
Now we introduce a cosmological constant for the very different purpose of hurrying up
the expansion.
It's really important to stop and appreciate the significance of what's just been said.
Here we are at the end of just over a century of revolutionary transformations in our understanding
of nature.
More progress has been made in physics in the last hundred or so years than in the preceding
2,000 years.
Modern mechanics has taken us deep into the innermost details of the micro world.
General relativity has given us a totally new picture of the universe on a cosmic scale.
All that work, all those achievements, and where does it leave us?
It leaves us with a body of physical theory that we now know to explain at best only 4%
of the universe.
We should be humbled.
We should also be proud because it was only through our seeking to understand that 4%
of the universe that we came to discover the limits of our knowledge and the vast scale
of our ignorance.
One cannot help but recall the story of the Greek philosopher Socrates and the oracle
at Delphi who proclaimed Socrates the wisest of all men.
Socrates was puzzled by the oracle's pronouncement because he was sure that others knew more than
he did about such things as statecraft, poetry, and medicine.
But as he questioned those wise men in an effort to understand what the oracle could
possibly have meant, he eventually realized that he was the wisest of all men because
he alone knew that he did not know.
If the physics that Einstein has taught us makes us wise, it is in no small measure because
it teaches us what we do not know and what therefore we have yet to learn.
One can react with dismay or one can react with excitement.
Most physicists are excited because those who like Einstein thrive on intellectual challenge
and adventure have so much to look forward to.
