Hello, and welcome back to our lectures on Einstein.
With this lecture 19, we shift the focus away from Einstein's science and the narrow sense,
and begin to think more seriously about how, more so than ever before, physics in the first
half of the 20th century found itself no longer just the disinterested pursuit of knowledge
for its own sake.
It's not as though science had ever been wholly pure.
Already in the 3rd century BC, Archimedes was building burning mirrors, steam guns and
other engines of war for Dionysus, the tyrant of his home state of Syracuse.
But something importantly new happened in the early 20th century in the relationship
between science and the state, forever altering the way scientists would have to live, not
just in the laboratory, but also in the political realm.
One version of the story of 20th century physics holds that a pure, disinterested quest for
wisdom was transmuted in the 1930s, after the discovery of nuclear fission, into a devil's
compact as physicists rushed to build the ultimate weapons of war.
But the real history is more complicated.
Already in World War I, scientists on both sides of the conflict redirected their research
to military ends, research on poison gas, on both sides, being only the most famous of
many examples.
Still, something important did happen in the 1930s and 1940s, for by the end of World War
II, physics and other sciences, as well as the scientists themselves, were drawn far
more deeply into the political realm than had ever been the case before.
Big science grew dependent upon government funding, including defense-related funding.
Scientists were to be found in front of microphones and cameras, trying to inform and persuade
the public, and they were to be found behind closed doors, trying to advise presidents,
prime ministers, and premiers.
Einstein himself played a pivotal role in moving science out of the laboratory and into
the public arena, in part because he believed that the scientist's moral responsibility
for the fruits of scientific research does not stop at the laboratory door.
Understanding this transformation in the politics of science will be our goal in both this and
the following lecture.
Einstein moved to Berlin in the spring of 1914, just weeks before the outbreak of World
War I. If ever he or anyone else had illusions about science being above politics, those
illusions were shattered shortly after the war began, when, especially in Germany, many
prominent scientists promptly redirected their research programs to war-related projects.
A famous case in point is the chemist Fritz Haber, an assimilated Jew, one of the movers
behind Einstein's appointment in Berlin, and a good friend to Einstein, Haber was already
well known as the inventor of the Haber process for the artificial production of ammonia.
The Haber process itself had important military implications, since if one can make ammonia,
then one can also obtain the nitrogen, so crucial in fertilizers and explosives, products
essential to a Germany at war whose access to foreign sources of raw materials was to
be cut off by a British naval blockade.
But after the war began, the intensely patriotic Haber turned his attention to research on
poison gas. Haber pretended that his aims were noble, that such a weapon of terror would
actually shorten the war and so reduce human suffering. But friends like Einstein were horrified.
Then Haber's wife had misgivings, and some believed that her suicide, while Haber was
away testing his inventions, was caused by her grief over her husband's war work.
The phenomenon of science in service to war was, however, neither a new nor exclusively
a German one. In the United States, the National Academy of Sciences was created by Abraham
Lincoln in 1863 to provide the government with technical advice during the Civil War,
and the National Research Council was created by Woodrow Wilson in 1916 to facilitate research
on technologies like sonar for detecting submarines. After Germany first deployed chlorine as a
poison gas at the Second Battle of Eppel in April 1915, the Allies were quick to retaliate
with their own poison gas weapons. One example of World War I poison gas research has surprising
connections to my own university. The chemist, Fr. Julius Newland, is famous at Notre Dame
for his having invented synthetic rubber. Our physics building bears his name. After
taking a PhD from the Catholic University of America in 1904, Newland taught botany and
organic chemistry at Notre Dame until 1936. In 1918, another chemist, Winford Lewis, noticed
that Newland's old dissertation also reported the discovery of a reaction between acetylene
and arsenic trichloride that produced the potentially lethal blister agent since known
as lewisite. While not deployed in World War I, subsequent research on what was also called
the dew of death led to the United States producing some 20,000 tons of lewisite. So
far as we know, the U.S. never used lewisite in war, but other nations, such as the Soviet
Union and Japan, manufactured comparable quantities. And there's also strong evidence
that Saddam Hussein used a combination of mustard gas and lewisite during Iraq's war
with Iran during the 1980s and against Kurdish villages within Iraq.
As we've already learned in other earlier lectures, World War I and its immediate aftermath
afforded another especially sad example of the way in which physics can become embroiled
in politics when the anti-Semitic backlash in Germany focused some of its hatred upon
what came to be called Jewish physics epitomized by Einstein's theory of relativity. After
the major public assaults on Einstein and relativity in 1920 that we discussed before,
such as the public meeting in the Berlin Philharmonic Hall in August, and Einstein's
showdown with Philip Lennard at the September meeting of the Society of German Natural Scientists
and Physicians, after these events, the controversy gradually reduced to a low similar simmer throughout
the rest of the 1920s and early 1930s. But with Hitler's rise to power in 1933, the anti-relativity
campaign boiled over as previously professionally marginalized critics of Jewish physics won
state backing for their agenda and in some instances moved into professorships vacated
by refugees from Nazi racial persecutions. By the latter 1930s, a physicist in Germany
risked censure or worse for mentioning Einstein or relativity. Heisenberg, for example, was
branded a white Jew because extreme critics thought him too accommodating to Einstein
and relativity. The anti-Semitic assault on relativity is not the only example in the
20th century of politics interfering with the ordinary business of science. The other
famous example involved the destruction of genetics and evolution in the Soviet Union
from the 20s through the 1960s by the followers of the Stalinist, biologist and agronomist
Trofim Lysenko, whose defense of the Lamarckian theory of the inheritance of acquired characteristics
was congenial to hopes for a revolution in Soviet agriculture as well as the engineering
of what they called the new Soviet man. From his powerful positions as head of the Academy
of Agricultural Sciences and director of the Institute of Genetics and the Soviet Academy
of Sciences, Lysenko led a campaign of repression against Mendelian genetics that set back the
biological sciences in the Soviet Union by decades and destroyed the careers and even
the lives of many able Soviet scientists. Lysenkoism was regularly attacked from afar,
but it was only after the Soviet physicist Andrei Sakharov, the father of the Soviet
hydrogen bomb, publicly attacked Lysenkoism in a 1964 General Assembly of the Soviet
Academy of Sciences, it was only then that Lysenko's influence inside the Soviet Union
began to wane. One rightly reacts with shock and indignation, one confronted by such examples
of political repression within science. But a touchy and difficult philosophical problem
lurks nearby. Earlier we talked about the underdetermination of theory choice by evidence,
and the scientists' occasional invocation of aesthetic criteria of theory choice like
simplicity for choosing among empirically equivalent theories. The touchy philosophical
question is this. If one is permitted to invoke aesthetic criteria of theory choice when confronted
by empirically equivalent theories, why is one not also permitted to invoke political
or perhaps even religious criteria as well? If it's not unreasonable for a physicist
like Einstein to choose the more beautiful or more elegant of two empirically equivalent
theories, why should it not also be reasonable to pick the theory more conducive to shaping
what one judges to be a beautiful social or political order? Don't hold your breath waiting
for me to give you an easy answer to this question. Happily, there are comparatively
few of any cases where resort to political criteria of theory choice might seem even
remotely relevant. The anti-relativity campaign and lysenkoism don't fit the bill, for in
these cases the evidence, fairly weighed, decided clearly and overwhelmingly in favor
of relativity and standard evolutionary genetics. But while physics and biology afford few or
no examples, it won't do to pretend therefore that the issue cannot or will not arise. Indeed,
as we move attention toward the human sciences, examples might more readily present themselves.
And more than a few philosophers of science have worried that in areas like sociology
and economics, areas where the evidence itself might be comparatively more in need of theoretical
interpretation, politics intrudes more often than we might want to admit. In such a situation,
pretending that theory neutral evidence will always decide the question might simply obscure
the manner in which politics actually does infect the science. Bear this thought in mind
when next you puzzle over why our national economy and the stock market upon which your
retirement income depends, why they don't always behave as some experts predict, or why
some political leaders are slow to accept what climate science tells us about phenomena
like global warming. After World War I, it might still have been possible for a few years
for theoretical physicists to believe that while engineers and chemists could be enlisted
to make weapons, fundamental physics research was above the fray. Indeed, many later looked
back upon those heady days of exciting work on quantum mechanics in the late 1920s in
places like Copenhagen, Göttingen, Cambridge, and Paris as a golden age when scientists
of all nations and political persuasions worked in harmony to solve the riddle of the quantum
world. It had occurred to some thinkers that Einstein's linking of mass with energy might
someday find a military application, since even a tiny mass was now seen to have locked
within it a tremendous energy. But nearly everyone thought that the prospect so remote
as to be meaningless. As late as 1933, for example, the famous British experimentalist
Ernest Rutherford said that anyone proposing the possibility of producing power from a
nuclear reaction would be talking, quote, moonshine, and Einstein himself at first dismissed
the possibility as remote. But as research on nuclear physics accelerated in the early
1930s, a once distant prospect began to look more and more real, especially after James
Chadwick's discovery of the neutron early in 1932. The neutron is one of two elementary
particles now known to compose the nuclei of all but the hydrogen atom. Roughly equal
in weight to its nuclear companion, the proton, the neutron has the advantage of being, as
its name is meant to suggest, an electrically neutral particle. That implies that since
neutrons are unaffected by electrostatic repulsion or attraction, they can easily penetrate a
positively charged atomic nucleus. And so in principle, unsettled the delicate balance
of forces holding the nucleus together, which might lead to a splitting of the nucleus,
what we call nuclear fission, and the consequent release of the vast stores of energy involved
in binding the nucleus. Not everyone was quick to appreciate the possibilities. But Einstein's
old friend, Leo Zallard, was extraordinarily present. Remember that Einstein and Zallard
had jointly patented a refrigerator design in the late 1920s. In 1934, Zallard drew up
and submitted another patent, this for the fundamental physical processes involved in
nuclear fission. And it includes discussion of using nuclear chain reactions, where neutrons
liberated in one fission event trigger still more fissions to make an explosion. In 1934,
no one knew for sure yet that nuclear fission actually occurred in nature. It was still
just a theoretical possibility. But the always far-seeing Zallard knew just what the consequences
could be if fission did occur. That's why, after he was awarded the patent in 1936, he
sought to keep the whole idea secret by assigning the patent to the British War Office.
It was only late in 1938 when Otto Hahn and Fritz Strasmann finally detected nuclear fission
in experiments conducted in a Berlin laboratory, and their former collaborator, Lisa Meitner,
then a refugee in Sweden, provided the conclusive interpretation of those results. In March of
1938, the Anschluss had formally united Germany and Austria under Hitler's control, making
the Austrian Jew, Lisa Meitner, a German subject, and so forcing her finally to flee
for her safety. On October 1, 1938, Hitler annexed the Sudateland, formerly part of Czechoslovakia.
When news of the discovery of fission began to spread at the beginning of 1939, with Hitler
already on the march, the theoretical physics world knew that such innocence as it might
once have possessed was gone for good. Scientists outside of Germany, many of them
Jewish refugees from Germany and Central Europe, rightly feared the possibility of a German
atomic bomb. One noteworthy reaction was a campaign starting around February of 1939,
and led by Leo Zillard, there he is again, a campaign for a voluntary moratorium on publishing
work on nuclear fission. This was a truly extraordinary step for a physics community
once deeply committed to the principle of free and open communication and science. But
a moratorium would be hard to enforce in a physics world where ego, ambition, patriotism
and pride and priority still overruled prudence. It was the Paris group around Marie Curie's
former assistant and son-in-law, Frédéric Joliot Curie, who most egregiously broke the
ban with an April 1939 report about the rate of neutron production in uranium fission, a
report that further alarmed those worried about a bomb by showing that more than enough
neutrons were liberated to sustain a chain reaction.
Another reaction to news of the reality of fission was Einstein's signing the famous
letter to President Roosevelt on August 2, 1939, that warned of the threat of a German
atomic bomb and led ultimately to the creation of the Allied atomic bomb project. Einstein
did not write the letter himself. It was drafted by the ever active Zillard, who drove out
to Einstein's vacation cottage in Pecanic, New York on Long Island to get Einstein's
signature. Nor did the letter make its way immediately to President Roosevelt. It was
delivered through an intermediary, Roosevelt's friend, the New York banker Alexander Sachs,
who finally met with Roosevelt on October 11. That was more than a month after World
War II began with Germany's invasion of Poland on September 1. When Sachs pressed Roosevelt
with a question whether he understood the seriousness of what Einstein and Zillard were
reporting, Roosevelt replied, Alex, what you are after is to see that the Nazis don't
blow us up.
It took nearly two more years and a second Zillard instigated letter from Einstein before
the major initiative that became the Manhattan Project was finally launched. More research
was needed to prove the possibility of a chain reaction and therefore a bomb. An important
moment came on December 2, 1942 when Enrico Fermi's group at the University of Chicago
produced the world's first controlled chain reaction in a nuclear pile constructed in
the squash courts under the stands of Chicago's old stag field. Stag field is now long gone,
but the exact location of Fermi's experimental reactor is marked today by a moving sculpture
by Henry Moore.
The principal lab for bomb research, design, and assembly was set up on a mesa in the New
Mexico wilderness at Los Alamos in the spring of 1943 under the overall scientific direction
of J. Robert Oppenheimer. There were satellite labs at Oak Ridge, Tennessee and Hanford Washington
where uranium and plutonium for the bombs were manufactured and additional research
was done in many other places including the so-called metallurgical laboratory at the
University of Chicago.
Four years had passed since Einstein's first letter to Roosevelt, but after work began
at Los Alamos it progressed with extraordinary rapidity given the nature of the many technical
obstacles that had to be overcome. In just over two years, in July of 1945, the first
bomb was ready for testing at Alamogordo, New Mexico in the Yornada del Muerto Valley
which means Journey of the Dead. Witnessing that test, nicknamed Trinity, Oppenheimer
is said to have recalled some words from the Hindu sacred text, the Bhagavad Gita, the
words, quote, I am become death, destroyer of worlds.
At about the same time that Zillard and Einstein were collaborating on the first letter to
Roosevelt, the German atomic bomb project was established under the leadership of Werner
Heisenberg. There was still more than enough physics talent in Germany to justify the fear
being felt elsewhere about the possibility of a German bomb. As it turned out, however,
Heisenberg's group did not come anywhere near to manufacturing an atomic bomb. They
didn't even succeed in building a successful nuclear reactor. There were many reasons for
the German's lack of success, ranging from inadequate industrial infrastructure, Hitler's
disinterest in any projects that couldn't promise an immediate contribution to winning
the war, and Heisenberg's ineptitude in both reactor design and calculating the critical
mass of uranium, the amount needed for a self-sustaining chain reaction. After the war, Heisenberg
encouraged the view that German bomb scientists had deliberately focused their attention on
reactor design so as to avoid having to build a bomb for Hitler. But debate still rages
today over the ratio of truth to rationalization and Heisenberg's version of history. Many
people at the time, including Niels Bohr, were convinced that Heisenberg was seriously
trying, if failing, to build a bomb. Michael Frehn's prize-winning play Copenhagen provides
a compelling look into this controversy over Heisenberg's actions and intentions. It focuses
on one crucial wartime meeting between Bohr and Heisenberg in September 1941, a meeting
that destroyed the once warm relationship between Bohr and Heisenberg, because it led Bohr
to believe that Heisenberg was working on the atomic bomb, and perhaps even trying to
recruit Bohr for the task, or at least trying to elicit from him information about whether
the British and the Americans were working on the bomb as well.
The lack of an adequate industrial infrastructure might have been an obstacle to the German
bomb project. There was no such lack in the United States. The Manhattan Project was,
by orders of magnitude, the largest scientific and technical project ever undertaken up to
that time. Many millions of dollars were spent, and thousands of scientists and engineers
were employed. The sheer scale of the project and the fact that it was successful permanently
changed the role that science plays in society. There were many consequences. For one thing,
after the atomic bombs were dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, killing nearly 200,000 Japanese
civilians, the physicists who built the bomb realized that they now bore a moral responsibility
different in kind and degree from any they had borne before. Among the results, to be
discussed more fully in lecture 20, was the physicists beginning to play a much more prominent
public role in debates about atomic weapons and about the place of science in society
more generally. As we'll see, Einstein's was one of the most prominent voices in the
ensuing public controversy. Equally significant in the long run was how the success of the
Manhattan Project permanently changed the way science is funded and organized. Most
scientific research before World War II had been carried out by individual scientists
or small teams of scientists, and funding had come mainly from the universities or research
institutes that employed those scientists. There were only a few examples of very modest
government or foundation funded research. But after World War II, new models for the
organization of funding and research were developed. This was the era of what came to
be called big science, epitomized by giant government laboratories like those at Oak
Ridge, Tennessee or Brookhaven, New York, where often hundreds of scientists gathered together
to do a single experiment with a large and expensive piece of equipment like a cyclotron.
Even the research done back in a university laboratory was now most likely to be funded
by the Department of Defense or the National Science Foundation, which was created in 1950
to coordinate federal government funding of basic scientific research. Other major sources
of government funding adopted the new model of government university collaboration, including
the National Institutes of Health, the mission of which was expanded after World War II from
being little more than an adjunct to the U.S. Public Health Service to being a major governmental
source funding research across all of the biomedical sciences.
With the government now picking up the tab, new questions arose about the direction of
scientific research. No longer was it the case that a scientist simply investigated any
question that might arouse curiosity. Proposals for funding had to be evaluated by committees
of one's scientific peers, and the sheer scale of research necessitated a bureaucratization
of the funding process unimaginable to scientists funded by Einstein's little Kaiser Wilhelm
Institute for Physics in Berlin in the 1920s. With so much money now being involved, with
such massive investments in infrastructure and personnel being required, both scientists
and government officials asked whether agencies like the National Science Foundation should
take an active role in deciding how, in future, fundamental research is to be steered. Was
there anymore a free market in scientific ideas? Should public monies, or tax dollars,
be given to scientists to follow their noses wherever they might lead? Should priority
be given to research promising immediate applications, or should priority be given to so-called
basic research, the kind of research that might generate new fundamental theories upon
which the technologies of the next century might be based? Should the public, through
their representatives in Congress, or more directly, have a role in making any or all
of these decisions? With questions like these now having to be asked, it was inevitable
that science would be entangled with politics in ways that Einstein the patent clerk could
not have foreseen in 1905. Today, it's normal for professional organizations like the American
Physical Society to hire lobbyists and for university presidents to whine and dine senators
and representatives in the hopes of securing earmarks, a euphemism for pork barrel, that
might fund a whole new lab or research center. In the Cold War climate of the late 1940s,
1950s and beyond, much of the research done with military funding was also classified.
This too changed forever the relationship between government and science. No longer
was it taken for granted that all scientific knowledge was to be open and freely shared,
the exclusive property of no nation or person. Individual scientists whose political loyalty
was suspect might be denied the security clearance necessary for entree into secure government
labs or for eligibility to apply for some kinds of funding. More than once, universities
anxious about funding or just anxious to modify conservative alumni fired faculty members
suspected of communist sympathies, although being a member of the Communist Party was
never itself illegal. Even students going to university on scholarships or loans provided
by government programs like the National Defense Education Act of 1958 were required
to take loyalty oaths. Another consequence of the growth in military funding was that
the geography of the disciplines could be dramatically reshaped by the imperatives of
defense related research. As happened in the mid 1980s, when the many millions of dollars
made available for research on Ronald Reagan's Star Wars strategic defense initiative revitalized
the somewhat moribund field of solid state physics. The need for high quality scientific
advice during the Cold War and the era of burgeoning big science also earned for scientists
a role at the highest levels of government. The fact made clear when, in 1957, President
Eisenhower created for the first time a cabinet level position of presidential science advisor.
In the next lecture, we'll look closely at the very prominent public role that Einstein
played after World War II in debates about the control of nuclear energy and the arms
race, surely the most important political fallout from the physicist's involvement in
creating new weapons of mass destruction. But as we look back over the structural changes
in the relationship between science and politics wrought by war in the first half of the 20th
century, we should keep clearly in mind the central role played by Einstein in affecting
these transformations. Einstein was by no means the only or even the main engine of
change, nor did he ever set out deliberately to make political the physics he loved for
its beauty and detachment from the everyday and the merely personal. And yet he, as much
as anyone, made it happen. The August 1939 letter to Roosevelt will always stand as the
clearest marker of the change in the relationship between science and the state. Scientists
had long advised governments, but no other single act by any other single scientist inaugurated
fundamental realignments of the kind represented by the Manhattan Project. And yet that letter
would not have had the impact it did have, and Zalard might not have turned to Einstein
in the first place, had it not been for the way in which, since the early 1920s, Einstein
had put its scientific reputation to work in the service of political goals, like Zionism,
pacifism, and world government. Einstein was uniquely capable of affecting change, not
only or even mainly because of his scientific reputation. Other Nobel Prize winners would
not have been able, like Einstein, to move a nation. Einstein was capable of affecting
change because of his prestige and notoriety as a thinker and advocate on a far larger
stage than that of physics alone. Is that a good thing? That's a question for each
of us to ponder by our own lights. For my part, however, however much I rue the advent
of a technology capable of destroying all human life, I also shudder to think about
what the world might have been like, had Eisenberg been just a little bit smarter, and had we
in the United States not been graced by the presence of a new immigrant with the intelligence
and deep moral commitment that Einstein brought to his new American home. How the United States
repaid that gift will be discussed in each of our next two lectures.
