Welcome to lecture 20 of our series on Einstein.
In the last lecture, we looked at the way in which in the first few decades of the 20th
century, science was becoming ever more deeply entangled with politics, culminating in the
Manhattan Project, which produced the first atomic bomb in 1945, inaugurating the era of
so-called big science and forever reshaping the relationship between science and government.
In the present lecture, we'll continue our discussion of the politicization of science
resulting from work on the atomic bomb, our focus now being on the post-war reaction of
the scientific community to the bomb itself and the changes it brought in world affairs
and in the scientists' understanding of their moral responsibilities for what they had created.
We will find Einstein playing a very prominent role in post-war debates about atomic weapons,
both as a loud public voice calling for the international control of atomic energy and
as a kind of conscience for the whole community of science.
But as we learned in the previous lecture, in 1939, Einstein signed the letter to President
Roosevelt that launched the American Atomic Bomb Project.
At the time, Einstein thought this step thoroughly justified by the risk that Germany might develop
an atomic bomb first and use it to tyrannize the world.
A deterrent was needed.
After World War II, however, Einstein came to regret this act as perhaps his greatest
mistake.
It's ironic that the Einstein who instigated the Manhattan Project was deemed too great
a security risk by the FBI because of his leftist politics.
We'll learn more about this in the next lecture.
And so was not asked by the Army to work on the project, though he did some modest war-related
work for the Navy, work having nothing to do with the bomb.
Through his many professional connections, Einstein knew, of course, that something was
afoot, that there was a very good reason why so many of his physics colleagues in Princeton
and elsewhere were booking train tickets to an obscure location in New Mexico.
Still, when the bomb was used without warning against largely civilian targets in Japan
in early August of 1945, Einstein learned about it as did everyone else.
On vacation at Saranac Lake in the Adirondacks, Einstein heard the announcement of the August
6th bombing of Hiroshima on the radio.
He was horrified, and from that moment on, throughout the last 10 years of his life,
no cause drew more of his energy than the effort to rein in the worldwide race in atomic
and nuclear weapons.
One of his very last public acts, the so-called Russell-Einstein Manifesto of 1955, is seen
by some historians as the first step towards serious international cooperation in arms
limitation.
Einstein was not the first physicist moved by a sense of deep moral responsibility to
try to limit the harm that might be done by the atomic bomb.
The first attempt actually came from within the Manhattan Project itself, even before
the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
By the spring of 1945, intelligence had revealed that the German bomb project was nowhere close
to success.
With the threat of the German bomb removed, some physicists thought that work on the Allied
bomb could stop.
But the pace of work at Los Alamos only increased, and it became clear to everyone involved that
plans were being laid to use the bomb against Japan.
Whether military necessity dictated the atomic bombing of Japan is a topic hotly debated
still today.
At the time, it was argued that the deaths of 200,000 Japanese civilians in Hiroshima
and Nagasaki prevented the one million Allied casualties that would have resulted from the
planned invasion of the Japanese homeland, along with comparable numbers of casualties
on the Japanese side.
Those numbers have since been disputed by historians looking at internal U.S. War Department estimates.
Others have argued that Japan was on the verge of surrender anyway, if only the Allies would
allow the Emperor to stay.
Some argue that the real motive for dropping the bomb was to force a Japanese surrender
before the Soviet Union could declare war on Japan and lay claim to a share of the spoils.
But another argument is that had Roosevelt not died in April 1945, the bomb would not
have been used against civilian targets, that it was the new President Harry Truman's lack
of experience and political insecurity that led to his bowing to the advice of his generals
and to his trying to use the bomb to intimidate our then ally, Joseph Stalin, whom many expected
to be our next great enemy.
Might be the view that, by the summer of 1945, so much effort had been devoted to building
the bomb, so much technical, military and political momentum had developed that the
bomb's use was unstoppable.
But in the summer of 1945, there were in fact a couple of attempts by scientists involved
in bomb research to persuade the government not to use the bomb in a surprise attack against
Japanese civilian targets.
The most important of these was the so-called Frank Report, which was prepared under the
direction of the refugee German-Jewish physicist, James Frank, at the University of Chicago,
where the metallurgical laboratory functioned as an important part of the Manhattan Project.
The report, the Frank Report, weighed the long-term political implications of a surprise
attack, concluding that a demonstration of the bomb in front of Japanese observers might
suffice to bring the war to an end and would also make more likely post-war international
cooperation in the management of atomic energy.
But the report never reached its intended audience, its circulation and the solicitation
of additional signatures being blocked by those in charge of the Manhattan Project.
While the Frank Report did not achieve its intended aim, it's remembered nonetheless
as an important turning point in the bomb scientists coming to grips with their own
moral and political responsibilities, because the report asserted an obligation for scientists
acting as scientists to take part in public debate about how the products of their research
will be used.
It recognized the special expertise of political and military leaders, but argued that since
the scientists know best the technical issues at stake, they have a right and a responsibility
to act.
That premise, that thanks to their technical expertise, scientists have a right and a responsibility
to act in the public political arena to control the use of science and technology, that premise
became the foundation for all the subsequent public campaigns in which the scientific community
played such an important role.
When news of the Hiroshima bombing was received, the Einstein, who had already done so much
to promote the cause of peace and mutual understanding among nations, saw immediately the new threat
posed by the atomic bomb and the responsibility that scientists like himself bore for trying
to make the world safe from this horrible new technology of war.
In remarks prepared for delivery in August 1948 to a World Congress of Intellectuals
in Rotschloff, Poland, Einstein echoed the sentiments of the authors of the Frank Report
writing,
We scientists, whose tragic destiny it has been to help make the methods of annihilation
ever more gruesome and more effective, must consider it our solemn and transcendent duty
to do all in our power to prevent these weapons from being used for the brutal purpose for
which they were invented.
True to his convictions, Einstein set to work as a world leader of the movement to prevent
a new arms race.
He wrote and signed manifestos.
He gave interviews and radio addresses.
In lecture 12, we learned about Einstein's vigorous promotion of Emery Reeves's post
war plan for world government.
Einstein had long been advocating such ideas himself, but the threat of an atomic arms race
made the need for a supranational authority vastly more urgent in Einstein's opinion.
Equally urgent was the need to educate the public about the dangers of atomic weapons.
Einstein and other leading scientists understood that in a democracy, policy is not made simply
by elite intellectuals advising or lobbying lawmakers.
In a democracy, an educated citizenry has an essential role to play in charting a course
for a nation or for the entire world.
It was for this purpose of public education and for promoting the peaceful use of atomic
energy that Einstein and his old friend and collaborator, Leo Zillard, co-founded the
Emergency Committee of Atomic Scientists in the fall of 1945.
The committee included the physical chemist, Harold Urie, who won the 1934 Nobel Prize
in Chemistry for the discovery of deuterium, the heavy isotope of hydrogen used in some
hydrogen bombs, and the chemist, Linus Pauling, who won the 1954 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
for his work on the theory of the chemical bond and the 1962 Nobel Peace Prize for campaigning
against nuclear weapons.
Another member of the committee was the physicist Hans Bethe, who won the 1967 Nobel Prize in
Physics for his work on stellar nucleosynthesis, the creation of heavy elements within stars,
and who in spite of his own theoretical work on both the atomic and hydrogen bombs, went
on to become in the 1960s and beyond a famous crusader against nuclear weapons.
Public education was also the principal goal of another organization founded in the fall
of 1945, the Federation of Atomic Scientists, known by the acronym FAS even after it was
soon renamed the Federation of American Scientists, and of the magazine associated with the Federation,
the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists.
Einstein lent his enthusiastic support to both of these initiatives as well.
Einstein and Zellard's Emergency Committee of Atomic Scientists was disbanded in 1950,
its work taken over by other organizations, but the Federation of American Scientists
and the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists carry on their work still today.
The Bulletin played an especially important role in public education.
In its June 1947 issue, it premiered on the front cover a famous device that has been
seen there ever since, the so-called Doomsday Clock, which measures the threat of nuclear
war and today other threats to the planet, such as global warming, by how many minutes
to midnight the hands of the clock indicate.
In June 1947, before the Soviet Union exploded its first atomic bomb, the clock read eight
minutes to midnight.
In 1984, at the height of debates about U.S. plans to introduce intermediate-range nuclear
missiles in Europe, the clock was advanced to three minutes to midnight, the closest
it has ever stood.
Today, because of such developments as the United States' unilateral abrogation in 2002
of the 30-year-old Antibolistic Missile Treaty, the spread of nuclear weapons technology to
countries like North Korea and the threat of global warming, today the clock reads five
minutes to midnight.
In the fall of 1945, scientists new to the business of politics faced one very specific
and important challenge.
During World War II, the atomic bomb was a highly guarded secret, and control of atomic
energy had been entirely the responsibility of the U.S. Army.
But with the end of the war and with the bomb's existence no longer being a secret, Congress
and the President had to establish a new framework to succeed the Manhattan Project.
What was first proposed in early October with President Truman's support was the May Johnson
Bill, which gave primary control to the military.
Groups like the Federation of Atomic Scientists feared that putting atomic energy under military
control would make impossible the kind of international control they sought.
Unpracticed in the ways of Washington, individuals like the Lard and groups like the FAS launched
a vigorous lobbying campaign against the May Johnson Bill and on behalf of the principle
of civilian control of atomic energy.
They were fast learners in the School of Politics and celebrated a victory of sorts when, in
December, the May Johnson Bill was shelved, replaced by a bill introduced by Senator Brian
McMahon of Connecticut, which was adopted in July of 1946 and established the Civilian
Atomic Energy Commission, the AEC, as the ultimate authority in the United States as
of January 1, 1947.
Of course the military retained primary responsibility for the use of atomic weapons, but more than
merely nominal control over research and development was exercised by the AEC, which continued
to function in that capacity until a 1974 reorganization divided the work of the AEC, placing
all regulatory responsibilities in the new Nuclear Regulatory Commission and shifting
many research and development responsibilities to the Energy Research and Development Agency,
which was itself later absorbed into the Department of Energy.
Einstein's own and continuing prominent role in debates about the control of atomic energy
is demonstrated by an interview that appeared in print just as Truman was promoting the
May Johnson Plan for Primary Military Control of Atomic Energy in October 1945.
The ABC Radio Commentator and Journalist, Raymond Swing, published a long interview with Einstein
in the November 1945 issue of the Atlantic Monthly under the title, On the Atomic Bomb.
Einstein's main focus in this interview was on how the advent of the atomic bomb made
world government an imperative.
Einstein argued that with just three world powers having emerged from the war, the United
States, the Soviet Union and Great Britain, it would be easier now to negotiate the transition
to world government than it would be after other nations rebuilt and began to contend
for power.
He also argued that it would be wrong simply to share the secret of the bomb with the Soviet
Union alone or to give it to a weak and untried United Nations.
As Einstein had long argued, a supra-national world government could function effectively
only if it possessed the military power necessary to enforce its laws and policies.
In an atomic world, that meant giving the power of the atom bomb not to individual contending
nations but to this world government.
One might well fault Einstein for naivete about the prospects for persuading both the
U.S. and the Soviets to give up their superpower status they had achieved through victory in
World War II.
But another of Einstein's arguments in this interview demonstrates his prescience, where
others were the victims of an equal or greater naivete.
For Einstein warned those who took comfort from an American monopoly on atomic weapons
that such a monopoly would not last long.
It was not unusual, right after the war's end, to hear confident predictions that it
might well be decades before other nations like the Soviet Union developed their own
nuclear weapons.
Einstein knew better.
He knew full well that in spite of the devastation of Russia's industrial economy during the
war, Soviet science was as advanced as that of any modern nation and that all that was
required for success was the commitment of personnel and resources.
Einstein was proven right when a stunned United States learned a few days after the
fact that the Soviets had exploded their own Hiroshima scale atomic bomb on August 28,
1949.
Einstein's larger point in warning about the likelihood of a Soviet atomic bomb being developed
sooner rather than later was that if there were no progress toward world government or
at least toward effective international control of atomic energy, an atomic arms race was
inevitable in the very near future.
He understood the risks and costs that would entail.
Here too, the idealistic champion of the dream of world government proved himself coldly
realistic and accurate in foreseeing a world in which superpowers compete instead of cooperating.
One effort to negotiate a form of international control of atomic energy, known as the Atchison
Lillianthal Plan, was introduced in the United Nations in June 1946 by lead American negotiator,
the financier Bernard Baruch.
The proposal was more or less condemned to failure from the outset and was countered
soon afterward by a proposal introduced by the Soviet delegate to the United Nations,
Andrei Gromyko, calling for a complete ban on nuclear weapons.
The American proposal was debated in a desultory fashion for a couple of years.
For their part, the Soviets wanted ultimate authority to sit with the Security Council
where the Soviet Union held veto power rather than in the General Assembly, which is what
the United States had proposed.
The United States was of course not willing to accept the Soviet proposal for a ban on
nuclear weapons since at the time such a ban would have affected only the United States.
Whether the Soviets then engaged in intense research on their own atomic bomb, whether
the Soviets were sincere in proposing a ban is open to doubt.
But with the revelation of the successful Soviet A-bomb test in August 1949, the terms
of the debate about international control shifted dramatically.
In the United States, which had just lost its atomic monopoly, the most important and
immediate effect was to intensify the push for the development of a new and still more
powerful weapon, known as the hydrogen or H-bomb, sometimes described as a thermonuclear
weapon and sometimes just called the super.
A brief digression on bomb physics is in order here.
The bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nakasaki, like the bomb tested by the Soviets in 1949,
were of a kind known as fission bombs, more popularly termed atomic bombs.
A fission bomb works by splitting the nuclei of very heavy elements like uranium or plutonium,
the energy of the blast being the energy previously binding the nucleus together.
For straightforward physical reasons, there are theoretical upper limits on the power
of a fission bomb.
Typical fission bomb yields are measured in kilotons, one kiloton being an explosive
force equivalent to 1,000 tons of TNT.
The Hiroshima and Nakasaki bombs had yields in the range of 15 to 20 kilotons.
Each killed instantly on the order of 100,000 people through direct blast effects and perhaps
another 100,000 through delayed effects such as radiation sickness.
Hydrogen or thermonuclear bombs are known as fusion bombs.
They work by fusing or combining the nuclei of light elements like hydrogen, helium and
lithium or isotopes of hydrogen like deuterium and tritium.
In this process, energy is released by combining two or more nuclei into a heavier nucleus
whose total energy content is less than the energy content of the separate lighter nuclei.
Unlike fission bombs, there is no theoretical upper limit on the power of a fusion bomb.
The most powerful fusion bomb ever tested was the Soviet Tsar Bomba, Tsar or King Bomb,
which was detonated on October 30th, 1961 with a yield of 50 megatons, the equivalent
of 50 million tons of TNT, or roughly two and a half thousand times stronger than a Hiroshima
or Nakasaki fission bomb.
One typically uses a fission bomb to trigger a fusion bomb and sometimes fusion is used
to amplify the effects of a fission bomb.
In the nuclear arsenals of Russia and the United States today, typical yields would
be in the tens to hundreds of kilotons.
Research on hydrogen or fusion bombs had begun already during World War II under the ages
of the Manhattan Project, but many thought that technical obstacles would make their
production difficult if not impossible.
Nevertheless, after the Soviet atomic bomb test in 1949, pressure mounted in the United
States for an all-out effort to develop the hydrogen bomb as a counter to the Soviet's
new atomic capability.
But from the start, the development of the hydrogen bomb was controversial from a moral
as well as technical point of view.
Even many of the scientists who developed the atomic bomb as part of the Manhattan
Project worried that because of the potentially unlimited destructiveness of hydrogen bombs,
their production would take us across an unacceptable moral boundary.
What possible justification could there be, asked physicists like Hans Bethe, for a weapon
that could destroy all human life?
Einstein joined in the public call to prevent the development of the hydrogen bomb.
One of many occasions was a video interview that he taped for the premiere of a new television
show on NBC hosted by Eleanor Roosevelt.
The Einstein interview aired on February 12, 1950.
The statement that Einstein read for the viewers is a remarkable document.
He warned, of course, that the hydrogen bomb brought with it the possibility of annihilating
all life on Earth.
He ridiculed belief in security through ever more powerful weapons as a disastrous illusion.
He again counseled world government and the building of mutual trust as the only real
route to peace and security.
But with a sense of increased urgency, Einstein went on to warn of other dangers brought on
by an uncontrolled arms race.
He pointed to the growing evidence of a concentration of financial power in the military, foreshadowing
Republican President Dwight Eisenhower's warning about the military industrial complex
eleven years later in his January 1961 farewell address.
Einstein noted the militarization of youth, the growth of police power to supervise the
loyalty of Americans, and the increasing employment of newspapers, radio, and even the schools
for purposes of indoctrination.
In short, Einstein warned that the arms race threatened a dramatic and unhappy change in
the American way of life.
Einstein meant what he said.
He remarked to more than one person around this time that he feared that the United States
was starting to resemble too much the Nazi police state he had fled in 1933.
As we'll see in the next lecture, this blunt, courageous critique in front of a nationwide
television audience won for Einstein the unwelcome attentions of J. Edgar Hoover's FBI.
Einstein enjoyed so much esteem and prestige that he was comparatively well insulated against
persecution during the worst of the McCarthy period.
Not everyone was so fortunate, however.
One might have thought that J. Robert Oppenheimer, the leader of the Manhattan Project, the
man who built the atomic bomb, would likewise enjoy a measure of insulation against suspicions
of disloyalty.
While not as famous as Einstein, Oppenheimer was still a very well-known public figure
thanks to his impressive wartime achievements that he built a working atomic bomb in a little
over two years was a truly extraordinary accomplishment.
Thanks to that, Oppenheimer had become, in the late 1940s, a trusted advisor at the highest
levels of government.
But by the early 1950s, Oppenheimer was no longer doing bomb work as his day job.
He still did consulting for the laboratory at Los Alamos, but he had long since resigned
as director of the lab and was then Einstein's boss as director of the Institute for Advanced
Study in Princeton.
Another important fact about Oppenheimer is that in the 1930s, like many other university
faculty in the United States, he had seriously flirted with the Communist Party.
Some think that he actually did join the party, as his brother Frank and a number of his own
students were known to have done.
More than a few American intellectuals in the 30s managed not to hear the growing reports
about Stalin's persecutions and murders of his perceived enemies in the Soviet Union.
When the Great Depression was producing over 30 percent unemployment in the United States,
with little sign of American capitalism having an answer to the worldwide economic crisis,
when supposedly democratic governments in Europe and America were doing little to halt
the spread of fascism in places like Italy and Spain, lots of thoughtful and caring people
turned to the Communist Party as a last hope for social justice and opposition to Nazi
tyranny.
That is, before Germany and the Soviet Union signed a non-aggression pact eight days before
Hitler invaded Poland.
Rumors of communist sympathies dogged Oppenheimer throughout his service in the Manhattan Project.
Oppenheimer never apologized for having built the bomb, and many scientists more opposed
to nuclear weapons worried that Oppenheimer enjoyed his role as counselor to the powerful
so much that he would mute his moral sensibility if that were the price for access to power.
Still, Oppenheimer had become another respected scientific voice in the nation's struggle
of conscience over atomic weapons.
For example, in one often quoted speech of November 1947, Oppenheimer said, in some sort
of crude sense, which no vulgarity, no humor, no overstatement can quite extinguish, the
physicists have known sin, and this is a knowledge which they cannot lose.
As the pressure to build the super intensified, Oppenheimer began to voice his reservations
more openly.
To those intent on building the hydrogen bomb, people like the bomb's longtime physicist
champion Edward Teller, Oppenheimer's opposition was an unforgivable sin.
It was one thing for an idealistic dreamer like Einstein to oppose the H-bomb.
It was quite another for the former director of the Manhattan Project to do so.
Oppenheimer's opposition might actually be effective in persuading workday physicists
to refuse to work on the super.
What happened next was like a great Greek tragedy, as seemingly fate-driven forces coalesced
to destroy a good and decent person who wanted only to serve his country.
Oppenheimer's opponents renewed the rumors about his alleged disloyalty.
Sympathetic parties in Congress and in the Atomic Energy Commission were enlisted in
the campaign to discredit Oppenheimer, and at the conclusion of a hearing into his loyalty,
on June 29, 1954, Oppenheimer's security clearance was revoked.
Now humiliated and effectively barred from the corridors of power, Oppenheimer was broken
psychologically.
Einstein was, of course, outraged.
He had earlier tried to persuade Oppenheimer to refuse to participate in what he termed
a witch hunt.
It was the same advice he gave to everyone who was a target of persecution during the
McCarthy period.
Einstein believed that by cooperating with evil, one legitimated evil.
But Oppenheimer thought that Einstein was too quick to see parallels between the Germany
of the 1930s and the United States of the early 1950s.
Oppenheimer seems to have thought that if he just spoke the truth, his loyalty would
be affirmed.
But in Einstein's judgment, Oppenheimer was being a fool.
There were good reasons to be concerned about Soviet espionage and sabotage.
Four years earlier, in January 1950, the Manhattan Project physicist Klaus Fuchs confessed to
having been a Soviet spy.
We now know that the data he provided to the Soviets about the Hiroshima bomb design made
a significant difference in the pace of Soviet bomb development.
Just one year earlier, on June 19, 1953, Julius and Ethel Rosenberg had been executed for
their role in another Soviet intelligence penetration of the Manhattan Project.
But Oppenheimer was no spy.
His friends knew it, as did even many of his enemies.
That was not enough, however, to prevent his being sacrificed on the altar of America's
collective fears and insecurities.
Einstein's own struggle against the madness of nuclear weapons continued right up to his
death.
One of Einstein's last acts before he died in April 1955 was to join the British philosopher
Bertrand Russell in issuing a manifesto calling upon all nations of the world to abolish war
as the only way to avoid universal nuclear annihilation.
The manifesto was drafted by Russell and was not released until July 9, 1955, almost two
months after Einstein's death, but it had Einstein's full support.
In what came to be known simply as the Einstein-Russell Manifesto, the authors argued that a nuclear
war would be different from all previous wars because of the immense destructiveness of
multi-megaton hydrogen bombs and the uncontrollable collateral effects, such as radioactive fallout.
With all-out nuclear war, they argued, there was the possibility of the complete destruction
of all human life.
The abolition of war was, in their view, the only option.
They wrote in the manifesto,
Here then is the problem, which we present to you, stark and dreadful and inescapable.
Shall we put an end to the human race, or shall mankind renounce war?
There lies before us, if we choose, continual progress in happiness, knowledge, and wisdom.
Shall we instead choose death because we cannot forget our quarrels?
We appeal as human beings to human beings, remember your humanity, and forget the rest.
If you can do so, the way lies open to a new paradise.
If you cannot, there lies before you the risk of universal death.
With hindsight, such words might seem overly despairing, and the call for an end to war
might sound naive, never mind the high idealism that motivated it.
But in the context of the Cold War, the Russell-Einstein Manifesto made an important difference.
It is credited with having helped to call into existence the series of meetings known
as the Pugwash Conferences.
After the town in Nova Scotia, where the series was first convened in 1957, the series of
conferences that brought together scientists from many nations, including the Soviet Union,
China, Britain, France, and the United States, for private discussion about the risks of
atomic war.
The idea was that a basis for international understanding could be created by forging
simple human-to-human ties within a scientific community fractured by the Cold War.
Naive and idealistic, though this idea too might sound, the Pugwash Conferences are
widely credited with having helped to create the ties that made possible the limited test
ban treaty of 1963, the first of what became a long series of treaties that finally brought
some measure of international control to the arms race, and with it, the chance of peace
and security that Einstein himself did not live to see.
