to think about. So I promised a talk, a wrap-up talk called dualism and idealism in the foundations
of quantum mechanics, thinking that this was where it was originally going to be the cage
match to the death between Kelvin and Marcus or between dualism and idealism. In the end
that, you know, those issues have certainly been present throughout the conference. And
I thought, yeah, it still makes sense to some extent to focus on them in this wrap-up talk,
which is basically a perspective on all these issues in the foundations of physics and metaphysics
and the philosophy of mind from the perspective of the philosophy of consciousness and the
philosophy of mind, which is my own area. And that's basically what I'll try to offer here.
Really, I mean, I said dualism and idealism, but then other philosophical views in the
philosophy of mind are never far away. There's materialism, there's panpsychism, maybe there
are some others, but those are perhaps the big four. So I thought, yeah, it makes sense to focus
on all four of those here and to basically see how the conference, how various talks in the
conference fit together. This is going to be a little bit of a mess because I prepared the whole
thing at lunchtime. There may still be typos in the slides, but we'll see. Okay, so I thought
of, I could kind of structure all this around a slogan or a sentence or an epigraph. I remember
hearing this years ago when I was in graduate school. Sometimes in the late 80s or early 90s,
I heard this epigraph and it really stayed with me. And a few years ago, I came to write an
article on idealism. I wanted to start it with this quote. And I searched and I searched. I could
not find this anywhere. There's this quote that I vividly remembered either somebody saying this
to me or I read it in grad school, but no one, I asked and asked, no one could tell me. I ended
up publishing it as in the first paragraph of a paper probably four or five years ago now and
still no one has reported ever hearing it. So maybe I don't know if I dreamed it or some amazing
conversation partner said it to me and then forgot. But anyway, but the claim is, this is the claim
about kind of philosophical progression that in thinking about the mind in this relation to the
physical world, I mean, everyone starts as a materialist, but then of course you become a
dualist, then you become a panpsarchist, and naturally you end up as an idealist.
And I think roughly the idea is, you know, in material, like in light of modern science at least,
materialism is the very natural default view, at least until you come up against the problem
of consciousness, you know, well, yeah, it's hard to see how you explain consciousness in physical
terms. So you become a dualist, then you become a dualist, and now you've got mind and matter
are separate from each other and you've got problems like how do they relate? How do they
interact? So you think, okay, well, and then you also maybe you start to think maybe you don't
understand the nature of matter all that well after all. So maybe we should become a panpsarchist
to integrate the mind into the physical world and its foundations. And then at a certain point,
do you think, well, why do we actually need anything but the mind? And everybody said, well,
everything is the mind and you become an idealist. So this is meant to be a natural path. And you
at least you can find a few philosophers out there who have followed it, maybe maybe done. I don't
know. People like some idealists like maybe John Foster in the philosophical literature, but I
certainly resonate with this myself, because you know, I started out myself as a materialist and
became a dualist and sympathetic with panpsychism, and I haven't made it all the way. So I haven't
yet reached full full enlightenment, but I entertain idealism. And anyway, I thought that
that would be a nice lens through which to look at this, at this, this conference. I mean, well,
all of these views, of course, face bigger big problems.
Yeah, which kind of motivates the progression materialism faces the hard problem of consciousness,
how does it accommodate consciousness, dualism faces the problem of interaction,
how do mind and matter interact consistently with physics, panpsychism faces the so-called
combination problem, how do little bits of mind at the basic level add up to our consciousness.
It would be nice if idealism faced no problems at all. So it would be a stable resting ground,
but among other things, idealism famously faces the problem of well, how does the external world
fit in if everything is mental? How do we explain the appearance of the external world? So it's
not obvious what the resting ground is. But anyway, maybe there's some sense in which you can
if you squint at this conference the right way, you can see, okay, we're somehow recapitulating
this, this natural progression. And maybe it's interesting to look at some of the conference
in light of this, of these views and these, these problems. I tried to break down the, you know,
the other speakers at the conference in terms of their teams, materialist, dualist, panpsychist,
idealist, I probably, I probably got you wrong. It's like, I probably got everybody wrong. Some
people get question marks, other people should have, should have question marks. I mean, I don't
know, not many people came right out and said, I'm a, you know, I'm a materialist, but some people
who took, I think maybe Ian came in, maybe Ian said more or less that, dual aspect bonus.
Dual aspect bonus. Okay. Well, that's a, that's a whole different, that's kind of gets in somewhere
towards the end there. Um, material slaving stuff. Yeah. Adrian, I think swings a little bit,
both ways. But I think he said on his talk, he was trying to go from materialist assumptions
and Joe Lowe just presented, what seemed to be a pretty materialist picture without
special wall for, for consciousness. And likewise, Janice picture, it looked a lot,
looked a lot that way. So I put them as materialist or dualism is concerned. Well,
Kelvin presented this consciousness collapse picture, which is pretty explicitly
dualistic and which I don't know if either he or I actually believe it, but we'll represent
people by their views here. So I guess we counted as dualists for present purposes.
Johannes was certainly entertaining the idea that consciousness is non-physical and affects
the physical. Lucien expressed some speculative sympathy for dualism. Jeff, I had to, I had to
categorize before actually, before actually hearing the talk. So that was tricky. I thought
we've got to get some stuff about, we get some stuff about free will and irreducible,
libertarian free will. It's a little bit dualistic. Put me as a superposition of all of you.
Okay, superposition of all of you. It's atomizing for what? Okay, good.
Panpsychism, we had a little bit less explicitly on panpsychism. Probably the closest was,
was Mauro, who said, every quantum state involves qualia. That sounds pretty panpsychist. And Don
certainly has panpsychist elements in, and when he says, all of these conscious agents out there
are associated with every last, I don't know, the every last little bit of matter and the wave
function is associated with the conscious agent. I'm a full-on idealist, actually. There's no
matter except as an interface between agents. Okay, you're a full-on idealist? Full-on. Full-on
idealist. Okay, so good. That's right. I gave you no question, Mark. I'm your idealist. Bernardo,
clearly an idealist. Don, clearly an idealist. If only Marcus was here. It looks like his view
at least leads to a kind of idealism. I'll get to that. Chris, the guy is that he's an idealist,
but certainly Cubism does have this element. Whenever you talk about the physical world,
you're talking about your experiences or your expectations. So I've put him there. Anyway,
I'll revisit all of these things in what follows. Some people I found harder to classify because
they didn't talk so much about these issues. IIT is almost impossible to pin down here,
so I'll get to that in a moment. So Larissa and Leonardo, I've got TBD. And likewise,
the Vigna Friends talk. I think we're mostly somewhat neutral on this. I think they were at
least consistent with materialism, but maybe some of them were consistent with dualism too.
So I've left them out. So those are my, those are the teams. But actually for organizing the tour
through the talks, I thought maybe more useful to do it by topics of the different talks and the
topics and views explored. I mean, the theme of the conference is actually agency and mind and
foundations of physics, foundations of quantum mechanics. I think it was more mine than agency,
as the conference went along. But there were a few things which were explicitly on agency output.
Jananne and Lucien definitely there. And maybe some of Jess's talk was about agency.
We had about three on IIT with Ian, Larissa, Leonardo. Then we had a few on different aspects
of collapse theories, the kind of the physical collapse theories, the more conservative collapse
theories based on localization of position or mass density. And so on. So Angelo, Adrienne,
Catalina talked about those, although they did draw some connections to consciousness.
And there are the less conservative collapse theories that tie it to consciousness. So Kelvin's
talk, put myself in that category too. Johannes was certainly exploring views like that.
And there were the big enough friends talk, talks, Eric Howard, Lydia Veronica. There was
Mauro's distinctive quantum panpsychism, which moves us in the direction of idealism,
Chris on cubism, and then explicitly idealistic, Bernardo, Don, and Marcus in absentia. So I thought
kind of a tour through those, but from the perspective, materialism, dualism, panpsychism,
idealism. Starting with agency. Basically, you could see a much less of an agency person than
a mind and consciousness person. So this is all I'll say about an agency. But I guess you could
see Janans talk as giving a materialist spin on agency saying, Janans, well, agency is special
in all kinds of interesting ways, these weird interference between action and knowledge,
and so on. But she also said many of the ways in which it's special are already present in
classical physics. This isn't unique to quantum physics and seem largely consistent with a
materialist picture. So a story about the specialness of agency that seems very much consistent
with materialism. Whereas Lucian, certainly Lucian's talk says something more like agency
and quantum physics could turn out to be special in a way that leads to dualism. If you've got the
right results on these Bell experiments involving humans, I mean, it's a speculation, but then it
would turn out to be special in a way that leads to dualism. And before the fact, I put Jeff in
this camp as well. So okay, so there's a, you know, there's a, okay, default materialism, but
you know, maybe there, okay, one thought is maybe that we results from quantum physics that will
push you into dualism and send you along on the, at least the first step of this philosophical
progression. IIT, integrated information theory. Well, now we basically face this big question.
What on earth is the metaphysical view behind IIT? Is it a form of materialism?
Is it a form of dualism? Is it a form of panpsychism? Or is it a form of idealism?
Or is it something else entirely? The answer is yes. And probably possibly there are versions
of it, at least of IIT, which is, which is each of those. And I think it can be understood
in each of these, these ways. I mean, you hear slogans like, I mean, you don't hear all these
slogans. One slogan, you often hear from proponents of IITs, consciousness is integrated information.
It's very natural to hear that in such a way that, well, integrated information is something
physical. We can define it in physical terms. Here it is, consciousness just is integrated
information. It sounds like you're reducing consciousness to integrated information. So
that sounds materialist. On the other hand, Julio is very, very clear that that's not his
intention. He doesn't think you can get mind out of matter. He doesn't think you can solve the
hard problem in that kind of reductionistic way. Rather, he takes it, he takes, he's very clear,
he's taking consciousness as fundamental, and then trying to relate it to everything else.
And that looks in a way inconsistent, at least with standard materialism. So another reading,
not I think one endorsed by Julio and IIT proponents in this way, but one that's
a quite common reading of it is, okay, consciousness is not identical to integrated
information, but these two things co-vary with each other. It's like, yeah, low, low-fi, low
consciousness, high-fi, high-consciousness, five is at least a measure of consciousness. And these
two things, the thing you can measure physically and this phenomenal state are at the very least
strongly correlated, but potentially distinct. This would be consistent then with dualism or
property dualism. I quite like this reading of IIT, although I don't know if proponents endorse it.
And there's also another slogan you hear though sometimes from IIT proponents, which is really
consciousness, i.e. integrated information is all that exists. Those are the only things that
genuinely exist. The things which are not conscious don't genuinely exist at all, and that begins to
sound idealist. And there's also the whole, it also begins to sound panpsychist at the very least
because you get consciousness in these simple two-element systems, which are very simple systems
being conscious. There's one hallmark of panpsychism, although strictly speaking, I guess one-element
systems have no consciousness. So there will be a bunch of systems with zero-fi, so maybe not
everything gets to be conscious, but elements of panpsychism. I mean, there's a question about how
you formulate panpsychism. Interesting. So how you formulate IIT. Interesting in its own right.
You might say consciousness goes along with high-fi. Okay, that was the original phi version.
Not so, not so specific. It's just this one-dimensional measure. We talked a lot about
the development of IIT where we've got these complex mathematical structures like q-shapes
or parlias shapes. We say, ah, consciousness goes along with that, with q-shapes. Well,
one way I like to express this, actually, to think of IIT as a theory, is that we define something
like a phenomenal q-shape, which is a structure of consciousness, a mathematical structure that
we find in consciousness, and we define some isomorphic structure, which we can find in the
physical structure of a system, according to the rules of integrated information, call the first one
phenomenal q-shape, second one physical q-shape, and say those two things go along with each other.
And that's fine for the purposes of, say, an empirical theory. But, you know, if we're classifying
these as metaphysical theories, an awful lot here depends on how we interpret that arrow, the double
arrow, in the middle. I just said it goes along with, but yeah, I mean, depending on how you
understand that double arrow, that could be understood as materialist. If you understand that
double arrow is saying something like just is, consciousness just is high-fi or is reducible to
consciousness just is q-shape, phenomenal q-shapes just are physical q-shapes,
that looks reductionist, and you've got a form of materialism. If you understand the double
arrow is more of like a psychophysical law, a law of nature connecting two different things,
then it starts to look perhaps like a form of dualism, and I don't know. If you go the other
way around, you think that high-fi and physical q-shapes are grounded in consciousness, then
perhaps you get something closer to idealism. So there are some, yeah, an awful lot depends on
exactly how we understand this connection here, which is something that IIT is often not very
explicit on as far as I can tell. There's an interesting sideline issue here. I mean, a general
theme has been running through the conference and a lot of our discussions about mathematical
theories of consciousness. I think interesting independently of this materialism, dualism,
idealism issue, which is, what is the right way to approach a mathematical theory of consciousness?
I mean, one big goal of a mathematical theory of consciousness is, among other things, a mathematical
specification of conscious states. So, you know, Johannes is a huge fan of mathematical theories
of consciousness, one of the founders of, what is it, the association for mathematical conscious
science and all these conferences on models of consciousness, and it's clearly, you know,
there's a big up-and-coming movement here to develop theories of consciousness in mathematical
terms. Many of the people here are very interested in these mathematical approaches and very
interesting as a philosopher to reflect on just what's required for a mathematical theory of
consciousness. I mean, you might think roughly we're going to need some mathematics of physics
and some kind of mapping relation from physics to states of consciousness and mathematical
specification of those, but at least one big part of it, it seems, has to involve a mathematical
specification of conscious states, both local conscious states seeing this, feeling that, and
global conscious states say, at a time or even across time. One nice thing about IITs at least
gives a candidate for that, and these are these q-shapes or these phi structures that we were
talking about on the first day. It's a potential mathematical representation of a complete state
of consciousness, but yeah, this kind of raises the question is, the general philosophical question,
is a mathematical specification of conscious states possible or is a complete mathematical
specification of conscious states possible? I mean, there's at least two different kinds of
issues here you might worry about. One is that structure underdetermines conscious states, so
maybe you can find different conscious states with the same mathematical structure. If you can
always do that for any structure, then it looks like the mathematical structure will
underdetermine the conscious states and can't be a complete specification. I mean, the most
obvious kind of example here to worry about is things like qualia inversion cases or, you know,
so-called inverted spectra where maybe you invert red and green with each other, keep the mathematical
structure the same. Many people think you can do something like that and do so coherently. Maybe
there are some actual asymmetries in color space that make this tricky, but then it looks like you
can move to just counterfactual versions where the asymmetries apply slightly differently. Anyway,
many people have argued this kind of thing is possible, so there could be beings with the same
structure as us hypothetically, but different experiencing different qualities. If so, it's
time to look like the structure underdetermines the conscious states to which you can respond in a
couple of ways, either try and argue that kind of asymmetry is impossible or at least there's always
some kind of structural difference. So you may be red and green and you're going to have some
fundamental structural difference between the two that renders this kind of inversion
impossible once you fix that more fine-grained structure. I'm a little skeptical of that myself,
although I think it's an interesting strategy. I think there's also a response that involves
lowering your sights a little bit, which is aiming for, instead of aiming for a mathematical theory of
an entire state of consciousness, including its entire qualitative character, aim at least for a
mathematical theory of the structural character of consciousness. It's a bit like, you know, mapping
like, say, the three-dimensional structure of color space without pinning down the qualities of
redness and greenness within it. And I think if we actually had a full mathematical theory of the
full structural character of consciousness, that would already be an amazing achievement
for a science of consciousness. Maybe it, in some sense, wouldn't be complete, but it would still be
amazing. So that's the response I'm inclined by to this one. But as well as this underdetermination
issue, I think there's also an interpretation issue, which is how does a mathematical structure
specify a state of consciousness? And we came up against this one on the first day with IIT,
where IIT produces these Q shapes. It's like, great, well, but there are these really weird
things which are, you know, points in some extremely high-dimensional space with five
weights attached to them. And what exactly does that mean about consciousness? It seems we need
this Rosetta Stone, that is some kind of interpretation scheme for turning mathematical
structures into claims about consciousness. And I don't think that's impossible. I think that ought
to be possible. But I think a full mathematical theory of consciousness can't just give you the
math. It's also going to give you the Rosetta Stone. It's going to give you that, that interpretation
scheme for turning structures into claims about consciousness. You know, you understand this
dimension of the state is out of some kind of intensity. You understand this is some kind of
dimension. And this is as composing that. Anyway, it's a very substantive issue. I think what will
such a Rosetta Stone involve. But I think this is a problem we need to solve. Or if you have a
mathematical, a full mathematical theory of consciousness. And I'd love to see, you know,
mathematical theories like IIT, when they're put forward, actually, you know, put them forward
alongside a Rosetta Stone like this, that will make them more complete theories of consciousness.
There's also an interesting question about the general form for a mathematical theory
of consciousness. Let's call it, you know, a Q structure, like a general candidate for the
structure, for the mathematical structure of consciousness. And I guess what we really need
is, well, here's one way to put it. First, you give a condition under which such a structure
is physically realized. So for IIT, that'll come down to, yeah, Q shape is physically realized
if there's a network of such and such a forms, which, which are connected to each other by
the right conditional probabilities, such that the integrated information, blah, blah, blah.
That'll be a big physical condition for a Q structure being physically realized.
We'll also give a definition of what it is for that Q structure to be phenomenally realized,
to be realized in experience. And that's a matter of giving certain phenomenal conditions
for a Q structure to be present in consciousness. That's a matter of giving the Rosetta Stone.
If you do both of those, and move those two definitions in hand, then you can just give a
something like a fundamental law, which says a Q structure is physically realized, if it only
if it's phenomenally realized. Under these mathematical conditions, you'll get the physical
realization of a Q shape. Whenever that happens, you'll then get the phenomenal realization.
This actually gets interestingly close to what I call the double aspect theory of information
back in my 96 book, where the whole idea was, yeah, whenever certain information spaces are
physically embodied, they're also experientially embodied. You know, I quite like this as a general
it's an interesting question whether this is a general form for a mathematical theory
of consciousness or also a or just a specific form, but it's one that I find
very appealing. And then it's just a matter of, okay, we have to figure out the right structures
and the right conditions for physical realization, the right Rosetta Stone, and we're done. Okay,
that was a bit of a sideline on mathematical theories of consciousness, a bit distinct from the
main line, but Johannes said, you got to talk about the structure of the mathematical structure
of consciousness. So that was for you. Okay, now getting back to getting back to
yeah, some of the main lines of the meeting, we had a lot of discussion of collapse theories
of quantum mechanics. Where do they leave things with IIT? I guess IIT could be materialist,
but it looks like it doesn't work because of the hard problem. So yeah, IIT is more naturally
understood as a dualist or perhaps even idealist. So it's pushing us in that direction. Maybe we get
some similar pressure from collapse theories of quantum mechanics, or at least potentially. So
collapse theory, supplement or modify the Schrodinger equation with collapse dynamics,
arguably something like this is present even in textbook quantum mechanics where it says
you've got these two processes, Schrodinger evolution of the wave function, and then when you
make a measurement, the quantum state changes in the special way, looks like collapse. So
that looks like what you can call a measurement collapse theory. Of course, then people complain
measurement is totally vague, and it's not a precise condition. So people then have tried to
articulate more precise theories, most well known of the spontaneous physical collapse theories
that we've talked a lot about, DRW, CSL, Deoshi Penrose, and so on. We've also talked here about
the consciousness collapse theories, which at least Calvin and I have tried to argue can be
articulated in a precise form. So you know, much more conservative and on the face of it
consistent with materialism, materialist picture of these physical collapse theories,
DRW, CSL, DP, which give physical conditions for collapse based on maybe some condition
involving mass density, maybe maybe gravitation, gravitational relations, structures of spacetime,
these look pretty nicely physicalism, pretty nicely physicalist. On the other hand, you might
think, well, but the writing is on the wall for these, for these theories, they're gradually being
refuted and eliminated. It's like those, those movies are like, you know, there's 20 people on
the island at the beginning, kill them off, kill them off one by one. So yeah, so yeah, all of these,
except we're, those ominous diagrams by Angelo the first day, but yeah, the ground is closing up.
There's only the tiny little square left in the middle for physical collapse theories.
It looks like before too long, all those standards at least physical collapse theories
are going to be eliminated. Likewise, Catalina's talk was doing the same thing. It's great that
these theories are testable, but, but not so great because it means they'll be tested and,
you know, most people would say almost certainly eliminated. So those, those nice, straightforward,
easy physical collapse theories may start to disappear. Now around them there's going to be a
question, okay, we could just give up on collapse theories entirely, but really that's not logically
forced on us. There are other collapse theories out there. And, you know, one interesting question,
what the best alternative is, but the most obvious alternative perhaps is to move to new
collapse theories that bring in different collapse operators, not quite as simple and as universal
as those, you know, mass density collapses. Angelo was very clear that, you know, that there's this
basic equation for a collapse theory that allows arbitrary collapse operators. And those could
correspond in principle to, you know, very high level physical observables, maybe things that
only come in the systems of a pretty high degree of complexity. Maybe, you know, if it's an IIT based
one, only comes in when phi is above some quite significant threshold. An interesting question
that our theory like that is more materialist or more dualist. Arguably, that kind of view is already
somewhat dualistic. It's at least got, you know, because it's got these high level physical states
which exert some kind of downward causal role in collapse. It's at least a version of what people
call sometimes strong emergence or strong downward causation. It needn't be an effective consciousness.
This could go on just for some complicated biological property, but it's already at least
somewhat dualistic in its form. And it's also got the property that we can gradually experimentally
test these theories as, you know, our experiments with interferometers or quantum computers get
better and better. We can't test these theories easily now, but we'll eventually be able to.
Yeah, so one thought is we'll keep doing those experiments and gradually roll out,
okay, collapse and, you know, they'll roll out collapse in fragments of fullerene molecules
and gradually roll out collapse in, I don't know, microtubules and cells and maybe, you know, flies
and, but then maybe at some point it'll stop and then, and then, oh my god, you get to,
you get collapsed at this level. That will be super, super interesting. You know, one thought,
one extreme case here is that, you know, is one point in logical space here, one attractive
point in logical space. So I think it gets more and more attractive. The more you eliminate the
simple collapse theories is the consciousness collapse theory, which could be understood as
that consciousness collapse theories are consistent with materialism. If you say consciousness is
itself a high level physical property, then that would be collapsed by a high level physical property.
But I think it's, it tends to be more than you just have downward physical causation. But I think
it's more natural and more common to understand these theories as forms of dualism with consciousness
as a non-physical property, not governed directly by the Schrodinger equation, which is what enables
it to, to play the special role and resist quantum superpositions and bring about collapse and clearly
vigner intent of it as a form of dualism. And Kelvin and I, in our treatment of it, also
intended that way, I'm not least as trying to overcome some of the standard problems
for dualism. I mean, the standard problem for dualism, as I mentioned, is how does the non-physical
world, non-physical consciousness, how does it interact with the physical world? Doesn't closure
of the physical, in fact, rule this out? Doesn't, you know, if physics is closed, how can consciousness
get in there? So in our article, Kelvin and I tried to argue at least that consciousness collapse
is consistent with known physics. We can develop this in a way that isn't experimentally refuted
by anything we know right now, and maybe a little bit suggested by the existence of collapse and
standard quantum mechanics, but at least consistent. It was nice to see your analysis talk today,
which seems to be making a very, heading towards least a stronger claim, which would seem to be
more like, if you want to be an interactionist dualist with a role for consciousness in affecting
physical goings-on in the physical world, then you basically have to be a consciousness
collapse theorist. Consciousness has to resist, has to cause, has to break down superpositions.
So that's, I mean, I'm a tiny bit skeptical about some of the, some of the details, but it'd be very
not, be very nice if it's true that interactionist dualism has to take this form. I was worried
about, yeah, versions where maybe consciousness serves as something like a fifth force and gets
built into the Hamiltonian. Maybe you could have some non-collapse effects of consciousness, but
but still, I like the idea that it suggests that especially neat mathematical motivation
for consciousness collapse theories, especially if one wants to be an interactionist, that holds
out the hope of, yeah, solving the interaction problem with a consciousness collapse theory.
Of course, it's going to be a hostage to fortune and, yeah, the empirical results are going to have
to come out the right way eventually and, yeah, few would be terribly optimistic, they will, but,
but, you know, we can wait and see. Anyway, this does offer to combine a couple of strands here.
This offers the possibility of a mathematical consciousness collapse theory. As Kelvin and I
have argued, we can combine a mathematical theory of consciousness like IIT with a mathematical
theory of collapse like CSL or Bassie's generalized form of this, and it's going to turn out that,
yeah, I mean, Kelvin already said in his talk that the most basic form of this with standard IIT,
serving as a mathematical theory of consciousness, is either already refuted by quantum computer
experiments or will very soon be refuted by easy to perform experiments. So simple versions
will be easy to falsify, simple versions which have, you know, very liberal theories of consciousness,
consciousness of everywhere, but versions of these theories with less liberal theories of
consciousness seem to be left open. If only if consciousness arises at a high degree of complexity,
for example, those are at least harder to, to, to falsify. I mean, we might get in principle,
test all of these, but the experiments just get harder and harder. So if we ever get to some level
here where we do the all the interferometry experiments and we just don't get superpositioned,
and it looks like, ah, you just got, you cannot get superpositions at this level.
If we build quantum computers where they, where they break down, if we ever find these collapse
effects, I think that wouldn't prove that consciousness is collapsing the wave function.
But I think against the light of this background of theoretical options, it would at least be some
evidence for the, this is exactly what you would expect if consciousness collapses the wave function.
So you might think we get at least some Bayesian evidence for the idea that,
A, that consciousness is collapsing, and B, that this is the locus of consciousness. I mean,
ultimately, the kind of experiments you might want to do here are basically vignifrance experiments
to see if humans collapse the wave function. If humans don't collapse the wave function,
then all this is probably going to be rather ill-motivated. But you can test that hypothesis
with vignifrance-style experiments where you try and put humans into quantum superpositions,
or as Eric and Howard were saying, if that turns out to be really difficult for biological reasons,
we can try and do the same thing, at least with the humanoid AIs that we build on quantum computers.
And then the question is, just so you put a human into a vignifrance experiments and try and put
them into a superposition, see if you get interference effects or collapse effects,
yeah, one possibility is you get no collapse effects, and it looks like humans enter superpositions.
Okay, that's pretty bad news for the consciousness collapse theory. At that point,
we've pretty much been empirically refuted. I mean, you could say things like, well,
only under certain circumstances does consciousness collapse the wave function,
the rest of the time it enters superpositions, but that starts to take away some of the
some of the motivation. So this happened in, who knows, I'd probably at that point give up on
consciousness collapse and, you know, endorse something else like in many worlds. If on the other
hand, we do find those collapse effects, humans don't enter superpositions. In this case,
observation is not unitary. It looks like humans do collapse wave functions. And at that point,
I'd be like, okay, well, that is looking pretty good for a consciousness collapse. I think it
doesn't prove that consciousness is doing the work. I think it would be very strong evidence for that.
I would say this is extremely speculative that the empirical results would go this way, but it is a
empirical hypothesis and hopefully eventually we'll be able to do this probably sooner with
humanoid AIs than with humans. And that is also that was always going to leave open the escape
route that, you know, well, humanoid AIs can't collapse the wave function, but humans can,
because it's something different, something special about the human case compared to the
humanoid AI case. But that'll be an argument to have, yeah, when and if we ever do these experiments.
Okay, so that's kind of the materialism and dualism
half of this. I kind of see this as, you know, here is this isn't quite the standard line from
from the hard problem from materialism to dualism, but kind of a potential empirical
route from materialism to dualism from thinking about quantum mechanics and collapse to maybe
consciousness collapses the wave function. If we got the right experimental results, if it turns out
that experimentally humans do collapse the wave function, but, you know, oscilloscopes don't or
whatever, then maybe at that point, okay, great, we've solved the interaction problem, we've got a
nice view here, we can rest with consciousness collapse, dualism. If on the other hand, things
don't empirically go our way, then this solution to the interaction problem for dualism, the
consciousness collapse solution is ruled out. That would be a shame because, you know, it seemed
like it was our best solution, but that's, but that's, that's science. That'll be ruled out.
That then makes the interaction problem for dualism so much harder. And remember the interaction
problem for dualism was the one that motivated moving beyond step two in the progression.
We thought we had a potential solution to it, but if empirically we don't, then
perhaps then avoiding the interaction problem for dualism plus as well as avoiding the hard
problems of physicalism is what motivates the move to panpsychism. So let me just say a bit
about panpsychism before then moving to idealism. I mean, one panpsychist idea that people often
think about in combining panpsychism with ideas about consciousness in quantum mechanics is okay.
Consciousness collapses at the wave function and consciousness is everywhere in the panpsychist
way. Even photons are conscious. Okay, that view is a disaster. Basically, if everything is conscious
and consciousness collapses at the wave function, everything will collapse the wave function all
the time. Photons will never be able to go through the two slits at once. You'll never get a,
you'll never get an interference effect. So basically this is ruled out, at least the extreme
version of this is ruled out by existing quantum effects. And in general, I think panpsychism and
consciousness collapse are two views that you don't want to want to combine. Maybe there's some
fancy way you can do it. But I actually think of those are two different, although I'm sympathetic
with both those views, panpsychism and collapse, I'm never sympathetic with both at once. It's like
one hemisphere likes panpsychism, the other hemisphere likes dualism. And those are very
much different alternatives. But if we're now going with the, we're now sitting inside the
dualist hemisphere and going with the panpsychist hemisphere, then we've got, you know, other forms
of panpsychism, a set of panpsychism collapsing the wave function. Maybe there's the idea the whole
wave function was basically a state of consciousness to begin with. This isn't far from Maurer's view
in his very nice talk that, you know, all quantum states involve qualia. And qualia basically take
to me basically another word for, for phenomenal consciousness or conscious experience or at least
the qualities thereof. I mean that view as stated, I think as Maurer stated, it seemed to be both
consistent with both a materialist reading, a physics first reading and what we might call
a consciousness first reading. On the physics first reading, it looks like it's a bit like the
mind-brain identity theory, consciousness is just the state of the brain. The quantum qualia
identity theory would say qualia just are physical quantum states of the kind specified in quantum
mechanics. That looks like a reductionist theory subject to the hard problem, the explanatory gap
and so on. It's not totally clear why we should endorse that over other forms of the identity
theory. On the other hand, there's also the consciousness first version of this view that
says something more like, you know, the qualia or consciousness is actually fundamental. We're not
trying to reduce it to anything. But maybe for example, the quantum states that quantum mechanics
actually talks about, these mathematical objects, really what they ultimately are in their intrinsic
nature is states of qualia. This is the view which has come to be known as Brazilian monism
in the philosophy literature that when physics, you know, describes things mathematically,
that's quite consistent with those things actually being states of consciousness. It's like
intrinsically the states of consciousness, the relations to each other are described
mathematically in this form. But I think this, you know, this panpsychist quantum state,
quantum mechanics can be understood as a version of this. So these quantum states,
physics characterizes them mathematically, but ultimately what it's characterizing,
the states of qualia with consciousness at the bottom level. I mean, probably ultimately this
is going to lead to, you know, the whole wave function is basically a state of consciousness.
And then you say, who's state of consciousness? And it gets, it gets complicated.
Is that a single state or many states? I mean, one big problem, the big problem for panpsychism
is the combination problem. How does micro consciousness and fundamental physics add up
to macro consciousness, the kind that we have, if our consciousness derives from
micro consciousness at the bottom level, how does that work? William James said, you know,
when you get, you line up 10 subjects in a row, you don't just get an 11th one coming along for
free as the combination of those. Why would you put together a trillion particles? Do you get us
as the result? Well, I think this is a point that actually motivates quantum mechanics.
A bit nothing narrow was said some last things on this subject. There's the idea
which a couple of people have explored. I mentioned David Pierce the other day,
that quantum holism might work as a, what we might call quantum holism is potentially a
solution to the subject combination problem, because when two fundamental particles are entangled,
what's really fundamental is not those particles, but the system, but the entangled system, which has
a quantum state of its own. Its quantum state is fundamental, not the state of the individual
particles. So you might think, okay, quantum entanglement gives you a mechanism by which
micro subjects can combine into macro subjects, or at the very least, maybe you could turn out that
macro system in the brain and entangled macro system would itself have a fundamental quantum
state that could correspond to a state of consciousness. I think, I mean, there are lots
of questions you might raise for that, like how do you actually make sure that the entanglement
is maintained and the hot and messy conditions of the brain with decoherence? How's that going to work?
Nonetheless, I think it's a conceptually interesting view solution to the combination
problem to think about. I think it works best for what we might call the subject
combination problem. How do you get macro subjects from micro subjects? It may still
face the quality combination problem. How do those quality are combined? I think, Mara,
I said you had a story about that, but I'd like to see it. There's also a big, what I call structural
mismatch problem. How does the physical structure of the wave function seems very different from
the phenomenal structure of quality? David Pierce has put a bit, there will be a commonality there,
but again, this is a very interesting idea, but I think it does face the combination problem,
and maybe the combination problem is part of what motivates the step from panpsychism
to idealism. The biggest motivation here is maybe if panpsychism is true,
why do we need anything non-mental? We've got all this mental stuff at the bottom level.
Yeah, who needs the other stuff? You might say likewise, if panpsychist quantum mechanics is
true, if these quantum states all involve qualia, then why have anything but qualia
in your quantum states or in your state of the world? That's at least a path to idealism. Idealism
is the view that everything is mental, or at least that everything is grounded in the mental,
including the apparent physical world, all grounded in the mental. That gets us to our
last station. In my article on idealism, I separated out about three different versions
of idealism, but a lot of people think about idealism. They think about the version where
everything is grounded in the mental states of an observer, of a conscious subject like us,
who's looking at the world, looking at the tree, looking at the walls, all that is grounded in
an observer's mental state. It's typically maybe a human observer, or at least a macro subject,
like a human, or an animal. I call that macro idealism, because everything gets grounded in
our mental states, but in contrast, this is the kind of micro idealism that you get more directly
out of, say, panpsychism. If you take panpsychism and then just supplement it with a claim that
there's nothing non-mental, then it starts to look like everything is grounded in the mental
states of micro physical entities, you know, particles or whatever has fundamental quantum
states. Okay, that's another possible view. The other possible view is what I call cosmic idealism,
where, you know, micro idealism, you've got zillions of tiny conscious minds adding up to
reality, cosmic idealism, you have a single cosmic mind, and maybe the universe as a whole
has a conscious state, and that grounds reality. Some versions of this are religious,
so you have a divine mind. Barkley ended up having a divine mind grounding this. Interestingly,
I think we saw potential versions of all three of these forms of idealism at the workshop.
It crosses cubism insofar as it looks idealist at all, looks kind of closest to macro idealism.
It's this, the quantum states for him are basically the expectations or subjective
probabilities of observers like us. When we talk, when we give quantum state descriptions,
those are basically all referring to mental states, expectations, subjective probabilities,
and in fact he says, so does all talk about physical objects, talk about the table.
I'm still talking about my mental states, at least the subjective probabilities I should have.
This is very reminiscent of a near relative of idealism called phenomenalism, most associated
with John Stuart Mill, where he says all talk of physical objects is actually talk of mental
states. Mill said permanent possibilities of sensation. I kind of see Chris's view as a version
of phenomenalism here, maybe we can call it quantum phenomenalism, and that's going to be
cubism. Yeah, we're at least talking about quantum states, we're talking about these mental states
and maybe all our talk about the physical world has that character. Chris actually,
Chris deny that he's a idealist, at least he says he's not committed to it, he says maybe there could
be an external world out there. One version of, and that brings out, there are actually two versions
of phenomenalism, phenomenalism can be idealist, it can say the external world is, everything is purely
mental, it can also be more analogous to Kant's transcendental idealism. Kant said, well maybe
there's a world beyond the world of appearances, it's just we can't talk about it and we can't
know it. That's actually interesting, you're not far from some things that Chris says
about the external world, he's not opposed to the external world, maybe there is one,
it's just quantum mechanics, there's not about it, and when you press him, it's like yeah,
when we talk about tables, we're not really talking about that either. So there may be an external,
not mental world, but physics just doesn't tell us anything about it. I mean he combines this with
a certain kind of pragmatism and there's a bit hard to pin down here, but his view starts to look
a little like Kant's transcendental idealism around here. Okay, that's the macro idealism,
probably the biggest problem for macro idealism, where everything comes down to our experiences,
is what explains the regularities in our experiences. I mean the famous problem of the tree and the
quad, I look at the tree, I go away, I come back next day, the tree's still there.
Well, if that's all just my experiences, what enforces my experiences being the same from day
to day, the physicalist has an answer, it's the tree. You just look at the tree and it always
comes back, but it starts to look as if we need something beyond our experiences to explain
the regularities in them. Barkley at this point appeals to God's mind. So you remember those
limericks, one limericks is about why is the tree always around in the quad,
and the other one says the tree isn't here because of me, you signed yours faithfully, God.
So yeah, you can have an external world like God's mind to explain it, but ultimately it looks
like that mind needs to be very complex, it's got ground all of physics. I mean the solutions here,
I think are either to move to cosmic idealism or to panpsychist idealism. Cosmic idealism,
I've already touched on, Barkley basically has a divine mind that does all this work, you know,
Bernardo I think has a version of cosmic idealism where the universe has, the universe basically
is one single cosmic mind and we are all parts of it and that will ground all of physics and ground
the regularities in our experiences. There's also panpsychist idealism where it's not a single cosmic
mind that does this, but a multitude of conscious minds, I think maybe Don's view looks closer to
this, with this manifold of conscious agents out there, one for, you get the structure of physics
out of the relations among these conscious agents and conscious agents distinct from ourselves
around the external world. So those are the natural solutions here. I think the problems that arise now
are one, one big problem that arises for both views is the, is the combination problem again.
You've basically got this dilemma. Where do we come from? Do we come from that cosmic mind?
Are we grounded in the cosmic mind? Are we grounded in the micro subjects? So does the idealist external
world ground macro subjects like us? If we say yes, then we've got the combination problem.
How do those conscious agents add up to me? How does that cosmic subject add down to me? How do I
somehow come out of that? I think Bernardo, Don, and Mauro all have things to say about that,
but this is often the point at which these views reach, reach maximal resistance. You might say,
no, it's okay. We are actually autonomous from those things. There's the cosmic mind and there's
us and we're just different minds interacting with each other. But now we do face a version of
the interaction problem for dualism, which is, hey, isn't that cosmic mind causally closed and
how does, how does my mind interact with it? And you get all the, all the issues of interaction
arising again. So there's at least worries for idealists there. I thought I would end all this
with a, just a, a pan to Marcus's wonderful view that we would have heard so much about
from the Marcus had been here. Because Marcus, it is amazing people, a law without law has a story
where you actually try and get to be a macro idealist. Everything is grounded in our experiences
without an external world, which I, something I previously thought was impossible. Marcus has
convinced me it could be possible. All that exists is our experiences. And on the simple
model, we just have a sequence of experiences, one after another. Regularities among our
experiences are explained by his ultimate law of universal induction, which is your experience
at time n plus one is determined by the algorithmic probability of that experience at time n.
That is, you know, look at the list of possible computer programs that will generate the series
of experiences from one through n and assign probabilities to each of these according to
their length and then assign your prediction of the next experience based on the probability
associated with those programs. So, you know, the ones generated by the simplest programs will be
the most probable, but not guaranteed. You'll occasionally have improbable things happen.
Anyway, you can make a very nice case that this is ultimately going to lead probabilistically to
some pretty stable laws of nature that generate a pretty consistent pattern of experiences,
even without an external world, just with an ontology of experiences. It's a very beautiful
picture. I think there's lots and lots of questions that arises. Does universal idealism
allow genuine intersubjectivity to other people really exist, or are they just
patterns in our experience, or just solipsism? And I think more deeply, can it really explain
the appearance of an external world as opposed to a mere internal world of our experiences?
Anyway, I think I'm probably way, way over time. So, let me, let me conclude.
Is the, so then final question, is the best terminus for philosophical reflection on consciousness
and physics materialism, dualism, panpsychism, or idealism? Is it something entirely new and
different? Well, I don't think we're in a position to answer those questions yet here,
but we have seen all kinds of interesting ways in which not just philosophical reflection, but also
experimental metaphysics and reasoning and mathematics could all bear on this question.
So, I say, stay tuned for future versions of this workshop, but everything will be revealed.
I don't have a question, I have a comment. I will just say that if anything could
convince me to shed my materialist leanings, it would be Arcus' law without law, because I
do very much like that. If only he'd been here so we could have refuted it.
Well, that explains the first word of the title, it's not the second two.
Law without physical law, maybe that's it, experience, yeah.
Well, the quote, it's a quote from Wheeler, that's what it is. Oh yeah, that's true.
So, John, did I give you a view, right? Panpsychist idealism?
Yeah, we're our first amount of identifying the individual agents with individual partners in
space. Yeah, so just abstract agents, just conscious entities interacting and then
creating space, time as an interface that they use to interact with each other.
But they could have other, other agents could have completely different interfaces. So,
our space was just one of infinitely many interfaces that agents can use.
We have one agent for the whole quantum wave function or it'll be like a whole bunch of agents.
Well, agents do combine and so ultimately there is one agent, but it's so complicated I can't
even wrap my head around what that would even mean right now. But the mathematics, since there is
one agent, I can't even comprehend it. So, you're somewhere between panpsychism now and idealism?
Half my mind, like one hemisphere likes dualism and the consciousness collapse model,
one hemisphere likes something in the vicinity of panpsychism or idealism. Probably,
if I had to choose around there, maybe I'd go for a form of cosmic idealism, but I'm not sure.
There are also like forms of neutral knownism where maybe there's something more basic than
either physics or a consciousness that generates birth, but mostly I'm confused.
Right, I think there was between the like the cosmic version versus the panpsychic,
but if you actually have a solution to the combination problem, then you can have both,
right? Because you can have essentially something that's a bunch of little ages, but there,
but this combination says there's also one so you can talk about a cosmic one and then view
all the individual ones as projections of this big cosmic one.
So, which is primary for you, the little ones or the cosmic one?
Well, since my mind is not capable of understanding the cosmic one, I'm happy to call my way up.
But then we need, so you do need a solution to the to the combination problem then for the little
ones to add up to the big one.
To present that thing about going to the current dropping rank and so forth and creating new
consciousness, because that's exactly what we have to do. So, we need to pursue that combination,
but we do have a mathematical thing that looks promising there. When you drop rank,
two becomes one, more n becomes one.
Okay, cool. Let's look at that.
So, sorry. To answer this question, and do you think that God egotists or not
dated the background to answer this question?
I'm most inclined to say no. However, in recent years, I've gotten just a little more sympathetic,
at least with the idea that might be a creator, by thinking about the so-called simulation hypothesis
that we could be in a computer simulation. I'm open to the idea that we're in a computer
simulation. If so, it's very likely someone who created the simulation, the programmer,
they may not be God-like in many respects. They didn't be especially wise or wonderful, but
they could be said in some sense to have created our world. So, I'm open to that kind of naturalistic
God, not so much standard supernatural gods.
Just a small comment, but I once presented our model in Amsterdam. About half the audience
was philosophers, but then there was half theologians. There was a theologian there who was
disturbed by the idea of consciousness causing collapse, because he accepted two claims.
One is that anything essential to our consciousness is essential to God's consciousness.
God will cause collapse for whatever he measures, and God is observing everything.
With thought being, if that theological hypothesis is true, then you'd get the same sort of problem
there you'd be. We have to get the quantum genome effect. God is constantly measuring anything,
so nothing can ever happen. I was quite concerned by this, so if that theory turns out to be true,
then certain theological hypotheses are getting refuted. Maybe God is not subject to the role of
resisting superposition. Maybe God is even capable of having a massively superposed consciousness.
That would be a difference. It depends on what second dollar God is doing.
Yeah, yeah. No accident. This happened in Amsterdam.
