Imagine if you lived in a world where you were constantly watched, a world where everything
is controlled by the elite, where you're bombarded with non-stop propaganda, a world where everyone
is repressed, lonely and isolated, existing as one insignificant cog in an incomprehensible machine.
This is the chilling vision of the future that George Orwell put forward in his masterpiece 1984,
and does it sound familiar? It's no coincidence that his predictions have come true nearly every
single way in our modern society today, so let's take a deep dive into the story of 1984 to learn
how you're all being controlled and if you can ever break free. Now the movie begins with a quote
from the iconic book that it was adapted from, who controls the past controls the future,
who controls the present controls the past, and this sets the stage. And then without delay,
we are then shown the iconic shots of a crowd of people staring at propaganda presented by the
party. The party is the shadowy government which controls every aspect of life through their
ideology in suck. The basic principle is to control information so tightly that every aspect of life
is dictated and controlled by the party. Absolute obedience is expected, down to rejecting basic
facts about life and even your own thoughts and memories. On the screen, a video player is creating
an idyllic image of the country that the West has become, all under this totalitarian rule, Oceana.
This is one of the three super states which make up the world of 1984, with control over the Americas,
Britain, Australia and some parts of Africa. And this is when we're introduced to the concept of
Big Brother and a man named Goldstein who attempts to persuade the people of Oceana that they are
being duped. But despite the truth in what he's saying, it's drowned out by shouts from the
audience. Insoc has conditioned them to reject the truth entirely, to the point they don't even want
to hear it. Throughout the demonstration, you can see the Insoc salutes, something that was
borrowed from historical totalitarian regimes. And after this propaganda video reaches its climax,
the crowd is pacified by the symbol of Insoc, alongside the face of Big Brother.
It's afterwards that we're introduced to our main character, Winston Smith, who is working
in an office cubicle for the Ministry of Truth. His job is to edit past broadcasts to reflect
the current reality that they're pushing. So if the sugar ration has been reduced from last year,
he will then edit last year's paper to imply that it actually went up instead. And then once he's
finished with his day's work, Winston makes his way back home, where propaganda has already been
played in his house. This time it's a man being shamed for falling under Goldstein's influence.
The man has been charged for attempting to persuade the public that they're not at a war with Eurasia,
but rather East Asia. This information control and Eurasia is central to Big Brother's control
of the people. As over time, the party has rewritten reality to suit their needs. Now Winston is a
key part of this process, but obviously this brings up contradictions. And that's where the concept
of double thing comes in. The idea of wholeheartedly believing in two separate contradictory facts.
One of the examples they give in the novel is the simultaneous belief that the party is a bastion
of democracy. And also that democracy is impossible. And it's through this concept that the party
rewrites reality, replacing it with an illusion of their own creation. And this is the all-encompassing
lie that maintains 1984 society. It's only through everyone believing it that it becomes real. But
this concept of a world founded on fiction isn't something that all are created all by himself.
Instead, this is something that's very real and has been observed throughout history.
Thousands of years ago, Plato wrote some of the first recorded philosophy on this concept.
Through what he called the noble lie, where people know their place in society through their belief
an entirely fictional story about the society's origin. The details aren't important,
so long as it gives justification for the social order. And this gives people a reason to accept
how the world is and that their equal man is somehow better or worse than him. And we see this
today when our own version of Big Brother's is one thing and then means another. Like when the
establishment media, politicians and world economic forum claim to be working for freedom and free
speech, also while doing everything they can to bully and censor all criticism into silence.
And there are just countless examples of this. Like when the fattest, most grotesque politicians
of them all claim that they're promoting health. And this concept has evolved over time as people
realise that all of society's institutions are built upon a necessary fiction. And this is known
as the habitus. It's the thou you need to see through for society to make sense. Now the concept
is similar to the noble lie, but the habitus goes much deeper. You see throughout your life,
you are influenced by your environment and your interactions with other people. And these,
combined with your personality, create your view of the world. And it's in this way that you buy
into the habitus, the shared societal illusion of how the world should be. You are socialised into
the habitus. It's come down from above and everyone else around you believes in it. The habitus is
the social contract between you, your fellow man and the government. And it's what determines your
culture. It's what determines all the societal trends around you. And therefore also decides
the rules of society. And this stretches to everything, our ideas of beauty, what's seen as
valuable, what's seen as even right and wrong. But because it's influenced by the environment and
how people treat each other, the habitus is always changing to reflect this. And the world of 1984
operates on a habitus. The problem with the 1984 habitus is that it's been cracked to the top
and severely deformed. And because it's been poisoned to the top, it's trickled down into
all elements of society. And this is why 1984 is so scary. In fact, 1984 is far more unsettling
than any dumb horror film because it's so realistic. We all instinctively know what the
future could be like because we're so close to it today. Our society that we live in right now is
just a few steps away from totalitarianism. And all while we're trying to warn us of all of this.
Because throughout the story, we're going to see exactly how the party has brought the habitus
and society and how it's affected everyone within the society. So getting straight back into the
story, and we see Winston sitting alone in his decrepit apartment, and it's here after lighting
a cigarette that Winston introduces us the concept of thought crime. Now thought crime is the act of
going against the habitus of the world, even in your deepest thoughts. Just considering rebellion
is already rebellion because it's something outside of the party's reality. The party enforces
this through the thought police, a secret organization which uses informant surveillance
and undercover agents to root out anyone who even thinks about rebelling. And as the propaganda
continues playing in the background on the ever present screen, Winston lifts a brick from his
house and uncovers his journal, something that's definitely banned in the world he lives in. And
it's in this journal that Winston reminisces about a world where thought was free, a time where minds
weren't controlled by big brother and the thought police. And by doing this, he's already become a
thought criminal just through his own memories. And upon waking up the next day, Winston is then
subjected to a mandatory exercise routine in front of his television, to which he is signalled out for
not performing adequately. Winston then half-heartedly waves the insoucane signal and makes his way to
work. And that's when he treats it even more propaganda playing on the television during
lunch hour. However, what instead catches the eye of Winston is a young woman staring at him.
Winston then sits down and begins eating his meal, when one of his colleagues comments on the new
shortened dictionary and how positive the destructions of word really is. Newspeak, as they call it,
is a new language invented by the party that reduces English to its bare essentials,
where controversial words are removed, meaning that if it works then rebellion will be impossible,
because it won't even be able to be considered. The words just won't exist for it. Back at work,
Winston then continues his job at the Ministry of Truth, this time unpersoning someone. Now
unpersoning is the act of essentially removing someone from history and replacing them with
someone else. And this is just one of the many aspects of 1984 which has its roots in previous
autocracies. Now in this, all world was specifically alluding to Stalin's dictatorship, where this
was an extremely common practice. Enemies of the state or rather enemies of Stalin wouldn't just
be executed. Every mention of their name and even their image and photographs was erased,
completely removing them from history. However, this practice of course hasn't died out.
The Chinese government, for example, was infamous for disappearing anyone they don't like.
Jack Ma, the CEO of Alibaba, essentially disappeared from public view after making
economic suggestions that would shift power away from the Chinese Communist Party. And today,
he's all but vanished from the public eye, spending his time in exile under constant
surveillance. But we're not just talking about China, this is happening all over the West. When
anyone who speaks out against the agenda set in place by Western governments, they are then often
censored or bullied into silence. Whether it be Julian Assange or Edward Snowden talking about
the government's crimes, or any other supposed thought criminal who's been cancelled on social
media for talking about COVID and its origins. Anything deemed a thought crime and you can
be cancelled immediately. I mean it's gone to the point now where FBI and other government
intelligence agencies are infiltrating and working in conjunction with all the big social media sites.
And once they have control of sites like Twitter, they can then censor any narrative they don't like,
shadow banning or completely deleting people from the sites. But it's not just social media
companies. Now even companies like Uber, PayPal and even Airbnb can ban you for having the wrong
opinions online. And then over in China is their infamous social credit system. The basic idea is
for each person to be assigned a personal score based on how trust whether they are according
to the Chinese government. Certain things can increase your score, like making a social media
post praising the government. But on the other hand, things like getting into debt, buying too many
video games, reading the bible or criticizing the government, deducts points from your score.
And if your score falls too low, the CCP will then severely reduce your already restricted
freedoms. As people with a low score can have trouble buying train or even plane tickets,
some people have even had their pets taken away from them. With one student even been denied a
place at university because his father had a low score. For now the system has only been put into
practice by some scattered regional governments, but it won't be that way for very long. And recently
is usually being pushed through new laws to lay the groundwork, meaning that a nationwide social
credit system is just a few years away. I mean recently it's gotten so bad in China that a new
law just passed, which means that farmers can only plant the crops the government approves of.
And the personal planting of vegetables like beans, melons, squashes in your front or backyard is now
strictly forbidden. And in the west we're also seeing a gradual progression of repression,
which is exactly what George Orwell feared. So after he finishes with his work for the day,
Winston makes his way to an antique store in the slum districts of London and meets the owner
who sold him his journal. He buys a coral figurine, tapes with glass, and makes his way out of the
store, where he meets the same woman who was staring at him during lunch. The woman continues
looking at him ominously, going into the proletariat zones in London, something that is forbidden by
the party. She could slum out and so Winston considers killing her back at his apartment.
Coincidentally enough though, the two see each other the very next day in an underpass. The
woman stumbles and forces the ground, but quickly makes her way back on her feet. Secretly as he's
helping her, the woman hands Winston a note before leaving. At work, Winston unveils the note and
he reads, I love you. Along with a meetup location on the backside, seemingly without a second thought,
Winston tosses the note into the incinerator, and we transition back to his apartment,
but Winston is fixing his neighbour's drain at the behest of his neighbour's wife. At the apartment,
one of the neighbour's children loudly accuses him of being a thought criminal. Obviously this
makes Winston very nervous. It's an accusation which can lead to death and suffering, and it's
coincidentally true, but both of the adults ignore it. It's just a result of youth indoctrination.
However, it's true all the same. Luckily before the confrontation go any further though,
a newsflash interrupts the engagement. The announcement states that the war with Eurasia
is reaching an end, but with how the flow of information works in a totalitarian state,
who can really say if this is the case? And as afterwards we see immobile citizens cheering
on executions playing from the television, along with a bunch of Eurasian prisoners being escorted
to their impending death. Winston is among this crowd, along with a mysterious woman who hands
Winston another note. She is relying on him to destroy it. Winston abides and says that he will
finally meet her at the drop point, taking a train to the destination. On the train ride,
a band of children are then singing a propaganda song, where they pledge lower devotion to the state
and to die with dignity. And it's in these two scenes where we see a worrying aspect of the
war in 1984. The party only came to power just a few decades ago, but the new generation of
completely indoctrinated children is already approaching adulthood. In the novel, Winston
notes that the children are the most pragmatic and fanatic supporters of Big Brother. Growing up
in the system means that a habitus is completely under the control of government, one day the
last people who can remember the old war like Winston will die, leaving no one left who knows
anything outside of the state's control. A truly terrifying thought. And so once Winston exits on
a stop, we see our first glimpse of nature in the movie. This change of scenery is a stark contrast
to the industrial environment that the majority of Oceana presides in. Winston is now out in the
forest and looking for the drop point, until he hears a twig snap behind him. It's the woman,
and she has been following him the whole time. When the two get to a scheduled hiding place,
it's here where we get an insight into Winston's worldview. After learning that the woman has done
this exact stunt with hundreds of men, Winston says that he hates goodness, and doesn't want
virtue to exist anywhere. Winston wants everyone corrupt,
much to the delight of the woman. This state of mind is a direct response to the tyranny of
Winston's society, meaning that everything the party in the habitus sees as good is turned on
its head. And because of this overwhelming level of control in the society, all Winston really
wants to do is yell bullshit at all the lies slung at him. But most of the things that Winston
thinks are bad or corrupted just aren't, the normal parts of life which the party sees as a
threat to their authority, and therefore its outlawed. It's part of the tactic of keeping
the people impoverished and uneducated, as this makes them far easier to control. Because real
education and economic prosperity are the two worst things for Big Brother. As they're not
trying to enlighten you or save your soul, it's all about control. The more you commit to their
ideology, the more they can poison your soul. And that's why in the book All Well Writes,
every record has been destroyed or failed, every book rewritten, every picture repainted,
every statue in street building has been renamed, every date has been altered. It's a beautiful
thing the destruction of words. And today in our own world, we're seeing a very similar process
unfold. You see things as simple as children's books. I'm talking real dull books, and now
being pushed through a demented purity filter, where all bad words or paragraphs are now being
rewritten. Words like witches have been turned to hags, fat turned to ginormous, black person to
dark, cloud men to cloud people. Entire sections of these children books are being rewritten to
eliminate any wrongthink. And this isn't just children's books, this is happening throughout
all genres. Roald Dahl's just the most egregious example of this. But it doesn't even stop there,
because even a recent UK government-backed report has now claimed that reading George All
Well's 1984 is a sign of quote, extremism. So Western governments are now characterising people
who read 1984 as potential enemies of the state. And this isn't just happening with words,
we're also seeing this in the same form of economic control. As we're all familiar with,
the past few decades have seen enormous inequality that has steadily risen over the last 40 years.
Which is why by 2019, the world's richest 26 people earned more wealth than the poorest 50%.
But then after COVID, the biggest wealth transfer in history occurred. Now to put into
scale how big this wealth transfer truly was, we have to look at the stats. In early 2020,
before COVID began, billionaires alone as just people, earned 2% of total global wealth. And
this is only including publicly available information. But just a year later, and this
number was now 3.5%. 1.5% more of the total global wealth has gone to just billionaires alone,
all in a single year. And the result of this is ginormous wealth for the top elites,
and a never-ending hamster wheel for the masses. Where you can never control your own money,
where you never own anything, where you have no property, land or assets, or even any prospect
of owning these things in the future, just continually renting everything with nothing to
your name. Because in the last couple years, as wages have stagnated, the cost of everything
around you has gone up exponentially, only continued to go up and up while your income
starts to shrink. And so it was no surprise that as this great wealth transfer unfolded,
the World Economic Forum unveiled their new plan, the Great Reset. Now for those of you
unaware, the World Economic Forum is a priestly class of people, mixed up with global leaders,
rural families, black rock, the world's biggest companies, the biggest banks, the biggest pharmaceutical
companies, mainstream media outlets and the top celebrities. Pretty much a culmination of the
world's most powerful people. And these are the people who create agendas and policies that
are then adopted by organizations such as the UN, World Bank, IMF and national governments.
And this private organization has no democratic vote, and yet it is quite clearly one of the most
powerful organizations the world has ever seen. Not just affecting the West, but also Russia and
China. So when they unveiled their plan for a Great Reset, this marked a new chapter in human
history. And the leader of this organization is Klaus Schwab, who claimed the Great Reset would
provide a unique window of opportunity to reshape our world. And I see the need for action. I see
the need for a Great Reset. And one part of this agenda was to make the world greener and more
carbon neutral, which sounds great. But what exactly did he mean by this? Well, as you might have
noticed, all governments in the West in just the last year have promoted these policies heavily,
with the West now being forced to cut their ammonium and nitrogen emissions by 50% alone.
However, for many farmers in Europe, their livestock normally produce ammonia,
urine and feces. And so farmers all across Europe were recently forced to cut 30% of their livestock,
which meant huge swaths of farmers were forced out of business by the government. And yet these
same rules never applied for sectors like the airline industry. So suddenly, farmers and workers
across Europe protested. But at first, these protests were smeared as just crazy right-wingers.
But as this resentment grew and the protests gripped European nations, the government acted
harshly, with live rounds being fired upon these protesters. I mean, in the Netherlands,
they even changed the law that officers who killed protesters were now immune from manslaughter
charges. And whilst the media covered this up, the Dutch government would never receive any
backlash as they were cowing to the World Economic Forum orders. And the working class people in
Europe were forced to see their futures destroyed before them as they were attacked and mocked in
the media. And so it was no surprise that around this period, Klaus Schwab, the leader of the
World Economic Forum, warned of increasing anger. We have to prepare for a more angry world.
Because the Western governments were now forcing the food supply to run dry,
whilst artificially inflating the prices amidst the global food shortage, only deepening the
economic crisis that the majority of the West were facing. And in an act of double-think,
something that came straight out of 1984, media outlets like Reuters would then claim that there
was no evidence that the Dutch government worked with the World Economic Forum to impose these
new laws. Which really isn't all that surprising given the World Economic Forum partnered with
Reuters for exclusive content distribution, as the World Economic Forum, otherwise known as Big
Brother, controls the flow of information. And whilst you might not see the anger in the news,
these protests haven't stopped in Europe. I mean, just recently, protests have gripped the country
of France. As the President Macron has risen the pension age, many is going to take longer and longer
before workers can ever receive a pension. Even though the majority of France hates this idea,
this was imposed anyway, as democracy in Western nations is becoming a façade. In fact, democracies
aren't even obeying the people anymore. They obey corporate and financial interests rather than
the popular vote, the World Economic Forum over the people. And that's why our freedoms have
slowly been stripped economically and socially. Because if everyone had social and economic
freedom, then the whole system would collapse. And instead of new parties emerging and addressing
these protests, you're now seeing the militarisation of the police, more surveillance, more distraction.
And it's following this agenda that people like Bill Gates are claiming at the World Economic Forum
that during our current worst cost of living crisis, and the ongoing fuel shortages,
build things that workers should now also be paying carbon taxes. All whilst people like
Bill Gates are using the most carbon of all. They'll preach things like private property
for the average person will be a bygone relic, all whilst snapping up record amounts of farmland
across the US. Following their mantra of your own nothing and be happy. And all you're left with is
again, more distraction, more noise, more misery, more tension and more depression. No more family
units, less farms, less freedoms and no more rights to pursue happiness. And this is just one
of the reasons our habitat has been violently shifted towards consumerism and hollow material
wealth. Because we're being starved of it. And it's the perfect means to keep control in society.
But how did things ever get this bad? This has never really happened in living memory.
But what all world didn't foresee was that pleasure was just as useful a tool to keep
the masses numbed. You see, as they slowly siphon the wealth out of the economy,
the elites keep us distracted with hollow, empty hedonism. And modern technology is the
perfect tools for this. By exploiting the basic social need to be accepted, social media applications
exploit your dopamine receptors in the exact same way as cocaine. Years of split testing of
perfecting the algorithms and billions of dollars in research have made big tech companies like
Facebook and TikTok as addictive as possible. And as people build up a tolerance, they always need
more content faster to stay engaged, all while procrastinating and wasting their life away,
being numbed into flaccid apathy in their bedrooms. The rise of TikTok, YouTube Shorts and
all these other short form social media sites is just a direct result of this process. It's why
we're developing parasocial relationships with streamers and not our own communities.
Given the people, the illusion of community and knowing what's going on in the world,
we're without any real substance or true information. And by providing a drip drip of
anodine lethargic dross, the meaning in your life is sucked away. The resentment you feel
at the government is numbed and repressed inside of you. And so you accept it. And anytime you
feel depressed, isolated, like things are just outside of your control, there's always that
little dopamine fix just sitting in your pocket, pushing people more and more into the online realms,
stuck alone in your bedroom. And the result of this is what you see today, the most depressed
and downtrodden generation in living memory. As the normal societal habitat is breaking down,
it's taking away your motivation to go out in the world and make something of yourself.
You don't have the energy to call out bullshit against your government and the people preaching
their agenda. Responsibility, duty, purpose, these key pairs that have motivated men for millennia
have all been pushed out of the societal framework. Instead, consumerism and greed are the only things
to look up to now. But the worst aspect of this is the effect it's had on people's relationships
with each other. I mean, our current habitat right now is leaving 63% of men under age 30,
single and alone, and a large majority of them on dating a tool. Millions of men are experiencing
the exact same lovelessness that Winston's known his entire life up until now.
But before we continue, I want to tell you about something I've been working on this
past month. You see, I've built something that I legitimately think will change your life,
because you see, from most of your life, you've always been fed a constant stream of lies.
Lies that have poisoned your value systems, purpose and passion in life,
whilst also poisoning the community around you. And it's why you feel so lazy, so meaningless,
so lonely. And so it's time that we've come up with real solutions, not just modern-day
BS solutions. I'm talking about a new form of community, a way for us to take back control
of our lives. Where I will go deep into the real solutions, answers and value systems of
thousands of philosophers consents into an easy to understand package, or to help you improve
your life. All at no cost to you, I will send you a weekly essay on the solutions to the problems
we discuss on this channel, so just click on the link in the description and add your email
on the name down below. After Winston and the woman get to know each other a little better,
we then transition back to the antique store, where Winston plans on renting out the place,
and once they're sure they're finally somewhere private, the jurors secretly engage
in an unsanctioned relationship against the state. We also finally get the name of the woman,
being revealed as Julia. In this moment, both of them can finally relax and enjoy themselves,
even if just for a little while. They then enjoy some contraband items that Julia smuggles from
the party like real chocolate and coffee, and for a while their little conspiracy works quite
well for them. Up until this point, Winston has been completely in the dark on whether there's
an active resistance movement, but in his mind, he's certain that he has some level of understanding
with an inner party member, a man called O'Brien. So when O'Brien corners Winston in a hallway,
he's full of hope for a way to resist. O'Brien tells Winston that he's a fan of his writing,
but he does mention that there were a few unwords in his latest piece, and recommends he reads the
state's next dictionary edition. When he goes to collect it from O'Brien's office, Winston is
astounded by the luxuries that he enjoys. He offers him real wine, something that Winston has never
tasted before, and O'Brien can even turn off his telescreen. But the most precious thing O'Brien
offers Winston is hope, when he tells him about the resistance against the party, and it's here
that we get an introduction to the shadowy practices of how Ensok truly operates. Between the pages of
dictionary that O'Brien gave him, Winston finds a different book titled, The Theory and Practice of
Oligarchal Collectivism, which is basically a manual on how Ensok and Big Brother operate,
and the author is listed as Emmanuel Goldstein. Now it goes over a lot of what we've already
covered, but it also tells Winston about what's really going on in the world's politics.
You see, in the world of 1984, three super states have reached global dominance. There's Oceana,
which controls the Americas, South Africa, and the UK. Then there's Eurasia, a Soviet successor state,
which rules over Russia, parts of Asia, and Europe. And then finally there's East Asia,
a successor of China, which controls the Far East. The three states exist in a constant cycle of war,
endlessly shifting alliances and fighting for control over the rest of the world,
but they're not trying to win. They all have enough resources for their impoverished people.
The states are also pretty much the same in their beliefs. Eurasia's neo-Bolshevikism
and East Asia's obliteration of the self are almost identical to Ensok, meaning there aren't
really any ideological differences. Instead, this war only exists to suck up resources and
keep people in poverty. It keeps their societies and their brutal ideologies running, all in order
to maintain control. George Orwell envisioned a dead end to put it simply. A world where progress
and forward movement have been stifled by three world powers to guarantee their control over the
people. And so as Winston sits at home, we learn that Oceana has once again shifted alliances,
and now the war is with East Asia, and Eurasia is now their ally. Which is just another bit of
double-think, and it doesn't really change anything for Oceana's people. It's just more
propaganda and more control for the populace. And that's why the parallels of our real life
politics and that of 1984 is truly uncanny, where secret families and powerful shadowy
organizations like the World Economic Forum fuel both sides of wars, where world enemies
are friends behind closed doors, where governments continually change our enemies and ally with
people that we're told to hate. But then this really does beg the question, where do these
big, powerful governments and these shadowy organizations actually come from? Why does
Big Brother exist? And why do we decide as humans to follow the order of these totalitarian regimes
and governments? Well, the answer simply lies in understanding how governments form in the first
place. Now, Thomas Hobbes was one of the first political theorists to understand this, in his
widely renowned book, Leviathan. Now, he wrote this after his experiences during the English
Civil War, a brutal conflict where the country for over a decade was split into two by the
parliamentarians and the royalists. During this period, but headings were common and the violence
was barbaric, and it was this chaos that inspired his thoughts on governance. In his book, he first
talks about human nature and primitive life, back in the time when human were cavemen, living a
tribal existence. And he famously described this life as nasty, brutish, and short. The lack of
laws and complete chaos of nature led to a constant fear of death in the people. There was no actual
progress, because people were either too afraid of each other or just too busy in their fight for
survival. There was hardly any social cohesion, there was no rule of law, and there was no societal
development. And it was this primitive fear for survival that laid the groundwork for society.
So to avoid this constant struggle for survival, men willingly lay down their claims to the world
to live in a peaceful collective under one powerful ruler. And for Thomas Hobbes, this was
the optimal form of government, where one powerful state with a sole ruler did his best to protect
the people. That way, everything follows one trajectory of the leader. All quarrels between
the masses are distilled by ultimate power, and only then can the lives of everyone improve.
But you see, Thomas Hobbes was actually wrong with this, as this only ever worked with a truly
virtuous and benevolent ruler. And yet the oligarchy of 1984 and the oligarchies we see today
are just the complete opposite of this. But nonetheless, when there is this benevolent
ruler who controls a massive population, the culture and societal norms of that population
always trickle down from the top. And this is where social habitus forms. Now it may change
based on the environment and the people that form the society, but a specific code of conduct
always takes shape along the same lines. You see, for example, in a healthy society,
the habitus is always focused on ideals like liberty, responsibility, virtue and discipline.
These would be the values virtues and moral code of the elite, and then that would trickle down
into all areas of society. So this is how the habitus works. And sociologists use the idea of
habitus to illustrate the manner in which a society's culture works. You see, there are many
unspoken assumptions and standards that underpin society. These are frequently carried out automatically,
and they are more akin to acquired skills than deliberate actions. The French thinker Bordeaux,
who popularized the word, frequently linked it to sports. For example, the rules of football are
set in stone, and you play the game without thinking why the rules are there in the first place.
And yet these rules are crucial, otherwise the whole game just wouldn't work without it.
And this is also how societies and culture flourishes. And that's why the renaissance
was so remarkable. The new habitus that was developing in Europe in this time gave birth
to a whole new wave of creativity, discipline, focus, moral code and beauty. But then what
happens when the values of the elite starts to crack, and the habitus becomes poisoned?
What does this then mean for the rest of society? Well, you don't really have to
look very far to see how fractured and malformed our habitus has become. I mean,
we only need to take a look at who our icons are in society to give us an understanding of
what has truly happened here. Due to our hyper crony capitalist system, the elites in their greed
and love of money have spread into every level of society. And I'm not talking about simple
capitalism here. I'm talking about the special kind, the special kind of corporatism and socialism
for the rich. You see, for example, we no longer value the European holistic lifestyle,
where a person's value is based on many layers of their personality. Instead, today in the West,
we only value the superficial to understand someone's value. And this explains the rapid
rise of these fake gurus you see online. People like Grant Cardone, London Real and these vacuous
new mega churches. You see, things like this would never even exist without millions of people
orientating their self worth and motivations entirely around money. You see, in contrast to
the Renaissance period, they used to care about art and religion. But our new religion is following
hedonistic and materialistic pursuits. Now, obviously, there's always need for money,
and it's a great way to have freedom in your own life. But it's these sorts of scammers that
completely rely on greed to survive. And greed is the name of the game in modern society. And
that's why the greediest of all are then promoted even further, going all the way up to the top of
the World Economic Forum. And in a lot of cases, people are just making money simply by talking
about money and nothing else. Nothing on natural societal value. And it's not just these sorts
of people. Our society now praises these celebrities whose only value lies in their image and wealth.
The caressions are always mentioned, but there's just so many others, people like Cardi B,
the entire cast of Love Island, or any other vacuous hollered out shell of a human being
celebrity. And because we praise these false idols, everyone then buys into the societal delusion,
helping to perpetuate this broken habitus even more. And that's why lots of well-meaning
rational people are swept up to becoming mouthpieces of a failing system. And one of the
perfect analogies for our twisted habitus could be seen with the FTX scandal recently.
From celebrities to established financial institutions,
Saint-Bank-Mont-Fried fooled the world by using his own artificial pumped-up currency that had
no attachment to anything real to make billions. Everyone believed in it, and that's where the
value of these coins came from. By everyone believing in Saint-Bank-Mont-Fried's lies,
he was able to make unthinkable money. But at the top of the pyramid of FTX,
this CEO was a lazy gamer playing League of Legends in the Bahamas, with his whole value
being tricking everyone into believing his money was worth something. But then when a gust of wind
came, this whole facade came tumbling down in just a matter of days. And our society is heading
exactly the same way. You see, as the habitus gets twisted even more, it becomes harder and harder
for people to reconcile it with the real world. Then when the illusion breaks and people realize
everything is built on a lie, it eventually collapses. And Winston and Julie have also been
living a lie separate to the great lie of their society. You see, despite knowing they'll eventually
be found out, they carry on seeing each other in the room above the shop. A taste of real life
is just too tempting. So Winston and Joy is reading subvertive literature to Julia,
all while enjoying the contraband food that Julia smuggled from the inner party.
Things are going great, they finally escape the clutches of Big Brother, they've had a taste
of freedom and love, all until one day, when Julia and Winston are relaxing in their room.
As they watch a working class woman washing some clothes and singing a song, they marvel at the
beauty of life, all the more stunning because they know their time is limited. Winston says to Julia,
we are the dead, and Julia says the same. And then a voice from behind says, you are the dead.
They turn around to see a painting fall off the wall, revealing a telescreen with the
visage of Big Brother. The voice directs them to stand in the middle of the room,
as the thought police break in through the window and the door. Even worse, the antique shop owner
walks up the stairs and reveals himself to be an agent of the thought police. Ever since Winston
set foot in the shop, he was always under their supervision. The agents take Goldstein's book
and smash the piece of coral, one of the last things of beauty left from the old world, and it's
one of the last things Winston sees before they take him away to the sinister Ministry of Loth.
We are then shown Winston and Cussidy, along with his neighbour Parsons. Parsons not knowing it
himself is apparently an agent of Goldstein, and also a thought criminal. However, he reveals
that he was taken in because his daughter reported him for things he said in his sleep.
Despite Parsons coming across as completely indoctrinated, he's still going to be tortured
and broken down anyway. The two remain in custody for some time until an announcement wakes them up,
Room 101. Parsons seems to already know what this entails and begs the correctional officers not to
take him there. Winston on the other hand doesn't seem to have a clue about what's going to happen,
but gives a knowing look that it probably isn't going to be good. Despite all of his pleading,
Parsons is then taken to Room 101, and Winston waits alone in his cell for some time,
until he is met with O'Brien. O'Brien takes Winston into an interrogation room,
where he is tortured with an electric restraining device. Throughout the time,
O'Brien educates Winston on the principles of double-think. He reaffirms the notion that Oceana
has always been a war with East Asia instead of Eurasia, despite the contrary being previously
correct. Along with this, O'Brien then asserts that two plus two can equal three, four, or five,
sometimes even all of them at once. And this is the final and most essential ingredient for keeping
the party and their stilted habitus alive, rejecting real authentic reality itself. They
need people to trust the party over their own eyes and ears. It's how people are willing to accept
that the enemy can change at a moment's notice, and it's how the party will have taken power in
the first place. It's in times of great chaos and upheaval that regimes and governments fall
and new ones take that place. It's just the cycle of history and we've seen it happen over and over
again. It's how the world ordered changes, and in our current world right now, the transition
is almost here. One of the most famous experts in this field, Ray Dalio, describes the process in
a study on historical cycles, beginning with the rise of civilisations. This is when a new state,
founded on the dominant ideals of the time, grows in power to take control of their world,
like the Roman Empire all the way to America after World War II. Then comes the golden age of
prosperity, a long period of time where a civilisation enjoys their position at the top. But
this is also where the problems start to arise. People make financial bets on the world order
continuing forever, unable to see a future unlike the present. As the leading powers economy grows
to dominate the others, their currency becomes the international standard. Internal conflicts also
arise as the founding ideology becomes out of date with the world, and eventually a bubble forms,
as people bet more and more on continued growth and prosperity, whilst internal divisions and
problems only get worse. Those with power try to consolidate their grip on it, alienating more
of the people whilst holding all of the wealth. And this then only fuels extremist sentiment and
revolution even more. However, sometimes this can be peacefully dealt with, although eventually
these problems get so large and the power structure becomes so stagnant that a revolution
and changing of the guard becomes inevitable. Then another rising power eventually eclipses the
stagnating one. Most of the time there's a war or sets of wars until the dust settles and a new
world power comes to the forefront. And time and time again this cycle has just repeated itself.
In recent history it was the Dutch who were dominant, followed by the British, then the US,
and now China is rising to challenge the US. And that's where we are today, on the cusp of
this transitional period. And because of this, our current societal habitats just won't be able
to cope with the changing world. As the cracks start to show in the habitats, and the society
becomes more and more deranged, we'll then see a massive shift back towards additionalism. Because
as birth reads full, young people fail to find love or happiness. The standard of living starts
to drop, and the ideals that the constitution starts to get ripped apart, right-wing sentiments
will rise again. Meanwhile, the elites at the top are going to keep tightening their grip on power,
bringing us closer and closer to a 1984 future. I mean for starters we've already talked about
the great recess, but this is only the tip of the iceberg here. Because right now it's becoming
very clear that corporate elites will keep pushing their elites as fake leftism on the masses,
or to maintain control of the world order. I mean we're already seeing this in the west,
with huge companies like PayPal's recent announcements on handing out fines for quotes
misinformation. Or like MasterCard's carbon fees, where their new credit card cuts people off for
exceeding carbon emission levels. All while oil companies make record profits, but can't find
the money to fix their pipelines and stop massive oil leaks. However the most disturbing part of
this is the new idea of CBDCs, one of the most odious forms of corporate control. And so if
corporations and financial institutions manage to purse the idea into the mainstream, it will
eventually give the banks and governments greater control over people's lives. It's digital currency,
but controlled centrally through the banks, Bank of England. So instead of having a bank account
with whatever HSBC or Bank of America, you'll have a bank account directly within the American
context with the Fed, in the UK directly with the Bank of England. You have a personal bank account
and you're given digital money in that bank account. These are called central banking digital
currencies. Because a centralized bank digital currency means that the government then has full
control of the money and so that everything you spend it on is tracked by the government. And with
one push of a button, they will be able to cut off your funds entirely, all for saying the wrong
thing. And this will then paralyze you, leaving you at the government's mercy. And this has also
response to the rise of crypto. And yes, crypto may be a paradise for scam artists. The crypto world
does also offer currency out of the government's control, which is a massive threat for the growing
control in Western society and is something that can't be accepted by the elite in this
transitional period. Now obviously in 1984, the party and big brother are far more advanced in
their efforts to control the people. But then again, all the ingredients for their kind of tyranny
in our own world are already present. They won't need to torture and indoctrinate people in the
way the party does. It's much more subtle than this. It's just a small shift in the habitus.
But eventually the end result is the same, complete acceptance of big brother's control.
And that's why during his torture, Winston begins to disassociate and hallucinates being in a grass
field, along with O'Brien. O'Brien states that Winston is one of them. And under significant
illusion, Winston says that he loves O'Brien, who suddenly turns into Julia. He still isn't
broken down yet. His love for Julia is still there. But just as this happens, the image of Julia is
shot, and Winston awakens back in his cell, where he is delusionally talking to himself.
Winston then snaps back to reality after being met with O'Brien once more.
O'Brien then asks Winston what he thinks of big brother, and Winston responds that he hates him.
This comes to the distaste of O'Brien, who states that it's not enough to obey big brother,
but in fact you must love him. So O'Brien escorts Winston to room 101. Room 101 is a torture chamber,
where the worst things in the world awaits his prisoners. A specialized room that houses the
victim's worst phobias. Winston is then strapped to a chair, and starts experiencing the horrors
of room 101. Now throughout the movie, we've seen that Winston is deathly afraid of rats.
He's dreamt about them, and he associates them with his tragic past. And O'Brien knows about
this, and he's going to exploit it to finally eradicate Winston's desire to resist. And so in
room 101, we see a compartmental cage filled with rats, with a set of two doors that is attached
to Winston's face. O'Brien then threatens him, and opens the first door, letting the rats out
within inches of Winston's face. And after what could have been months or years of this torture,
this is the last draw. And it's here that Winston loses his final bit of humanity,
as he pleads with O'Brien to do it to Julia, to finally put the woman that he loves the most
through the same unbearable punishment. It's the final betrayal, and what seals Winston's fate as
a broken puppet of the party. O'Brien is finally satisfied. Winston has been completely broken.
Sometime later, Winston is released, and we then transition to the Chestnut Tree Cafe,
where Winston awaits at a chessboard. Julia arrives, but they're both apathetic. They've
been changed forever, and after their betrayals, they don't really love each other anymore.
They only love Big Brother. And just as Winston makes a comment on thought crime,
Julia then excuses herself with a half hearted,
You must meet again.
to which Winston apathetically agrees to. We are then shown Winston on public television,
embellishing his supposed crimes, along with admitting to crimes he didn't commit,
such as poisoning the water supply, and guiding rocket bombs onto airstrip 1 through coded radio
signals. Eventually, Winston charges himself as guilty on all counts,
labelling himself a victim of Goldstein's influence.
We are then shown him alone at the cafe, fiddling with the chessboard. Using the dust on the table,
Winston then writes 2 plus 2 equals 4 on the countertop, and grabs a night piece just as
another announcement is made on the television. And that's when we are then shown a final shot
of Winston gazing longingly into a picture of Big Brother. He then turns away with tears in his eyes,
and says, I love you, as the credits roar.
But then this brings up the question, how can we avoid a situation like this,
where people are nothing more than just mindless individuals becoming statistics on a government
database? How can we avoid being just another loveless depressed, nihilistic cog in an uncaring
machine? Well, I'd love to tell you that the answer is simple. I'd love to say that the solution
is just waking up at 4am, having a cold shower and going to the gym. I'd love to say it's
hiding away in the middle of the forest. I'd love to say it's money, or a Tony Robbins lecture.
I'd love to say it's as easy as buying a $3,000 dropshipping course and escaping the matrix,
driving a Lambo in the palm. But let's be real here, this doesn't actually do anything. By
themselves, these are all great things to make you have an easier life. Self-improvement is vital,
and it's incredibly lacking in modern society, but it doesn't really change the world that you live
in. It only changes yourself, but it doesn't change the system that put you where you are today.
It doesn't change your values, the values of your associates, friends and family. It doesn't
change the why behind all of this self-improvement stuff. Why should you improve your life? Why
should you seek freedom? Why should you even care about Big Brother? If life is just so cruel,
hopeless, depressing and empty, then why bother chasing rewards from that system when the system
itself is so demented? Well, trust me when I say that the solution to all of this is just so much
deeper than you've ever been told. And to understand why, we need to go back 3,000 years in time to one
of the earliest philosophical texts in human history, a text that has transcended time, culture and
religion, a text known as the Book of Job. Now, for those who don't know, the book is a thought
provoking and complex piece on God, giving direction on the meaning of life in the face of
overwhelming nihilism. You see, the story centers around a wealthy and righteous man named Job,
who is living a comfortable and prosperous life. However, in short, Satan challenges
God's assertion that Job was righteous, suggesting that he is only faithful because
of his good fortune. So God agrees to allow Satan to test Job's faith by taking away his
possessions, his family and his health. This causes immense suffering for Job, but Job refuses
to curse God or renounce his faith. However, he does struggle to understand why he is suffering,
and he moans about the injustice of his situation. As almost all of us would,
he questions why God would allow such terrible things to happen to a righteous person like
himself. He's forced to go through various trials and tribulations. Job is tested to his core,
which forces him to grow through a journey of his self. Job's friends who come to comfort him
offer him traditional explanations for his suffering. They suggest that he must have sinned
and that his suffering is just a punishment from God, that he's a bad guy who deserves it.
But Job rejects all these simple explanations, insisting that he is not sinned and demands an
audience with God to plead his case. Eventually, this whole book culminates in God's response to
Job's demands. God speaks to Job from a whirlwind and challenges him to consider the vastness and
complexity of the natural world, asking Job if he can even comprehend the mysteries of the universe,
and Job humbly acknowledges his own limitations. As God tells him that he made all these terrible
elements of society and nature, he made the universe, and all of the badness in the universe
is God's creation. And so God's response to Job is how dare you question any of these things?
As these challenges put on Job are just tests of his ethical ability, they're essential for
Job to evolve and grow as a person, just like it is for us. You see, I'm not even religious here,
but the terrible parts of nature and society that God has supposedly created are only noticed with
consciousness. Like Job being aware of losing his family fortunes in the future he could have had,
and then the results in suffering from it that has come from his consciousness. And then you see
when we are unconscious like animals, we are always in the present unaware of true reality.
But as consciousness emerged in humans, we became more and more aware of the dark realities around
us. Reality is like the horrors of death and human suffering, and it's with these dark,
soul-crushing realities that we have an impulse to return to unconsciousness, and we do this through
instant gratification in empty pursuits, like never maturing, choosing to be ignorant, drugs,
alcohol, and terminally living online. These are just some of the things that we use to cope with
the real world and the pain that comes with it. But Cole Young suggested that what the book of Job
tells us about our own life is that to escape the horrors of man, Job and you watching this needed
to become more conscious, as consciousness was actually the true solution to all of this. As by
being more and more conscious of reality, it allows you to elevate above it, because all the burdens
and pain of life are just a necessary process to make you a whole person. To be a good person,
to build a great civilization, you have to face these trials and tribulations. You need to be
more aware, more thoughtful of all the evil in the world, to be a better person, to be strong in
the face of evil. You need to be strong in the face of all the devastating facts of life, of the
derangement of the elites, and the degeneracy of the society around you. You should never avoid all
the terrible thoughts and events confronting you. You should never ignore all the pain, suffering,
and nihilism being thrown at you by our corrupt society. As Young famously said,
that which you most need will be found where you least want to look. And that's why instead of
following your bliss that modern culture tells you to, you need to instead follow your blisters,
for a true awakening. And so with all of this in mind, Job then finally understood that God was
there to build order from chaos, because here's the embodiment of evolution and growth. While on
the surface you may just view this as some basic religious story, the actual meaning to the story
is deeply profound, and provides a perfect solution to the problem of 1984 and our own modern world.
You see the whole point of this, the whole point of why this text has transcended thousands of
years of history. The reason it's been studied by millions of scholars is for a reason. The writers
use the story as an allegory of the spirit of individual growth, and thus the whole of human
civilization. God in this instance is the analogy for the spirit of meaning growth and human potential,
the spirit that generates human culture. And that's why throughout all religions of mankind,
God has been above the culture, as he is the spirit of it. And there's a reason this is so
important to understand. I'm not trying to convert you to any religion here, this is just a very
necessary foundation to understand the solution to all of this subversion and control of the big
brother. You see this whole story is one of faith in the face of adversity, of trusting in your
mind and intuition. And that's why God, the spirit of growth and potential, is revealed to us through
the actions we undertake in our life. This is why prayer is a key element of all religions.
And I'm not talking about the kind of prayer where you ask for something and God automatically
gives you it. Prayer is not a vending machine. The idea of true prayer is saying the problem and
then changing who you are, so that God treats you differently and the problem fades away. You're not
supposed to be the same person before you pray. The prayer is meant to instead act on your mind,
by trusting your intuition and mind to be the better person. And then through your actions,
growth and rewards come to you, which is ultimately the solution to big brother in our modern world,
by trusting your intuition and guts and by being an individual. You know before in the US,
the dignity of the individual was paramount. But now if you notice, this concept is being portrayed.
As Oscar Wilde said, most people now are just other people, their lives are mimicry, their
passions are quotation, which is why you must trust yourself. You must reject big brother. All
the supported authority figures you're meant to believe are liars. They're the worst among us,
and they will lead you to your own destruction. The world you live is not some democratic liberal
utopia where everyone has a piece of the action, where culture and policies determined by all of
us. That is total BS. The priestly cast at the top, big brother, wants to control you. They're not
there to save your soul or fire the spirit up inside of your mind, which is why the more you
follow the narratives and their lifestyle, the more you start to poison yourself. You see,
the reason you're lazy, the reason you have all these bad habits, the reason you never achieve
the life that you want or chase the goals and passion that you believe in, is because you've
been repressed. The meaning and soul of your life has been stripped away from you, making you a cog
in an uncaring machine. Your life is someone else's, where your best years, your character,
creativity and hopes are being stolen from you. And that's why you must insist on your dignity.
You need to free your mind. You must reject all the noise around you and embrace the chaos,
the pain and the sorrow to grow. And if you don't, you become another pawn of big brother. You're
the person who didn't even fight back. You never did anything to go against the system poisoning
your life, too passive to actually care what's happening to you and the people around you.
Is this the life you want to live? Well, for many of us, we're starting to see the rejection of all
of this, because as we enter the age of Western civilization collapsing, with the government
trying to control us more and people becoming more atomized, depressed and lonelier than ever,
we're now starting to see antibodies being produced to overcome the societal disease.
We're seeing more and more people rejecting the values of our twisted habitus, of all the
bullshit fed to you by big brother. The pendulum towards individualism is swinging back. And that's
why when I see this rise in self-improvement, this rise in individualism, when I see all these big
political changes happening in the world, it just shows to me that the new world order is on the
horizon. The spirit of growth is nearing. A spirit of dignity, empowerment and hope for young men.
The hope that our culture has killed and used against us. And so after millions of successfully
lived lives throughout all periods of history, the challenge to grow now passes on to you.
You will determine the future of the next generation. Your mind determines the direction of
everything. So don't just give it up for some sick cultural narratives. Giving your genius to
the worst among us. You should act without regret. Follow the path in front of you and take back
control of your mind. I want to tell you about something I've been working on this past month.
You see, I've built something that I legitimately think will change your life. Because you see,
from most of your life, you've always been fed a constant stream of lies. Lies that have poisoned
your value systems, purpose and passion in life, whilst also poisoning the community around you.
And it's why you feel so lazy, so meaningless, so lonely. And so it's time that we've come up with
real solutions. Not just modern day BS solutions. I'm talking about a new form of community. A
way for us to take back control of our lives. Where I will go deep into the real solutions,
answers and value systems of thousands of philosophers, consents into an easy to understand
package. All to help you improve your life. All at no cost to you. I will send you a weekly essay
on the solutions to the problems we discuss on this channel. So just click on the link in the
description and I will email the name down below.
