Charlie D'Amelio, Alison Rae, Zach King, Bella Porch and MrBeast.
Right now, these social media stars are the most popular celebrities in the world.
They use TikTok to provide us endless hours of seemingly harmless, bite-sized entertainment,
and they're making an insane living doing so.
But what if I told you that these people were unknowingly involved
in one of the most sinister geopolitical conspiracies the world has ever seen?
Let me explain.
It's no secret that TikTok is currently the driving force behind popular culture in the West.
Every popularized song, meme, style, trend, development and slang can be traced back to
TikTok in some shape or form, because everyone you know is consuming its content.
With all other social media platforms that were once the cusp of every trend and development
in internet culture have now seemingly fallen behind the curve, and TikTok has taken the mantle,
amassing over 1 billion current active users around the world,
80 million of which are in the United States alone,
and with its growing hold over Generation Z in particular,
it might be obvious why TikTok is growing to be a trendsetting powerhouse.
And when you think about it, the youth are really the arbiters of popular culture,
and so by providing a platform in which the youth can dictate content rapidly and instantaneously,
means the set platform now dictates popular culture.
And although it's just one country, popular culture in the United States is extremely
important. It's a pay-setter for the Western world,
what becomes popular in the United States quickly becomes popular everywhere else.
And this is what makes TikTok and its most followed individuals extremely powerful,
with the app mixing and homogenizing the world's entire culture.
This process will only accelerate as the average TikTok user spends over an hour and a half on
the app every single day, and 60% of TikTok users are from Generation Z.
And as I'm sure you're all aware, TikTok has bled into everyday life on such an unprecedented
scale, meaning that by now, it has an immeasurable impact on people's culture and their personal
lives. Now at first glance, popular TikTokers like MrBeast, Alison Rae, Zach King are just simply
the youth driving cultures they always have, making fun and entertaining videos to be consumed
and shared by the masses, creating trends that attract existing celebrities and people of order
generations who fear being left out or left behind. However, what if I told you that it's
not exactly Gen C or influencers who are at the wheel driving popular culture at all,
and maybe instead the wheel is being tightly gripped by the white-knockled hands of a fascist
government in a country that is one of the greatest threats to the United States.
To understand what I mean by this, we first need to understand how TikTok came to be.
Q Bydance, founded in 2012 by Zhang Yiming, the Beijing tech company Bydance began working on
an algorithm that would change the world, and this algorithm was perfectly designed to
predict its users by feeding them short-form content rapidly, analyzing their viewing habits
and carefully creating their intake to keep them consuming for as long as possible. After all,
in the modern world, attention equals currency, but how is this seemingly random Chinese company
going to implement the world's most advanced algorithm that the world has ever seen?
Well, the start in 2017, when Bydance acquired the Shanghai-based social media startup Musically.
Through Musically's app, users could create 15-second to one-minute music videos with their
lips synced to popular songs and interacted with their communities, and Bydance saw the
value in combining this with the score-focused interface of their existing property Flippagram
to create what we now know as TikTok. Bydance had already seen the success of Vine, and they
understood the power of these bite-sized videos, and by mixing all of these apps together, Bydance
was developing the perfect algorithm, and with its user-generated content now being rapidly fed
in scottable bite-sized pieces to the masses, TikTok became the perfect avenue for aspiring
creators and influencers, providing anyone anywhere the opportunity to go viral like no one has ever
seen. Bydance tested out the formula in China first, attracting both content consumers and
content creators in the span of just a couple of months, and soon the app took over the entirety
of China, and that is when the Chinese government saw an incredible opportunity. But it's important
you understand who the Chinese government really is. The Chinese Communist Party, or otherwise known
as the CCP, has governed China since 1949, rising to power under leader Mao Zedong after a bruisedy
forced civil war. Their mastery over the use of propaganda tactics to capture the minds of the
people proved to be one of the most critical aspects of their success. With Mao Zedong,
heavily emphasizing the importance of controlling the culture to control the population. In his
great cultural revolution, Mao specifically focused his propaganda on certain idols, people who stood
as examples of socialist heroes. Lei Feng and Dongkang Ru were model soldiers who lived and
died for their devotion to the state and its leader. Alongside these idols came mass censorship,
state-controlled media and the creation of imperialist enemies in the west. And since Mao,
the CCP has always cracked down on liberalization, returning to the traditional ways of thought
control and censorship. And with that the CCP employed a variety of propaganda techniques
including control of the media, and more specifically the construction of role models
to be emulated by the Chinese youth. Now it's very important to remember this point later on.
Anyway, fast forward to the current day, where the CCP has become one of the most successful
dictatorships the world has ever seen, standing as the second largest political party in the
world, with more than 96 million members under current leader Xi Jinping. His totalitarian
government has sought to control every aspect of modern life. First they offer the carrot,
the impoverished masses are offered a promise they can escape poverty and hardship if they work
just hard enough for the state. Cut through state exams with incredibly high fail rates,
ensure this dream only becomes true for a few. And in return for this opportunity,
citizens are then expected to swallow the propaganda, accept the status quo,
and stay out of the way of the ruling party. Which is why every part of communist Chinese culture
is so strictly controlled to keep this narrative going. Social media, television, the news,
entertainment, all of it is passed through the CCP's great filter. If you don't swallow the
propaganda and play along, you end up in jail. Or in one of China's re-education camps, Mao could
only have dreamed of the control that the CCP now has over his country. And the total control of
culture that Mao's done once stressed so heavily is still so strong. With extreme surveillance
monitoring and data gathering to create profiles in citizens, the CCP can then assign a social
credit score to each individual. This allows them to do two things. It incentivises their citizens
to behave and effectively predicts the future in regards to those who will likely disobey.
The other major facet of the CCP's control is enforced legislation that limits the influence
of foreign media and access to the internet. Through these methods, the Chinese government
is creating citizens that are both more efficient economically and more obedient politically than
those of foreign nations, consolidating its position as the world's global superpower.
And this leads on to something very important. When Xi Jinping was first elected in 2012,
he ran on the promise of the Chinese Dream, described as the great rejuvenation of the
Chinese nation by the hundredth anniversary of when the CCP was founded, 2049. And this 2049
plan hinders on a series of five-year economic plans to ensure China will become the dominant
global superpower. But to achieve such heights globally, Xi Jinping and the CCP would have to
find a way to not only strengthen its own position, but weaken the position of competing nations.
And the way to do this would be to enact the same sort of cultural control they have achieved
within China over the rest of the world. And so with this context out of the way, it becomes
very clear the value of TikTok, an app that is acutely engineered for growth and popularity,
with one of the most advanced algorithms the world has ever seen that is constantly collecting data
on the global population. And so it shouldn't be surprised to find out that the Chinese government
always had a plan for buy-dancing TikTok. In the short term, the app would be a tool to collect
data on foreign citizens, building profiles around them that mirrored the existing social
credit scores within China. And in the long term, it would become key to infiltrating popular culture
around the world. But you may be thinking, well, a government making efforts to influence the culture
of foreign nations really isn't anything new. And to be fair, this is a relatively common practice.
Perhaps the most obvious examples of this are when governments with countless human rights
violations use investment groups to buy controlling stakes in sport. When countries like Qatar or the
United Arab Emirates buy their way into a European football club, they will then elevate the success
and status of that club through excessive spending. And by doing this, they legitimize these countries,
it normalizes these kingdoms, and creates a fan base that is in theory loyal to defending these
countries. However, this approach does backfire. It's often too obvious. By making such a public
splash on the world stage through investment, you're opening yourself up to widespread critique,
as sports is a heavily scrutinized and discussed industry around the world.
And the Chinese Communist Party actually knows this, which is why in 2017, coincidentally when
TikTok was first launched, that the CCP forced Chinese businesses to sell their ownership stakes
in European football clubs citing that these clubs offer nothing in return for their investment.
Instead, the CCP prefers a more subtle approach to foreign public relations. For years now,
they've been using their control over media and technology companies through things like Tencent
and Hawaii to get fingers in the pie of Western culture. And this is no secret, almost all world
governments know about this, as the Shenzhen-based company Tencent is one of the highest-grossing
media companies in the world, with investments in major cultural pillars such as the NBA,
Reddit, Spotify, Epic Games, and Activision Blizzard. And the Chinese government-run Tencent
has used these ties to silence and limit the reach of discourse surrounding the genocide
being carried out by the Chinese state, censoring any information about the Muslim
Uyghur population being sent to concentration camps and the resulting protests in Beijing.
And Hawaii's know better, documents have confirmed around the world that their consumer
and business-facing surveillance products have been providing information to the Chinese government
on an unprecedented level. And this is what's so effective about Chinese propaganda,
because coming back to the sports example, Qatar spent hundreds of billions on their
propaganda World Cup, only to see some of their image abroad worse and considerably.
However, with China, they've been able to stay under the radar and quietly buy influence in other
areas, and have seen all the benefits with very few drawbacks compared to countries like Qatar,
and they very effectively use Tencent to suppress any foreign support for Hong Kong.
In fact, there's a very good reason you've probably never heard of this. For example, in 2019,
the president of the Philadelphia 76ers spoke out against China, and so Tencent stopped airing
their games. And the clubs saw a significant portion of their revenue disappear, and were
forced to make a public apology. And there's just so many countless incidents of this I
could go on forever. But all of these incidents portray a much grander plan. By buying these
investments in Western companies, China has suddenly gained the ability to sway public opinion,
censor critics abroad. The solution here seems obvious, and you may be wondering why the Western
world hasn't sought to limit China's ability to interfere with their media and technology
infrastructure. In the same way they've done for other hostile governments such as North Korea's
Russia's. And the answer becomes clear when you take a closer look at the relationship China has
cultivated with the Western world. You see, China has done a very effective job at projecting the
image of being a somewhat liberalized nation to the eyes of the Western world.
Furthermore, TikTok is reportedly willing to share more of its algorithm to avoid being banned in
US states. According to this article published by the Wushi Journal, TikTok tries to win allies in
the US with more transparency in response to the ban on US government-issued devices.
In the new proposed arrangement, US third party monitors would check for video recommendation
algorithms to detect whether it has been manipulated or if the Chinese government or other foreign
actors have had access. And speaking of propaganda or media censorship, let's take a look at how
this is being covered by other media outlets by using ground news, which I use to research topics
like this. It's interesting to see that the Wall Street Journal was the first article to pick up
the story, and that most of the sources reporting on it are from the US. We can see the Washington
Examiner headlines the story as TikTok opening nearly $1.5 billion proposal to accommodate US
regulators. The evening standard, as TikTok offers to share algorithm details in a bid to swerve US
ban and the New York Post, TikTok offers to have third party monitoring if China spies on US users.
It's also interesting to see that all of these sources are from right-leaning outlets, making
the story a huge blind spot for readers, reading left-leaning outlets, and that of these sources,
33% are owned by media conglomerates. And today you can check out the story at ground.news.com
to read more about it and subscribe to see all the features that are used to avoid bias in the
media. Comparing the language used in each headline, we can get an idea of how language and the media
can be used to shape our understanding of a story, and from this, that the Chinese company is keeping
in line with portraying an image of alliance to keep them from getting banned in the US.
Since the 70s, the CCP's leaders have maintained appearances and played nice with the leaders
of global superpowers, all in an effort to ensure national security and economic growth.
And this has allowed the public to see their leaders shaking hands with the likes of Mao Zedong
or sharing a drink with Xi Jinping, and it humanizes the CCP. China wasn't seen as unfavorable by a
majority of Americans until recently in 2018, and this is exactly the same time that TikTok
exploded in the US market. And whether this happened by coincidence or planning, TikTok's rise
perfectly coincided with the beginning of the second stage of China's foreign policy, aggression.
After years of making friends, China has also been making deals. Along with their companies
buying parts of the Western economy, China has also moved to consolidate power over global trade
itself. By buying out around 100 ports in 60 different countries, China has taken its grip on
vital global infrastructure. In fact, by this point, China's almost colonized Africa. But then
the trade wars began, relations severely worsened between the two global superpowers, and that's
when propaganda in China started to worsen towards the US, with China now framing the West as an
open enemy. But during this time, the West seemingly had much bigger things to worry about.
The Western world was focused on Russia in the Middle East, all while the Chinese government
was positioning itself perfectly. But then what was this for exactly? And what does the Chinese
government have to gain from their publicity efforts? Well, it's not just freedom to exert
economic or cultural influence, those are just a means to an end. So then what's the end? Well,
the end goal is the scariest part of all of this. The truth is that right now, China is preparing
China has a defence budget of over 270 billion US dollars, and that number is steadily increasing
with each year, with the Chinese government reportedly restructuring and ramping up their
recruitment, promotion and paying centres for military personnel. There's also news of the
Chinese military making lucrative offers to former officers of the British Air Force,
all in an effort to bolster training methods. And although China hasn't yet initiated conflict,
all signs point to it being a matter of time. I mean, you don't have to look very far into this
to realise that the Chinese government has set their sights on Taiwan. There's a reason the
Chinese government is threatening use of force if the peaceful consolidation of the two nations
cannot be achieved. And to demonstrate this, China has been practicing invading. They've literally
held combat drills in the air and sea around Taiwan two times in the past month, preparing to
storm the presidential building in Taiwan, which China claims this is all to resolutely counter
provocative actions of external forces and Taiwan independent separist forces. But again,
why is China doing this? What is the end goal here? Why do they want to absorb Taiwan?
Well, there are many reasons, but one stands out in particular, and that being trade,
one of the key pillars behind China's global dominance. Because Taiwan's GDP was estimated
to now be over $800 billion in 2022, with its two largest expo partners being China and the US.
This is not to mention the increasing global demand for advanced semiconductors,
one of the most vital parts of the whole world's technology industry. Without this,
you won't have your laptops, phones, all of the world's technological infrastructure relies on this.
And it turns out that Taiwan is home to 90% of semiconductors. And not to mention it's been
reported that nearly half the demand for these semiconductors is from the United States. Not
only this, but Taiwan was always a part of China's 2049 plan. They were never supposed to break away
from China. It's been a stain on the CCP's rule since their independence. All Chinese leaders have
set their eyes on reunifying with Taiwan, and it's just a matter of time until this happens.
China is also facing a crisis in the country. People are protesting the CCP's authoritarian
regime. They're sick of the lockdowns, they're sick of the surveillance, and China needs a
distraction right now. And what better time than when the West is distracted by Ukraine?
And so it should be clear the very real possibility of a war between China and Taiwan,
which would inevitably involve the United States. And in this case, although the United
States has no official diplomatic duty to help Taiwan, it would very much be to their advantage.
In fact, this is pivotal. If they don't do this, the United States is ceding all their power to
China. And so with this in mind, we start to understand why the Chinese government cares
so much about TikTok. It's the most dominant social media platform in the United States.
And by having full control of TikTok, this will control the narrative behind any future tensions
between the two countries. Because more and more we find out that social media has the
ultimate power to influence political opinion. And this power has been amplified in the United
States during recent years. I mean, skepticism of traditional media sources has reached an all-time
high. And this is for a very good reason. Mainstream news has led the mass slip in recent years,
and it's become increasingly clear that the sources who were once most trusted by society
simply exist as propaganda outlets for billionaires, or to increase the profits of the investors
that they represent. Noam Chonsky and analyst academics have talked about this. The traditional
news media in America bends facts in the name of entertainment, capitalizing off of fear and
creating villains and strawmen amongst the population that they're meant to inform. But
the truth is, this is left a vacuum for truth. Misinformation is everywhere, and social media
simply amplifies it and makes it more difficult to pass through. And this turns into people blindly
trusting and repeating this misinformation, which can make it seem more credible and result in online
echo chambers, which increase division, create siege mentality, and heightens the toxic culture
we've been stuck in. And these social media echo chambers lead to what we saw in 2020,
with massive black lives matter protests ravaging America, and the US capital rights that threaten
American democracy as we know it. But it's in the search for truth that we realize that we've
been taken advantage of. Foreign agents all around the world are busy licking their lips,
through their direct interference in democracy and by perishing agendas in the online space,
with foreign dictators and autocracies banning all these social media sites and using them against
the West. And whilst the summit might have seemed like Russia was the first regime to take advantage
of this, China has been perfecting social media and into their manipulation for years, and the
sinister taxes they've used to control their own segregated internet can easily be used abroad.
All they needed was control of an online platform. And with its insane growth, TikTok is uniquely
positioned to be the most powerful social media platform in the United States, and across the
world for the foreseeable future. And not only because of its growth either, TikTok's algorithm
is powerfully designed to have these snowballing effects I mentioned. TikTok platforms certain
people with ideas deem popular enough and allows them to gain momentum very quickly. We trust TikTok
to feel as content that is similar to our interests, even though there's no authority making sure it
does so. I mean any TikTok user knows by now that the app is designed to fill hours upon hours of
people's daily lives, which inevitably causes them to conflate what they see with their actual
environment. And with this in mind, the capacity for users to be psychologically manipulated
and ideologically driven on TikTok seems to be a feature and not a bug. And the alarming fact is
that by dance and by proxy the Chinese government controls this algorithm entirely, they can create
inputs that promote certain videos and limit the reach of others. And these algorithm changes can
be subtle, happening overnight and without any sort of official notice. And everybody outside of
bite dance, even creators who have seemingly mastered this platform, are then in the dark about how
exactly this algorithm works. And this gives the company free license to steer users down certain
paths that benefit them and their associates. And let's not forget a point made earlier in the
video. TikTok is particularly appealing to a younger or impressionable audience. You may be
thinking a possible negative effect on children and teenagers is a flaw of the internet in general
and not really specific to TikTok. But TikTok is designed with a pillar of the CCP's original
propaganda philosophy in mind, the construction of role models. There's a reason why China's
version of TikTok, Douyin, is so different from the version they send to the rest of the world.
If you're a child under the age of 14 in China, Douyin shows you the educational videos like
science experiments and museum exhibits. With the rest of Chinese TikTok showing hard-working
everyday civilians helping their country and sacrificing for the greater communist good.
And yet if you're that same child in the United States, TikTok shows you sex,
vandalism, crime, social disruption and other Douyin satisfying degenerate clips.
And when preteens in the US and China were surveyed, asking what is the most aspirational career
they hope to achieve, the number one answer in the US was to be a social media influencer.
While in China, it was to be an astronaut, which is why it's clear that Mao's old method of
creating idols has been turned on his head and used as a weapon.
And they make their domestic version a spinach version of TikTok,
while they've shipped the opium version to the rest of the world.
What China uses to unify their population culturally is now being used to sow descent
and weaken the population of the West. And it's evident that the role models that
generations he is exposed to almost always come from TikTok. But it's not just the idea that
these TikTokers have social influence that makes them so useful to the CCP, it's the idea that
they have economic influence. In just over four years since its launch in the United States,
TikTok has become its own industry. Individuals are making their entire incomes on TikTok.
Mainstream celebrities are now using TikTok to maintain relevancy and revive their careers.
Major companies are now hiring entire teams of people solely dedicated to TikTok
all in order to market their products. And the beauty of TikTok for the CCP is that when the
most powerful people in Western society are chasing views on an app that they control,
they then control these people. So if people's livelihoods depend directly or even indirectly
on how many views they mass on TikTok, they'll create whatever content the algorithm needs them
to create. And because of this, the CCP no longer has to buy social media companies,
they don't need to buy sports teams, they don't need to be so overt with their propaganda,
as they have all the world's most powerful and most influential people in their pocket.
And by doing this, they can influence discourse surrounding issues involving China,
easily turning a dull to amplify certain voices while silencing others. And those
silent voices will either have to fall in line or risk losing their incomes or career.
Scorning through a freedom real-time, it may feel like a reach to draw a conclusion that your
favorite TikTokers are currently contributing to the propaganda machine of a corrupt foreign
government. And that's because they're not, at least not yet. The videos in TikTok for the most
part are entertaining, harmless and fun. Your favorite TikTokers probably provide you with
comedy, art, knowledge, and community at no monetary cost to you. And in turn, they get a
platform and outlet in a fulfilling career. So it seems like a win-win. And on the surface,
it seems like there's very little reason to distrust the app. But this iteration of TikTok
is the before picture of the Trojan horse. The global version of TikTok being consumed outside
of China is currently operating within a single goal in mind. The CCP is playing a long-term game
and to acquire the kind of foothold that will aid them in their goals as being a dominant global
superpower, they need users, they need money, they need trust, and they need to maximize its
addictiveness. So far, it's working incredibly. In just a couple of years, over 20% of all internet
users in the world are now using TikTok on a regular basis. And this percentage is increasing
with no signs of slowing down. At this rate, TikTok has the potential to be the ultimate global
sleeper agent for the CCP. And almost no one's doing anything about this. And the concern shouldn't
be in response to what the CCP and Bite Dancer doing with TikTok at the moment. The concern should
be what they can do. You see, we've already established that in the increasingly likely
event that China invades Taiwan, the United States will be forced to take the side of Taiwan in order
to protect their own trade interests and their geopolitical positioning. But this isn't a
certainty. Whilst the war on Ukraine has definitely given China pause for thought,
they haven't reduced their aggression at all. Biden has promised that the US would defend Taiwan.
Are you willing to get involved militarily to defend Taiwan if it comes to that?
Yes. Although it still does seem like China will try their luck,
whilst the West is distracted by Ukraine, and it's also the perfect opportunity
to regain their own population's trust in the CCP. But in many ways, the war has already started.
TikTok and China's other technological expansions are the first move in a growing
technological war. Although neither side wants a full-scale physical war, the best wars are
thought through the mind. And that's why with TikTok, China might have the perfect way of getting
what they want. Using TikTok's power and influence over culture, China could very easily
push an anti-war agenda on the site. They could so doubt online about the true nature of the war.
They could money the water with misinformation, and influence high-level content creators to
speak out against US intervention. I mean, China's already done this with Tibet. They've silenced
all the outcries for Tibetan independence. They silenced all the Hong Kong protesters.
They silenced all the backlash against the Uighur genocide in China. This is why you don't hear
about these massive issues in the world that relate to China, because China controls the algorithm.
Just like everything else today, a war to defend Taiwan would become an issue along political lines.
Although one of the only issues that Democrats and Republicans, liberals and conservatives
have been united on is the growing threat of China. Although this also could change, TikTok could be
used to interfere and delay an organized defense of Taiwan, or even stop foreign interference
completely. And this is just one of the issues that China would love to change the public's mind on.
With TikTok, the CCP will be able to sweep their atrocities under the rug,
and further expand their borders and damage the social fabric of their enemies.
This is why the United States government now sees TikTok as such a major threat,
and it's not just one side of the US political dichotomy either.
Current US President Joe Biden has declared his intention to ban TikTok in the United States for
good, and has already made headway in banning the use of the app on government devices at the
federal and state level. The Biden administration also explicitly cites the known data and security
risks surrounding Biden's, as the main driving force behind their push to eventually ban the
app on all civilian devices. And these risks surrounding personal data are very real. As
recently as June 2022, TikTok employees were cited in the report saying that quote,
everything is seen in China, while one director claimed a Beijing-based engineer,
referred to as master admin, has access to everything. And this is within their terms of
service. When you download and sign up to TikTok, you're accepting this. You're accepting that
they can see everything that you do on your phone and online, with some of the most outrageous
data collection policies of any social media site. This is from TikTok's privacy policy.
It said, we collect certain information about the device you use to access the platform,
such as your IP address, user region. This is really crazy. Your screen resolution and operating
system, app and file names and types. So all your apps and all your file names,
all the things you have filed away on your phone, keystroke patterns or rhythms. So they're monitoring
your keystrokes, which means they know every fucking thing you type. Wow. And the thing is,
we've already been down this road. Donald Trump actually tried to ban TikTok in the US back in 2019,
and yet he failed to get this through. The executive order was signed, but the move was
actually blocked. And in 2020, Trump's administration settled for a compromise,
instead forcing Bidance to sell a measly 20% ownership stake in TikTok to an American company,
with 12.5 going to the tech company Oracle and 7.5 going to department store giant Walmart.
Bidance would also have to let Oracle quote, run cloud services and security for TikTok in the US.
In response, Bidance swiftly decided to take legal action in the form of lawsuits and filed
a preliminary injunction in September 2020, which was actually approved. Bidance used American law
to further damage the American nation. And it should be telling that banning TikTok is a
priority to both Democrats and Republicans. Both sides agree on this, and yet still hasn't gone
through. But with the Biden administration's latest declaration of intent, the discourse has
already started, and those with vested interest in simply perpetuating the discourse itself.
And unfortunately, the precedent for government successfully banning TikTok is basically non-existent.
Outside of countries with strict censorship laws, only India has achieved a nationwide ban on the
app. At this point for the United States and the rest of the Western world, the question becomes
whether or not TikTok is already so entwined with our culture that its removal will be impossible.
But it should be clear to all of you who have watched so far that TikTok is one of the greatest
geopolitical weapons the world has ever seen. And thank you to Ground News for kindly sponsoring this video.
