These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by the teaching company.
These lectures are titled Introduction to the Study of Religion Part 2.
Lecture 13. Brief excursus on Immanuel Kant.
It's necessary at this point to break the sequence of these lectures to some extent in order to introduce the thought of Immanuel Kant.
We've referred to him a couple of times already, but he's going to be crucially important in undergirding the thought of several figures that are yet to come.
And so it will pay us to go ahead and take the time now to look at his thought in detail in order to understand many of the developments that we've already seen and many that are yet to come.
Immanuel Kant has been called the central figure in Western philosophy after Aristotle, the man who turned everything upside down and after whom nobody could think about philosophical issues in the same way ever again.
What gave rise to Kant's phenomenology?
During his lifetime, while he was already working as a professor at the University of Königsberg, the primary debate that was happening in philosophical circles was between empiricism and rationalism.
Now what do those two terms mean?
Empiricism is the view that whatever we know about the world, whatever ideas we have in our head, come to us by our experience of the world.
We learn everything that we know.
So if I want to know the things that are around me, whether it's this lectern, that coffee cup, or the floor, I have to get to know them.
I have to come into contact with them. I have to ask people about them.
There is nothing in my head already that will prepare me to simply appropriate them in an unmediated way.
So empiricism means we learn everything that we know.
Now the other view, rationalism, was based on a mathematical model of knowledge.
Mathematics was a whole system of knowledge that was not, strictly speaking, derived from the world, but was simply thought out deductively by people.
And so you began building a system of mathematics by starting with a small set of axioms,
and then you went from there to derive ever more elaborate laws and relationships which could then be applied to the world in order to get to know things about it.
So here was the question. What is the nature of the things that we know about the world?
Do we only know what we've learned? Is our mind a complete blank when we're born that has to be filled in by learning?
Or do we come to know the world by thinking it through and producing principles which we then take to the world and apply in order to understand it?
Or is it both?
Kant came into this dispute after reading the works of David Hume, a figure whom we've already discussed,
who questioned the whole notion of cause and effect, seemingly one of the most basic things we can know about the world, A causes B.
Hume was an extreme empiricist. He held that every baby is born with a complete blank slate for a mind, a tabula rasa, nothing on it at all,
and that everything that we know as we go through our lives, we learn from our experience of the world.
So there is no law of cause and effect that we can derive rationally just by thinking about things and proposing as an unalterable law of nature.
We know about cause and effect only by past experience which we then extrapolate into future expectations.
We simply have seen that the sun rises in the east every day, and we assume that it will continue to do so, but we cannot, by purely rational thought, derive any theoretical law that proves that the sun must always rise in the east.
Kant read Hume's works and famously said that it roused him from his dogmatic slumbers, whereas he had had a very productive career up to that point, producing many fine works of philosophy.
His thinking about the issue of empiricism versus rationalism sent him into a hiatus of 11 years with no publications at all while he thought through the issues and tried to find a way to break the conundrum.
The results of this 11 years of thinking appeared in 1781 with the publication of his enormously influential and magnificent synthesis called the critique of pure reason.
So how did Kant resolve the problem of empiricism versus rationalism?
He did it by what philosophers have called the turn to the subject. In other words, he took his attention away from the world itself and the question of how we get to know it and turned it to the mind that possesses this knowledge and began to ask, how does the mind do it?
Now, this gave rise to what philosophers call phenomenology. Phenomenology is based on the Greek word phenomenon, which means image.
And the reason why Kant thought this word was appropriate for the kind of structural reconsideration of the mind that he was putting forward is because he came to believe that in fact we do not ever get to know the external world
as it is, what we do come to know is the image of the world that we have in our mind. How does this work?
Kant never denied that there was an external world. There must be something that our minds are coming into some kind of contact with.
The external world, he referred to as ding an seek, a German term meaning thing in itself, the thing as it is completely apart from our apprehension of it.
So let's take the simple act of perception whereby I know that there's a lectern here. How do I know that? Do I ever come into any kind of contact with this lectern as it is in itself and of itself?
Both empiricists and rationalists would have said yes, if I know the lectern I must be perceiving the lectern in a fairly direct way. But Kant said no, it's a little more roundabout than that.
What I am getting from the lectern is nothing more than raw sense data. My eyes are taking in form and color. That's all.
Maybe I can feel it and my sense of touch is simply giving me a sense of smoothness and a slight coolness and some edges here and there.
I might even bring the sense of sound into it. I might knock on it and hear what it sounds like when things bump into it.
But when you think about it, those are three different channels by which sensory data are being mediated to the mind.
There's no a priori reason to think that the mind should consider the sight, the sound and the feeling as all referring to the same thing.
They are three separate sense inputs coming from three different directions.
Once that data gets to the mind, then the mind gets busy. The mind begins to correlate all of these sensory inputs and to construct an image.
To take the sense of sight, if all I see is shape and color, then all I know really is that there is a color and a shape that ends here, the edge of the lectern, and another color, the carpet, that starts there.
My mind has to construe these into two separate things, lectern and carpet. I don't get that just from my eyes. The world does not present itself to me in this sort of predigested way.
The mind then forms a concept, an image of the object in its own interior.
Now here's where Kant gets complicated.
Kant said, for the mind to be able to do that at all, the mind must have its own internal mechanisms and structures which it deploys in order to put together images.
He came up with then the categories, things that are in fact innate to our minds, and here's where he contradicts the empiricists.
The mind is not a tabula rasa, a blank slate upon which things are simply inscribed. The mind is in fact an active mechanism.
But unlike the rationalists, Kant asserted that what you have in the mind, since it is simply mechanisms, cannot be in itself knowledge.
So he's disagreeing with both. The mind is not either a blank slate, nor is it something that can generate knowledge simply from within its own resources.
Rather, it is a machine for processing and constructing knowledge. So what is innate to the mind is not knowledge itself.
What is innate to the mind is simply the mechanical processes and the structures by which knowledge can be generated from these images that the mind constructs.
Now two of these categories are space and time.
When I look at the lectern, one of the things that my mind does is to see it as occupying space.
According to Kant, we can't help that. The mind simply does that. It uses space and extension in space as basic categories for building images.
Time is the same way. I see this lectern here. It was here for the last lecture. I presume it will be here for the next lecture.
So I see it extending through time.
Now here's where it gets a little funny. What Kant is literally asserting is that space and time are mental structures that the mind uses to create the image of the world.
They are not things that exist necessarily in the world itself.
What's going on out there may in fact not be even happening in space and time in quite the way that we conceive it.
And in fact, it's provocative to think that perhaps one of the things that Einstein has shown us with his theory of relativity is that in fact our common sense view of space and time really isn't the way things actually operate in the external world.
There's an idea to play with.
But the rub is that we will never know. We have no way of breaking out of these basic sensory and mental mechanisms by which we construct an image of the world in order to see the world in and of itself, the ding-on-seesh.
The image is all that we will ever have.
But Kant was not a solipsist. Even though we are restricted to the interior of our own minds, Kant did not then take the last step of saying that therefore the world is simply a creation of our own minds, like when we're dreaming.
And even though we may see ourselves walking down a street and bumping into people, we know that in a dream they are simply projections of our own minds.
No, solipsism is universally regarded as a philosophical dead end. There are too many things that you simply cannot explain if you take a solipsist position.
You can't explain, for example, how you could possibly learn anything that you don't already know if the world is simply a projection of your own mind.
It's hard to account for the seeming stability of the world, the fact that I can see my coffee cup there, turn my head away, and turn back and see it there again.
So we can at least assume that there is something out there that is informing the images, that is having a determinative effect on the images that our minds form.
But when it all comes to the final analysis, the image is all we've got. That's the essence of phenomenology.
I want to turn now to some of Kant's other writings in which he touches on issues that have more direct bearing on the study of religion and the theories that are generated about it.
One of the most important in this regard is his theory of beauty and the sublime, as contained in his book The Critique of Judgment,
in especially the first part called The Critique of Aesthetic Judgment.
Now, it is one thing for me to say, this is a lectern.
As we've already seen, that is an act of cognition, of simply coming to know that there is something here and identifying what it is.
It's mediated by the senses, my mind constructs the image, it then pulls the word lectern out of the language bin,
it correlates it with all of the concepts that I already have about what you do with lecterns, how you relate to them.
That is what Kant called a determinative judgment. This is a lectern.
But now to get a little bit silly, what if I make the further statement, this is a beautiful lectern?
What do I mean by calling it beautiful?
Clearly, to determine that something is beautiful is not a pure act of cognition.
It is not to identify something that is beautiful in the same way that one could say, this is a lectern.
To say that something is beautiful, to identify beauty in an object, is what Kant called a reflective judgment,
something that comes about through the reflection of one's own mind.
But as with the analysis of phenomenology that tries to steer between the two extremes of empiricism and rationalism,
Kant wanted to steer between two extremes here in his theory of beauty.
On the one hand, he thought it would be patently absurd to simply say, beauty resides in the object itself,
that this can never be anything but a beautiful lectern.
If that were true, then everybody would just have to admit that it was beautiful, because it simply would be.
In the same way that they would have to agree that it's a lectern.
That's clearly not the case.
But he also didn't want to go all the way in the direction of radical subjectivity,
where all we can say is, well, I like it, I find it beautiful, maybe you don't.
In that case, there's no basis for any kind of discussion about beauty.
I cannot communicate to you why I think the lectern is beautiful,
or why I think you should take it to be beautiful too.
In fact, Kant observed that in our normal interactions, when we're talking about artistic productions,
or pieces of music, or fashion, or a landscape, we rarely take the extreme subjective position.
If somebody disagrees with us about the beauty of what's in front of us,
we might say, well, how can you not find it beautiful?
If we try to explain to them how it is that we find it beautiful,
this sense of beauty is communicable.
Otherwise, why would we have art appreciation or music appreciation courses
if there was no way for us to communicate with each other about how we find it beautiful?
So how did Kant get between these two extremes of either extreme privatism in aesthetic judgments,
versus the objective judgment that something is just beautiful just because it is?
He did it the same way he talked about our ability to exchange knowledge with each other.
The human mind is always the same in all human beings,
and it has the same sort of mechanisms for processing judgments of beauty in any given person.
Therefore, even though you wouldn't want to say that the object is beautiful in and of itself,
it still makes sense to say, if I find something beautiful,
then you might also find it beautiful because the mind that you're bringing to the experience
is the same as mine in its structure and in its function.
And so by once again turning to the subject, referring to the structures and mechanisms of the mind,
Kant was able to show that we can have an intersubjective communicable experience of beauty.
Beauty, he said, could be found in a feeling of pleasure,
and he specified that this pleasure must be disinterested.
In other words, if you find a person of the opposite sex beautiful
because they might be good sexual partners for you, that's not a true aesthetic experience.
There's a high degree of self-interest at work in there.
Beauty is found in a completely disinterested view of pleasure.
And it is also found in things that you can recommend to others,
and so they become universal experiences, beautiful sunsets, everybody should find those beautiful.
And because it is the mind's structure, its own inbuilt mechanism that is finding this beauty,
beauty is also necessary.
The beautiful sunset has to be beautiful
because it plays off the structures of our mind in determinate and predictable ways.
What about the sublime?
Now this is where we get into issues that are much more fundamental to the study of religion.
Kant said the experience of the sublime is related to the experience of beauty.
Both of them are experiences of pleasure.
Both of them seem to bring the faculties of the mind into some kind of agreeable harmony.
They all have this experience, this quality of being disinterested, necessary, and universal.
But there were some stark differences between the experience of the sublime
that set it apart from a simple experience of beauty.
For one thing, the beauty of a thing was intimately connected to its form.
If you find a tree beautiful or a painting beautiful or a piece of music beautiful,
the beauty resides in the form of the thing.
But a feeling of sublimity that one is in the presence of the sublime
is a feeling that there's more to the object in front of you than meets the eye.
Japanese scholars working in the 18th century, roughly the same time as Kant,
noticed this.
They said you can run into a beautiful boulder out in the woods,
but over and beyond the beauty of its form,
you might also have the feeling that you are in the presence of something,
that there is something more than meets the eye,
that it transcends its own form,
and is a sort of channel for something that is ultimately formless.
Kant also said that the feeling of beauty is always an agreeable feeling.
When you experience something as beautiful, you always take pleasure in it.
Now, he said the experience of the sublime can also produce that kind of pleasure,
but he called it a sterner kind of pleasure.
It was something that might even repel you a little, even as it fascinates you.
It's not uniformly attractive.
And third, even though Kant said that the experience of beauty is always agreeable to our minds,
in that it seems adapted to our minds, it fits our minds,
and thus produces the sense of harmony,
the experience of the sublime may strike us as something that is other than us,
that really is different from us, that comes at us from a different angle,
that we're not entirely prepared to deal with.
It can even outrage us, Kant said.
Kant summarized his analysis of the experience of the sublime
in the following remarkable passage in his critique of aesthetic judgment.
Bold, overhanging, and as it were, threatening rocks,
thunder clouds piled up in the vault of heaven,
born along with flashes and peels,
volcanoes in all their violence of destruction,
hurricanes leaving desolation in their track,
the boundless ocean rising with rebellious force,
the high waterfall of some mighty river and the like,
make our power of resistance of trifling moment in comparison with their might.
But their aspect is all the more attractive for its fearfulness.
And we readily call these objects sublime
because they raise the forces of the soul above the heights of vulgar commonplace,
and discover within us a power of resistance of quite another kind,
which gives us courage to be able to measure ourselves
against the seeming omnipotence of nature.
The lectern might be beautiful, but an erupting volcano is awesome.
This juxtaposition of the feeling of presence,
of a combination of attraction and fear,
the push and pull of the sublime
is something that will play a large part
in the development of the phenomenology of religion
as we trace it from Rudolf Otto to Mirce Eliade.
There are a few other remarks that Kant had to say
specific to his own theory of religion,
which I want to call your attention to,
they will play parts in the development of others' thought as well.
One is the idea that reality is not a uniform quality of all things,
that reality or existence can actually manifest at different densities
or levels of intensity,
so that it wouldn't be true that everything is equally real
merely by virtue of its existence.
The reason Kant said this is because he did in his own way believe in God,
but his God was a very abstract theoretical God.
This was a God that had more reality,
a denser existence than anything else,
and because of this density of reality
was able to provide the matrix of possibility
out of which other things could arise
that accounted for how God was able to create.
This idea that reality or existence can have different levels of density
is going to be an important component
in the phenomenological thought of Mirce Eliade.
Second, there was a moral component of practical reason
that Kant brought to bear on religious questions.
When speaking at the purely rational theoretical level,
Kant said you can never prove the existence of God
as conceived by any religion.
As I've just indicated,
for him God was theoretically simply the matrix of possibilities,
the densest existence out of which things could arise,
but that's all you could say on that level.
But he did find ways for talking about God as being gracious and provident
and for proving the immortality of the soul.
The trick was to make a distinction between proving that something is true
on a theoretical level and justifying a belief in its truth.
Let's take these three issues one at a time to see how this works.
Kant was extremely concerned with human morality and the development of virtue.
He thought that, like Christianity's teaching of original sin,
people are born basically evil and self-centered.
The great task of their life is to go on this journey towards the highest good.
And the highest good has two different aspects to it.
One, the perfection of virtue and second, the attainment of happiness.
Although if you had to choose between the two, Kant was very clear.
You always choose virtue over happiness.
Now for people to pursue any goal with any degree of rationality,
they have to believe that the goal is attainable in some way.
But we all know that the attainment of perfect virtue
simply cannot be accomplished within the short span of a single human lifetime.
And therefore, it can be justified to put forward the belief in the immortality of the soul
as a way of providing a continuing arena for the progression towards virtue even after death.
It provides the timeframe that makes the pursuit of virtue reasonable.
Again, the attainment of happiness makes sense in a moral universe
only when happiness is deserved, when the person who attains happiness is truly worthy of it.
But none of us human beings can see clearly into anybody else's heart
and make that determination of worthiness.
We can't even really say that of ourselves.
So it would make more sense then to believe that there is a God who is provident,
who sees into the human breast and can actually determine who is worthy of happiness
and assign them that happiness on a rational basis.
And then finally, we all have this perception that the pursuit of moral virtue and perfection
is a tremendous task beyond the power of any of us if we had to do it working solely under our own steam.
It is more reasonable to pursue that goal if we believe that there is some being
who is upholding us and helping us and infusing us with additional power,
in other words, granting us grace.
Can you prove the immortality of the soul and the providence and grace of God?
No. That is why none of these things can be believed in or affirmed on purely theoretical grounds.
But here's what's important.
On purely theoretical grounds, you cannot disprove them either.
And so being lost without any way of either proving or disproving,
it is okay then to fall back on these practical considerations
and say well to believe in the immortality of the soul,
the providence of God and the grace of God have beneficial effects at the very least.
And so if we are left without theoretical proof,
we can then fall back on practical reason and justify,
not prove, but justify belief in these three things
on the basis of the good effects that they have in helping people to lead better lives.
This way of thinking through the issue is going to be a component of pragmatism.
We have seen it already in our talk on William James,
where he demonstrated no concern with the actual truth or falsity of a religious belief,
but was interested in how it impacted a person's life,
changed their behavior, altered their outlook.
This will come again in the thought of Clifford Geertz,
as we will see when we turn to anthropology.
So that, in about as brief a format as one can possibly imagine,
is the thought of Immanuel Kant as it impacts on the development of theories of religion.
We will see that many of the thinkers that we will be looking at,
Sausure, Levi-Strauss, Geertz, and some that we've already considered like Jung,
take his premises as their fundamental axioms upon which they build,
that we are not talking about how religion either does or does not accurately reflect the external world as such,
but how the image of religion, how the beliefs we hold as they appear in our minds,
have practical effects in determining our behavior and in putting together
an intelligible and coherent picture of the world.
So with that foundation in place, we're then ready to move on back into other theorists of religion.
