We continue our examination of psychological theories of religion by looking at the work
of Sigmund Freud, the founder of modern psychiatry and one of the most influential thinkers in
the 20th century. But before we look at Freud's theories in particular, I'd like to begin simply
by telling a story. If we pay attention to the details of this story, then many of the
features of Freud's severe critique of religion will make a little more sense.
The psychologist and bestselling author M. Scott Peck once told a story in one of his
books about a particularly memorable patient that he had. The woman was deathly afraid
of spiders. And this was crippling her life. She could not even go into a room if she thought
there might be spiders in it. So she came to Dr. Peck for help. As Peck spent several
years talking to her about her life and her relationships, the following picture of her
family life emerged. Her father was rather passive, intended to hang in the background
and wasn't a real presence in her life. Her mother, on the other hand, seemed to be a
real nightmare. The woman had no sense of proper boundaries. Even after the daughter
had moved out of the family home and taken up a new apartment on her own, her mother
showed up there just about every day. The mother was intensely curious about her daughter's
love life. She would ask her all kinds of intrusive questions, wanting to know all of
the details about everything that happened on every date. And even worse, the mother
was carrying on a series of affairs behind the father's back, and she insisted on sharing
all the details of these affairs with her daughter.
Dr. Peck could see that there was a connection between the fear of spiders and this horrific
mother figure right away, but he couldn't put it out there because the woman had to
discover the connection for herself. The breakthrough came one day when the woman suddenly blurted
out, my mother is just like a spider, and suddenly the light dawned. She could see that
like a spider, her mother had her in a web, and she was trapped, she was caught, she couldn't
break free. She had not been able to admit that to herself before, because she was raised
in a culture where all of the country music songs on the radio tell you how much you ought
to love your mother, how your mother is the one who loves you, and she's the most important
person in your life. So it was very threatening to her to realize how deeply angry she was
at her mother. Not being able to face that anger, she had subconsciously transferred that
anger, redirected it towards an analogous figure, a spider, who spun her in its web.
That provided a kind of safety valve for the feelings of anger. What should have been directed
at her mother was now directed at spiders, so at least it had a way of getting out. But
once she realized the connection, she was then able to face the problem directly to realize
that her mother was the problem, not spiders. Immediately, her crippling fear of spiders
subsided. She was able to lead a more normal life. At the same time, she was able to start
telling her mother to get out. This was a good therapeutic outcome. It meant that what
had been a makeshift solution to a very real psychological problem could now be abandoned,
and the person could resume a much more normal and healthy life.
Sigmund Freud was the founder of the psychoanalytical technique that gave this woman back her life
and relieved her of her fear of spiders. Prior to Sigmund Freud, Western culture had
no real concept of the unconscious, something that we now accept almost without question.
People naturally thought that anything that went on in your conscious mind represented
the sum total of who you were. There was nothing below the level of the thoughts and feelings
that we had and that we knew we had. If things happened like a fear of spiders or dysfunctional
behaviors or if you seem to be acting against character, there might be a religious explanation.
There might be a demon who had taken control of you. More often, it was simply a moral
failing on your part, and if you simply applied yourself, you could get over it. Freud gave
us the unconscious, a deep reservoir of mental contents that we don't even know are there.
It became a dark basement into which things were shoved when they were too frightening
or too threatening to contemplate directly. Things like a child's sexual feelings for
the parents, or as in Dr. Peck's case, a deep-seated anger against a figure whose love
you desperately needed, thus making the anger too hard to face. These things got pushed down
into the subconscious where they then resided and leaked out in all kinds of strange behaviors
that were otherwise inexplicable because they came from a source that we had no real access to.
Psychoanalysis was the process by which a doctor could talk a person through these problems,
leading them to realize for themselves the contents of their own unconscious,
raising them to consciousness, and therefore being able to face them directly, rationally,
intelligently, and as an adult. And in Freud's book, this was always good. Freud was a committed
atheist. He never got religion. And so for him, religion became a problem to be solved. He was
one of the people that Rodney Stark said posed the research question as, why do people believe in
such silliness? Why do they do what they do? Freud addressed the problem of religion in three
separate books, Moses and monotheism, Totem and Taboo, and most importantly in The Future of an
Illusion. In the brief time that we have right now, we will only look at the latter two books,
Totem and Taboo and The Future of an Illusion. In Totem and Taboo, Freud takes up the question of
the origin of religion as a matter of history. And the story that he tells struck his contemporaries
and continues to strike people today as rather fantastic and speculative. He says, back in some
distant past, there was a family group governed by a strong patriarchal figure who dominated all of
his sons. One feature of this domination, this alpha male behavior, was that the father monopolized
all of the available women. This means all of the other males in the group were literally his sons.
And all of the women were the mothers. The sons, being shut off from any sexual access to these
females, became naturally very frustrated. They decided they didn't want to put up with this
treatment anymore, and so they banded together and plotted in secret to murder the father.
Having carried out the deed, they then took the harem of women as their own. But the matter
didn't end there. The man they had killed was, after all, their father, and so they were bound
to experience some deep feelings of regret, of guilt, of anxiety over this act. The pressure of
this guilt and anxiety became so unbearable that they got together and they determined that this
kind of thing was never going to happen again. They developed a horror of incest because these
women that they had now married in edible fashion were their mothers. They wanted to apologize and
make amends to the father that they had killed, but being dead, he wasn't available. They couldn't
do it. So they erected a mental image of this father and they transferred him up into the sky,
and he became the first god. In this way, Freud points to a traumatic primal murder
as the fountain and source from which later religion springs.
That's the argument in Outline. Many people feel this is a wild story. How could a single event
in a primal past account for such a broad, vast, widespread phenomenon as religion?
Freud never produces a single shred of historical evidence. He himself claims that he is retrojecting
the story into the past based on his psychoanalytic theories. The edible complex leads him to believe
that there was some historical event that gave rise to it. So he is speculating with no evidence.
In defense of this, it must be pointed out that nowhere in Totem and Tabu does Freud actually
make the claim that only one event of this type ever happened. He says this is a drama that was
repeated over and over again in many times and places in the primal past and that it was the
accumulation of feelings of guilt and a common pattern of dealing with that guilt that led to
the formation of the kind of religion at least that believes in Father God's up in the sky.
There is, however, another interesting shred of evidence and support that comes from Darwinian
theory. Human beings are, in Darwinian accounts, most related to the great apes, the guerrillas
and the chimpanzees. When we look at guerrilla and chimpanzee bands, we do in fact see just
the kind of alpha male behavior that Freud was describing. A single dominant male accumulates
all of the females and controls sexual access to them, usually fighting off any other male
that tries to mate with the females. Darwinian theory these days holds that with the development
of language among early humans, this form of social organization and these mating patterns
came to a final end. With language, the lesser males in the band were actually able to do just
as Freud said, to get together, to plot together, to put together a plan by which they could gang
up on and overpower the alpha male and take the women away. And they could then create a more
rational system for the distribution of mating so that one male would have one female and everybody
could at least have some sexual partner. And this pattern now continues to the day. So Darwinian
theory seems to indicate that a scenario very much like the one Freud pictures actually was the case
at some point in the past. It still needs to be said, however, that it's a great leap from that
scenario to the development of sky father type religions. The argument that Freud presents in
his other book, The Future of an Illusion, is a lot more elaborate and complicated.
Whereas Todemann Tabu was concerned to present a historical picture of the moment in which
religion was born, the future of an illusion is a more psychological portrait of the inner
mechanisms of religion. It answers Freud's question, why do people do it? Why do people believe?
The primary theme is that religion is an illusion. But we have to understand very clearly what Freud
means by that term. It's very easy to think that Freud wants to say it's a delusion, a simple
hallucination, a simple fabrication, but that is not what he means. Freud, like many other
thinkers that we will be considering in this course, takes the stance that in religious studies is
called methodological atheism. The term methodological atheism means that the theorist takes no stand on
the truth of religion. Generally, the claim is that working within a particular academic discipline,
whether it's sociology, psychology, anthropology, or what have you, you are using a certain set of
research methods. Those research methods are geared toward looking at certain kinds of phenomena
in order to derive certain kinds of conclusions. The methods of sociology, the methods of psychology,
the methods of anthropology simply are not suited to deciding religious questions any more than you
can use a telescope to study an elephant. So methodological atheism is the move of bracketing
out the religious question, making no declaration on it, and stating that what we're going to say
in this book or this article or this theory is simply the legitimate result of the application of
this particular method. So Freud will not say outright that religion is simply a delusion or
a fabrication, although it's very clear that he does believe that to be the case. When Freud says
that religion is an illusion, he means something that we believe through wish fulfillment, something
that we choose to believe simply because we want it to be true. This doesn't make it a delusion.
The example he gives is the woman who pins her hopes for the future on the hope that a prince
will come and marry her and take her away to his castle. The life of Grace Kelly shows us that
such things actually can happen, but is it realistic to believe that it will happen and
to plan your future on the basis of it? Should you plan your retirement on the idea that you're
going to win the Powerball one day and that'll set you up for life? These are not impossibilities,
they're not fabrications, they're not hallucinations, but the basis for believing them is in wish
fulfillment. They are believed because you want them to be true, whether they are or not.
Freud says that is the role and function of religion in people's lives. So now the question is,
what exactly are the wishes that religious belief fulfills? And in answering that question,
Freud identifies three dissatisfactions that people feel that lead them to religion.
The first of these areas will remind you very much of what Karl Marx said. Freud points out that we
are social beings, we live in societies. Civilization itself impinges on us and makes demands upon us
and coerces us into fulfilling those demands. Everybody has needs and wants and urges. The
average male may want very much to act like the alpha male in a gorilla band. He may want to
want to have all the available women. He may want to undermine his enemies, to lash out at anybody
with whom he feels angry. But civilization demands that we control ourselves and that we not follow
up on every desire that pops into our head. Now we are generally willing to comply with these
demands, but the fact is that they do frustrate us, they do leave us feeling dissatisfied. And that
feeling of dissatisfaction can accumulate and it needs some kind of outlet, at least it needs some
kind of consolation. And so Freud says we can understand the belief in an afterlife on this
basis. There is a heaven in the sky where the streets are paved with gold, where I won't have to
report to the factory every morning, where I won't ever be hungry or cold, where I won't have to
control myself. It's marked all over again, pie in the sky, in the sweet by and by. The second need
that religion fulfills is the need to protect ourselves against the forces of nature. And in
this aspect of Freud's theory, he's going to sound very much like Fontanel and Hume. The question
about civilization and the demands that it makes upon us leads Freud to then observe that we do
band together to form civilizations for a very specific purpose. If we didn't come together
and form societies, then we would simply be isolated individuals out wandering the landscape
looking for food with no one to help us. We would be naked and exposed to the very terrors of nature.
These terrors then force us to confront nature and we want protection from the wind and the
hurricane and the tornado and the thunder and the lightning. Now in Totem and Tabu, Freud had
already explained that historically people had posited a kind of father figure that resided in
the sky. Freud says that based on this we can understand why we continue to believe that
there's a father figure up there. We remember that there was another time in our life when we were
helpless. It was in our infancy. It was while we were toddlers. We were dependent on our parents
for absolutely everything, otherwise we would never survive. Now as adults we find ourselves
loose in the world of nature with all kinds of terrors that assail us and no one to protect us,
no one to just give us food, no one to just give us shelter and clothing and take care of all our
needs. But we remember how nice it was to have that kind of loving protection and so we transfer
the feelings we used to have for our father and we project them up into the sky and we believe
that there's a great father up there that will in fact protect us. As an interesting side note,
even religious people are sometimes willing to admit that this is the case. One time in church
during the sermon, the preacher actually said that a position that Christians have
characteristically adopted for prayer when they're standing is to reach upward with their arms and the
preacher said that's exactly what a two-year-old does when he wants to be picked up. So he made
the connection. The third of the problems that Freud says religion addresses is the simple fear
that we feel when faced with death. Fate has a role to play in our lives. Apart from nature,
apart from the demands of civilization, we simply know that we are going to die. We are also well
aware that there are aspects of our life that are simply beyond our control. Anytime now we could be
hit by a truck, struck by a disease, or we could in fact win the lottery. People need to understand
why good things happen to bad people, bad things happen to good people, and why none of it seems
to make any sense as the book of Job often tells us. Freud says religion helps with that by saying
there is somebody who's in charge. There's a plan that's working itself out and that we are all part
of that plan and if we simply accept our lot, accept our fate, behave as best we can within
the constraints that life gives us, then we'll be much better off. So religion does these three
things. It gives us protection from the terrors of nature by giving us a father in the sky that
will take care of us. It helps us to understand the vicissitudes of fate, why our fortune may be
good or bad, and why we finally have to die. And it finally offers us compensation, comfort in a
heaven in the sky for the privations that are forced upon us by the very civilization that we
live in to protect ourselves from nature. These are powerful inducements to the fulfillment of a
wish and so we believe in religion. We believe in the father in the sky, not because he's necessarily
there, but because we want him to be there so badly. All of this makes religion in Freud's view
a neurosis. Let's get back to the story of the woman and her fear of spiders. She was clearly
suffering from a neurosis. A neurosis is not like a psychosis. A psychosis means that the person has
completely lost touch with reality, they're schizophrenic, they're seeing things that aren't
there. But a neurotic person is still fairly well in touch with reality and can still function,
but has things that are operating in their subconscious that leads them to
act and do things in particular ways. Freud says that religion is like a neurosis. These fears
that we just outlined that make us wish that there could be a father in the sky that would be
there for us are by and large unconscious. Most people are not willing to come right out and say
that they're very unhappy with the constraints that civilization puts on them or that they're
scared of nature, but they are. And so these fears are shoved into the subconscious and they come
out, like the woman's fear of spiders, in terms of neurotic behaviors. One of the most common
features of neurosis in Freud's day was ritualistic behavior, what today we might call obsessive
compulsive behavior, where a person demands that they be able to do exactly the same routine day by
day by day over and over again in the same day, otherwise they get very anxious and fearful.
Freud noted that one of the major features of religious life was the performance of repetitive
rituals and that people could feel equally anxious and fearful if they did not, for example, get to
mass on time every Sunday. So Freud, while originally simply comparing religion to a neurosis, went
further as the book progressed into saying that religion is a neurosis. In fact, religion is a
group neurosis. Religion is, to the large social unit, what a neurosis is to the individual,
a safety valve for the expression of fears that we are simply not willing as a society
to admit that we have. We project them outward, we make them into a father in the sky,
and we invest that projected reality with a sort of basic factuality as if it's just there,
it's just objectively true and a person would have to be crazy not to believe it.
We mentioned in the lecture on Karl Marx that Ludwig Feuerbach in the 19th century
had analyzed Christianity in just such a way. He had said that God is a human projection,
but there's a crucial difference in Freud's model of this process of projection.
For Feuerbach, God was a projection of everything that was good about humanity. It was to ascribe
to God all of the goodness, all of the virtue, all of the power, all of the mercy, the justice,
the love that properly ought to be human virtues, and thus we deprived ourselves of our own esteem
by putting them off into a figure in the sky. Freud, on the other hand, said that this projection
of the religious worldview represented an outflow of everything that was bad about us. It wasn't
a projection of our own love and mercy and justice, it was a projection of our fear,
of our need to engage in ritualistic behavior, in our frustration and dissatisfaction with
social constraints. We put all that out in the world and we invest it with a sense of religion
as if it's just a brute fact out there available for all to see.
So Freud was very clearly in the camp of the projectionists. Based on this, he then said religion
is a bad thing. From start to finish, it is like a neurosis, a dysfunctional coping mechanism
that ultimately needs to be rejected. Again, remember the story of the woman with the spider.
Even though her fear of spiders had provided a safety valve for the pressures of the unconscious
fear and anger that she felt, it still kept her from addressing the actual problems she was facing
more directly. The good therapeutic outcome in Freudian terms is to reach a state of adult
suspension of safety mechanisms by facing your problems directly and resolving them
so that you don't even need the safety valve in the first place.
So if the real problems that human beings face are dissatisfaction with civilization,
they need to just realize that and say so. They need to just say,
I really don't like having to drive by the speed limit all the time. It makes me unhappy.
If their fear of nature is what's on their minds, they need to simply admit
that the forces of nature are powerful and beyond their control
and could destroy their house and kill them at any moment.
Whatever the dissatisfaction or the problem is, it simply needs to be acknowledged directly
as a simple fact of life and adult mature intelligence needs to be brought to bear on it
so that one can then face it in a healthy way. If that happens,
then religion will simply die on its own. You just won't need that safety mechanism anymore.
Like all the theories that we will be studying in this course,
the Freudian theory has had its detractors. As we will see in the next lecture,
one of Freud's most prominent disciples, the Swiss psychiatrist Carl Gustav Jung,
took issue with Freud's unrelieved negative assessment of religion.
Jung came to see that religion could in fact be a good thing. If it really helped us to cope
with the pressures of life, then maybe it was a sign of health that a person had some kind of
religious life. This split was so serious that Freud and Jung parted ways over this issue.
Freud might have wished that the whole tradition of psychiatry would remain
as committed to atheism as he had been, but subsequent psychiatrists have come to question
the atheistic stance and the negative assessment of religion that Freud bequeathed.
The man whose work we started with, M. Scott Peck, has said that one of his most popular lectures
that he gives to groups of psychiatrists and psychiatric residents has to do with the use
of religious concepts and terminology in the treatment of patients. Peck says, sometimes with
a patient, you don't need to relieve them of their religion in order to restore them to health.
If the person's fundamental stance toward life is a religious one, then perhaps it's enough
to simply redirect them from unhealthy religious practice into healthy religious practice.
In this, Dr. Peck is more in line with the view of William James than he is with Sigmund Freud.
There are people who have been through psychoanalysis in the Freudian tradition
and who have reported just this outcome, that a religion that they held prior to therapy,
which really was distracting them from their real problems, that really wasn't helping them cope,
was addressed through therapy, but instead of coming out as healthy atheists, they say that
they come out as healthily religious. They come out with a religious worldview that actually does
function to help them face the problems of their life, to repair broken relationships,
and to get on with life with a new, more positive outlook.
Daniel Powell points out that many people have critiqued Freud's theory by saying that whatever
else it might be, it is not science. Rodney Stark had Sigmund Freud in mind when he said that many
theoreticians had mistaken a metaphor for a theory. Freud said religion is like a neurosis, therefore
it is a neurosis. But Charles Elder of the University of Chicago, in analyzing the rhetorical force
of Freud's argument, gives us a clue as to why it still endures so many years after Freud's death.
Elder says that Freud's argument is more in the nature of a heuristic than a logical syllogism.
By heuristic, he means a lens through which we look at things. He illustrates this with Ludwig
Wittgenstein's famous statement, all people are really going to Paris. As a statement of fact,
one can quibble with that. You can go to this person and that person and ask, are you going to
Paris? And if enough of them say no, you will conclude that the statement is wrong. But there's
another way of looking at that statement. If you say when you get down to it, all people are really
going to Paris, they may not realize it yet, but they will get there one day. Then having heard
that, you can never look at the way people move in quite the same way again. In a similar way,
when Freud talks about religion as neurosis, as a heuristic, it makes us look at religion
in a whole new way. Maybe religion has something of the neurotic about it, whether it stands up
as a scientific fact or not, who knows. But we can certainly say that once Freud has told us that
religion is very much like a neurosis, we can't ever look at it the same way ever again.
