Lecture 18 Symbolic Anthropology, Clifford Geertz
Like Claude Levy-Strauss, the American anthropologist Clifford Geertz was not very happy with the
functionalist method. By simply doing field work and observing the externals of people's
actions, watching them engage in exchanges, marriages, plant their crops, and then putting
one's own explanation on top of that, the native voice was silenced. There was no room
in a functionalist approach to ask the people under study what they thought they were doing
by these activities. As I said before, the Indian who plants a seed of corn and puts
a little minnow in is, in a functionalist approach, doing nothing more than fertilizing
the seed of corn in order to maximize the nutrition and help the survival of himself
and his community. The fact that he says he's making an offering to the God of the corn
doesn't appear to enter into it. Clifford Geertz wanted to bring the native voice back
in, and by the symbolic approach and its insistence on finding out the ways that people create
these webs of signification that give meaning and orientation to their lives, he thought
you could get into the minds of the people that you were observing and find out how they
existed in the world, how they placed themselves in the natural world and into the society
where they had to relate to each other. Geertz had a nice phrase for describing what he found
wrong with the functional approach. He said, if you only attend to the external actions,
you would have no way to distinguish between a simple twitch in the eye and a wink, where
a twitch would just simply be a random spasmodic movement of the eyelid while a wink is a socially
determined pattern that actually communicates something to somebody. As a way of recommending
a mode of procedure for field observation, Geertz recommended what he called thick description,
a term that he borrowed from his own teacher, the philosopher Gilbert Ryle. Thick description
meant to go beyond a simple description of the surface details, to simply make notes
that people did this or said that, and to create the linkages by which people created
cultural webs of significance so that one could know not only that somebody winked at
somebody else, but what they meant by that. That would give you a thick description.
Now so far, Geertz is in agreement with Claude Levy-Strauss. Levy-Strauss also said you had
to discover the webs of signification which gave people's lives meaning. But Geertz still
wanted to do field work, whereas Levy-Strauss' method could be, in a way, a retreat from
field work. So as he was in actual field settings, first in Bali, later in Morocco, Geertz could
see that societies weren't these static entities. As Sassour had observed with language when
he stressed the mutability of languages, Geertz could say that cultures evolve, societies
change, things are always on the move. And the problem with the structuralist approach
was by the mere fact that it emphasized structure tended toward statics. It tended as the function
lists themselves had to see societies as stable units that endured over time so that once
you had a description of them on the table, you could simply leave it there and it would
always be valid. To demonstrate the inadequacy of this approach, Clifford Geertz wrote an
essay in which he described not just how a local society performed a funeral, but a
particular instance in which the funeral was thrown into chaos and crisis. It happened
in a Balinese village in the nation of Indonesia. Indonesia is officially a Muslim nation and
in those days, the early 1960s, there was a Muslim group that was pushing for a stricter
observance of Islamic principles across society. And the population of Bali could then be
divided between people whose religion was a sort of mix of a kind of watered down Islam
with native animism over against other people who wanted to adhere to a more strictly interpreted
and pure form of Islam. When funerals happened, it was generally the job of a village headman
to make the funeral arrangements and officiate. One time in a village where Geertz was working,
a 10-year-old boy unexpectedly passed away in the middle of the night while staying at
his uncle's house. The parents were called over the next day from the neighboring village
and people set right to work to get the funeral arrangements done. The preference in that
society was to get the funeral over within the body buried as quickly as possible before
even 24 hours had passed. So, according to custom, the village headman was called in,
but he had decided to use this funeral as an event through which he could push his
own Islamization program, so he set a condition for doing the funeral. I will do it if you
all will convert to a strict Islam and let me do the funeral in very strictly Islamic
terms. This created a controversy and a crisis. As the boy's body lay in the sun, people
squabbled with each other over the propriety of this, wondered how the village headman
could take advantage of the situation in quite this way, and in the meantime the whole emotional
setting was dissolving into tears and crisis as people just wanted to get the funeral over
with so they could grieve in the normal way. At the end of the day, people were simply
paralyzed. They were hunkered down on the ground, staring into space, not knowing what to do.
Clifford Geert said, how could you use a structuralist analysis to come to any kind of understanding
of this situation? Structuralism and earlier functionalism, with their assumption of stability,
cannot provide an adequate explanatory framework for a funeral that falls apart in the way
this one did because of transitions in society as competing religious groups try to predominate
over one another. So he decided what was more needed was a pragmatic approach, in Salsorian
terms to just leave the long, the language aspect of culture off to one side and concentrate
on the parole, the actual speech. It was still a symbolic approach because you cannot understand
this speech unless you look at it as a set of interlocking symbols that are deployed
in certain grammatical structures, but you can safely leave aside the question of language
as such in order to study the actual events of speech through which both stability and
change can be observed and accounted for. Now, Clifford Geerts did make some study of
religion, and one of his most influential essays was called Religion as a Cultural System.
In this essay, he points out that there hasn't been any real theoretical advance in the study
of religion within anthropology in quite some time, so he proposes to begin his study by
just putting out a definition of religion. But he says this is not to determine once
and for all what the word religion means. In fact, his definition is going to simply
act as he says as a paradigm, as something he can move through and unpack in order to
lay out how he thinks religion functions within a given culture. So, how does he define religion?
Religion is a system of symbols which acts to establish powerful, pervasive, and long-lasting
moods and motivations in men by formulating conceptions of a general order of existence,
and clothing these conceptions with such an aura of factuality that the moods and motivations
seem uniquely realistic. Now, at the very outset, he has already established
that religion is a system of symbols. Culture itself is a system of symbols, religion is
an aspect of culture which has the very same nature. But having said that, at the very
outset of his definition, he immediately leaves it behind in order to move on to tell us what
this system of symbols does. And in unpacking the remainder of his definition, he points
out that religion is a model for reality. Religion is a system of symbols that in its
way models reality. It creates that idea of a general order of existence. But he points
out that to simply say religion is a model is not quite adequate because the word model
itself can be used in two different senses. And he points out that you can have models
of something and you can have models for something. Religion fulfills both of these forms of symbols
and functions. As a model of reality, it is a model of reality. It is also a model for
reality. And in order to come up with a vocabulary that designates these two functions, Geertz
asks us to think about religion as providing two things for people's lives, a worldview
and an ethos. By worldview, he means the model of aspect. The worldview is the way you look
at the world, the way you take the raw reality in front of you and the people that you associate
with and you put them together into a structure that presents a picture of the world as you
see it. That's religion as a model of. It tells you what the world is like. Ethos is
the model for aspect. That is, it gives you a model by which you can then go out into
the world and do things. Ethos meaning a mode of behavior, a code of conduct, a way
of proceeding. So let's take those two one at a time. Geertz talks about worldview in
a very Kantian way. Like many of the thinkers we've looked at so far, he also agrees that
we don't get the world handed to us predigested and preinterpreted on a plate. With the help
of the society around us, we have to form an image of the world in our mind. We have
to create a model of it. And the way in which we create this model is going to tell us a
lot about how we orient ourselves in the world and how we move through it. He agrees not
only with Claude Levy-Strauss, with whom we dealt last time, but also with Peter Berger
that we looked at a couple of lectures ago, that we have to do this because unlike animals,
we don't have instincts. We don't just go out into the world and are able to cope with
things. We have to create a model of the world and society helps us by educating us and
by giving us this system of interlocking symbols by which a model of the world is constructed
and which tells us who we are and where we are within that world. Geertz also agrees
with Peter Berger that to have that model threatened in any way is a grave crisis for
any human being. If you recall, Peter Berger talked about anomy, this disillusion of our
world view that leads us to feel that we're lost, that we don't know where we are. We're
just out in the woods with no track and no place and no mode of procedure. Geertz agrees
that that is what happens and he shows us that there are three different arenas in which
our world view reaches its limit and in which we are confronted with a potential crisis
that the world view has to be able to deal with in order for us to keep going. One is
a simple cognitive crisis. It's the feeling that we have encountered something that we
just can't explain, something that doesn't fit in our frame of reference. He gives an
amusing story to illustrate this. He tells that once while doing field work in a village
in Bali, a mushroom grew in somebody's woodshed, but the mushroom grew overnight into a bigger
mushroom as he says that any mushroom has the right to be. This mushroom was so amazingly
big that people came from neighboring villages to come and look at it and as they marveled
at it, they wondered, how did the mushroom get to be so big? Geertz points out the one
thing they did not do was just shrug their shoulders and say, well, who knows? They offered
all kinds of explanations. It wasn't necessarily true that they cared whether the explanation
they put forward was actually true or not. What they were really trying to do, according
to Geertz, was at least establish that they could know something about this mushroom in
principle. They wanted to know that within their worldview, perhaps the mushroom could
be explained. Even if they didn't have the explanation, the mere putting out of hypotheses
at least reassured them that their worldview was potentially adequate to deal with it.
Geertz concludes this by saying in this they acted like true Tailorian savage philosophers.
The weird, the inexplicable has to be dealt with in order to maintain our worldview, otherwise
we are lost. The second limit or boundary situation is that of extreme suffering.
As Geertz observes and many anthropologists agree, people can bear with suffering, even
great suffering, if they can at least invest it with some meaning. Somebody who is being
held as a political prisoner or tortured for their religious faith can actually survive
that experience intact because their religious beliefs give them a way of understanding why
they are undergoing the suffering. But when suffering is meaningless or random, it threatens
our worldview. It puts us in a world that is immoral, that doesn't really care about
us and can inflict us with great suffering for any reason or for no reason at all. Again,
in these situations of extreme suffering, the worldview must rise to the occasion and
provide a plausible account or else things fall apart.
The third boundary situation, which demands restorative action for the worldview, is that
of evil, of pure human moral evil. It's often been noted that in World War II the Holocaust
was the occasion for a lot of loss of faith among religious people. When you look at great
evil such as that, it is hard to understand how that fits into any kind of coherent worldview.
So philosophers since the end of World War II and theologians have been grappling with
a way of explaining and understanding the great evil of the Holocaust in order to maintain
a meaningful worldview. Now, assuming that the worldview is sturdy
enough to survive all those crises, we then can feel some confidence that we have an adequate
picture of the world and that we therefore know how to move within it. And that puts
us into the realm of ethos, the aspect of religion which is the model for. The relationship
between worldview and ethos is very simple and seems to just accord with common sense.
If you believe that the world is a certain way, then it makes sense to act within it
in certain ways. So, looking at the realm of religion, if you are a Christian and your
worldview tells you that God made the world and humanity in it, but that something happened
which alienated us from God, then the ethos that will flow from that is we will want to
do things that will restore that relationship with God. Given that the world is that way,
then this is the most sensible course of action to take. On the other hand, if one is a Buddhist
and one believes that the picture of the world is that we are living beings trapped in an
endless round of birth and death that has no end and no inherent meaning to it, then
the ethos that will flow from that will be actions that are intended to help us to escape
from that endless round of rebirth and suffering, and so we will go that way. Now, in describing
ethos, Geertz in his definition uses the term moods and motivations. What he means to say
by that is that our ethos, our way of acting in the world, has two aspects to it. It doesn't
just mean the actual things that we concretely do. It has more to do with our propensities
for action, and this will have both an emotional and a motivational aspect to it. Mood refers
to the emotional or the affective aspect of our ethos. Mood is simply a way of acting
feeling about things, and if our worldview tells us that a certain kind of emotional
tone is more appropriate than another, then we will work to inculcate that mood.
The examples that Geertz uses are a plains Indian who comes from a warrior culture and
somebody from the island of Java who believes that one should be very calm in all situations
and dispassionate. This means that the plains Indian will deliberately try to inculcate
the mood of bellicosity. They will thrill, as he says, to the idea of joining a raiding
party and counting coup. The Javanese, on the other hand, will do things to try to deliberately
inculcate a mood of dispassion and serenity. He might sit for long periods meditating while
staring at a candle flame, all the while trying to create that mood of serenity.
Now, moods don't really go anywhere. As Geertz says, moods are merely scalar. They simply
have intensity, but they have no vector. Motivations, on the other hand, have a vector. They actually
go somewhere. A motivation is a propensity to act in a certain way. For example, one
may be a smoker. To say that one is a smoker is not necessarily to say that one is right
now engaged in smoking a cigarette. It simply means it's reasonable to suppose that sometime
in the near future you probably will go to have a smoke. It's an inclination to act
in certain ways established by habit. Both of those factors, mood and motivation,
go into the creation of the ethos. In response to the worldview, the picture we have of the
way things are, we inculcate certain moods and we adopt certain motivations so that we
will feel certain feelings and act in certain ways.
Now, while the application of these ideas to the realm of religion is quite obvious,
it doesn't simply focus on religion. We can say that all kinds of cultural forms give
us certain pictures of the world and inculcate in us certain moods and motivations. A church
service might do it, but so might, for example, a martial arts film. So where does religion
itself fit into this scheme and what role does it actually play?
Geertz believes that the key is ritual. Religious rituals are the events in which both the model
of and the model for aspects of religion come together in an integrated, organic way.
Rituals have the property of bringing people together and having them perform certain dramatic
actions that both enact the worldview and reinforce the moods and motivations so that
once the ritual is over, people will be more likely to go and act and feel in the ways
that the worldview prescribes.
As a concrete example of this, Geertz spends a lot of time describing in detail a kind
of dramatic performance that he witnessed on the island of Bali. It was a ritual in
which a whole village came together and put on a play. The subject of the play was the
eternal cosmic battle between a witch named Rangda and a kind of buffoon monster named
Barong. Rangda was a fierce character who screeched in a high-pitched voice and wore
long nails and threatened people. Barong, while monstrous, was also a kind of a clown
who danced around and bumped and ground and engaged in a kind of bumping contest with
Rangda.
What Geertz observed was that unlike going to see a movie or a play, the audience did
not simply sit quietly and passively and watch as this battle unfolded. While the performance
went on for hours and hours into the night by the light of a bonfire, the people in the
audience went into trance. They joined one side or the other. They got with Barong and
charged at Rangda. In certain instances, they even took out small daggers called chrisses
and lacerated their own bodies. In the end, many of them fell into a swoon and were dragged
off the scene by other people who had not yet gone into trance in order to keep them
from coming into further harm.
Now, with all of that going on, how could this be anything but a very powerful experience
for people?
If we look at the model of aspect and ask, what is this battle between Rangda and Barong
telling us about the view of the world that we ought to adopt, what it seems to be telling
us is that there is no such thing as absolute good and evil. Neither Rangda nor Barong
are pure good or pure evil. The battle between them is never concluded. The play ends with
both sides simply retreating, and you know that the next time the ritual is enacted,
the battle will be joined all over again. So the worldview that comes out of this is
one that reinforces the idea that our concepts of things are very relative, and we cannot
find their exact analogs anywhere in the world, and that the world is a struggle between
opposing forces, which may not be exactly the same as good and evil, and whose opposition
is never really resolved one way or the other.
Now, the fact that people become so powerfully involved in this drama that they go into trance,
lacerate themselves and go into a swoon, tells them that this ritual is representing a true
picture of the world. If the ritual has this effect on me, how can it not be true? And so
not only is the worldview enacted and reinforced, but even after the ritual is over, and people
have come back to their senses and gone back to their homes and resumed the activities
of their daily lives, it will continue to affect the way they see the world, and therefore
to provide certain moods and motivations that will govern how they act in the world.
Now we can see very clearly here Clifford Geertz's pragmatic bent. He has in some quarters
been criticized for not paying too much attention to the long aspect of culture, about looking
at the structures of culture which were so dear to Levi-Strauss. Daniel Pals once observed
that Clifford Geertz having spent time in two Islamic societies, Indonesia and Morocco,
published a book called Islam Observed. But in this book, strangely enough, he says absolutely
nothing about the actual beliefs of Islam. He simply spends his time telling us what
the style of Islam that the people in Morocco and Indonesia adopt has on their lives, how
it makes them adopt certain moods and motivations and how it makes them go about their business
in certain ways. James Boone has said that maybe we need a combination of Geertz and
Levi-Strauss in order to bring the long and parole aspects of culture back into a fuller
relationship. And he points out that each of them has certain things that their theories
are capable of dealing with while others tend to go by the wayside. If for example we take
a Thanksgiving dinner, Levi-Strauss would help us to understand why the table is set
in a certain way, why the foods are put where they are and why people sit in the particular
seats that they're assigned. But it's Geertz who will be able to tell us who gets to carve
the turkey and how people go about actually eating it. Again, Geertz is strongest when
he's describing cultural dynamics, the funeral that falls into a shambles because the whole
social structure is in transition. Geertz can deal with that whereas Levi-Strauss with
his static structures perhaps cannot. But Geertz is ill-equipped to deal with things
that happen in cultures that don't necessarily eventuate in action or which seem to go nowhere.
There are tableaus. Churches in America put up nativity scenes that just sit there. Or
people will tell jokes or make puns. Speech acts that don't really produce any action
but simply put symbols into interesting juxtapositions with each other. That's where Levi-Strauss is
strongest. So perhaps symbolic anthropology is at its most useful when we have both Levi-Strauss
and Geertz telling us what are the structures out of which cultural performances arise and
the cultural performances as they act dynamically to change the culture itself.
With this we have come to the end of our consideration of anthropological theories
of religion. And what I want to do to finish up just for these last few minutes is to make
a few remarks on where we have come so far. We have looked specifically at religion in
terms of three different disciplines, psychology, sociology, and anthropology. It is interesting
that the study of religion seems to arise more frequently out of those three disciplines
than out of others. We don't really have a mathematical theory or an economic theory
of religion. Geertz pointed back to the Harvard sociologist
Petr Mseroken who pointed out that human action and human existence seems to take place within
three separate realms. On the one hand there is the inner life of the individual. There
are the contents of a person's own mind that may include both the conscious and the unconscious
elements. There are the concrete relationships of exchange into which people enter. And then
there are those explanations of what these exchanges mean.
Now these three realms were not well described when all three of these disciplines were in
their infancy. In particular, sociology and anthropology were almost interchangeable in
the days of Durkheim and Tyler. But with the rise of symbolic anthropology, we now have
a way of sorting out the data of religion into each of those three realms and assigning
a different discipline for studying them. We can look at the inner life of the individual
and as both William James and Carl Jung did to look at ways in which religious ideas
and concepts and images and symbols can be integrated in order to form a healthy person
or can go awry in order to produce a religious pathology. That's where psychology is strong.
We can now use sociology to look at the actual relations of exchange that religion helps
to facilitate. So as Malinovsky observed the Kula ceremonies among the Trobri and Islanders
by which they got together with people from other islands and did their exchanges, he
noted that often these were underwritten by religious ceremonies that helped to establish
the relationships and to determine such things as what items can be exchanged and who constitutes
a legitimate exchange partner. But despite all that, the actual trading of things
simply remains what it is. Symbolic anthropology then gets into the public domain of shared
symbols by which people understand what the things that they are doing actually mean.
Now, to finish with a concrete illustration of how these three realms might be in play,
let's take a non-religious but highly problematic situation that we often see in the United
States when a black motorist is stopped by a white police officer. In the inner psychology
of both of the actors in that drama, certain complexes are certainly at play. They are
engaged in an exchange relationship, although the exchange is quite an unpleasant one frequently,
where they both know what to do and who trades what with whom, how they are to actually interact.
But when they both go home to their own communities, they might have radically different accounts
of what the events of the day meant. So, by using these three disciplines, we can see
religion in the life of the individual, in public exchanges of concrete things, and
in the publicly shared meanings that communities give to them. But what is left out of all
three of these is any sense that they have any real referent in a sacred reality. So,
next time we are going to begin looking at the phenomenology of religion, a fourth discipline
that tried to recover the actual sacred divine referent of all these religious activities.
