Lecture 24 How Religion Uses Religious Studies
We've arrived at the end of our exploration of religious studies.
So it's time now to review and wrap up.
We began by looking at the arising of this discipline that we call religious studies,
as it first broke away from theology and tried to fashion an overarching vision of religion for a fractured Europe.
We then saw how under the rationalism of the European Enlightenment,
it eventually developed its own theories to try to explain religion
in a way that didn't make any appeal to theological concerns or any conception of the supernatural at all.
We then went through various disciplinary approaches to religion,
the sociological, the psychological, the anthropological.
We paid attention to the problem of reductionism as each of those approaches
tried to position religion as simply an aspect of a larger disciplinary reality
called society, the human psyche, or culture.
We then saw how the phenomenological approach tried to combat this reductionist tendency
by pointing to a real referent of religion in the holy or the sacred
and to try to say that there was a disciplinary approach to the study of this reality
that could not simply be reduced to an aspect of human life.
We then looked at the feminist critique of these theories
to see that they all came up short in some way
in leaving out a lot of human religious experience.
But finally we ended with some case studies
in which we put some of these theories to the test
to see how well or otherwise they helped us in understanding actual religious data
from the lives of real people.
And there a problem arose.
We saw that in many cases there was a deficiency to these theories.
They didn't entirely help us to understand actual religious life.
This prompts the question that I want to consider now.
Can we still use these theories?
Should we simply forget the whole enterprise
and just let religion go on its way
and not try anymore to theorize about it?
Should we be looking for some different kind of theory
that is more adequate to the task?
What do we do with all of these theories that we have been exploring
during this course of lectures?
I want to suggest that these theories are still useful.
But they are useful provided we make two adjustments in the way that we use them.
We have to relinquish the idea that they are either explanatory or exclusive.
Let's take those two adjustments one at a time.
First of all, to relinquish the idea that a theory should be explanatory
seems like a rather strange claim to make.
If theories don't explain anything, then what good are they?
I want to be clear that I have in mind a specific mode of explanation
that these theories attempted to put forward and that we have to adjust.
These theories claimed, with only one exception, to be scientific.
They were looking at religion as a phenomenon
that needed a scientific explanation.
That meant that these theories were concerned in explaining the origin of religion
and in trying to discern a set of laws by which religion behaved.
Whether it was the early Victorian saying it is a form of human knowing
that we can understand by looking at the way human beings approach knowledge in any capacity
or it might be Freud saying we can find it in the science of the human psyche
or Freud saying we can find it in the laws of political economy.
In all these cases, the approach to religion was scientific.
What these thinkers meant by science was that it was empirical.
It was based on observation.
It was rational using either inductive or deductive reasoning.
They could discern the laws by which religion behaved.
It was revisable as new data came in.
And most importantly, their theories were naturalistic.
They required no belief in or appeal to supernatural power.
This of course accepts the phenomenologists.
Now this kind of approach is very appropriate if one is approaching natural phenomena.
If you want to study a hurricane, then as a meteorologist
you will be asking precisely those questions based on our observations and our reasoning.
What can we say about where hurricanes come from?
What gives rise to them?
By what natural laws do they develop and endure, attain their final wind speed and finally die out?
If we can understand these things, then perhaps we can do something about them
or at least be able to predict when they will arise and how they will behave a little better.
So when I say we need to revisit our assumption that these theories are explanatory, this is what I mean.
Do we approach religion as if it were a hurricane or a geological formation or a dinosaur bone?
Do we appropriately apply scientific reasoning to religion?
And if we do, do we derive any kind of usable understanding from it?
Of all the theorists that we have looked at, Clifford Geertz was the one who came the closest to critiquing that scientific approach,
that way of trying to find a naturalistic, science-based explanation of religion.
He said in his essay, Religion is a Cultural System, that religion is a web of significations.
This means that it is a way in which people produce meanings for things,
and they interrelate meanings to each other and based on the meanings that they derive,
they come up with moods and motivations that then influence their behavior.
Since it is a web of signification, a set of meanings, religion is not therefore to be explained but interpreted.
Let's take another illustration. Rather than religion being like a hurricane, let's say religion is more like a novel.
If someone were to hand you a copy of Lewis Carroll's Alice in Wonderland and offer to explain it to you in a scientific mode,
you might find that rather strange.
You might wonder what useful understanding of Alice in Wonderland are you going to get by an attempt to determine its origin as a natural phenomenon
and the laws by which it behaves as a novel.
But a literary critic could help you to understand Alice in Wonderland by applying interpretive strategies to it,
to study what words meant in Lewis Carroll's day so you can understand the puns and the humor better,
to tell you something about how human beings read novels and appropriate their meanings and alter their lives in response to them.
That kind of approach does not yield an explanation. That kind of approach yields an understanding.
For many scholars of religion these days, this approach which is called hermeneutics,
the science of interpretation and the principles of interpretation is more appropriate than the older scientific explanatory model of religious studies.
As religion creates meaning, we are to approach it as if it were a text and try to discover what it means, how it signifies,
not where does it come from and how does it behave.
So the modern mode of religious studies is no longer looking at religion as a science in search of a law,
but as a system of signification in search of an interpretation.
Now, does that mean then that we need to throw out these scientific explanations and adopt newer hermeneutic explanations?
Not necessarily. What we can do is critique the scientific nature of these explanatory theories and reposition them as interpretations.
Let's take the theory of Sigmund Freud and see how this works when we apply this strategy.
Freud, in his book The Future of an Illusion, clearly thought that he was providing a scientific explanation of religion based in his work as a psychiatrist.
A critic of Freud's Charles Elder once noted that despite this claim, Freud's explanation of religion is in fact anything but scientific.
For example, Freud points out that religious ritual behavior is strikingly similar in both form and function to the behavior of obsessive neurotics,
people who have rituals that they do religiously all the time.
So by drawing the analogy between religion and neurosis, Freud thought he was giving a scientific explanation.
Religion is like a neurosis, therefore religion is a neurosis.
But any working scientist today will tell you that an analogy is not a theory and a similarity does not constitute an explanation.
So Freud's theory is not in fact scientific.
Is it useless?
If it were, then it's doubtful that it would still be read today and would still be influencing people's thought.
So what if we approach Freud as a hermeneutist, as an interpreter of religion?
Then Elder says a whole new picture emerges.
Once Freud has pointed out the similarity between religion and neurotic behavior, it becomes impossible to ever look at religious behavior in quite the same way again.
It becomes a lens through which one looks at religion.
It becomes a light that shines upon the phenomenon from a certain angle and illuminates features of it that might be invisible otherwise.
Elder's example is drawn from the work of the philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein.
To illustrate this principle of how statements of analogy or interpretive statements color the way people look at things, Wittgenstein proposed everybody is really going to Paris.
No matter what you see people doing or how they're moving or what direction they're going, they're really going to Paris.
Now as a scientific statement, this is obvious nonsense.
You can disconfirm it very easily by just going up to people in motion and saying, where are you going?
And if enough of them say they're going somewhere other than Paris, then clearly as a theory that falls to the ground.
But what if it's not a theory? What if it is a heuristic, a lens through which you look at the way people are moving?
Then even their own self-report that they're not in fact going to Paris doesn't sway you or change your mind.
You can always say to yourself, they really are going to Paris, they just haven't gotten there yet, and they don't realize yet that that is where they're going.
When this statement, everyone is really going to Paris, becomes a heuristic, a lens through which you look at people in motion,
it will change the way you perceive them. You will never be able to watch somebody walking down the street in quite the same way again.
Similarly, Freud's theory as a heuristic colors the way we interpret religious behavior and the way we look at it.
By positing the analogy then, Freud is not, despite his own protestations to the contrary, establishing an explanation,
but he is causing us to look at religion in a certain way.
That explains the enduring power of Freud's theory.
We can certainly see in light of Freud that there is such a thing as highly neurotic religious behavior.
We can also come to understand why it is that some very religious people who have undergone Freudian analysis do not achieve what Freud would have considered the desired outcome,
which is that they give up this illusory religion of theirs in order to adopt a more mature adult approach to their problems.
Instead, they come out reporting that they are still religious, but they feel that their religion has become less neurotic and more healthy.
So that's the first adjustment, to relinquish the idea that religious studies theories are explanatory in a scientific mode,
and to take them as heuristics that shed light on religion from a certain angle and reveal certain features.
Now this gives us a weight into the second adjustment, that we also give up the idea that any of these are exclusive.
Something that scholars have long noted is a phenomenon called the hegemony of the good idea.
When someone has a brilliant insight into the way things work, it is natural to apply that to as many different contexts as possible
to test the usefulness of the theory in the broadest possible field.
Usually the theory will hit a limit somewhere in which it will cease to be useful,
and at that point people will be able to settle into using it for appropriate analyses.
Claude Levy-Strauss' structuralism bled out of anthropology and came to be all the rage in art and literary criticism for a while, for example.
Part of this phenomenon of the hegemony of the good idea is to claim that a certain theory is all-encompassing,
that it explains everything, and that no other theory is necessary.
So for a Marxist to see religion as an ideology which is part of the superstructure of a political economy
that serves to keep the lower classes in their place, having seen that one need look no further,
one understands everything there is to understand about religion.
Once one understands from Freud that religion is a universal human neurosis,
then there's no longer any need to look at any economic or sociological theory of religion.
One has everything one needs.
Durkheim clearly thought that his sociological explanation of religion was the only necessary theory
for interpreting everything that there was to know about religion.
That leads to all kinds of difficulties.
It leads to the over-application of a theory to data which it is not appropriate for interpreting.
It would be like using a telescope to study an elephant.
But perhaps once we have come to see these theories as heuristics,
as lights that shine upon religion from certain angles,
then it might make sense to use them to supplement each other.
The more light you can shine on something from the greatest possible variety of angles,
the more features will be exposed to view.
So if we take the elements of the theories of all of these thinkers
and apply them in places where it is appropriate to use them,
we might actually get a fuller picture of religion.
For example, by paying attention to the theory of Durkheim,
the theory that says that the object of religious rituals and worship
is a symbol by which a society represents itself to itself,
I can certainly tell you that I've never looked at college mascots in quite the same way again,
but I've also gone back to my own church community
and began listening to people's arguments about the nature of God in a new way.
Perhaps as an element of these arguments,
we might discern that the people by talking about what God is like
are also talking about what they are to be like.
God is at least in part a symbol through which the society focuses on itself.
Then maybe a discussion of the nature of God is, to some measure,
a discussion of the nature of society and the ethics that it will endorse.
Similarly, having looked at Marxist economic analysis,
one becomes more aware than before that there is, in fact, an economic side to religion,
that while theologians and other elite thinkers within a religious tradition
may be talking about a kind of pristine truth that is independent of any human institution,
one comes to notice that there is such a thing as church supply catalogs,
that church buildings have to be built by workmen who need their wages,
and that religious doctrines themselves generally do espouse some kind of economic ethic
and endorse some idealized system of exchanges of goods and services, of money,
and of the division of labor.
One can also come to see that in some instances,
the kind of economic theory that a religious theology is endorsing
is, in fact, oppressive and unjust to certain people.
Looking at Freud's theory, one can certainly see that there is such a thing as neurotic religion,
that there are religious rituals that people use in the same way that neurotics use their neuroses,
as ways of avoiding whatever is the actual problem in their lives.
All of these are valid insights, and they can be embraced all at once
if we see all of these theories as interpretive tools that are good for specific things.
In my work as a carpenter, before I went back to graduate school,
I certainly was fully aware of the idea that one should have a toolbox full of tools
so that you would have the right tool for the right job when the time came.
Interpretive theories are like that as well.
One should have a toolbox full of them so that when the time comes to examine religious data,
one will be able to pull out the right one for the job.
I want to finish this part of this review by passing along ideas about the use of religious studies theories
that I learned as a graduate school from one of my professors, Benjamin Ray, of the University of Virginia.
Having now decided that these theories are interpretive tools rather than scientific explanations,
and that they are not exclusively true, but merely tools in a toolbox,
we can then articulate a general principle as to what we do with them.
The way Professor Ray would put it was like this,
Never use data to prove a theory. Always use theory to interpret data.
Never use data to prove the theory. Always use theory to interpret the data.
When confronted with data from actual people's religious lives,
and in seeking to understand the lives of these people better,
one needs to reach into the toolbox and pull out the right tool for the job.
You might not be sure which is the right one, so it's appropriate to try one,
and if it doesn't give you the kind of understanding you need,
then you can certainly put it right back in the toolbox and pull out another one and see if it gives you any better understanding.
What you don't want to do, though, is to say,
I am a Marxist, or I am a Freudian, or I am a Jungian,
and be so committed to the use of a single interpretive tool
that one comes to see all religious data as simply supporting that theory.
As I've said once before in these lectures, when I was doing construction,
we had a saying on the crew,
if all you have is a hammer, everything starts to look like a nail,
and I think that's perfectly applicable in this arena.
So, we now have theories that are useful heuristics.
Some of them prove more useful than others.
Durkheim's analysis has been appealed to again and again and again,
and has shown its usefulness in interpreting many different kinds of religious data.
Claude Levy-Strauss' structural analysis, on the other hand,
has proven so useless in so many instances
that it is staying in the toolbox for the most part these days.
Now, I want to move to a different topic to wrap up.
One of the themes that I have alerted you to many times
during the course of these lectures
is the fact that many of these theories of religion
arose initially out of a hostile attitude towards religion,
a severely critical attitude towards the myopia, superstition,
and backwardness of these religious traditions.
Do these theories have anything to say to religious people?
I think they certainly do, and you can see this in the world today
as, in a perhaps ironic twist, many religious bodies themselves
are utilizing these theories in order to order their religious and communal lives.
I'll start with a very simple example.
In the year 2004, I was a delegate to the annual conference
of the Episcopal Diocese of Washington.
So all of the Episcopalians, the different parishes,
sent their delegates to the National Cathedral,
and we met to discuss and debate the future direction of the church.
The bishop had arranged as the major event of this conference
a presentation by a marketing consultant.
And so for several hours, we watched PowerPoint presentations
that mapped out the demographics of the population
within the Episcopal Diocese of Washington.
We looked at survey data that showed us
what kind of person was most likely to utilize an Episcopal church.
We looked at how the demographic shifts were relocating that population,
that those kind of people were moving in certain directions.
The upshot was that we took this data and put it into plans
for establishing new churches.
Now, this appeals to several sociological theories.
Peter Berger and his analysis of the marketplace of religions
in a country where church and state are separated
and religious people are uncoerced consumers of religious products.
Like any corporation with a product to sell,
we were doing our market study.
Rodney Stark and his rational choice theory would point out
how this is a perfectly rational thing to do.
Religious bodies frequently operate on very thin financial margins.
It costs a lot of money to erect a new church building
and to staff it with salaried personnel.
You don't want to spend that kind of money establishing a church
in a place where no one is likely to actually use it.
So in order to make some very rational choices,
we wanted to look at this sociological and market data.
I have spoken to a Swedish Lutheran theologian
who took this a step deeper.
She said she would never dream of doing theology
without consulting sociological data first.
For her, the older model of theology,
which was what scholars sometimes call the top-down approach,
the approach which says religious truth is a pristine truth
that is independent of human beings,
and it is the job of human beings to orient themselves
and conform themselves to that truth.
That style of top-down theology runs the eternal risk of irrelevance.
Her view was that by consulting the sociological data,
she would see where actual people's concerns lay,
what questions they were actually asking
so that she could then provide theological answers to those questions.
A more bottom-up approach.
Even a theory as hostile to religion as Marxism
has been incorporated into the religious lives of people.
We call it liberation theology.
In the 1970s and 80s,
a set of Catholic theologians in Central and South America
took Marxist economic analysis
and Marxist data on the place of religion within political economy
and began applying it to critique the Christianity
of the land-holding classes in their countries
and to support what has come to be called the preferential option for the poor.
That is to say, a version of Christianity
that was to empower the peasant classes
so that they could actually do something
to help better their lot and improve their lives
by actively working against the interests and the religion
of the oppressive land-owning classes.
In the arena of psychological theory,
it has now become very common for mainstream religious denominations
to require that people aspiring to ordination as ministers
undergo psychiatric evaluation.
This would not have been done in the past.
The call to ministry would have been seen as a divine charism
that had nothing to do with a person's psychological profile.
But many religious bodies nowadays
put their faith in psychiatric evaluations
to try to weed out people who are likely to be ineffective or abusive pastors.
Even in seminary training today,
much of the training is in psychology and counseling techniques
that don't necessarily have any rooting in Christianity.
If you had gone to a Christian seminary
in the United States of America in the 1930s,
you would have found that the curriculum consisted primarily
of theology, biblical studies, and church polity.
These days, those things have been minimized.
And much of what people do, both in coursework and in internships,
is learning how to do psychotherapy and counseling.
And rather than admonishing and rebuking people in their parish,
many ministers now counsel them
and try to help them overcome psychological blockages,
or at least refer them to other therapists
who will be able to help them with those issues.
So the irony of all this is that these theories,
which grew out of a split with theology
and a severely hostile critical attitude toward religion,
have shown themselves to be useful
in helping to manage the religious lives
of religious institutions and communities throughout the world.
We're almost out of time. Let me end on a personal note.
Many people who watch me lecture on religion
want to know what I do with these theories.
It's true that I am a religious person. I go to church every week.
But I also study all of these theories.
What part do they play in my own religious life?
I find it very useful to keep in mind both the theological attitude
and the religious studies attitude,
because by having both and keeping them in creative tension,
it keeps them in check and in balance.
It keeps either one of them from becoming hegemonic and controlling.
Each critiques the other.
And I think that kind of healthy tension
provides a way of maintaining balance in this world in which we live.
That brings us to the end of our course.
I thank you for your kind attention.
Visit our website at www.teach12.com
or call our customer care representatives at 1-800-TEACH-12.
That's 1-800-TEACH-12.
Thank you very much.
