How do we let go of the certainty that we know what the right answer is?
But we also let go of the certainty there is no answer and we're fucked.
We orient towards faithfulness that answers might exist and they take working towards,
and then we commit to the discipline and rigor to be part of figuring that out.
Knowing that we can't do all of it,
the discipline and rigor of evolving ourselves to work well with
other people that are also doing it so that collective intelligence of groups of people
working to do that can and act solutions.
That is like the discipline of a people that want to be able to reinstate
governance of foreign by the people.
Collective insights as a voyage through topics and technologies revolutionizing human well-being.
Groundbreaking approaches for a better world and a better life await you.
Welcome to collective insights.
Well, welcome to the next edition of Homegrown Humans with Neurohacker Collective.
And this is a very full circle kind of conversation.
Get to speak with a dear friend and colleague and fellow instigator of all things.
Future facing Daniel Schmacktenberger, one of the founders of the Concilience Project,
an organization dedicated to improving the world's information ecology
and bettering our collective decision making so that we can forge
futures that we all want to live into as well as part of the founding team of Neurohacker Collective
itself and a generally all-around thoughtful and good guy.
So Daniel Schmacktenberger, welcome to Homegrown Humans.
It's good to see you.
You're going to be talking with you, Jamie.
It is a fun full circle thing given that the first instantiation of this podcast ever.
I was hosting five years ago or something like that.
And then Heather did and then we started to grow it.
And yeah, it's cool.
It's cool to be here talking to you.
Absolutely.
Well, listen to me.
There's an infinite number of directions that we can go.
But one of the ones when I kind of just busted out my notebook that came to, you know,
leapt off my pen first was just curiosity on your sense of how, you know,
the kind of quote unquote, the conversation.
And by that, I would say we can refine it to all things.
Tending towards both existential risk, future studies, positive interventions
at any level of the human cultural stack that we're playing with.
What's your sense as we're not really out of the whole COVID woods,
but everyone's just playing through at this point.
So it feels like we are somewhat on the other side of two and a half years of quarantine.
And I'm just curious, if you've got an answer or we can just explore this out loud,
is what feels like it has shifted or changed?
What have you noticed from, say, where we were in January, whatever it was,
was it 2020 that we went into lockdown?
Is that right?
So we went in February or March, right?
So what going into that woodchipper of existence?
What's changed or shifted?
Because obviously there's been so much.
And I think we've probably already started forgetting the layers as they've come in.
But what are you tracking that is different now in the summer of 2022
than when we were all sort of caught on our wares with a two week lockdown in late February of 2020
within this conversation and our friends, our colleagues,
and just what you're sensing in the zeitgeist of the space?
It's an interesting question because the initial frame of what things are in the conversation,
it actually seems like a pretty small number of people that think about existential risk and all
things positive and say the world as a whole as a single conversation.
I would say the biggest changes that I've seen in terms of people's sense of,
like maybe what that conversation has in common is people who are thinking about
humanity and the world globally.
What are the major issues that we face rather than in a specific sector or by a specific nation or
to a specific audience of people?
But what are the things humanity faces globally?
And what are the ways of addressing those that might be adequate or meaningful?
And how do those global issues contextualize other things that might be meaningful?
I would say COVID, but even before COVID, the Trump election, I noticed a shift in my conversation
publicly, but also in my conversation with a lot of institutional heads, whether like academic,
government, big business, whatever, in their sense of there are problems, but there have always been
problems. This is business as usual to the sense that, oh no, we're actually entering a kind of
different phase where Pax Americana and the post-World War II world seems to be
shifting radically. It seems like the degree of bipartisan, like, venom and polarization
associated with the Trump election had a lot of people who had before that still been arguing
their problems, but the country works fundamentally fine. It works better than any other country to
like, oh, maybe there's actually an existential risk to democracy itself.
Maybe social media technology really did break the fourth estate in a way that breaks democracy,
but it's fine for autocracy. I started noticing much more serious consideration regarding the
fundamental viability of these social systems that we've depended upon, liberal democracy and
things like that. And then so much of Australia coming on fire. And then everybody forgetting
that because of COVID when that was like the biggest thing ever. And then the secondary shocks
of COVID from the supply chain effects to the economic effects to that. And then I think definitely
January 6th and all of the George Floyd related protests and that suite of things seems to have
made the small group of people that saw that these current world systems were untenable and
kind of unwinding made that pretty popularly, if not believed, at least something that a lot of
people were sensitive to, and particularly the people who have been in the running the institution's
position. That is something I find very interesting. So what I've found is that I've had way more people
asking about things like how do we fundamentally redesign our political economy? How do we
build a world where democracy is viable in a post-social media and pretty soon post-deep fake
world? And asking in even getting a little bit more future oriented, what does the future of
economy and education and everything in a post-technological automation world look like?
Those are questions now that there are very few people in institutional positions not
kind of interested in, and there were very few very interested in them before.
Yeah, that reminds me of that University of Chicago philosopher Jonathan Lea who wrote that
book Radical Hope, and I reference him at the end of Recapture the Rapture, but he said,
the inability of a civilization to conceive of its own demise is one of the blind spots of any
culture, and it does feel, if I'm tracking what you're saying, you're sort of suggesting that
2016 through now, including both the political disruptions there, Brexit, Trump, Gen 6, but
also these psychosocial governmental policy, everything of quarantine, has just massively
stretched the Overton window as to what quote-unquote mainstream or polite opinion
is willing to entertain at this point. Yeah, totally, and I know our friend,
Nate Higgins, is just out with you, and there are some things that are still really far outside
the Overton window of thinking about adequate solutions to, and so I'll just take his as an
example, because maybe people here are familiar. One of the things that he looks at very deeply is
that the GDP of the world, the total size of the global economy is pegged very tightly to the total
amount of energy used, which makes sense, right, whether your any good or service was going to
require some energy, so it's kind of tightly pegged. We say, well, what about efficiency,
shouldn't we get more dollars per joule of energy with efficiency? Yeah, but at a smaller rate of
changes in efficiency than the rate of increased demand of energy from the increased demand in
finance and those efficiencies lead to using more energy. Is that Javen's paradox? Javen's paradox.
Any time you get an increase in efficiency of energy, you use more energy, because when energy
becomes a little bit cheaper, you get new markets that open up, and the energy return on energy
investment needed to get us off oil means you got to use a lot of oil and coal to make those
solar panels. It's going to take them 10 years or however long to make enough energy to pay off
the energy it took, it just doesn't converge. And so then we say, okay, well, this is like a key
insight is that somewhere around 2019, we started getting very clear diminishing returns on hydrocarbon
investment, meaning it takes more barrels of oil to get a new barrel of oil. It's not specifically
like clossands and fracking and all the diminishing returns on those original bonanzas.
Exactly. And so if we're in a place where we can get more oil, but we're getting
lower energy return on energy investment, which is going to continue to happen,
while having a need for an exponential amount more money for the financial system to keep
up with its own interest, and the money and the oil are correlated, that thing doesn't get to keep
going. And so then there's a reckoning in where like the price of oil has all the externalities
in the environment, we're not making more hydrocarbons of that type, and we're not dealing
with all the waste of which climate change is one of the waste streams, but not the only one,
obviously oil spills and mountaintop removal mining for coal and everything. So if you were to say,
what would it cost to pay for oil with real costs, right, where we could sustainably keep
doing this forever, we're not actually net harming the environment, depending upon which
way you analyze it, it's $10,000 plus per barrel of oil. And that makes it...
So wait, that's an interesting data point. So you're just saying if you actually priced in both
costs of acquisition, restoration, distribution, pure refinement and distribution, and then all
sort of carbon offsets that would be required to do this in a sustaining way, then you're at 10K
a barrel? 10K to a million, depending upon how you factor all of the lifecycle analysis.
And so what that means is that the cost of my shoes and the cost of the computer we're talking
on and everything just became like the entire market of everything broke.
Yeah, so you basically buy a pair of shoes and you get them resold
indefinitely, a pair of really good shoes, right? It changes purchasing decisions.
Well, and the computer we're talking on, that rather than being a $2,000 or $3,000 Apple might be
like a million dollar Apple, if you factor the real cost of what it takes for the supply chains
to make this thing. And then you're like, okay, we would actually not even do manufacturing the
same way. We only do manufacturing this way because we've been able to externalize all the
costs to the environment. Now we're hitting planetary boundaries. We're not going to be
able to keep doing that. If we were going to internalize the costs, we didn't externalize
like half the costs. We internalized like four orders of magnitude more of the costs than we
internalized. And so nobody is thinking seriously enough about what the fuck does an economy that
does not externalize costs look like and how do we retool our total global infrastructure
in that way? And how do we do it in the time we have factoring that we're already in diminishing
returns on hydrocarbons and everything is oriented towards growth and you have to completely change
the financial system. And so I would say at least conversations like that are, there are more people
listening to them and bothered by it. That doesn't mean there's anything like a transition plan on
those things that is starting to get realistic. Yeah, we actually, one of the fellows who attended
our camp was actually a really good hearted DC policy analyst and his partner is Tibetan Arjun.
She's working deeply in the house and the Senate as well. So they're way into the policy side of
things, but interestingly had kind of, you know, come that, you know, familiar with your work as
well, familiar with that kind of thing. And it was very interesting to kind of hear their sort of
inside baseball on how the policies like if people knew that this was all just overworked Ivy League
early 20 something, a congressional aides that are fundamentally moving this all through the system,
people will be shocked and horrified. But I'll tell you what, I want, there's so much you've
just, you know, you've just teed up here. I want to, this is probably one of the main threads of
the conversation. But before we jump into it, I just kind of want to also ask you about the other
side and I'll play my card first, which is I have noticed a staggering number of people in the last
two years get sucked down conspiratorial rabbit holes and people I otherwise thought were sane
and grounded are now in the tank for one particular, you know, reality tunnel conspiracy theory,
or another, including otherwise fairly centrist public thinkers, etc. etc. So whether that is
convinced of some grand Davos led great reset conspiracy bundling in vaccine concerns bundling
in the deep hermeneutics of suspicion, sort of all round and and sort of therefore veering
precariously too dangerously too irresponsibly into some form of acceleration as a meaning
let's hurry up and get this thing over let's help start tearing it down, because the big time baddies
are out to get us. So first let's just talk about that what what what have you been noticing because
I mean, I've been shocked, you know, about how just divergence among friends and colleagues
that I would normally even while we have a variety of different political, you know,
philosophical perspectives, I always took them as sort of good faith representatives of their stand.
And now, you know, and we know some, you know, some filmmakers, documentarians, right, that
there's a whole swath of these folks, podcasters, you know, what what is your sense of that, because
it's one thing to say at the bottom of the barrel of Reddit and eight chain and telegram,
you've got some kooky folks saying some wacky ass things, but it feels like that has bubbled up
and has now been capturing a staggering number of otherwise what I would have thought of as
reliable independent thinkers. What's your take on that? First of all, are you experiencing it and
if so do you have any sense of mechanism? Yeah, there's a lot in there and it is true.
There was obviously already a trend that had been strengthening for some time since like post
Vietnam on increased left-right polarization and also increased kind of pro versus anti-institutional
or pro standard model anti standard model orientation. Obviously, we saw this pick up
heavily with social media because of the nature of how social media works and then.
But in this timeframe, we saw it pick up a lot and I would say, you know, the leading up to the
Trump election post and then COVID definitely. But I wouldn't, I don't think the way I would
say it is, there's a lot more people that are conspiratorial because that's part of it. But
there's also more like interestingly blinded standard model support simultaneously.
So that's a mouthful. So unpack that.
For every like the whole
instant zeitgeist washing on it's not a lab leak, it couldn't have been a lab leak,
the science has settled. If you think that it could have been a lab leak or engaged the hypothesis,
you're doing some weird kind of xenophobic conspiracy theory. That was a really radical
push in the zeitgeist that was not founded. The science was not settled. It was a totally
reasonable hypothesis. Whether it was true or not, it was absolutely something that needed
to be explored because if you just have that big of an effect on the world, of course, you
fucking explore all those things. And if we're doing gain of research and synthetic biotechnology,
and we had an instant somewhere, we might have more of those instances. So it should absolutely
be a totally realistic conversation and the suppression on the conversation.
That's what I would call there was like a standard model narrative.
And there were more smart people that bought the standard model narrative without realizing how
ridiculous it was. While there were simultaneously more that assumed that it was baby eating
people that were running a conspiracy against it, I see those as equally concerning because I see
them both as kind of conspiracy isn't the essence of what I'm focused on. What I'm focused on is
where people's sense making is getting more captured by some narrative.
And so the mechanisms that I would say are in place is one, increasing complexity makes it
impossible for anybody to process all the information. So they have to decide some things
about who do they trust. And of course, you want to trust the CDC or a trustworthy institution,
but if you don't, then you want to trust whoever seems like they're doing the research of why you
can't trust them. And so you get that kind of mercy because who the fuck is going to go through
all the CDC data and then compare it with the VAERS database data and then compare it with
this investigative journalist, not to mention the IPCC and climate change and the social justice
cop shooting things and to have a self informed opinion on all these things. And then to question,
is the data even good or was there underlying bias in the nature of what was funded in the
research? And so all of the data is on one part of a bell curve unevenly distributed. And so
I would say the just sheer work and epistemological nuance it takes to make sense of things as
complex rules almost everybody out. And then the consequentiality of it makes you want to not just
sit in uncertainty, but have some sense of it. And then like the emotional in group out group
polarization around like, and this is again, one of the social media things that like anyone who's
questioning if the vaccine was the right approach for public health can get thrown into some like
tin foil hat wearing anti-vaxxer thing, like that they're they everybody's going to die of
whooping cough and smallpox because of these fucking crazy people. When some of them are that
and some of them have a pretty nuanced view of like, Hey, I think there's more that we could have
done on small molecule research. And there are reasons why doing that small molecule research
would have made sense. And there's more safety analysis on vaccines. And so there's something
where it's like, we see the craziest left pink hair dantifa people. And we see the like dumbest,
most bothersome MAGA people as if representative of the whole groups that then makes the groups
polarize against each other. Yeah. And so I think the complexity, the total number of topics,
the speed, the crappiness of the underlying scientific substrate with replication issues,
and all of those things, the media environment that orients towards the hypernormal stimuli,
which will be confirming bias and sanctimony and in group identity, and giving us the most like
extreme versions of the other, the extreme and straw man, never steel man versions of the other
side. I think that whole suite of things leads to this where the number of people that I knew
who I felt like were doing really a good job of sense making say COVID related issues,
whether it was lab leak, or whether it was proposed small molecules like ivermectin,
or whether it was vaccines, or I saw some people at the very beginning doing a good
job of not getting captured by one side or the other. Yeah, almost all got progressively
captured by one of the sides, simply because their their ability to pay attention to everything,
they just couldn't. And so certain choices ended up making the new suite of information coming
their way more oriented in a certain direction. And it became very hard to not be affected by that.
Yeah, I always think of sort of almost like a World War One, you know, no man's land trench warfare,
and it feels like the trenches are getting pulled further and further apart. And I'm sure you've
got the accurate stats, but I feel like it's like less than 5% of all social media posters or the
majority like make 90% of the news. So it's all the it is all the extremes. And as the no man's
land gets bigger and bigger and more and more treacherous tank traps and barbed wire and nerve
gas, there's no fucking way you're going to make the sprint to the far side to jump in that foxhole
with your potential enemies. So like no man's land is dead. So I you know, there are no atheists
in foxholes, right? So you got to believe something if you're jumping in with and you're going to and
you're more prone to jump back to your closest affinity group than you are to risk crossing
the middle. And so it just seems like that that is that the price of defection from my
identified in group is so high at this point. So for instance, you could have a whole bunch of
live and let live middle Americans that are nonetheless getting pulled aggressively right
wood, because the pink haired baby killing and Tifa, you know, hooligans are such that are such
the caricature of the left at this point, that people are like, I don't know which way to go,
but there's the moderate middle is just getting completely hollowed out. I actually don't have
these stats Tristan and Isa were telling them to me, but it had to do with a really cool social
science that was the center for humane tech folks for anybody. Yeah. Yeah. And it had to do with
pulling people on the left about what they expected the percentage of certain things on the right
were and vice versa and seeing how badly off in a negative direction they were, something like
asking people on the right. And I think it was more specific. It was like asking Trump supporters
at a rally what percentage of Democrats are LGBTQ themselves. And they thought it was like
half or something like that. And it turns out was like less than 6%. And there were similar
things that people on the left, you know, what percentage of people on the right want to cut
all social services or whatever. And they estimate it to be way higher than it actually was. So you
could tell that they were both dealing with caricatures of each other that they thought were
true that like they were dealing with two standard deviations to one side of the Gaussian distribution
of what was really there thinking it was the median. And a Gaussian distribution is fundamentally
the familiar bell curve that people understand. Yeah. Yeah. So and this is, you know, Pat Ryan's
stuff he was talking about this years ago on auto colts that you would he was predicting that
that we'd have this phenomena that things like Colts would just start automatically popping up
as a function of the information technology landscape. Because when and I would say the
underlying cause of this or one thing we have to factor is that of all of the singularities that
Kurzweil talked about, the info singularity is the first one, meaning the the singularity,
meaning the point at which things change so radically that we can't really predict what's
going to happen or how to respond to them afterwards and where humans kind of can't keep
up with the pace of technological change. The idea of the information singularity is that so much
information would be published that no human could process all the relevant information about
anything. And so there would no longer be an expert. And that's already true, right? It's
already true that you'll have more peer reviewed journal articles within a specific domain because
of how big the world is and universities all around the world and any expert can keep up with
even in their own domain and obviously way more journalism on topics. And so obviously now we
have to get into computational processing of all of that since the human can't process it anymore.
But now it's well, what are the algorithms and how we're doing that computational processing?
And currently the answer is things like newsfeed algorithms, Facebook and other newsfeed algorithms
at least deciding of all the stuff out there what makes it into your feed because you're not
going to see a million news articles in the day. So the ones that make it in are based on personalized
data harvesting about you mostly focused on not trying to make you believe something but what
you actually interact with the most. But the tricky thing is what you interact with the most is mostly
based on one marshmallow stuff, right? Mostly based on like what actually makes you click with it
because the title was so salacious and effective at making you click or so many of your friends already
had or something like that. And so that phenomenon means everybody doesn't see the same thing because
there's too much stuff everybody can't see the same thing. And so what everybody sees is the stuff
that is AI split test optimized in the direction of their twitchiness, right? I think twitching
is a term you use it. And that usually means in the direction of their confirmation bias because
people are less likely to click on a thing that uses words they don't even know what they are,
which means likely to expand their uncertainty set than things that are already primed to them
as something bothersome. And so this is not just a left-right anymore thing, it's like it's a
algorithmic basis of cult generation. And then one of the really fucked up things I don't know if
you, of course you saw, you pointed out to me, I had these deep fakes made about me these audio
deep fakes. Was it catabytes? Is that that was that the term? Catamite. So there's a third one
that just came up. I am a biracial colonialist in this third one. I'm large, I contain multitudes,
you know, I can have my contradictions. So yeah, catamite. I mean, just to be clear, this means
like a young male homosexual sex slave for older powerful men, whatever. So there's this
thing with my voice talking to Lex Friedman about me being a catamite, citing a poem about it,
whatever. And of course, to be clear, this is an AI-generated deep fake. I had nothing to do
with it. I didn't authorize it. There's just enough of my voice and Lex's voice, you can make
shit like this. And this, so the first step was the AI to curate all the content, which is the
Facebook algorithm or the YouTube algorithm, whatever, or the Google algorithm. The next one
is to say, you don't even want when you do a Google search to see 8,000 result pages,
or 8 million result pages, you want to see a customized chunk of info for you that read all
of those and calibrated it to you. And that's what GPT-3 can do, right? That's what new advanced
generative text AI can do is read that and say, in a thousand words, summarize X for me.
So when you have, and it can also do it in fucking anybody's voice and pretty soon anybody's
similar to it. So now you imagine the auto-cults where not only are they being attracted by what
they're being attracted now, which is just who all is attracted to the same memetic twitchy thing,
but where you can actually produce bespoke content from bespoke content producers in that space.
So you, you can actually create gods of the auto-cults. That's all very weird.
It's super weird, but also like, I'm trying to think, so I think it was a GPT-3,
an AI kind of generating algorithm, and somebody was already starting to use, I mean,
A, talk about race to the bottom and whatever that law is that like any tech online will be used to
make porn first. It was the equivalent of that, but it was for info marketers. So there were info
marketers who were already trying to explore using AI, cutting-edge AI tech, to generate better
info marketing sales copy. Of course. Right. But like anybody who's seen that rash of Dahle,
you know, everybody and their mother posting there on their social feeds, I said this,
here are my five ingredients and here's my piece of art, right? But like from, from AI generation
to speak of like the auto-cults and even creating the deities, right? You could not only do it in
the name of, you know, like give me a summation of quantum physics and as Stephen Hawking's or
Richard Feynman would say it, right? But you could even do it as Jesus, as Buddha, as Lao Tzu,
right? You could actually literally give the AI the coding to give voice to our divine archetypes,
which to me seems super fascinating, but also wildly spooky. Okay. So totally spooky,
will get abused. This, there's an important principle about tech that is related to the
thing you said about, um, it'll be used for porn first or then internet marketing, which is
any new technology enables new things, right? That's what technology does is enable human
seduction that they weren't able to do. It will be used for all the things where there is incentive
to use it. And where there is more incentive and return on that incentive, it'll get used the most
there. So whenever somebody's developing tech, they might be developing it for a certain purpose
that seems really lovely. But what they have to realize is it's going to be used for every
purpose that is not regulated that there is incentive to use it for. And it will be
differentially used the most by the ones that have the most incentive to use it. And so when
we're developing new tech, we have to take that really fucking seriously when we're dealing with
tech that makes changes to the world as quickly as powerfully and at scale and as irreversibly as
the new tech does. So you develop CRISPR, where you meaning you develop some gene editing technology
where you have ethical review boards that you have to go through with lots of good scientists on
them to assume this is to assure this is a good thing to do in a biosecure laboratory. But then
you publish your paper and you're doing it for immuno oncology, right? To figure out how to edit
genes to cure cancer. But as soon as you for that purpose with that money in that major institution,
figure out, oh, here's how we spliced the gene to do that and you publish it. Now anybody with
really fucking basic hardware and without ethical review boards can do that for any purpose they
have a purpose for. You make AI and make it open source. And you can use the AI for any
purpose to optimize computational processing of lots of stuff. I won't even talk about what
they could be, but people, you know, it's not that hard to think about. So this, I'm actually,
I believe that we are moving into a world where and this will be a radically controversial thing
to say. Good. You, the reason why we don't like the term regulation is because we don't
trust this government or a lot of people don't trust this government or any government structure.
The idea that anything that is powerful enough to regulate will become corrupt.
All the kind of libertarian public choice theory critiques, those are all good and those are all
right. I don't trust it for the same reason, but I also don't trust open market proliferation
of exponential catastrophe tech and with no regulation where, of course, if we're talking
about drones or cyber or biotech or specifically synth bio where like the ability to synthesize
genomes corresponding with the best institutions in the world putting the pandemic grade genomes
that they're figuring out online through publishing and the same with AI, the world just doesn't
make it through that, right? The world doesn't make it through decentralized catastrophe weapons
with no oversight. And you can't regulate after the fact the way we always have, like after DDT
killed so much to finally figure out how to outlaw it. Round up, right? Took 30 plus years
and we're still sorting out forever chemicals. And lead and gasoline and all those things, right?
Lead and gasoline is estimated to have taken a billion IQ points off the world and made us
4x more violent holistically to just stop engine knocking. And that was 4x more violent. Yeah.
The real politic assessment, I'll send you a link on it. There's an incredible explainer
piece somebody did on lead and gasoline as an example of externality to fucking stop engine
knocking. We take something that you have to mind that would never occur in the biosphere and figure
out how to burn it and aerosolize it so that it's in everybody's breathing air that makes us both
dumber and meaner. And so then we get people doing social science and doing this real politic
assessment of humans are too dumb and mean for things like democracy to work or things like
nicest or dork. It's just genetics. We're nasty chimps. It's not fucking nasty chimps and genetics.
It's like shit that we did that we could do differently. And if Hoxon's in the brain piece.
That assessment, the 4x more violent and the a billion IQ points off like literally dumber and
meaner was one chemical, one chemical, right? We have 50 million chemicals in the chemical
database of the American Journal of Chemical, whatever it is. And how many of the other ones
also have negative behavioral effects, let alone on the other side of the fucked up topsoil that
doesn't have the trace minerals that were needed for healthy neurotransmitters and everything else.
So the whole let's study humans under ubiquitous conditioning and then call it nature. And then
say we're too fucked because of ubiquitous conditioning like no, we have to. So I have
massive critiques of humans are this way studies where we studied humans that were all conditioned
by the same things and then took it as inexorable. That was a tangent. Well, I mean, I remember,
wait, the controversial thing I was going to say, we have new categories of tech have to be pre-regulated.
So you can't put let out because the market just figured out how to add it and then only after
enough people die and people figure out how to measure invisible stuff and the policy groups go
against the financial vested interests that are already making billions of dollars on this.
You finally regulate it in one area, but it's hard because other areas are using it. Nobody wants
to be the first one to incur the cost of the regulation. We don't get to do that with AI.
By the time it's causing that much harm or all that or any other exponential existential tech,
right? There's no whoops do overs. Correct. So the world and you also can't do national
regulation because all these things create global effects very quickly. It's not like we can say,
oh, we're going to stop doing gain and function research in the US and that's going to matter.
Global pandemics because of global supply chains, either you get everybody to them or
doesn't matter that much. Same with AI weapons. So now what I'm saying is in the face of the
amount of power of exponential tech, you can't let it out unregulated first because either
some people want to do fucked up stuff with it or simply the accidents, right? It happened.
And you can't regulate it at a national level. So you do have to have something like global
regulation that does safety analysis on the tech to say, okay, these applications,
not all applications, these applications done in this way are a safe way to put it out. And we
continue to watch and iterate to change regulation and change tech design. I'm saying we don't make
it through if we don't have something like that. And yet nobody has proposed any system of governance
we would trust with that. That would be like some centralizing power dystopia. So it would be like
salt treaties or some other nuclear non proliferation. But boom, across a whole additional
swath of stuff. And stuff that moves way faster. Nukes move really slow. And so you don't have to
do as much because everybody can't make nukes just when somebody publishes because the physical
tech is ordered. But that's not true for since by area. So we do have to there is no in the same
with the like everybody becoming conspiratorial or standard model bias. There is no way for us to
make this much sense of stuff. Like we do have to come up with institutions that can process this
that are both lots of humans and computational capacity that we trust and that we have a reason
to trust, meaning the kinds of audits and transparency and everything to avoid corruption
and embedded mistakes have to happen. So this I think is a really critical thing to realize.
Well, okay. So that's that's one that has has baffled me. I mean, I even wrote a bit on it
a month or two ago, which was just what I've noticed is that, you know, basically, because
what you're describing is a some version of a benevolent new world order. You're saying we do
need global coordination for global existential issues. We need to have authorities that have
the capacity for enforcement and policymaking. And the thing that baffled me again, back to this,
what's happened in the two years of quarantine and that kind of thing is that this is not just
ultra far right libertarian john birchers, you know, afraid of the, you know, afraid of the
council on foreign relations and the club of Rome and all these big time baddies and, you know, and
watching for these things. It's now on the left hand side, it's on the spiritual, psychedelic,
transformational cryptocurrency side. So everybody, even nominal progressive do gooders
are now completely freaked out about any form of coordinated transnational governance, right,
and are now seeing that as signs of the beginning of the end, the move to the panopticon surveillance
state, you know, lockdown. And so now, even people who would have who would normally follow
everything you just said and agree and be rooting for benign authority to do something
on our collective behalf are actually now so suspicious and resistance, resistant to any
signals of gloat transnational coordination, that they're sort of, they're going to be in,
you know, at minimum passive resistance all the way to potentially violent uprising.
But they're right. And so this is, this is why I talk about catastrophes and dystopias as the
two things we have to simultaneously prevent and find a third attractor that's neither because
if you maintain, if you try to avoid too much centralization, so you use things like markets
or the separation of lots of countries or whatever, you end up getting these kind of
multipolar trap race to the bottom things, they make the fucked up AI weapons, so we have to also
make the fucked up AI weapons so we don't lose they produce the carbon so we have to nobody can
stop climate change. So we get catastrophes from that model. In order to avoid those catastrophes,
you can't just use incentives, you have to be able to use deterrence, which is because somebody
will figure out how to have enough incentive to do the whatever the fucked up thing is and if they
get so much advantage out of doing it that then everybody else has to do it or lose, then you
have to have a deterrent that says, no, nobody gets to make bio weapons. If you start making
bio weapons, we're going to stop that forcibly. We're going to do something to stop that and
whether that's tariffs or war or whatever it is. So then who implements that to have enough
control to prevent the decentralized catastrophe processes looks like enough control where you're
like, wow, to have the power to do that looks like an uncheckable power. And the history of
uncheckable powers is not pretty. If people are concerned about excessively concentrated power,
that just means they're good students of history because there's nothing in history that tells us
that's a safe idea. And even if you have something like, obviously, there's lots of times where a
very malevolent dictator pretends to be a benevolent dictator that happens all the time. But even if
you have a more benevolent dictator, you get the rules for rulers dynamic, which is the equivalent
of a multipolar trap on the other side, the rules for rulers is, if there's that much concentrated
powers, the more power seeking people want it. And so you've now centralized the point of capture
of the system, even if you set it up good at first. This is why it's like, the Republicans and the
Democrats, it's a common thing that they'll be like, when they have their guy in, they want to
increase the power of the executive branch. And then they get really upset that they increase
their power of the executive branch from the other guy gets in because fuck, you just,
your guy doesn't stay in and you increase capture possibility, right? So anytime you have a system
that has a lot of centralized power, how do you prevent capture and how do you prevent corruption
becomes the core questions? How do you build that in given that we've never had good answers to that?
Because the more malevolent people are willing to do fucked up stuff to get in that position,
the benevolent people can't stay totally benevolent and adequately deal with the malevolent ones
under most situations. So they either lose and it gets captured, or they become capable of winning,
which makes them less benevolent, i.e. even the good Kings putting heads on stakes to make sure
that people knew not to do that thing because it was better for them as a whole population-centric
wide kind of punishment strategies. So we have to, we have to solve the catastrophes, but we have
to do it where the control mechanisms are uncapsurable and uncorruptible. That requires
new shit. It's not democracy as we have understood it. It's not markets. It's not monarchies. It's
not communism. It's not, it's actually some better processes of governance that the same
infotech that is messing the world up enables if we do it rightly.
Well, now you're, so now you're getting into the post democracy question, right? And back to
Overshine windows and what people are willing to consider these days. And so you were riffing on a
lot of the multipolar traps, the race to the bottom, if someone's going to do the shitty,
if someone's going to be a sociopath, if I, if I have a, basically a non-zero suspicion
that there is a sociopath amongst us, then I might as well do the sociopathic thing just to
prevent the other person from doing it, right? And then having us all with our pants down. So
therefore we can get sociopathic behavior, even if all of us were actually otherwise decent people,
but just not in a hundred percent trusting environment. And that sounds like the Slate
Star Codex famous piece, Meditations on Moloch, of which it was very rudimentary game theory as
he went through all those things, like it's far better for a bunch of countries to sign on to
anti-pollution treaties, but keep polluting. Because what they want to do is actually hamstring
everybody else to get an advantage, all those things, right? So for people that are listening
along at home, right, the Slate Star Codex Meditation on Moloch was one of those kind of
central pieces a few years ago. This also brings up, I think is it Menchus Goldbach? I forget,
that's his nom de plume, what he's here in Austin now, but you know, he's been arguing
fairly boldly and provocatively. He's kind of one of the Peter Thiel-backed
disruptors, chaos agents, right? But he's arguing for some form of a return to monarchy,
a.k.a. Plato's Philosopher King, a.k.a. Rousseau's Enlightened Despot. So what do you think,
given the risk assessments and the coordination challenges that you're describing about the
are we at the end of a very brief, really fairly wobbly 300-year experiment in representative
democracy? And are we moving towards, as Victor Orban and many others, right, are starting to
kind of signpost a post-democratic, much more centrally controlled forms of form of governance?
And is that an innovation or an aberration from where you believe we ought to be going with this?
Yeah, to get into what I think the social system adequate to
safely steward the power of exponential tech must be, there might be many different specific
proposals, but what the criteria that must be in place to do that are and to do it in a way that
are also not highly central controlled dystopias. It's beyond the scope of what we can do right now
because there's a lot of other ways that things fail and a lot of other criteria is to make the
more we'd have to build, but I'll speak to the democracy as a very temporary thing.
There's a lot of different smart assessments about why democracy is a short little blip,
or as we understood it, and obviously that occurred because of some fairly unique things
happening in the change of mostly infrastructure. Obviously, the first one that comes up in the
kind of McLuhan line of the way media tech changes stuff is the printing press enabled
people to overthrow feudalism because you could start having a newspaper and textbooks,
as opposed to the hand-topping of information where you had to be very wealthy to have access
to information, and nobody thinks the idea of people being engaged in governance who have no
idea what's going on makes sense, right? So the foundation... That was a founding fathers kind
of question, right? It was the illiterate mob. Yeah, it's a big part of why they chose, amongst
many things, representative democracy rather than direct democracy, but the founding fathers were
coming out of modernity's enlightenment, and the idea that the two prerequisite institutions for
democracy to have occur were a very high quality of public education and a fourth estate or independent
news and media. So everybody could be educated enough to understand all of the issues,
and they could ongoingly be informed enough that they could participate in collective
choice making, and of course that was also, in 1776, the complexity of the issues was way less.
You could actually be an expert in most everything technical at the time, right? You could understand
the issues of agriculture and infrastructure and whatever if you were a kind of renaissance era
enlightenment person. Ben Franklin's in the Thomas Jefferson's of the world, yeah. Right,
and that was why they wanted a representative democracy. It's too high a burden for the average
people to study all of that, but some people can, and the average people can study enough to be able
to see who understands the issues better and pick them to represent them. Obviously, now we're in a
situation where the average people can't actually tell good thinking from populism, and the representatives
not only couldn't be an expert in everything, mostly they're not experts in anything,
or even particularly good thinkers. They're people who are good at
winning those types of political games, so the whole basis of that thing's eroded.
But there's definitely a, the idea of if we are, you've seen those things where they go around and
interview Americans to show how sad it is about how dumb Americans are, they're again obviously not
showing, I'm sure the people who said the right answers didn't make it into the editing of the
clip, so it's again trying to show us a strawman version, but do we see a lot of young people
who think Africa is a country and can't name previous presidents and all like that? Yes,
there's a lot of that, so obviously our public education is not doing what it would need to
for something like democracy to make any sense at all, because what should the average person's,
like how much do we want to factor their thoughts on international relations if they think Africa is
a country? Well, that's always boggled me as all these new shows have rushed to be like hip
and online and like, who's tweeting what? And then they'll take social media things and they'll
be polling people and like, do you think Syria has weapons of mass destruction? So they're like,
how the fuck would you know? Like, why are you polling a body politic that is absolutely has
no access to the relevant information to ask what they think? And it's somehow considering that,
you know, up-to-date newsmaking is baffling to me. Okay, you're actually saying something else
really important. Not only is it clear that the people aren't getting educated enough for base
things like, like geography and history, right, not just even news and classified information.
So the education is not there, the news and their relationship to it is not there. And as we mentioned,
rather than a newspaper where everybody reads the same thing, you have a social media feed now
where everybody reads a personalized to them optimized for engagement, which is usually more
limbic than good thinking modes. So you have the like the social media thing isn't just the end of
the fourth estate, it's an anti-fourth estate, it exactly does the opposite effect of what the
fourth estate was supposed to do, which is rather than give everyone a unifying basis of information
to go to a town hall on, it gives everyone the certainty on stuff that is exactly opposite of
what the other people have certainty on and strawman villainized versions with a social contract
is broken. And if your greatest enemies are your other, are your other citizens of your same nation
and a democracy, that's the end of the democracy. So there's one way where there's the like the
McLuhan-esque scholars say that, like the guy at Center for Digital Life, that democracy is a
function of the written word being the dominant method of media. And that actually TV was the
beginning of the end of it and internet was completely the end of it. Because when the written
word was the dominant method, not only did you have everybody could have textbooks and you had
the enabling side in newspapers, but you also had people had to read long form to get any
information and they had to know how to write, right, if they're writing letters and sending them
via mail. The development of all of the modern democracies we have in that time, it meant you
had to be able to linearize your own thought, you had to be able to hold kind of longer thoughts,
read books, things that didn't have hypernormal stimuli. It's a very interesting assessment
that democracy, as we understood it, was the result of a particular way of info processing
that was mediated by a certain info processing technology without which that thing won't work
anymore. You can't do short attention spans in democracy because democracy requires being able
to hold many people's opinions and lots of conflicting information. And so that's one,
there's like three others, but I can see you thinking on that one that I was going to say of
like, what was unique to the founding time of democracy that isn't true anymore, where the
way we think about it moving forward has to update itself. Well, yes. And then just to give us a
little bit of elbow room on that, because my sense is, you know, you're effectively idealizing or
strongmaning a sort of age of the early republic where, you know, all citizens and voters were
sort of extended renaissance, well, you know, literate, competent thinkers and some version
of renaissance men at that time, just men. But, you know, I mean, being an American historian
myself, I mean, like those early republics, it was a fucking bear knuckles brawl. And they would
host keggers and get all the people wasted. And they'd throw barbecues and cookouts. Now put your
vote in for our buddy who just sponsored this, like there was all kinds of thumbs on the scale.
There was the Federalist Papers. There was all kinds of quote unquote, fake news and diatribes
between Madison and Mason and those guys and back and forth. And right. So I just think it is
important to understand that like democracy has always been a wild, chaotic, hopelessly messy
process versus some idealized origin state that we have fallen from grace and therefore can never
get back to, you know, to me, that almost gives us more resiliency now, being like, oh, these are
the mutations, these are the variations on the theme. But, you know, but this is there's continuity
versus a fall from grace as far as the narrative. I don't think that what I'm saying is that it was
that perfected thing. And I think what I'm saying is that the the narrative of how democracy should
work, it was being developed at that time was partly for political expediency and partly
based on real political philosophy and earnest thinking, right. And it's usually always a mix
of both. Because memes that are just based on earnest truth with no motive usually don't catch
on that well, because no one's that motivated to push them. And so we wrote this article in
Consentence Project called where arguments come from on the kind of think tank research industrial
complex of like, if there's an idea that is trending, there's probably somebody that cares
about it that is making a trend that funded all that research and did all the ongoing publishing.
And that that's not connected to what is simply the best idea anyone's ever had in the space.
And there's quite a few in there that we did that are relevant to these topics, the one on how
to mislead the facts is another relevant one on the people who get caught into biases that are
not the conspiratorial ones with the standard model ones and think that it's all fact check.
But so let's I'm just trying to take the earnest part of the philosophy of democracy
that was occurring and say that was the philosophy upon which the political thinkers were saying
this thing might work, right, is we could give everyone a good quality of education could give
them all news, and we could at least have a representative class that was very well educated
on the topics and the smallness of scale so the printing press the education thing.
And things like public education so that that was being insured for everyone which wasn't a thing
under most of feudalism, right. And it's a tripartite government term limits there was all
sorts of these fairly ingeniously constructed checks and balances effectively to nudge towards some
expression of the infinite game, right, the attention isn't definitive when and loss,
but to keep playing. Like they would I mean to me, the architecture, whether or not it's still fit
for purpose, you know, secondary question, but I mean, it does feel like the architecture was
surprisingly thoughtful. I think there are principles of the architecture that actually
are still fit for purpose so a different instantiation a different way that they play out so like,
I don't know if you've had Alexander Bard on he has a he's an interesting thinker in these ways
he has a interesting analysis of the three branches of government and that most every system of
governance that was stable long term had three things that were somewhat similar, like structurally
similar to a judicial executive and legislative branch. I think so I think things like
separations of power are trying to get to something deeper, which is avoiding centralized failure
modes, either from corruption or bias and blindness, right. And that doesn't mean we have to do it
through separations of power, like we could do it through something like computational methods
that allowed the transparency on the information provenance through the whole system and insurance
that all of the information was being processed with all of the relevant epistemologies.
But that wasn't possible then so simply checks and balances on power was how you prevented
centralized capture corruption or failure. Say that last sentence again.
Separating power into these various branches was ways of preventing centralized failure modes.
And they didn't just do three brands like the mad the mad king idea right just somebody going
totally off the rails and having unchecked power, or even the emperor has no close situation where
it's not that they're idiom mean and they're fucking have really really nasty but where they are
in a distortion bubble, where they have a bunch of yes men in a court around them they just can't
tell what's true and the thing is failing for those reasons right. So the idea of like, a centralized
system can have bad intent at the top, it can have mistakes at the top, it can have modes of
capture at the top for others who have bad intent weren't currently there. So let's just keep it
so there's some type of stability, and the two alone can't do that, which is why the two party
system gets so fucked is it ends up just driving polarization. So you have to be able to have
something like this three body problem of it, you know, having them check each other,
and they do different things. It makes sense that the judicial branch is optimized for
wisdom that can adjudicate where the letter and the spirit of the law are different not
optimized for everybody has a say. The creation of new law is optimized to go slowly representing
everybody and the ability to execute really quick shit that has to be quick has limits put in place
but there's a branch for it like like all that was smart. But I mean I would say it's I would make
the case that the thing that Trump did was he broke tripartite government, right. So he had
an attorney general and he just replaced attorney generals till they did his bidding although both
of his choices were more than happy to the legislative branch went fully in the tank. So
instead of the Senate bowing up on him and being like you're you're the rhino bro and we're going
to let you know that what this august institution will or won't do right now this gets back into
information ecology and doing an end run around public opinion via Twitter and a bunch of other
things and the judiciary which most people while people were raised tweeting about you know Trump's
latest inflammatory thing you know he and McConnell were packing the courts top to bottom
they posted more court appointments in three years than Obama did in eight and now Roe v. Wade
and all these other things we're now seeing you know in creating McConnell's utterly cynical
stalling tactics of appointments and this and that right you're now we don't have a tripartite
government and so and to me that was the most concerning thing 20 watching 2016 to 2019 I was
like oh shit this is now a decades long hangover this is not swapping out the guy at the top
every four years and yay we get our guy back in or anything like that this is now a systemic
rupture of any of the checks and balances that you just laid out in the theoretical model well
so this is we're saying two different things and I think they're both true and important we're
saying that even if the previous system was well intact it would be insufficient for various
reasons and we didn't start to lay out all those reasons but it would be insufficient we can say
things like we don't have ways of ensuring that the representatives are representing the people
because we don't have everybody going to town halls and because of smallness of scale type
issues and we don't and the fact that you would regulate after the fact because of the speed of
tech being so slow it doesn't work anymore so there's like a few things where it's like even
if that system was intact it's no longer an adequate system or the thing like it needed a
fourth estate to actually function well and it doesn't the other thing is that that system
isn't even intact right that system has eroded profoundly and so both of those things are
simultaneously true because it's eroded so profoundly we know some major changes to
governance are necessary and I because it's even if it hadn't it's no longer fit for purpose
in the exact way it implements itself even if some of the principles are right
thinking about well how would we rebuild now something that is aligned with the right kind of
principles that both create the kinds of regulations that are important without the
kinds of centralizations of power that are really problematic and I don't think it's an unreasonable
thought for anybody to say if we were even the most like founding father staunch person
doesn't think the founding fathers would have built it the same way if they built it today
exactly those guys brought here like printing press wouldn't wasn't the exciting information
tech right um and given the total amount of information to process and given all of the
changes like of course this current system would have a much deeper digital interface
everybody can't fit in a town hall anymore but everybody can't fit in the internet to be able
to directly input on things and um we can make identity as secure as we have for online banking
easily right that's already um secure to be able to do a lot of things differently so I the idea that
it we have to and can start to restructure the thing very deeply um I think is a pretty reasonable
thought okay well there's a lot there and in fact that that fella that I just mentioned who's in
DC politics who just came to our recent event was talking about parallel democracy movements
of you know and the idea of people starting to sort of spin up alternate ways of governance and
you've been working with the digital and direct democracy efforts you've you've referenced the
Taiwanese um expressions which is increasingly acutely relevant right now um I feel like you've
been hinting at a model do you want to just play this through and kind of lay out what you think
would be optimal I'm imagining there's some version of blockchain validations and security
and anonymity underneath it or not um you know again banks don't use it so we don't have to go
that way but what would your best take be in a quick sketch of some version of digital democracy
and then what how on earth would you pry the wheel away from the entrenched and potentially
corrupt or captured powers and interests that are running the old system
yeah it's tricky if we were to say how do you how do you design an ideal system from scratch
even if you come up with a good design obviously it'll probably be wrong but let's even say we
came up with a really good design how do you do enactments and this is where a lot of people
like the people in the teal circle become libertarian is there like your utopian ideals take so much
violence to enact and the presence of all of the vested interests that don't want them is it
still a utopia after you committed the amount of violence needed to enact it um that's the
shagovara paradox right yeah exactly when he starts out as a starts out as a as a as a bleeding
do-gooder you know doctor on a motorcycle and ends up capping people in the jungle
for a reason that we can empathize with like the process that took him in that direction right
but empathizing with doesn't mean want to repeat um and
the other so the the other direction is not design a perfect system and then be stuck with
enactment problems the other way is what is intelligible to the current system
that could vector it in the right direction and can those shifts converge to a new adequate thing
the forward and reverse engineering approach and i i like to do both of those and have them
in or inform each other because i do think there are certain risks that are clear and
eminent enough that they require acting and where the forcing function of them can make
certain action occur they can also move us in a fundamentally different direction um
i'm biting my tongue because it will it will take a lot to construct some of these things
let me let me construct one other thing first when i was saying that at the time of the
us democracy and the other kind of modern european democracies were roughly in a
similarish time but let's take the us democracy obviously the critique is also pretty clear that
the the political economy right you can't separate the government and the economic system
those things are embedded especially when it's something like liberal democracy that's trying
to make the market do most things it uh it did depend upon genocide and slavery right it was
not a political economy that worked without the most gruesome things and then it only we can only
kind of say slavery ended when you actually really look at the history of the peonage
indentured servitude system following and like that but also it was able to kind of start to end
because of fossil fuel slaves because of the industrial revolution and then this gets us
into the nate stuff we were talking about earlier which was oh now rather than extract from another
race we can extract from nature radically faster than is possible to produce enough abundance that
this kind of system works this is another one of the ideas of why this is a short term one of what
like whitney calls the carbon spike a very short period of time where the abundance went way up from
anything it had ever been where you can have people happier with whatever the system is because
you're creating so much distributed abundance of certain kinds that everyone feels like well at
least it keeps getting better every year but in a way that is fundamentally not continuous and
actually self-terminating yeah well I mean and that's worth talking about right because it's
because all modern political theory economic theory I mean I mean Friedman Hayek the shi
you know the austrian you name it any and you did all the way to canes and and and new economic
whatever the fuck quantitative easing just print more money because canes was basically like hey you
you can't ever print too much money provided you can deliver on the investments right but there
was that huge key asterisk of provided you can deliver on the investment right and so logical
consideration on that yeah and and but all of that was within that carbon pulse so it was basically
like we were trying to do sleep and physiology tests you know when everybody was given an eight
ball to go you know to go home for the weekend and you're like okay none of this is actually human
nature tests on a big what it's led yeah yeah yeah so so one of the things that Nate has said that I
think is is really memorable when you're talking about slavery right because because there is a
there is a strong argument Yale historian Edwin Morgan made it American slavery American freedom
he's like hey slavery is a central prerequisite yeah for attempting the experiment of democracy
it happened in Greece it happened in Rome it happened in the United States it's not until
you get to the mid 19th century with the advent of coal and steam power slavery and slavery and
genocide it wasn't an empty land you had to kill all the people that were here oh and then massively
extract all the crazy abundant natural resources which were one-time bananas also but but his point
is is that just in like right now today we are enjoying via the fossil fuel bump the equivalent
labor of 500 billion humans to support 8 billion or really more like more realistic to support 4 or 5
billion max right and and that 500 billion effectively you know units of manual labor or
enslavement are we're borrowing from our great grandchildren so we're effectively enslaving
the unborn to enjoy our current standards of living and just I everyone might not be clear on that
the the fossil fuel slaves you're talking about are that if caloric units of barrels of oil yeah
that are doing massive it would have been human work yeah so if you were to replace all the things
that are running on hydrocarbons the automation that's already occurred with human activity would
take about 500 billion humans to do to run the current materials economy yeah it's like
what comes to mind is like friends if you've got any friends that have ever posted up in Asia
and they live like Rajas you know in Kathmandu or or or India or Thailand or wherever and they've
got maids and they've got goddess and they've got all these things you're like we're all kind of doing
that yeah there's something called the global slavery calculator I don't know if you've used it
yeah but it you basically plug in your lifestyle details and it's not looking at carbon slaves
it's actually looking at humans that are in indentured servitude conditions that are making
your iPhones and that are mining the cobalt for the battery for your iPhone and basically saying
based on your lifestyle how many slaves I think 27 on average for an average American
meaning that many not just the fossil fuel slaves but actual people in indentured servitude equal
types of positions required to make the supply chain that your life depends upon
yeah it's gonna break right that thing doesn't get to keep happening that way for a lot of reasons
and the reckoning of that is really significant okay well this now brings us back to where we put
a pin in the map with that initial thread so we kind of jumped into sense making meaning making
post-covid information ecology etc now let's come back to Nate Hagan's our friend and colleague
on energy blindness is his general take which is hey you've got to include where are we pulling
all this juice from to create the substrate of the society we live on and then of course what are
the implications as we appear to be getting to peak cub and slash the downhill slide on the other
side um if you ask me like as i'm trying to run the numbers and i'd love your input i don't know
if you saw any of the stuff on Sri Lanka right which has recently gone through political instability
slash collapse Barry vice did a kind of snarky this is this is the problem with woke esg goals
this is what goes wrong and there's definitely a whole information you know warfare on woke esg
right like the coupling those two things together um and but and i think her i think her critique
was superficial and snarky because some additional kind of energy scholars that i was tracking was
like hey you know Sri Lanka was a more or less subsistence economy dirt poor of about seven
million people they got they got the world bank imf double whammy you know like let's give you
debt and investment and then you stop growing all your food and you start exporting more of that
kickass tea you guys make and we'll give you more return on your cash crop to then go and buy and
import the foods you actually need and the population ramped from seven to twenty one million
and then they were trying to get off pesticides and this is a gross simplification but this is
kind of more or less as i tracked it then that you know lately they've been made a couple of
efforts to get off high petrochemical high nitrogen npk fertilizer you know turbo industrial
agriculture that then has created a crash which was also mirrored in in uh holland in the netherlands
with like the dutch farmers you know protesting lately and driving tractors kind of like our
truckers convoys all these things happening but now you're at a situation where Sri Lanka as a
government as a people are potentially trying to do the right thing they're trying to get to
more sustainable farming but they're already addicted to the heroin of the global market economy
and dependent upon it therefore to get off it is going to create incredible suffering and that you
know most estimates where that the natural whatever that would mean carrying capacity of
their landmass is about seven million people so they're looking at you know a 14 million person
catastrophe even if they were to try to get back to anything resembling a sustainable um a sustainable
arc for a caring you know for a sustainable population but now isn't that just us at eight
billion people like i what i don't understand i mean do you read peter zion's book the end of the
world's just the beginning right so like if you take zion as one thumb if you take nate as another
throw in buck love schmiel and anybody else doing this kind of big metasystemic energy informed
analysis um is it not it feels like to me we've got two choices right we can oath either you know
the cousinets curve of like greater technological advancement creating decreased pollution over
time it's a question mark i don't think that is established canon by any stretch you know this
the papers i've seen have said that hey that was true for western europe and oecd countries
it's not proving out when you test the asian tigers when you test a bunch of other post 1950s
moves in that direction but nonetheless it's either we find a way to successfully navigate
off the top of this curve of the the carbon pulse onto something sustainable and renewable with all
the caveats and asterisks about what sustainable and renewable actually could or does mean you know
with lithium ion with windmills with all the high embedded energy shit we currently call renewable
and can we do that without without a total disruption to our socio-political economic
structures and can we do it in time to avoid an utter population crash and the erosion of our
capacity to innovate further the einstein's thing of you know the fourth if the third world wars
fought with nukes the fourth will be with sticks and stones like are we not heading to
that bifurcation because to me that seems like the monster bifurcation like you've got surveillance
states and catastrophe and a third attractor which seem beautiful but to me even before that even
more foundational is either we just hop off one sinking iceberg to land on the next as far as the
foundations of our energy economies or we suffer a population collapse of truly horrifying proportions
because if you look at all the population because they all hit the hockey stick mid-19th century
and and we're at a billion people at 1800 we're at eight billion has doubled in mine in your lifetime
so surely you take away npk fertilizers you take away genetically modified crops you take away
overtapped groundwater which is an you know I think Nate even used to have fossil aquifers
just I think just to indicate non-renewable millions of years to recharge kind of thing
are we not looking at a Malthusian horror show when and if we simply run out of oil
I think oil is a really good center point there are a few other ones that are not reducible to
oil when you are mentioning npk and Sri Lanka's issue there and what that did to population
obviously npk started with N just Harbor Bosch method and nitrogen fertilizer and we went
which was rocket which was rocket engine stuff for the Nazis for anybody planning along at home
that's wild military industrial complex shit but we went from I mean the green revolution
agriculturally in that way was as deep a part of the thing we can think of as like the beginning
of industrial revolution as using hydrocarbon energy it was used hydrocarbon energy and make
soil radically more productive in areas that it wasn't productive and productive for a very
narrow set of purposes meaning caloric consumption to grow open sustained populations so we went from
about a half a billion people at the beginning of that curve for the you know like however
three million years since the early things we call humans in hundred thousand years of current ones
ever to get to half a billion people and then half a billion to eight billion largely as the
result of being able to extract nutrients from soil faster than they replenish themselves
and those all that nitrogen of course also equals nitrogen affluent as it flushes out which
equals dead zones in the ocean which is very close to a catalytic tipping point level of being able
to make life inhospitable for any large number of people and so what we're looking at is we haven't
our economics has oriented to have everybody oriented to benefit themselves
where they will extract unrenewably and they will pollute unrenewably maximize extraction and
externality and the entire market system is oriented around maximizing extraction and
externality right maximizing profit the profit is an extractive measure revenue minus expense
how much you get out of the system more than you put into this is supposed to be a measure of
productivity how much did you add in terms of the value of putting those parts together but of
course that's not a suit that's not factoring that nature has a valent sheet and so it's very
important to understand that profit is as much a measure of extraction as it is of production and
we have to be we have to think about that more realistically it's like the Tolstoy quip in
Anna Karenina where she says behind every great fortune lies a theft yeah if you written writ
large right across our civilization you could make the case that behind you know behind our
abundance simply lies just externality so the Georgia guide stones were where I don't know
what the fuck happened they were blown up recently but you remember they said maybe a population of
half a billion that's the pre-hubberbush level of the you know that that was the pre-industrial
agriculture level of global population so some people look at it and say how many people can
the earth support sustainably well the most we empirically know is maybe around that number
no of course technology technology can create efficiencies they could make that number higher
but does it make it eight billion does it make it the projected numbers we're going to
those are very important real questions but let's also look at other fundamental stuff so we're
looking at energy but then the energy is mostly now moving some bits around in the digital world
but mostly moving atoms around in the physical world and it's important to understand that
where everybody's focused on we can keep growing GDP forever without hurting the earth because it'll
all be digital value now that's a nonsense idea because the digital infrastructure runs on a
physical infrastructure you need to do a lot of rare earth mining to make all of the computer chips
and you need to use a lot of energy to run the server farms and all that kind of stuff and ultimately
there's only people have a finite amount of time and attention to engage in content online and so
you do end up getting a diminishing return on how much like what how much of the economy can be
purely digital relative to the bits part relative to the energy and atoms part yeah we don't get
to eat we and we live in these meat suits and they are in 3d irreducibly so in the same way that we
have an issue on energy we also have a fundamental issue of atoms is that all of the atoms in the
materials economy are coming from unrenewable extraction and creating pollution and waste
unrenewably on the other side and so to close those atomic loops where all the new stuff comes
from old stuff and none of the old stuff turns into unrenewable waste or pollution and that the
energy required to run that closed loop cycle is sustainable energy those are like the beginning
requirements for the materials economy of how we live in relationship with the planet and of course
the closed loop means not only not just the minerals needed to make stuff but also that the
process of that acquisition is not destroying the species extinction and biodiversity loss and
like the biosphere that we inhabit what it so when you are energy informed or you're kind of like
biodiversity informed or you're like closed-loop materials economy pollution etc informed those
all look bad I mean I did read somewhere that we're only like someone was talking about closed
loop renewables and battery recycling right to just to just electrify all of our transport and
they were saying we're only at something like a quarter of the extracted and converted stock
of batteries to be able to be in that reach so we still need to do like three to four x more
mining before we even have the stock to engage in indefinite recycling demand amount of today not
at the demand amount of three to four years from now on an exponential growth curve up okay well
so so talk to me about because one of the things yeah yeah and one of the things that Peter Zion
for anybody following along that that book the end of the world is just the beginning which
came out a couple of months ago this kind of kick hit public saturation one of his major
tubs to thump is demographics right what is happening to the aging of populations everywhere
around the world in particular hottest hit probably China basically his thesis is the
faster you modernized the basically the steeper the cliff so England took four generations Germany
took three japan took two so they've all got some buffered edges to their demographic codes but the
the asian tigers the china crazy ramp up of the post you know obviously isolated communist era
those guys are all just running off the cliff and a billion chinese are going to be 600 million
within a few decades and then that completely erodes the worker capacity the economic output
gdp etc etc and potentially even the viability of all of these nation states um elon musk has been
you know tweeting about this of course it's mostly not been taken in context to get sensationalized
with he's having all these babies with all these women and that kind of stuff but but how do you
reconcile those because to me when when elon's like we should have more babies i think what he's
really saying is we should have more super genius montessori kids and less poor starving kids in
sub-saharan africa right i mean i'm absolutely putting words in his mouth they may not be right
but when you've got a demographic critique like zions and you know just think of yourself as the
ccp or anybody any government you know sweden i think where somebody in scandinavia is actually
trying to sponsor dirty weekends for couples like literally will pay for you if you conceive
over the weekend because our demographics are tanking as well so it's clearly a you know almost
national security issue of how do we have more people to keep this train going how do you reconcile
that with the flip side what we just talked about which is potentially that a stable carrying
capacity of this planet absent excess fossil fuel you know wattage is half a billion a billion to
take your pick but somewhere radically less than what we're talking about now and it's clearly based
on near decimation not extension or expansion of our global population because it just feels to me
like the people who are focusing on each one on including the other perspective correct the
when you make a system that is dependent you make a global system or would we then depend
upon it but it is dependent on a unrenewable process you're gonna have a problem because at a
certain point to substrate that that system is depending upon says the system has to change and
yet we've made a lot of other things dependent upon that system and that's what we have in a lot
of ways right now we we can't not keep growing global GDP exponentially with our financial
system being what it is because where it was it was supposed to be that there were goods and
services that were exchanged and then we figured out a way to make an amount of currency that
indexed the value of goods and services it's very hard to figure out exactly how many goods and
services are being created so at a certain point you get central banks and a Bretton Wood monetary
system and you just basically say the financial system now has its own mechanics people are
lending money whether it's just putting in a savings account and the bank does that or
it's traditional that or whatever they need interest on that money back because they're
they're letting someone else use their productive capacity rather than use it themselves in which
case they would grow it so the financial system now has its own physics where it has to grow
just to keep up with interest not also factoring the other reasons it has to grow in terms of
more advanced types of debt and and money printing and things like that but just to keep up with
interest compounding interest means you get an exponential growth curve to not deflate the
value of that currency that means you have an exponential demand on the physical earth which
both means energy and raw materials and given that that's been coupled to population that also
means a continued demand on the people being able to do the people parts of that material economy
to do the people parts that's nice well if you know Elon talks about a factory being a cybernetic
system ultimately this whole thing is a cybernetic system where it's the tools are complicated not
complex they don't make themselves but it just defines cybernetic system a complex control system
that like an artificial control system that in this case involves human elements and technological
coordination of those human elements and so as soon as you realize the people make the tools the
tools don't make themselves they're not self-replicating the way that animals or people or plants are
but the people make the tools and then the tools predispose patterns of human behavior to get them
to make more tools because the people who make and use the tools get ahead relative to the ones
who don't so then everybody has to and etc so the people make the tools the tools end up controlling
patterns of human behavior that system as a whole that is the tool human system that the tech stack
human system is a complex cybernetic system and Nate calls it the superorganism Benjamin Bratton
calls it the stack you know we've called it the paperclip maximizer or moloc but it so since humans
are part of that cybernetic system and that cybernetic system has an embedded growth obligation
our friend Eric Weinstein's term that he popularized they're embedded a growth obligation to
exponentiate its output you need an exponentiation of the population well that was easy because it
was being built on a time where the population was growing exponentially but then you required
exponential growth of all those things and you get to a place where the limits of growth which is
why that was a good term for that book back in the day the limits of growth don't let it keep doing
that thing but now what would it mean to have a financial system or a way of mediating exchange
of value and property rights and access to things that doesn't involve interest we would
we don't know anything that is like would is there's nothing in play to change that currently
and so yeah where's Bono when you need him we just need forget Africa we need global debt
forgiveness we just need a quick reset and now before the removal of Glass-Steagall that might
have seemed like a good idea right before radical deregulation because the idea hey there's radical
wealth inequality it must be all of the like super duper billionaires who have the money and
are loaning it to everybody else so let's just do debt forgiveness and only the uber wealthy will
get kind of fucked in that everything else will be better that's not true now because of the deregulation
everybody's retirement funds when we're talking about government employees and teachers therefore
a 1k is being lent out and so if you do that debt jubilee everyone's retirement is gone
and they don't know how to run their life and work as old people and so the system is really set up
to be hard to change yeah well listen i want to talk to you about this because a this is deep
nerd so anybody listening along we are in deep nerd land and and i i mean i i love it and i love
to get to ask you the kind of questions i don't get to ask too many folks um and if you know um
there's that film that came out on netflix it's one of david akbers like a couple of years ago
called breaking boundaries and it's a complete departure from his normal look at all the pretty
animals and it's with yoan rocstrom uh rocstrom from the potsdam climate institute which is arguably
one of the most credible um you know institutions in that space and and rocstrom is basically just
describing you know nine parameters or whatever it is around the world tipping point kind of
you know gauges to be watching and where do we stand in each of them and and and he then came
and presented to our friends amary levins and the rocky mountain institute folks and one of his and
therefore rmi's assumptions as of last year i think was we are effectively going over the falls
in the barrel we came in and so much of your critiquing analysis is this is self terminating
this is self terminating that's self terminating these are all inescapable generator functions
of demise the only solutions are for us to reinvent education reinvent capitalism or economies
reinvent politics and governance so run the thought experiment with me i hear what you're saying
and you know the logic is fairly tight other than humans have always muddled along with these
imperfect situations and conditions and institutions but if you take that we're going over the falls
in the barrel we came in what's your prognostication like we are who we are we have our goofy dysfunctional
captured government we have our wacky inflation incentive economics we are who we are we are
products of our time and place and the inertia to our existing way of living um exceeds our
trim tabs to you know to borrow one of bucky fuller's notions um ability to do this so what's your
sense realistically other than somehow having this confab of world leaders and thinkers that
just suddenly decided enough's enough and we need to rebuild everything simultaneously from scratch
right what's your actual sense of capacity to go over the falls in this barrel we're in
yeah so there's a lot more things that we should construct about the other
non-reducible things that are not able to continue that the system depends on
their self-terminating because then it gives us an even deeper sense of what has to be reconstructed
i i won't go down these rabbit holes but let me just mention briefly we were talking about the
problem of the financial system having an exponential embedded growth obligation that is
connected to a materials economy that where you just can't do that on a finite planet with a
open loop materials economy but the financial system also even deeper if you have your assessment
of value all quantitative and a single quanta right dollars then the value of everything that is
qualitative gets converted to quantitative what will the market bear and all different
metrics get converted to a single metric how much of this person's creativity this original
rembrandt how many copper how much for this animal's life and it's all dollars so what that means now
is like the real question of can i convert tons of co2 into saved rhinos or less parts per million
of mercury in the ocean or higher quality of life for old people or like no they're fundamentally
different things those quanta are those those metrics are uninterchangeable with each other
but when you determine the market-based value of all of them in a single metric then rather than
maintain each of them with their own accounting and logic that they need where you maximize
extraction externalization is where the logic of the dollars ends up operating because if i value
something that doesn't give me more dollars i lose economically to those who only value things that
are quantifiable extractable exchangeable then they have more power in the system so those that have
the most perverse value system end up winning and determining the system so the future system
won't have something like a single fungible metrified currency that's really fucking different that's
so different right because then if you say okay well we'll have lots of different currencies for
different things well if there's an exchange between them then you end up still getting one
quantified i mean one one fun thing so choose your reserve currency that that everything
it is scissors so that's an example again of like oh the the future things we're talking about
are really really different and there are so many of these and it's important if we're going to try
to talk about how to design a future because if we if we were just talking about these issues that
we've talked about so far regarding the global mega machine and energy and like that and we weren't
recognizing that we're within a single digit number of years from tabletop gene synthesizers
in basements which actually i think gets us to globalizing catastrophes faster than these other
globalized things do we wouldn't have to focus on regulating exponential tech that fast or the
exponential tech applied to ai applied to population centric kind of warfare and mind control so
it's all this shit at once right and that's the important thing most everybody gets overwhelmed
with one of them and then over indexes everything on that thing and but the solution to that thing
makes other problems worse most of the time sure but this this is this is the schmucktenberger
effect right like like listening to you and listening to your credible running down all the
threads and all of them being self-terminating my sense as let's say just as a listener right is
like i either slit my wrists or i gather my loved ones and i fuck off to the deep woods
because none of this is solvable given how we've done so far yeah i think it is solvable actually
and so thank you for bringing this up um something i find interesting in the current
thinking environment as you mentioned of everybody being kind of deeper and not clear
thinking rabbit holes one of the other things i've noticed is that it's very common for people
currently to go from high epistemic certainty to when that's challenged adequately epistemic
nihilism in one step like they're super certain about whatever the thing is regarding um covid or
climate change or institutional racism or whatever and if some and mostly they're closed to having
their challenge thinking they're they're thinking challenged at all but if you do adequately challenge
it including the solution that they have hope in because as you know that as you bring up people
need hope if you challenge the hey renewables aren't going to get us there in time to solve the
climate change problem because dot dot dot or whatever it is they go to i don't fucking know
what's true and but not like a hmm that's interesting let's work on that and figure it out
but like a give up right in nihilism and you can't go from certainty to nihilism and possibly
have any chance of being a part of the solution or being part of solution and you have to be able
to say i don't have anything close to adequate certainty but that also means i don't have adequate
certainty that the whole thing is inexorably fucked i i should i should not have certainty
about what the right answer is but i also shouldn't have certainty there's no answer those are both
unfounded and so i should say the unknown unknown set is pretty large there's a lot of
shit i don't know and there might be a lot of solutions in there if i don't know the problem
space well i won't even know how to recognize them because i'll think the thing that just solves the
tiny part of the problem space i currently know is a good answer and it externalize and harm somewhere
so i need to actually be willing to engage in understanding the problem space better so i
can recognize good solutions and then i have to be engaged in working hard to figure out what those
might be so i think the people like people's willingness to sit in not certainty and work
harder really important and that's that that's just worth emphasizing right sort of agnostic
optimism yes i don't fucking know yes right and i'm keeping the faith regardless faith is a key
word i don't think we have any chance without something like a faith and it's not a faith that
god will figure it out and i don't have anything to do right it's not a 2012 will make us all
higher dimensional light beings or jesus will come back and fix it or the new version of jesus
will come back and fix it which is the agi will become superintelligence who have been able to
and fix it all for us um those types of faith are totally pernicious and dumb and the and the
atheist movement get rid of them for the obvious smart reasons they're a child's faith right but
there was a kind of faith that every innovator had that a solution might be possible that a new
discovery might be possible that had them work in the presence of the unknown so hard to find
something and it's a faith in possibility not uncertainty not in the specific thing right
there is no such thing as like real invented innovative work that doesn't have a faith at the
center of it um and so i would say i don't know if this is exactly true but i'm i heard from gene
houston once when she did her did her phd thesis was like the helped kick off the human potential
movement back in the day and then she studied 50 of the top creative polymath geniuses at the time
looked at their psychology and wanted to see do they have anything in common that the rest of
population doesn't have in common that is developable it could be the basis of a future education
human development system and she studied bucky fuller and margaret mead and linus pauling and
jonah sock and like the fucking great luminaries at that time and the first of the quality she said
she noticed that they all had in common was that they all had an extremely positive emotional
valence associated with failure and you see that there's like a kind of sad superficial version of
this silicon valley has taken called move fast and break things um but there there was a deep
thing she said when she talked to bucky and asked him what does it mean if you're failing that he
started rocking in his chair and smiling and he closed his eyes and he said it means that there's
an intimacy with nature that i have because i'm working at the edge of human knowledge i'm working
on touching nature in the cosmos in a way no one ever has because if people already knew how to do
the thing i wouldn't fail i would just implement the recipe i'm only failing because i'm working
at something nobody knows how to do and there's something so ennobling and honoring and beautiful
in that and that's a different relationship to failure right and most people have and that's
what makes a bucky or a jonah sock versus most people and if we started to have now this is one
of those things in terms of like population centric do i think that those people rather than
representing extreme outliers on the right of the bell curve that we could actually move the whole
bell curve to have more people functioning in similar ways i do believe this and well dude
interestingly random apropos this is the new bucky filler biography
inventory of the future which just came today and i just i just read the quick book review and it
turns out that he's fundamentally like most of his the prior biographies are kind of hagiographies
by by disciples and this one is more of an even-handed one and it's just a very very
mixed more complex picture of bucky filler the man who turned out to potentially be a bit of a
kind of a gas-lighting womanizing cantankerous misanthrope as well so so just you know just
for us to all give i mean if nothing else right to give ourselves broke-ass permission to do our
partial humble fallible bests and not think that we can't all attain some of those qualities that
that gene chieftain was it was described because like everybody's banged up broken and partial and
still can make it make a positive dent in the universe yeah i think that's a i think that's
super important i do think i haven't seen that book i'd be curious uh be curious to see it
i had a i definitely had a process with many of my heroes growing up whether it was
mahamma ghandi or mlk or whatever that when i got the more kind of real politic biographies
it was less purely rosy than the thing i had thought and that was actually really good right
because of the point you mentioned that someone can be pretty fallible have a lot of damage and
still actually do incredible work and that doesn't mean that we should not work to take
responsibility to really try to clean that shit up in ourselves but it does also mean that we
shouldn't take the presence of those things in ourself or others as a limiting factor of the
possibility of meaningful contribution yeah absolutely i mean that that's why we kind of
playfully coined that term 80 20 it woke into broken like like the fact it will always be
in that that is our planks constant is just 20 fucked up human we will always be that and then
and then the plug i always make for nancy keen's book she's the harvard business school historian
her book forged in crisis which is detrick von bonhoeffer rachel carlsson frederick douglas
shackleton and lincoln and just these this really beautiful contrarian set of biographies of their
moment of crisis and challenge and why they're in the history books and that they were just
scared shitless flying blind going on their best guess and just the profound humanity
of these historic figures and how they shape the course of history but they did it from
incredibly humble mortal fallible positions that after the fact after that all the dominoes toppled
in the right way we can look and see as destiny or history and then sort of absolve us from being
part of that same process so it just feels really important to kind of ground ourselves in our
broke-ass humanity and willingness to try anyway it's it's interesting because
you know a lot of the people listening here probably are pretty interested in their own
growth as people and that's why whether it's how do they eat healthier and take better supplements
or do the right meditations and psychotherapy or study the right topics they're interested in
how to be a more whole complete person and part of the motivation of that is it's just intrinsically
valuable for the quality of life and how they contribute to their family but also the idea
that they will be in a better position to contribute to the world from there which is true
but it's also interesting to notice in those biographies and even more extreme cases with
Churchill and you know so many others you see people that contributed in really profound ways
who were like more broken than average right right not very personal development oriented at all
and there there is an interesting thing where like if if someone finds puts themselves or finds
themselves in a position where things of real consequence can be influenced by their behavior
that can that can up level of person in really profound ways and it still doesn't clean up all
of those things but it can clean up some of them and or motivate them to transcend it enough
and yet it can also end up having that all the good things you're doing are a little bit damaged
and polluted by some of the things those things simultaneously there is no end to the personal
growth work to be like now I have arrived and I can start making contributions to the world because
I can unwind my own patterns kind of forever so there is a thing where it's like the way I
orient to it is there's a sense of Dharma of how my life is connected to dependent on and thus
must be in service to the greater world and what is my calling there and how do I get actively
engaged in that and then a major part of my personal work is where is there shit in the
way of me doing a really good job and whether it's a really good job in my family or in my community
or in whatever the larger scaled work if I have that is and so it doesn't have kind of the infinite
solipsism of just personal work but it also doesn't have the working on the world in a way
where your own blind spots keep getting in the way and one thing I would say is
everybody has blind spots by definition I can't see some things about myself that other people
can see about me so if you want to not have your life if you want to not harm things that you care
about because of blind spots you can't see fucking get people that you trust that know
you will point out your blind spots continuously like that's one of the very best things I can
say is no amount of self-inquiry though you should do lots of it will give you the same
thing that other people's feedback can and this doesn't mean listen to everything that every
hater says and take it all to heart but it does mean buying people that know you well and who
give you really honest full feedback but there's an interesting thing so everybody has blind spots
it's really good to get a feedback mechanism and work on them it's not true that everybody has
defended blind spots in the same way and personality disorders have deeply defended blind spots
and that's the thing and that's their psychological trauma that creates it but I would offer
there have been people who've contributed a lot to the world with major personality
disorders because narcissism makes you want to do great things
um and you know sometimes external validation seeking is a strong fucking motive to do great
things um but bain and company the management consulting firm similar to mckinsey right has
actually they they've they've had explicitly in their internal documents seeking early candidates
on track for partner that are a little a little destabilized and have a little hole to fill
they actually right they want people who are seeking external validation to compensate for
internal relax they're going to work harder and or in you want that in the um executive positions
and entrepreneurial positions you want people that are codependent enough to not have boundaries
and just take everything you put on them in the employee positions um so there's there's a bunch
of interesting things there there's a very cynical but pretty true take of that some smart tier one
venture capitalist silicon valley venture capitalists that the main thing they're actually
betting for is not the technology but the intelligent sociopathy or dark triadness of
the founder they will hear out how to win at all costs while pretending that the real thing that
they're investing in is some kind of like takes making the world a better place yeah um but if
you want to win then you bet on people who are really dedicated to winning um and which is which
is externalities of the relational web like i'm willing to i'm willing to take the profit right
of my social capital and my exchanges and never mind the cost of an of a solid thriving social web
right we have companies set up to privatize their gains and socialize their losses that
there's a perverse incentive on the structure of the innovation very very deeply um but i was going
to say so that so someone can do a lot in fact there might even be more people who made the
history book with deep personality disorders than not that said that's where you start getting really
questionable there were a lot of positives and a lot of deep negatives mixed in with it so i would
say in terms of how you want to how people want to orient themselves and who else to trust because
everybody has some brokenness but those who are really willing to look at it want to look at it
don't give don't give very defensive reactions when it comes up and then take real accountability
to change it are doesn't mean they'll be perfect are definitely more worth trusting than those who
have a defensive answer or an excuse whenever those things are brought up and don't actively
seek and receive those well um and so i would offer yes except that even in the presence of
brokenness you can do meaningful things and wherever you get feedback about brokenness
really work on addressing it and in fact actually actively seek input from people close to you
where you don't get super devastating because you're like that isn't even me in my essence that's
a weird shit that happened in my childhood that's whatever it is me in my essence is the self that
wants to transcend that right that's to me that doesn't want to be an asshole who feels bad when
people tell me i come off as an asshole sometimes or whatever it is if that was really me i wouldn't
even be bothered or want to change it i'd be a piece of it the only reason i'm even bothered by
that is because it's dissonant with my true nature so i want to see it so i can take responsibility
to work on it well yeah i mean you gave me some feedback from that recent gathering where it was
effectively some some version of i sort of seemed like a not a great listener kind of add and and
and often changing the topic or spicing things up and because that i was like yeah totally that's me
and and i didn't there was zero i was like oh bring it like if this is it if this is all it is
i could take this all day long and i can for sure apologize to anybody that didn't feel
heard in a conversation but i was like oh no that's that's me without a doubt so you and i
made agreement as friends that if we had that experience with each other or if we heard other
people bringing that stuff up we bring it to each other i think that's actually like a minimum
requisite of real friendship like a critical thing is yeah i'll actually be honest with you
yeah and and and i am grateful for that i mean for me i always just think of you know physical
metaphors but like i i appreciate being able to bow onto the mat with you and train even at full
contact although i don't think we very rarely get to full speed but but even even relatively vigorous
attack you know for for us to you know train with and learn from versus where we're getting into
interpersonal challenges and let's just talk about the global x-risk sense making all you
know all the all the community all the communities that kind of overlap in our works um my senses is
we're terrible at playing well together and and i held out somewhat naive assumptions that oh if
people could only do circling or some other dialogical process or if people learned and take
fill in the blank of nv you know nvc non-violent communication nlp neuro-linguistic programs
circling authentic communicating whatever whatever we would all be better at it but it seems like
we're just all that does is just um make the obvious glitches in our personality structures
and or power dynamics and negotiations it just sends them underground and it just wraps them in
swaddling cloth and it becomes hotter and hotter to actually get to the heart of things so so um
i'm aware we're you know we're we're going into a lengthy chunk of time let me just check to see
how much time you have left because i would imagine anybody plugging into this channel
would be psyched to hear you you know hear your conversations um or you know and so i've got three
things left and i'll just choose whether we do three or we do one let's do them we're here okay um
so so the first then is um you know how do we maintain good faith and and i was just there was
some nature program on pods of orcas and it was just talking about how the orcas have additional
folds in their brains for social cognition and coordination so on the one end you've got these
badass apex predators they kick ass they're smarter than great white sharks right they are
literally kind of arguably the kings and queens of the ocean and super smart cetaceans big brains
and have extra folds specifically for social coordination we feel like at least when you
talk about the kind of quote unquote thought leaders clever people you know as burger kids
building models in the universe galaxy brain take your pick of you know what indicators you
want to describe it feels like there's a bunch more lone wolves than orchids right so so sort of
the lone wolf it could be cats it could be tigers line whatever but they need 400 square miles of
territory for themselves and they might come up against each other at the edges of their territory
and they might sniff each other out but end of the day they want to they they cannot become pack
animals coordinated pack animals they they will fight or they will retreat to the center of their
territories so what is your sense this is a goofy tea up to a very heartfelt question which is
how do we become more like orcas and less like lone wolves so that we can coordinate more effectively
together because on the psychosocial level that to me has been a staggering and saddening fail
point that i've just watched again and again over the last five to ten years and we're not even into
the hot stuff yet i think is external pressures get harder the coordination gets easier in many ways
i think you know you wouldn't have seen some of the alliances that happened in world war two
if it wasn't for world war two and so that's one thing i think when you're the specific people
you're mentioning are mostly not exclusively but mostly they're non institutional thinkers
or thinkers who are focused on the topic of what's wrong with our total global institutions
so even if they happen to be at an institution like fhi or fli or something like that they're
still in a different position than most of the institution which is they're looking at what is
wrong with the world system including the academy system the research system whatever so the people
that are most oriented to kind of see what is wrong with the system are probably not people who
it's different than the people who developed say inside of an academic system as thinkers
are looking for iterative improvement but not looking at it as fundamentally broken and thus
are conditioned in a way to be able to collaborate through peer review journals and through conferences
and whatever with other people in their fields so i don't i mean i would say academic collaboration
is also really fucked but the that you're bringing up is a uniquely challenging case
because i think anybody who is saying everything that we know is inadequate then typically if they're
oriented to do that they've spent a long time thinking about well what would an adequate way
so there's not some existing traditional frame they trust that they will say can adjudicate
our differences with each other or can give us a basis to collaborate now sometimes that's because
of a weird disposition they had to begin with i'm smarter than everyone i don't trust anyone i always
know what's right right it's like the woundedness of the gifted child based in a nutshell sure yeah
and this is one of the tricky things is if you have someone who's really smart and sees a lot
of things that other people don't see and they're used to every time that i brought this up with
people and they knew i was wrong i ended up proving that i was right and they have real examples of
that it then gets over generalized where it isn't true and they can't see their own blind spots and
where people give them feedback about their blind spots or whatever it is they're still sure that
they're right and that everyone else is miss assessing right so i would say sometimes those
people had a disposition that brought them into that place and that's challenging the other thing
is even if they didn't so one thing i'd say is what brought someone to the place what was the
generative process inside of them that brought them to the place of looking at what is wrong with
the world and how do we need to redo it from scratch if someone is in that place that the
process that got them there is worth looking at then the next thing is what is the what effect
did that have on them right independent of what what cause brought them to that effect what effect
did that have on them of looking at the actual real tragedies of the world the catastrophic
problems not thinking that the authorities have it dialed in trying to take responsibility on it
there end up being a lot of frustrations and and pressures and scars and sadness and whatever
that comes from that and then if they're if they're trying to make sense of that it's probably
because they're trying to do something so they're probably overwhelmed busyness wise so they just
don't literally have the time they need to model sync with other people um so there's a number of
factors that are involved um i i would say i've actually had the experience of feeling very
in hardened and hot okay yeah i've had the experience of being like at first when i first
started diving into the planetary boundaries catastrophic risk fundamentally new thinking
on governance economics culture tech etc i would say i was naively hopeful that everyone who stated
that they had those values did and would work nicely together in the presence of the magnitude
and timeline of the issues and i would say i was pretty devastated by bad experiences in that way
but then that was part for the course because i was just under informed and that was part of
learning and then i've also been in hardened at how many people who have spent their whole life
thinking about things are willing to update their frameworks and do want to work together and are
motivated for these things even if through some traumas also out of real genuine care and love
and desire for the world and how as things are getting worse in some ways i'm actually seeing
more genuine collaboration emerging so yeah i experienced both of those yeah that's interesting
as you describe that because i've had a very schizophrenic experience too like i'll go to
events conferences gatherings and it's usually one or the other right it's either oh this is an
irreparable shit show everything i was pinning my hopes on is is turning to ashes fuck i go home
just being like okay now i'm going to the woods but then they're equal a number of opposite
gatherings and where where i'm profoundly heartened and inspired and it's all and i think i mean this
is i'm just thinking this out loud right now but i think the difference is is the people that really
give me hope are the people who have put their stake in the ground at any level of the stack it
could be education it could be animal welfare it could be sustainable farming it doesn't matter it
could be pick any single spot they found their place and they're doing their pot and there's
almost always a self-effacing humility even if they're doing global global scale things and they are
just phenomenally inspired self-effacing humans and the ones that typically break my heart share
my gut so the ones who are holding out some inflated sense of their importance or their role
and just never get off the dime on coordinating so in some respects it's almost um it's almost
people overreaching for too much complexity too much scope too much mandate and yet they
haven't really put their stake in the ground versus the people who are simply going to where
they are most called and they are in in some respects sort of surrendered to their dharma
you know to that to that the part that is there is to do does that track for you yeah it does and
there is a correlation but it's not like a exact correlation so i want to add a dimension to it
that i see like when you were you said something about like where you put your hope or where your
hope is derived from or something and i i find that the thing where like where my hope is derived
is totally invisible i can't go to a group anywhere and say we're going to make it through the
metacrisis because of what i'm seeing here um because this person who's doing unbelievably
beautiful work and conservation of wilderness doesn't even know about ai risk and their
conservation work is completely earnest and amazing and has saved all these species and nobody
even knows about them but it's also not on track for all the conservation that needs to happen even
close and they don't even know how to think about that and they don't know how to think about a
financial system that needs to turn all that wilderness into paperclips and um i think of
joe brewer right down in columbia just just posting these endlessly hopeful but honest sometimes raw
updates on just trying to restore a little patch of forest in columbia i'm like thank you you know
and similarly there are people who i think are doing very good work on say an area of synthetic
bio risk and the fact that the work they're doing isn't that the right rate equations for what's
happening globally or doesn't factor some of the underlying game theory that is needed or
so i find hope in those things but i don't find anything like comprehensive hope where i can say
and even if i take a few of them i don't say this plus this plus this equals adequate solution in time
so the hope is more that like there are more things that i'm seeing that are
not sufficient but are necessary emerging in more places that the convergence towards
sufficiency is something i can feel but i can't see it
um well let's can we talk about that can we unpack that because because that was the thing
i wanted to end with was what we had talked about um you know in our prep call for this which was
what breaks your heart right now and what gives you hope and and i'm and we whether we've covered
the what breaks your heart we you could touch back on it if relevant but if not you have said to me
and and i you know in my most intimate thoughts conversations with my partner julie and and you
know and close close friends i mean i orient right to some kind of upbeat optimism even though my
situational assessment is fairly grim and you've described some long arc of history consciousness
cosmology something something something where you kind of have a rooted faith yeah that it works out
yeah now walk me through that the how and the why of that and then also because i just wrote a book
taking you know taking the air out of all hockey stick rapture ideologies how are how are these
convictions of ours that it all works out in the end not just blind faith right not succumbing to a
happily hopeful ever after rapture ideology of like and then some inflection point and then
we're all saved whoever's you know the elect and identified as such um what's the difference between
blind faith and radical hope and how do you and how do you steer your way between those two
and it's fine if there's a if there's an appeal to metaphysics is you know we're
just because as long as we tag that transition i'm happy to play into that space as well i don't
want to be just a reductionist materialist nihilist existentialist although i can go there
on a bad day yeah okay a few things i want to go back and say one thing but i want to
because i think what you're saying right now is a good place for us to end so i want to complete
one part because it'll be useful on the people who give you hope versus the ones that more
break your heart and and so i was saying there are a lot of people where i feel hope in terms of
the importance of what they're doing right the fact that what they're doing is necessary is is
effective as well motivated is any of those things that the collection of those things is not
sufficient there's still a big delta of what has to happen that isn't happening
i can't see the hope in a place right but i can feel something like a convergence and i can talk
about why i feel that but the other thing was that you were saying you know that there are people
who kind of won't put their stake in the ground because they have a self-inflated importance
of what their role is or i think there can be a correlation that those who are thinking about
more complexity might also have
special types of ego challenges because they want nothing to be outside of their domain of scope
they don't want to trust that anyone else has other issues that they that they need to have
the totalizing solution for everything or and or their work has to include and transcend everyone
so that they have the their work is the most important and so whether it's that they can't
trust anyone or whether it's that they want to be at the top of the stack of importance or whatever
there's no question that like certain types of psychologically problematic dispositions can orient
people towards thinking about the whole and someone can also think about the whole in long
term because of being oriented towards abstraction rather than the physical instantiation because
they're just pretty disconnected and disembodied and they actually don't feel real empathy they have
just like some abstract sense of utilitarian calculus or whatever right there's plenty of
reasons that someone can be a big picture thinker for not great reasons but that's not always the
case and i also think that some people doing that work well is really important and not more important
than people doing the conservation work or the vial risk work or being exceptional nurses
but also critically important and i don't necessarily expect them to have their stake
in the ground be advancing something that has some clear metric in some part of it it might be
advancing insight about why those other processes are insufficient but is still helpful for that
other field to grow or how they're interconnected which is helpful for those fields to communicate
with each other so i want people who are thinking at high levels of abstraction and i want other
people whose sleeves are rolled up working on things i actually want all those things and i
have seen plenty of people who are in a specific domain not thinking about the whole thing that is
a sleeves rolled up domains it still have plenty of problematic ego dispositions there's plenty of like
dark triad middle managers and major NGOs that are focused on the environment or animals or
whatever else and so i i just i don't want to have the sense that if someone is thinking about
things at scale and communicating that knowledge that that always equals not that important or
not good at collaborating or not putting their stake in the ground i think both are really important
and actually having recursion between people doing on the ground work other people thinking
about that theoretically across more spaces giving feedback seeing if their feedback is
actually implemented on the ground that type of recursion is really good and that's where
my faith is in kind of like collective intelligence and curves of collective intelligence that don't
live in any of the parts that really are behavior of the whole not many of them and what's interesting
is collaboration is possible with people's output even if they suck at collaborating
um they can still if they create artifacts if there's if there's bodies of content or
information that are then accessible in the public domain or right there there are some
brilliant scientists and thinkers who are impossible to collaborate with but who put
information out that helps advance collective intelligence so they have a role to play too
um yeah i mean to me to me i i even not jotted this down as this notion of sort of agonistic
confederate confederation you know and i think you and i exchanged an email
18 months ago where i was sort of like hey you know the funny thing is about all of our different
dramas is that virtually none of us would sign up for each others right we we sort of like i'm
like dude your conciliance project it's amazing but i don't think you're going to beat qanon
with a better wikipedia page you know or tristan you know working on the social dilemma and this
kind of stuff i'm like thank you that's fantastic i think it's it's tragically doomed and i think
we probably think that about each other's stuff but at the same time without a doubt right would
like we'll be fighting the good fight and scanning the battlefield at the end of the day
to see your banner still flying and we'll be deeply cheered and and galvanized if it is
so to me that that notion and maybe this goes all the way back to you how did we reinvent
democracy you know is is that notion and this i borrow this from uh john gray at london school
of economics but that notion of agonistic liberalism the idea that we're not going to
get to combine our consensus that any utopian singular monolith descends to fascism in its
enforcement and that can we tolerate the diversities of our dramas and can we celebrate the differences
can can there be a confederation of the humanity involved while there is absolute multiplicity
of approach um and can can we celebrate that a little more versus creating you know factions
and divisions because we don't agree on the 11th decimal point of our proposed solutions
i think it's easy to say yes to that enthusiastically at a superficial level and i think there's a
lot of devils in the details um because like the idea that everybody who is pretty certain
that they're right about something that history is unkind to their certainty
and that it turns out that they were more wrong factoring more things that were unknowable at
the time and so the idea that at least pluralism that can at least make us less certain about any
particular subset is good like okay sure i totally agree with that that said some people will have
relatively better certainties than others where the decimal point really matters on things like
like can we do like this is very alive right now can we do a limited nuclear exchange that won't
create nuclear winter and won't lead to full-blown strategic um escalation or breakdown of global
supply chains and that that's actually a good way to go or can we not do that the difference
that's not like one of those we can just agree and live and let live on those differences it's like
it um okay sure we'll go with your model that the nuclear winter doesn't happen go ahead and
let that many nukes fly no no no no you you fucking got your model wrong it is really consequential
or i don't think that ai is going to be that problematic if we let it out into the wild
because there's such good near-term market purposes i have strong motivated reasoning
to want to let it out into the wild no no no i'm pretty sure you're about to kill everything
and you're missing something really critical so there are places where there's this really
consequential and those differences are like can we just live and let live or is the consequence
of some of those things stuff that won't live and let live it'll actually have second-order
effects that are really profound historically we couldn't fuck up as bad as we can fuck up now
yeah we could do as quickly or as irreversibly so you can see why there's more of a desire for
certainty but then there's also more motivated reasoning too much information and polarization
that makes it harder to get that well i mean i i think you know just even in pop culture right
you can trace this with black panther you can trace this with with the marvel universe like
like the anti-heroes these days and i think there's there's a what it's the sequel to the
davinci code i think it's called angels and demons and it's some tech bro who's convinced
that the world is overpopulated and we need to actually crash the population to save the other
half then Thanos famously with his snap wipes out half of the universe so that the other half can
live you know black panthers um i forget what he killed kill monger right his his critique is
effectively a black lives matter slash black panthers assessment of racial inequalities like
none of the anti-heroes in our movie in fact quite often the anti-heroes are giving more voice
to the current situation than the nominal heroes and there's been this kind of post-modern
play back and forth in our in our mythic mythic storytelling these days where actually the villain
actually has has run more of the facts and so the question back back to do we simply live and let
live you know a concern is if there's anybody particularly if they're decoupled from relatedness
from family from you know heart and their humanity and they're excessively in their heads and they
conclude there is a hundred percent certainty of a mass casualty event if i don't do something
then there's a whole lot of extreme and potentially sociopathic behaviors that they might see as
1000 percent valid and actually pro pro life over the longer term this is the problem with
like this is the biggest problem with utilitarian ethics there's a million problems with utilitarian
ethics but the and there's also a million things important about it i would say and this beyond
the scope of what we can do but i would say that virtue ethics utilitarian ethics and
deontological ethics all have a role a kind of complete ethics requires various of those systems
let's just talk about utilitarian ethics for a minute this bad thing is gonna like i'm i'm
responsible both for the effects of my action and inaction if i could have done something and
didn't and the bad thing happened i have some co-operability in that good that's fucking important
but you gotta watch out uh there are current inexorable bad things going to happen i can do
something that has some badness in it but less badness than the total badness that will occur
if i don't do the thing therefore i'm morally obligated to do the thing that has the some
badness in it that's all those anti-heroes that you're mentioning the it's not that that would
never be true right it's not that would never be true anyone who has made an act of self-defense
that was warranted and harmed someone to prevent their family from getting harmed did that calculus
and it might have been warranted right or a country that did or whatever simultaneously though when
we start doing it based on population numbers and limits of growth and IPCC calculations and
things where slight changes in the calculations do lead into very different outcomes and there is a
bunch of unknown unknowns that i'm not factoring that could change it radically the major problem
the utilitarian calculus is we we usually admit a false basis for excessive certainty of the bad
thing that is for sure going to happen yeah because i'm so certain that bad thing's going to
happen i am now morally obligated to do this other thing where i also have a false sense of
certainty that it will work and be less bad and so um it's the unwarranted certainty that's the
problem there yeah not the idea that sometimes you have to take certain costs to serve the larger
good um it's the certainty around those calculus it's not only that right there's also do i
wait certain things that i care about more than other things and whatever which which goes back
to what we were talking about 10 minutes ago about the wound you know the trauma of the of the gifted
child the idea if i've always been right but wronged right you know my tendency to presume 100%
certainty with my own models and calculations is going to be higher than if you what you were
suggesting 20 minutes ago which was its relatedness to our blind its relationships that give us
shine light on our blind spots okay return us to our humanity and potentially some more
humble um calculus if you have some kind of agonist federation as you were saying of people
that have some real expertise who disagree but who do trust the um process of deliberation between
them more than themselves my faith in that thing goes way the fuck up from any of them on their
own or from an uneducated democratic choice yes what is the right choice that the general
democracy would make about the safety of publishing synthetic bio information or advancing a
particular type of crisper like who the fuck knows that's not a that's not a late topic that's a
topic where the scientific knowledge is so detailed that's required for how to figure that out or
you're going to harden the energy grid well how much hardening do you need based on what the size
of the emp or the coronal mass ejection is and what's the cost of that relative to the opportunity
space the other things you do those are not good things for uneducated democracies but
they're also not good things for siloed experts with their own issues those are things for
combinations of the values of the general population being factored the realities of
planetarity and physics and biology being factored the experts and hopefully progressively more
earnest process and better collective intelligence with augmented computation being able to process
a lot of stuff that they can't and better processes of transparency and oversight to prevent
corruption so that the population does have a basis for trust in those processes all of that
together to make a better augmented collective intelligence system is necessary to handle those
kinds of things which goes perilously close to slitting my wrist or retreating to the woods again
but yeah now i want to say something about this the so the whole idea of our liberal democracy
we were talking about separation of the three branches of government but there was also the
separation of government culture and markets right that you have a market that has regulation
but has a lot of freedom to do its own thing so that it's not all government controlled
and that you prevent monopolies so that the market has its own checks and balances because of
voluntarism that that wouldn't happen if you had monopolies and you don't allow monopoly of religion
you allow lots of religions so it was a check and balance between religions markets states
multiple religions with each other multiple companies competing with each other multiple
branches within federal government most of government happening at a state level there's a
lot done to create a pluralistic type system is pretty smart but overall the idea is we're gonna
let the market do a lot of the innovation stuff and have supply and demand and invisible hand
guided there's all kinds of problems with that that are clear now that we're not clear at the time of
Adam Smith or even at the time of Anne Rand but I'll leave that out for now let's just say
the fundamental calculus is you're gonna do that but it's there would be a market incentive for
organ harvesting and cutting down all the trees so there's no national parks and fucked up stuff
so we're gonna have some state that has some law to be able to regulate some things and avoid crime
and whatever so we have a state that regulates the market the main fucking thing the state does
is prevent people from doing things that they have a personal incentive to do whether a person
or a group of people right so market type incentive stealing is a market type activity
meaning advancing personal gain of ownership through a particular process so the main thing
the government's supposed to do is regulate market type activity that only works if the people are
then the states watchdogging the market the people have to watchdog the state right if the people
don't watchdog the state and oversee it which is why it's supposed to be a government of foreign
by the people blah blah blah then of course if you don't have that then rather than the state
regulate the market the market captures the state and you get crony capitalism with a revolving
door between people in big ag and fda and blah blah blah well we were mentioning that the system
is too complex for the people to regulate this or to oversight the state to be able to see where
there are accounting errors and real problems so people a lot of people distrust the institutions
right now for understandable reasons i'm saying we need to rebuild the institutions in a way that
is fundamentally more oversightable and auditable and i believe we can but i'm also saying that we
we have to have a people that don't just bitch about a bad government while not being willing to
engage but who are like okay i do want to see what i really think about the models the IPCC is running
and about climate change this is a big deal i actually want to be able to have some sense
or i don't i'd like to proxy my vote to someone who i think really does i'm going to do a liquid
democracy thing or i do in which case how do i get educated enough and how do i become aware
enough of the biases that i can meaningfully engage where i don't become over certain of the
catastrophe but i also don't become over certain that the thing is currently fine and so this is
that place of how do we let go of the certainty that we know what the right answer is but we also
let go of the certainty there is no answer and we're fucked we orient towards faithfulness that
answers might exist and they take working towards and then we commit to the discipline and rigor to
be part of figuring that out and knowing that we can't do all of it the discipline and rigor of
evolving ourselves to work well with other people that are also doing it so that collective
intelligence of groups of people working to do that can enact solutions that is like the discipline
of a people that want to be able to reinstate governance of foreign by the people to say i'm
aware have you said that before because that feels as cogent a synopsis of your optimism
that i've ever heard you say well i don't know i've said it quite that way before but there are
reasons why i think that is possible at scale that would be stupid to think if it wasn't for
actual certain new possibilities that were not previously possible i'll say briefly i don't know
if you saw this paper that went around recently on why are there no supergeniuses anymore
the one about homeschooling about aristocratic tutoring yeah yeah yeah and um
noting that you've got a strong confirmation bias to believe that paper but yes go ahead play through
well i i was not from the aristocracy i didn't have aristocratic treatment but it did actually
give me some insights on what like norah bateson is a very interesting person and look at how the
fuck she grew up and you know our friend azeraskan is a very interesting person look at who he grew
up with and so it like it did give me so norah is gregory bateson's daughter for anybody listening
i don't know aza's background beyond his tech background what was his his father and then the
macintosh and was kind of the center like the the founder of human center design oh fantastic and
so aza's the result of that childhood and makes perfect fucking sense right but so what the paper
what this paper said and we can include it in the show notes here and then i went and i checked in
with zack and scott brick Hoffman and a bunch of educational theorists and um various of them who
done the research are like yeah this is like a third rail topic but this is a known thing that and
even charles sanders purse did a study himself to say because he was wondering why he was able
to make sense of shit across so many fields faster than so many other people were and he's like i
don't think i'm genetically that different like what the fuck
answers it so who are all the other people who are really really exceptionally polymathic what
did they have in common and he came up with the the main thing they had in common statistically
though it wasn't one factor was that they were all the results of some kind of aristocratic
tutoring where they had really exceptional private tutors when they were young and you look at the
dolly llama the dolly llama gets a kind of tutoring that nobody else ever has all of the best llamas
training the fuck out of you from the time that you're tiny yeah he was a punk ass trust fund
brat to start with till his tutors got hold of him and and so you're like is the dolly llama the
result of a particular educational model that just doesn't scale for shit but if it could scale
it would be very interesting then you look at marcus or ellias and the entire first chapter
of meditations is dedicated to his tutors there's a reason it was dedicated to his tutors is if
you're being raised in that period to be the emperor of rome the best mathematician the best
grammarian the best rhetorication the best historian are your private tutors and one of the
key insights i remember reading a paper many years ago that was looking at world-class mathematicians
and it was saying what is the statistical correlate we found across all the assessments of what makes
them a world-class mathematician like on online to win a field of metal or something like that
and it said the the clearest thing is that everyone who became a world-class mathematician the most
likely thing they had in common was that somewhere when they were young they interacted or studied
with a world-class mathematician and of course someone can try to flip the causation and say well
it was because they were so bright someone brought them there but it's actually the other direction
it's a very real thing which is the teacher that i get for math in grade school does not think like
a world-class mathematician about math they can teach me shit that's that somebody else figured
out but they didn't think that way they don't know how to teach me to think that way so i can get
the output not to generate a function right and if i'm with someone who is not teaching me how to
memorize a quadratic formula but is helping me understand the whole history of why it was never
understood and then how it was derived and why they derived it and they're the kind of person
that is derived shit like that themselves from scratch i'm going to get a very different level
of education and the type of general competence and thinking so it turns out that even up until
recently von Neumann and Einstein both had mathematician governesses when they were young
before they went to school and it makes sense that like it seems hard for me to learn Mandarin
but fucking one-year-old babies are speaking Mandarin if they grow up in China we're very
neuroplastic right whatever you're learning so they were they were like bucky fuller
terms that i was speaking as a little bitty baby because that's what my dad was reading to me and
so saying isotropic vector matrix and omnien or accommodative sound like fancy things but it's
just whatever the fuck a baby here it's a kind of a medic wait what what was the omni one omni
omni inter accommodative it was the word bucky use that i remember was one of my early words and
some people who were not bucky familiar were like oh that's a big word for a little kid and it was
like it's just because it was fucking used all the time but but it was also that it wasn't just
memorizing it it was a process of dialogue to understand what does it mean for something to
be omni inter accommodative that all of the generalized principles don't conflict with each
other right across the whole universe all of the constants and all of the laws of physics
chemistry biology etc are omni inter accommodative it's actually really great concepts built into a
word bucky like to do that but you could you could just call it groovy right i think that kind of
like doesn't that sort of um i that's what bucky called it after enough joints i think
but so you got this aristocratic tutoring model when we were trying to kill feudalism
because it was so unequal and gruesome and create democracy all the vestigial remnants of feudalism
where things wanted to get rid of and when you have a situation where almost nobody got a good
education because of course they were just going to be laborers or whatever they got some basic
guild knowledge of how to do a labor thing maybe and of course the nobility and then the aristocracy
got to pay patronage jobs of the best thinkers to tutor their kids it makes sense why you'd
have such a radically unequal distribution but you'd also get a certain kind of super genius
born out of that privilege but the thing is that's not scalable and you were just mentioning earlier
will these deep fakes be able to share all of wikipedia's knowledge or all of the knowledge
on whatever chemistry formal logic but also in the voice of whomever so now you imagine
the positive version of the ai deep fakes metaverse world where i go to the academy and i can ask
einstein and von neumann and kurt girdle to all come sit with me and have a real time dialogue
about formal logic where all of them are both speaking with the kinds of semantic coherence
to everything they ever wrote that they would have while simultaneously having access to all
knowledge of formal logic that has even been learned since they died and their ability
to model my theory of mind and pedagogically regulate how they communicate to my level of
understanding well that's pretty fucking phenomenal from a that's a tech new utopian left
10 but i'll take it let's keep going now i think we're only a single digit number of years away
from being able to build this and i think right now we're most likely building because of market
incentive dystopic fucked versions of this thing rather than the awesome versions could be but i
think we could do the awesome version now i also think that corresponding with that the population
lowering the reason why i want to raise the population has to do with trying to keep up
economic output of the people whatever but of course that's not factoring the technological
automation is going to obsolete most of the jobs both robotic and ai automation are going to
obsolete most of the jobs so then we have to answer what the fuck do we how do we rebuild an economy
and what is how do we rebuild an education what is even the role of education what's the role of
humans in a world where ai and robots are better than us at most things well what are we still here
for what are we uniquely good at and what are we intrinsically incented to do and what is intrinsically
meaningful now has to be the core question to redesign fucking everything because we're no
longer the best at doing most of those things and so it's not just the running out of oil and stuff
it's also the becoming fundamentally obsolete in lots of things but also obsolete it in the
shit that mostly we don't like doing and so then we say okay well let's assume that it's not pure
agi but it is um very smart ability to do computational kinds of stuff ai and robotics but
fundamental phenomenology experience human connection is still both intrinsically meaningful
to us and we have unique capacity well then knowing how to interface with the robot ai type
dynamics and how to do much more in the domains of what is uniquely human and we don't have to
prepare people for the workforce so we can rebuild an economy from scratch that doesn't say humans
have to work to get provisioned because that was only what we did when we needed the humans to do
the jobs and you don't need the humans to do the jobs you can also make it to where the humans don't
need the jobs and you have a different kind of commonwealth stewardship that also works better
with ecological boundaries i'm almost there i'm going to converge and close a couple things and then
now what my ai tutors are giving me has more knowledge than marcus aurelius's tutors could
have ever had but they don't love me they're not they don't actually really care i don't love them
and there are differences between the artificial intelligence and natural intelligence so now
my live tutor my live teacher is also talking with me and there's i just had the conversation
with einstein or jefferson or whoever it is and they're asking me what do you think is different
from what that ai einstein said and what the real einstein might say if he was alive today or might
have said back at that time so now we have to start to think about the way minds are contextualized
in history and the difference between natural intelligence and artificial intelligence and
the difference between hydrocarbon self-organizing systems and silica systems and what is intelligence
itself and what is the relationship of intelligence to sentience to life to consciousness so now the
human teachers are oriented to those very very deep theory of mind questions that once humans
start asking they go recursive on knowledge processing on intelligence and meaning itself
and you get these kind of exponential curves and can we have way more people being teachers
and way more developed in that system because we automated a lot of the things people already
currently do so can i have 10 times as many teachers who all get phd level training as
opposed to whatever you know current level of training they get starting with kids so the
kids get mathematical geniuses they both get a study with the you know einsteins and girdles
and whatever but they also get a study with people who have that level of capacity and
similar in the way that the da Vinci machine is already starting to obsolete surgeons because
an AI robotic surgeon is just going to not have their handshake so the the the doctors of the
future the doctor nurse role starts to merge more to who can do real human connection with the patient
and interface with the AI robotic type systems that do a better job at very specialist tasks
does that mean that we can develop people that have way more human connection a lot more so we
have a much higher percentage of teachers parents nurses high connection oriented roles way more
developed and way more AI augmentation of how we develop people to where the einstein and the
dalai lama become the median of human development yeah i mean to me on the conversations of like
universal basic income and those kind of things is like what's the question is always well what
on earth would we do you know we would be pointless or purposeless if we didn't have our work which
is very you know max vapor product and work ethic he kind of you know cultural conditioning and my
first sense would be like holy shit we would go back into childcare and elder care and art
and music and gardening and community and spirituality like like all the amazing human
things that humans have always cared about and there's and meanwhile we're outsourcing them to
bottom of the barrel minimum wage workers instead of making them central to our shared human experience
so that that tracks really closely with what you're suggesting so do i think that already
the state cannot check the market if the people aren't checking the state do we have to rebuild
the state to make that possible because it's impossible right now yes we have to rebuild the
state and the market and info processing and education and a bunch of things but can we already
have the motivated tiny subset of people listening to things like this say you know what i'm gonna
not default to the lazy certainty that everything is fucked because that's just lazy there's a
trillion possible solutions i don't even know of and in fact the people who i'm listening to who've
thought about this more than me aren't hopeless so maybe it's fucking dumb for me to go hopeless if
the people who know the problem space more than me aren't hopeless right and i'm also not going to
default to it's not my job i can't do anything about it's too hard to understand i'm going to work to
understand it and work to see what is mine to apply and i'm going to work to find other people
that are doing that and i'm going to work to try to be able to rebuild something like bottom up
governance of people who are really making sense of things so i want to see people doing that and
i also think that we have the capacity to be developing people with those capacities at scale
now there's a boot loading issue right there's some change to infrastructure and some changes to
social structure and some of the superstructure that all affect each other and take more time to
go into how i see that boot loading looking but when you're asking like why do i have hope
i was just wanting to play with a couple examples of how the same tech that fucks us can actually
radically enable us but the current market dynamics that are guiding it don't build that version they
build the facebook ai not that it would be so easy for facebook to do audrey tang's unlikely
consensus or twitter and up regularly all the things that a super majority would agree upon
and everybody gets to see what are all the things a super majority would agree upon and you run a
third party candidate that says anything the super majority agrees upon i'm going to run
block that would just start to make amazing change that quickly so it's the tech can do
different things and audrey tang just is liquid democracy taiwan right so for anybody's looking
to track that track her down yeah um so i think that the tech that creates so much power under the
current extractive and coordination failure dynamics leads to self termination but it also
enables fundamentally new possibilities that previous social and political theorists could
not have thought of because they weren't possible we could not do planetary wide coordination without
the tools to be able to do that so um so yeah i do think that if i take all of the failure modes
that i know of all the self terminating things i take the timelines associated and then i say
is there any path through this that is both feasible with physics it doesn't require
replicators and dilithium crystals and stuff it's like feasible with physics and it's feasible with
human nature and assuming we condition people differently but i don't have to assume that
everyone has an iq of 2000 and are omnibenevolent to begin with yes i absolutely believe there are
models that are adequate that are both possible with physics and possible with human nature
i believe they're threading the eye of a needle i believe there are way more ways it fails but i
believe that the likelihood for it to succeed is the people who are oriented to how we make it to
the eye of the needle and dedicate their whole lives not to ask the question do we or not but how
does my life increase the likelihood that it does beautiful so yeah that that notion of leaving
space for grace right the idea that there's there is there is always that miracle element and
kevin kelly has that beautiful quote where he's like it's way easier to imagine the devil than god
because of basically second law of thermodynamics but yeah everything awesome from the flowers to
you and me are highly improbable and we have to get better at believing in the improbable
yeah and and feeling it even before we have a thing to believe in
and then the other thing is i don't believe that humanity is going to make it i also don't
believe it's not going to make it i know either could happen and my my disposition is not just
because i'm sure we're going to make it so i have that certainty it's that i'm sure that i want my
life oriented to what could help it happen and i know that everyone who's sure that we aren't has
unwarranted certainty and disconnection from life force yes yes and then so the other thing is i
want my life oriented to the best possible future but i also want it oriented to the most
honoring of life now so if we don't make it i still wouldn't change any of how i'm living because
it is coming from the like recognition of the radical amazing that i get to be alive for a second
at all right like i had this experience this is so fundamental is like i remember as a teenager
looking at a sunset and feeling this experience of like i would incarnate this life and go through
every fucking hell and difficulty for this moment because it's so like as opposed to no experience
at all ever like it's so incredible and then i'm like i've already had thousands of moments like that
and if there if i've had thousands of moments that are worth an entire life it's all gravy from
here in terms of what's in it for me right like it just keeps being this embarrassment of riches
that the beauty of life keeps happening and it's all worth it and that doesn't mean the pain isn't
painful it just means like i have experienced pains that were excruciating and i can't feel
them right now and i don't choose to dwell on them and i've experienced beauties that were
awe-inspiring and i do dwell on them and so it's worth it right and so there's also a like if we
don't make it i don't just want to be partying in the Bahamas i want to be in like sacred service
to life because i because i it's it's still i it's the only thing that actually makes sense
yeah beautiful well i mean and that feels very um resonant with the Ajna Krishna story and in the
Bhagavad Gita right some reconciliation with the impossibility of this thing and also um
that we're never off the hook for playing our part to the help and dharma is not a utilitarian
ethic right it's a virtue ethic which says the utilitarian ethic says i can calculate the possible
future states and choose an action based on the best utilitarian outcome except you and i both
know that we can't know what the wind is going to be 10 days from now because fucking complex
systems are unpredictable and so i want to do utilitarian calculus where i can but i also want
to say if i can't predict the future each moment is unfolding from this moment and there's a trust
that the if i am in the deepest integrity in this moment the future that unfolds from that is the one
that i want and so that's like a it's a fundamentally different it's not based on future outcome it's
based on a trust of what unfolds from the way this moment is lived and the Bhagavad Gita is just
like the whole thing is understanding that dharma let go of the fruits of action and do it is right
because you know it's right yeah which also feels like why Yoda can never like call like
apel corner pocket he's always like i'm feeling the force you know but like there's perturbances
there's things right but it is a dynamic flow yeah of a complex system right so so yeah um because
yoda isn't god right if you didn't violate idol worship it's not this thing is all determined
it's still there's great mystery and i don't know and the wisdom is not i know at all the wisdom is
i know i have a beautiful relationship with the unknowability and still how to live in the presence
of that yeah you know and and even i mean the one the story that um whether it's you know yoda's
agnosticism even though he's jacked in in total gangster he still can't call this he still cannot
call the shot right but though the one that um yeah i may noodle on this more but is it's the
note like for me it's it's the lord of the rings and just the the genius of the ending right the
golem is the enemy and he is corrupt and corrupt and you think oh is he going to be savable is he
going to come back to schmigel and he does that whole schizophrenic chinatown you know back and
forth right and and it's not that he's redeemed in the end and sam wants to kill him and Gandalf's
like hold man you we don't know what part he has yet to play and then in the end it's not that he's
redeemed and comes over to team good guy he actually descends into his most corrupted self does the
he folds where he has folded many times before great you know bites the ring off Frodo's finger
and that is how it ends up in mount doom and destroyed so you're sort of like and that's what
i mean about the the space for grace right we don't know and i feel like you're echoing that
really strongly we cannot with certainty predict what happens next and if i'm hearing you right
what you're saying is the only thing i can do is act from virtue act from love act from defensive
and and and and bearing witness to life in this moment and the next moment and the next and perhaps
right if there is a path to salvation if there is a path to redemption it lies that way
and and we cannot see it from here but if but if we keep the faith in it that is essential
for us ever arriving yeah yeah totally and when the fellowship of the ring came together they knew
the task was most likely impossible and they didn't know exactly how it unfold and there was also
wisdom that guided that it was the right thing to do and needed to happen yeah all right so
before i fuck off and sail sail west over the ocean at the end of middle earth i will i will hang
out i will hang out with you optimistic and rosy one it's weird to be you know this is actually
this is interesting nate and i talked about this recently where a lot of the people that i not
everybody i don't want to make any generalizations that are too sweeping but some people get into
being very good at like thinking about catastrophic risk because their disposition is that they
catastrophize like in the CBT sense of like running worst case shit all the time in their own
personal life but then smart and they end up the good side the gift of that is that they're able
to think about how could this tech really mess stuff up and how could this agreement get fucked up
and how could this be gamed and um but it's also that that's the gift of it but there that
disposition is not oriented to find solutions it's oriented to find what's wrong with any possible
solution i was talking with a different friend the other day and i'm like look every time i tell
you a new possible catastrophic risk you without a lot of rigorous analysis you just believe me
that that's probably gonna happen and every time i tell you a possible solution you're like what's
wrong with that what's wrong with that until you find something possibly wrong with it that's a bias
you're running because why don't you wonder what could be why don't you just as rigorously analyze
the catastrophic risk of why that probably won't happen there's a and so i and if one is oriented
to catastrophize they won't coordinate with other people for shit because they'll catastrophize the
relationships and assume that everyone is fucking them and just doing it for game
theoretic power just virtue signaling and everything else and so you actually have to overcome
catastrophizing in one's own self to actually be in service to catastrophe as well to be able
to think through them and yet be oriented to solutions and oriented to collaborate with other
people so it's weird to be in a place of like no we really want to understand all the things that
are fucked so we can address them but it is so we can address them and that's both the show we
not so I and the address rather than just leaving. Takes a village to save a planet.
This was fun Jamie this was really fun today. Yeah yeah yeah well listen so so for everybody
listening you probably don't need any introductions or reminder to Daniel and his body of work and his
relentlessly good hearted contribution to finding ways forwards but I would super
encourage everybody that we will include in the show notes a bunch of the different references
that you made potentially to that tutoring paper you had mentioned another one towards the end we
can kind of go back and and all the ones I can remember. That sounds great and then just just
an encouragement that out of all of this complexity the simplicity on the other side is for each of
us and all of us to find what's ours to do and get cracking and and share share the triumphs
and disasters right not just post wins but but also seek solace and comfort so that we can keep on
keeping on together and get super dubious of your own certainty talk more to people that think
really differently than you and really try to understand both what they're saying rationally
but also feel the internal state of the trueness of that that they feel and while decreasing
your own certainty increase your own rigor and work towards what you would need for effectiveness.
Beautiful well Daniel Schmackenberger Consilience Project thank you for your time my man. Love you
Jamie. Much love. Cheers.
This podcast is for informational purposes only. The podcast is not intended as a substitute
for professional medical advice diagnosis or treatment you should not use the information
on the podcast for diagnosing or treating a health problem or disease or prescribing any
medication or other treatment always seek the advice of your physician or other qualified
health provider before taking any medication or nutritional herbal or homeopathic supplement
and with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition never disregard professional
medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have heard on this or any other
podcast reliance on the podcast is solely at your own risk information provided on the podcast
does not create a doctor-patient relationship between you and any of the health professionals
affiliated with our podcast information and statements regarding dietary supplements have
not been evaluated by the food and drug administration and are not intended to diagnose treat cure
or prevent any disease opinions of guests are their own and this podcast does not endorse or
accept responsibility for statements made by guests this podcast does not make any representations
or warranties about guests qualifications or credibility individuals on this podcast may
