Brian, get me started.
Yeah, you don't want to get him started.
I know that from experience.
You're actually the only, you're a professor of math as well as physics, probably the only
one on the table.
Yeah, and the question that comes to mind for me is, how do you know that math is the
language of the universe?
I was going to say, what about the multi?
The universe told me.
Okay.
What's your first approximation, I'll tell you?
Okay.
We're not doing science by revelation.
I was wondering, because I have a question about this.
Could you imagine that one day far in the future, we encountered some alien civilization
and they say, hey, show us what you've done to understand the universe and we bring out
our math books with all our theorems and physics and they turn to us and say, math, we tried
that.
And it takes you just so far.
And the real way to do it is like this.
I would say that whatever that real way is, will not manifest to us at this moment.
And until that day happens, where an alien tells us how backwards we are, all I can say
is that the math that we did invent out of our human brain, as you surely know Eugene
Wigner said, the unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in describing the universe,
the fact that it works at all is sufficient enough for me.
But here, I want to have a no reason to say it.
And just because you still can't figure out your string theory, don't come crying to me.
Don't come crying to me because you can't figure it out.
You got him started, see, you got him started.
He said, don't get me started.
No, but I want to go on record.
He warned you not to get him started.
I know, I told you.
But I want to go on record.
I want to go on record, and this is a moment's occasion, I want to go on record, I was agreeing
with Brian.
Is anybody keeping the record?
But no, in the sense that it is fascinating if you're a theoretical physicist to wonder
when you find something fascinating, whether some mathematical formula is fascinating,
whether it's a property of our brains or whether it's a property of the universe.
And we just don't know, I think, is the answer.
If string theory is great.
Right, but let me ask you a question.
I find it slightly confusing because Neil, you described math as something that we create.
So why is it the thing that we create is somehow intrinsic to the universe?
And that also...
Is that our description?
That's awesome, right?
That's awesome, right?
It is surprising.
And all of that, I celebrate it.
It's a good thing.
I celebrate it too.
Yeah, but it is a question.
There may be limitations on understanding the universe because of the way our brains work.
And I think...
That's surely the case.
That's surely the case.
And for Republicans, it's already happened.
But it's...
No, but seriously, that's an interesting question, and we really have to wonder about that.
If you're, again, working at some point, at the forefront of physics, you wonder at some
point when it's going to end.
It's some Republicans.
But to the questioner's question, I wouldn't worry about the possibility that mathematics
is going to turn out to be ineffective in describing the universe and use that as a reason to not
keep practicing.
Press on.
That's right.
