This video is about the exponent rules, rules that govern expressions like two to the fifth
or x to the n.
Two to the fifth is just shorthand for two times two times two times two times two, written
five times, and similarly x to the n is just x multiplied by itself, n times.
When we write these expressions, the number on the bottom that's being multiplied by itself
is called the base, and the number at the top telling us how many times we're multiplying
the base by itself is called the exponent.
Sometimes the exponent is also called the power.
The product rule says that a five x to the power of n times x to the power of m, that's
the same thing as x to the n plus m power.
In other words, when I multiply two expressions with the same base, then I can add their exponents.
For example, if I have two cubed times two to the fourth, that's equal to two to the
seventh, and that makes sense because two cubed times two to the fourth means I multiply
two by itself three times, and then I multiply that by two multiplied by itself four times,
and in the end, I have two multiplied by itself seven times, which is two to the seventh.
I'm just adding up the number of times that's multiplied in each piece to get the number
of times that's multiplied total.
The quotient rule says that a five x to the n power divided by x to the m power, that's
equal to x to the n minus m power.
In other words, if I divide two expressions with the same base, then I can subtract their
exponents.
For example, three to the sixth divided by three squared is going to be three to the
six minus two, or three to the fourth.
And this makes sense because three to the sixth means I multiply three by itself six
times, and then I divide that by three multiplied by itself twice.
So when I cancel out threes, I have four threes left.
Notice that I have to subtract the number of threes on the bottom from the number of
threes at the top to get my number of threes remaining.
That's why I subtract my exponents.
The power rule tells us if I have x to the n power raised to the m power, that's the
same thing as x to the n times m power.
In other words, when I raise a power to a power, I get to multiply the exponents.
For example, five to the fourth cubed is equal to five to the four times three, or five to
the twelfth.
And this makes sense because five to the fourth cubed can be thought of as five to the fourth
times five to the fourth times five to the fourth, expanding this out some more.
That's five times five times five times five times the same thing times the same thing
again.
So I have three groups of four fives, which is a total of three times four or twelve fives.
The next rule involves what happens when I raise a number or a variable to the zeroth
power.
It turns out that anything to the zeroth power is equal to one.
Usually this is just taken as a definition, but here's why it makes sense to me.
If you have something like two cubed divided by two cubed, well, certainly that has to
equal one.
Anything divided by itself is just one.
But using the quotient rule, we know that this is the same thing as two to the three
minus three.
Because when we divide two things with the same base, we get to subtract their exponents.
Therefore, this is the same thing as two to the zero.
So two to the zero has to equal one in order to make it work with the quotient rule.
And the same argument shows that anything to the zero power has to be equal to one.
What happens when we take something to a negative power?
X to the n is equal to one over x to the n.
Again, most people just take this as a definition of a negative exponent, but here's why it
makes sense.
If I take something like five to the seventh times five to the negative seventh, then by
the product rule, this has to equal five to the seven plus negative seven, which is five
to the zero.
And we just said that that is equal to one.
Now I have the equation five to the seventh times five to the negative seventh equals
one.
If I divide both sides by five to the seventh, I get that five to the negative seventh has
to equal one over five to the seventh.
So that's where this rule about negative exponents comes from.
It has to be true in order to be consistent with the product rule.
Finally, let's look at a fractional exponent.
What does an expression like x to the one over n really mean?
Well, it means the nth root of x.
For example, 64 to the one third power means the cube root of 64, which happens to be four.
And nine to the one half means the square root of nine, which is usually written without
that little superscript up there.
Now the square root of nine is just three.
Fractional exponents also make sense.
For example, if I have five to the one third and I cube that, then by the power rule, that's
equal to five to the one third times three, which is just five to the one or five.
So in other words, five to the one third is the number that when you cube it, you get
five.
And that's exactly what's meant by the cube root of five.
The cube root of five is also a number that when you cube it, you get five.
The next rule tells us we can distribute an exponent over a product.
In other words, if we have a product x times y all raised to the nth power, that's equal
to x to the n times y to the n.
For example, five times seven, all raised to the third power is equal to five cubed
times seven cubed.
And this makes sense because five times seven, all raised to the cube power can be expanded
as five times seven times five times seven times five times seven.
But if I rearrange the order of multiplication, this is the same thing as five times five
times five times seven times seven times seven or five cubed times seven cubed.
Similarly, we could distribute an exponent over quotient.
If we have the quotient x over y, all raised to the n power, that's the same as x to the
n over y to the n.
For example, two sevenths raised to the fifth power is the same thing as two to the fifth
over seven to the fifth.
This makes sense because two sevenths to the fifth can be expanded as two sevenths multiplied
by itself five times, which can be written rewritten as two multiplied by itself five
times divided by seven multiplied by itself five times.
And that's two to the fifth over seven to the fifth as wanted.
We've seen that we can distribute an exponent over multiplication and division, but be careful
because we cannot distribute an exponent over addition or subtraction.
For example, a plus b to the n is not generally equal to a to the n plus b to the n.
A minus b to the n is not generally equal to a to the n minus b to the n.
And if you're not sure, just try an example with numbers.
For example, two plus three squared is not the same thing as two squared plus three squared.
And two minus three squared is definitely not equal to two squared minus three squared.
In this video, I gave eight exponent rules, which I'll list again here.
There's the product rule, the quotient rule, the power rule, the zero exponent, the negative
exponent, the fractional exponent, and there are the two rules involving distributing exponents
across multiplication and division.
In another video, I'll use these exponent rules to rewrite and simplify expressions
involving exponents.
In this video, I'll work out some examples of simplifying expressions using exponent
rules.
I'll start by reviewing the exponent rules.
The product rule says that when you multiply two expressions with the same base, you add
the exponents.
The quotient rule says that when you divide two expressions with the same base, you subtract
the exponents.
The power rule says that when you take a power to a power, you multiply the exponents.
The power of zero rule says that anything to the zero power is one as long as the base
is not zero.
Since zero to the zero is undefined, it doesn't make sense.
With exponents, to evaluate x to the minus n, we take the reciprocal one over x to the
n.
To evaluate a fractional exponent, like x to the one over n, we take the nth root of
x.
We can distribute an exponent over a product, a times b to the n is equal to a to the n times
b to the n, and we can distribute an exponent over a quotient.
A over b to the n is a to the n over b to the n.
In the rest of this video, we'll use these exponent rules to simplify expressions.
For our first example, we want to simplify 3 times x to the minus 2 divided by x to the
fourth.
There are several possible ways to proceed.
For example, we could use the negative exponent rule to write x to the minus 2 as one over
x squared.
All that gets divided by x to the fourth still.
Notice that we only take the reciprocal of the x squared.
The 3 stays where it is, and that's because the exponent of negative 2 only applies to
the x, not to the 3.
Now if we think of 3 as 3 over 1, we have a product of two fractions in our numerator,
and so we evaluate that by taking the product of the numerators times the product of the
denominators, which is 3 over x squared all divided by x to the fourth.
I can think of x to the fourth as x to the fourth over 1, so now I have a fraction over
a fraction, which I can evaluate by multiplying by the reciprocal.
That simplifies to 3 times 1 divided by x squared times x to the fourth, which is 3
over x to the sixth using the product rule, since x squared times x to the fourth is equal
to x to the 2 plus 4, or x to the sixth.
An alternate way of solving this problem is to start by using the quotient rule.
I can rewrite this as 3 times x to the minus 2 over x to the fourth, and by the quotient
rule that's 3 times x to the minus 2 minus 4, or 3 times x to the minus 6.
Now using the negative exponent rule, x to the minus 6 is 1 over x to the sixth, and
this product of fractions simplifies to 3 over x to the sixth.
The same answer I got before.
The second problem can be solved in similar ways.
Please pause the video and try it before going on.
One way to simplify would be to use the negative exponent rule first and rewrite y to the minus
5 as 1 over y to the fifth.
Using of this as a fraction divided by a fraction, I can multiply by the reciprocal
and get 4y cubed y to the fifth over 1 by the product rule.
The numerator here is 4y to the eighth, and so my final answer is just 4y to the eighth.
Alternatively, I could decide to use the quotient rule first.
As in the previous problem, I can write this as 4y cubed minus negative 5 by the quotient
rule, and so that's 4y to the eighth as before.
I'd like to show you one more method to solve these two problems, kind of a shortcut method
before we go on.
A shortcut relies on the principle that a negative exponent in the numerator corresponds
to a positive exponent in the denominator.
For example, the x to the negative 2 in the numerator here after some manipulations became
an x to the positive 2 in the denominator.
Furthermore, a negative exponent in the denominator is equivalent to a positive exponent in the
numerator.
That's what happened when we had the y to the negative 5 in the denominator and translated
into a y to the positive 5 in the numerator.
Sometimes people like to talk about this principle by saying that you can pass a factor across
the fraction bar by switching the sign of the exponent, that is, making a positive exponent
negative or a negative exponent positive.
Let's see how this principle gives us a shortcut for solving these two problems.
In the first problem, 3x to the minus 2 over x to the 4, we can move the negative exponent
in the numerator and make it a positive exponent in the denominator.
So we get 3 over x to the 4 plus 2 or x to the 6.
In the second example, for y cubed over y to the minus 5, we can change the y to the
minus 5 in the denominator into a y to the 5 in the numerator and get our final answer
of 4 y to the 3 plus 5 or 8.
We'll use this principle again in the next problems.
In this example, notice that I have y's in the numerator and in the denominator and also
z's in the numerator and in the denominator.
In order to simplify it, I'm going to try to get all my y's either in the numerator
or the denominator and similarly for the z's.
Since I have more y's in the denominator, let me move this y to the 3 downstairs and
make it a y to the negative 3.
I'm using the principle here that a positive exponent in the numerator corresponds to a
negative exponent in the denominator.
Now since I have a positive exponent on z in the numerator and a negative exponent in
the denominator and I want to get rid of negative exponents, I'm going to pass the z's to the
numerator.
A z to the minus 2 in the denominator becomes a z to the plus 2 in the numerator.
Notice that my number 7 doesn't move when I do any of these manipulations because it
doesn't have an exponent and the exponent of negative 2, for example, only applies to
the z, not to the 7.
Now that I've got all my z's in the numerator and all my y's in the denominator, it's easy
to clean this up using the product rule and I have my simplified expression.
In this last example, we have a complicated expression raised to a fractional power.
I'm going to start by simplifying the expression inside the parentheses.
I can bring all my y's downstairs and all my x's upstairs and get rid of negative exponents
at the same time.
In other words, I can rewrite this as 25x to the fourth.
I'll bring the y to the minus 5 downstairs and make it y to the fifth on the denominator.
Bring the x to the minus 6 upstairs and make it x to the sixth, the numerator, and then
I still have the y cubed on the denominator.
All that's raised to the 3 half's power.
Using the product rule, I can rewrite the expression on the inside of the parentheses
as 25x to the tenth over y to the eighth.
Recall that we're allowed to distribute an exponent across a product or across a quotient.
When I distribute my 3 half's power, I get 25 to the 3 half's times x to the tenth to
the 3 half's divided by y to the eighth to the 3 half's.
Now the power rule tells me when I have a power to a power, I get to multiply the exponents.
So I can rewrite this as 25 to the 3 half's times x to the tenth times 3 half's over y
to the eighth times 3 half's.
In other words, 25 to the 3 half's times x to the fifteenth over y to the twelfth.
Finally, I need to rewrite 25 to the 3 half's.
As 3 half's can be thought of as 3 times 1 half or as 1 half times 3, I can write 25
to the 3 half's as 25 to the 3 times 1 half or as 25 to the 1 half times 3.
Well using the power rule in reverse, I can think of this as 25 cubed to the 1 half or
as 25 to the 1 half cubed since when I take a power to a power, I multiply the exponents.
25 cubed to the 1 half might be hard to evaluate since 25 cubed is a huge number.
But 25 to the 1 half is just the square root of 25.
So I have the square root of 25 cubed or 5 cubed which is 125.
Therefore, my original expression is going to be 125 x to the 15 over y to the twelfth.
In this video, we use the exponent rules to simplify complicated expressions.
This video goes through a few tricks for simplifying expressions with radicals in them.
Recall that this notation means the nth root of x, so this notation here means the cube
root of 8, the number that when you cube it, you get 8, that number would be 2.
When we write the root sign without a little number, that just means the square root, so
the 2 is implied.
In this case, the square root of 25 is 5 since 5 squared is 25.
Let's start by reviewing some rules for radical expressions.
First, if we have the radical of a product, we can rewrite that as the product of two radicals.
For example, the square root of 9 times 16 is the same thing as a square root of 9 times
the square root of 16.
You can check that both of these evaluate to 12.
Similarly, it's possible to distribute a radical sign across division.
The radical of a divided by b is the same thing as the radical of a divided by the radical
of b.
For example, the cube root of 64 over 8 is the same thing as the cube root of 64 over
the cube root of 8.
And you can check that both of these evaluate to 2.
You have to be a little bit careful though because it's not okay to distribute a radical
sign across addition.
In general, the nth root of a plus b is not equal to the nth root of a plus the nth root
of b.
And similarly, it's not okay to distribute a radical across subtraction.
If you're ever in doubt, you can always check with simple examples.
For example, the square root of 1 plus 1 is not the same thing as a square root of 1 plus
a square root of 1.
The right side evaluates to 1 plus 1 or 2, and the left side is square root of 2, an
irrational number.
The second expression to show that that fails, I don't think it'll work to use the square
root of 1 minus 1, it'll actually hold in that case.
But I can show it's false by using say the square root of 2 minus 1, which does not equal
the square root of 2 minus the square root of 1.
You might notice that these rules for radicals, the ones that hold and the ones that don't
hold, remind you of rules for exponents.
And that's no coincidence because radicals can be written in terms of exponents.
For example, if we look at the first rule, we could rewrite this.
The nth root of a times b is the same thing as the 1 over nth power.
And by exponent rules, I can distribute an exponent across multiplication.
And so this radical rule can be restated completely in terms of an exponent rule.
Similarly, the second rule can be restated in terms of exponents as a over b to the 1
over n is equal to a to the 1 over n divided by b to the 1 over n.
We can use the relationship between radicals and exponents to rewrite a to the m over n.
a to the m over n is the same thing as a to the m with the nth root taken.
It's also the same thing as the nth root of a all taken to the nth power.
To see why that's true, think about exponent rules.
So a to the m over n is the same thing as a to the m taken to the 1 over nth power.
That's because when we take a power to a power, we multiply exponents.
And m times 1 over n is equal to m over n.
But a 1 over nth power is the same thing as an nth root.
And therefore, this expression is the same thing as this expression.
And that proves the first equivalence.
The second equivalence can be proved similarly by writing a to the m over n as a to the 1
over n times m.
Again, this is worked because when I take the power to the power, I multiply exponents
1 over n times m is the same thing as m over n.
But now these two expressions are the same because the 1 over nth power is the same as
the nth root.
One mnemonic for remembering these relationships is flower over root.
So flower is like power and root is like root.
So that tells us we can write a fractional exponent.
The m becomes the power and the n becomes the root in either of these two orders.
Now let's use these rules in some examples.
If we want to compute 25 to the negative three-halves power, well, first I'll use my exponent rule
to rewrite that negative exponent as 1 over 25 to the three-halves power.
Next, I'll use the power over root mnemonic to rewrite this as 25 to the third power square-rooted
or as 25 square-rooted to the third power.
I wrote the twos there for the square root for emphasis, but most of the time people
will omit this and just write the square root without a little number there.
Now I could use either of these two equivalent expressions to continue, but I'd rather
use this one because it's easier to compute without a calculator.
The square root of 25 is just five.
Five cubed is 125, so my answer is 1 over 125.
If I tried to compute the cube of 25 first, I'd get a huge number.
In general, it's usually easier to compute the root before the power when you're working
without a calculator.
Now let's do an example simplifying a more complicated expression with exponents in it.
I want to take the square root of all this stuff, and since I don't really like negative
exponents, I'm first going to rewrite this as the square root of 60x squared y to the
sixth over z to the 11th, so I'll change that negative exponent to a positive exponent
by moving this factor to the denominator.
Now when you're asked to simplify a radical expression, that generally means to pull as
much as possible out of the radical sign.
To pull things out of the square root sign, I'm going to factor my numbers and try to
rewrite everything in terms of squares as much as possible since the square root of
a square, those two operations undo each other.
So I'll show you what I mean.
First, I'll factor 60, so 60 is going to be 2 squared times 3 times 5, and I'll just
copy everything over for now.
Now I'll break things up into squares as much as possible, so I've got a 2 squared times
3 times 5, I've already got an x squared, I'll write the y to the sixth as y squared
times y squared times y squared, and I'll write the z to the 11th as z squared times
z squared, I guess 5 times 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 times 1 extra z.
That should add up to z to the 11th if I add all those exponents together.
Now I know that I can distribute my radical sign across multiplication and division, so
I'll write this with a zillion different radicals here.
Every time I see the square root of something squared, I can just cancel those square roots
and the squares out and get what's left here.
So after doing that cancellation, I get 2 times the square root of 3 times 5 times x times
y times y times y over z times itself, I guess 5 times, times the square root of z.
Now I can clean that up with exponents, I'll write that as the square root of 15, I guess
2 times the square root of 15 times x times y cubed over z to the fifth, the square root
of z.
I'm going to leave this example as is, but sometimes people prefer to rewrite radical
expressions without radical signs in the denominator, that's called rationalizing the denominator.
I won't do it here, but I'll show you how to do it in the next example.
This example asks us to rationalize the denominator.
That means to rewrite as an equivalent expression without radical signs in the denominator.
To get rid of the radical sign in the denominator, I want to multiply my denominator by square
root of x, but I can't just multiply the denominator willy-nilly by something unless
I multiply the numerator by the same thing, so that I'm just multiplying my expression
by 1 in a fancy form and I don't change the value of my expression.
Now if I just multiply together numerators, 3x squared of x, and multiply denominators,
square root of x times square root of x is the square root of x squared, square root
of x squared is just x.
Now I can cancel my x's from the numerator and denominator and my final answer is 3 times
the square root of x.
I rationalize my denominator and the process got a nicer looking expression.
In this video, we went over the rules for radicals and we simplified some radical expressions
by working with fractional exponents, pulling things out of the radical sign, and rationalizing
the denominator.
Hi class, happy snow day.
Since class is canceled, I'm putting together this video with some additional examples on
simplifying radicals that I would have done in class.
I hope this will help you complete your assignment that's due tonight.
Let's start with this example, asking us to simplify the product of two radicals.
I could simplify each radical separately and then multiply things together, but I think
it'll save me trouble if I multiply first and then simplify.
So I'm going to multiply these together since the product of two radicals is the radical
of the product, assuming everything's positive.
I can rewrite my expression as the square root of, let's see, 5 times 15, that's going
to be 75, x times x cubed, that's x to the fourth because when I multiply two expressions,
I add the exponents and y to the seventh times y cubed, that's going to be y to the tenth
since seven plus three is ten.
Now I want to simplify by pulling as much out of the square root sign as I can.
If 75 were a perfect square, I could just take the square root of it, but since it's
not, I'm going to factor it, so 75, let's see, that's 25 times three and 25 is five
times five, so I can write that as five squared times three.
Now I can write my square root, let's see, so that's five squared times three times x
to the fourth times y to the tenth.
Now since I know that the square root of anything squared is just that original thing, assuming
that the variables are positive, I can maybe rewrite this as by breaking everything up
into a bunch of squares.
So let's see, I already have a square here, there's no hope for the three, the x to the
fourth I can write that as x squared times x squared, right, that makes four x's and
y to the tenth, I'm going to need five y squareds to get ten y's out of that, one,
two, three, y squared, y squared.
Now splitting up the square root back into a product of a bunch of square roots, every
time I see the square root of something squared I just replace it with a thing, so that's
five, I still have the square root of three, that gives me x, x, y, y, y, y, y, and I can
rewrite that as five, square root of three times x squared, y to the fifth, so that's
one way to simplify this expression.
Alternatively, I could complete this problem a little bit faster the following way, I could
go ahead and break up my five squared times three times x to the fourth times y to the
tenth, I'm going to break that up, go ahead and break that up as a product of square roots.
Now the square root of five squared is certainly five, square root of three stays the same,
square root of x to the fourth is going to be x squared, there are a couple ways to
see that, one way is the square root of x fourth, that's x to the fourth to the one
half power, since square roots are the same as half powers, and now I can multiply my
exponents to get my x squared, or alternatively I can think of that because the square root
of x to the fourth, that's the square root of x squared squared, since I take a power
to a power I multiply my exponents, square root of something squared is just a thing,
so that's x squared. Similarly the square root of y to the tenth, that's going to be
y to the fifth, notice I'm just taking half of the exponent, and you can see that the
same way, that's because if I do the square root of y to the tenth, that's the same thing
as y to the tenth to the one half, which is y to the tenth times one half, or y to the
fifth, or alternatively you can think of this as the square root of y to the tenth is the
square root of y to the fifth squared, which is y to the fifth. So if it weren't for all
that little side work I did, that would have, this would have been a faster way to get to
the same answer as before.
The next few examples have to do with rewriting expressions by rationalizing denominators.
Please pause the video for a moment and see if you can decide if these two expressions
represent the same thing or different things. In fact, they represent the same thing, and
we can see that, that we can transform a to look like b by doing something called rationalizing
denominator, trying to get all the square roots out of the denominator at the expense
of maybe putting some more squares in the numerator. So to rationalize the denominator
in this case, since there's just that one, that one piece with square roots in it, I'm
going to multiply both the top and the bottom by the square root of y, the thing that has
the square root around it. If I multiply the bottom by the square root of y, I have to
multiply the top also so I won't change the value of my expression. This way I'm just
multiplying by one in a fancy form. Now when I multiply fractions I multiply the numerator,
and I multiply the denominator. Well let's see, the square root of y times the square
root of y, that's the square root of y squared, which is the same thing as just y. So I can
bring my square roots together and get three square root of xy over five y, which is exactly
the second expression. Here are two even crazier expressions, the last one's especially crazy.
Again, try to decide if these two represent the same thing or represent a different thing.
Kind of surprisingly, they actually represent the same thing still. And we can transform
one to two by again rationalizing the denominator, this time we're going to use something called
the conjugate. And that's because we have a difference in this case of two expressions,
one of which has a square root in it. So when I have the difference of two expressions,
one of which with a square root in it, I find the conjugate by taking the sum of those two
expressions. If instead I had had the sum of two expressions, then the conjugate would
be the difference. Okay, so I'm going to multiply the top and the bottom by this conjugate of
the denominator. So let me move down here and rewrite with more space. Once again, I have
to multiply the numerator and the denominator by the same thing so that I'm not changing
the value of my expression, I'm just multiplying by one in a fancy form. Now let's look at
what happens in the denominator first, I have to multiply three by three, three by the
square root of a, negative square root of a by three, and negative square root of a by
square root of a. So that's going to give me three times three is nine plus three square
root of a minus three square root of a minus square root of a squared. So in a moment that
I'll simplify to these things cancel. So that'll be nine minus square root of a squared is
a. Notice how I've gotten rid of the square roots of the denominator, which is why it's
called rationalized denominator. We get rid of the, I don't know, irrational numbers,
the radical signs. Okay, let's look at the numerator. So again, we have to, we're going
to have four terms, this times this, this times that, b times three, b times square
root of a. That gives us 15 a plus five a square root of a plus three b plus b square
root of a. Now that's starting to look similar to this expression here. And in fact, it we
can see that it's exactly the same thing by turning our radicals into exponents. So let's
see, we still have the 15 a. This is the same thing as five a times a to the one half, we
still got the three b. And we've got b times a to the one half. And now let's see a times
a to the one half here, that's really, I can add my exponents. So that's going to be five
a to the one plus one half is three halves, three b, b, a to the one half. And that's
exactly what I have in this expression, just in a slightly different order. So these really
are the same, kind of weird. Please pause the video and try your hand at rationalizing
the denominator of this expression. Since we have a sum of two expressions in the denominator,
we want to multiply the numerator and denominator by the conjugate of the denominator. So that's
squared of a minus one. Now when we multiply out the numerator, we'll get four terms,
squared of a squared. Let's see minus the square of a. And now we have seven times
the square of a. And finally, seven times minus one, that's minus seven. On the denominator,
we get the square of a squared minus the square of a plus the square of a minus one. Notice
how the square root things cancel, just like before, that's the whole magic of using the
conjugate, it makes those square roots cancel out. So now on the numerator, squared of
a squared is a minus the square of a plus seven squared of a, that's a net of six square
of a minus seven. And then on the denominator, we have a minus one, we've gotten rid of the
square roots on the denominator, rationalize the denominator, I'm happy leaving the square
root in the numerator, but if you want to, you can change it to a exponent instead, it's really
up to you. That's all the examples I have today, I hope you enjoy the snow, which hasn't started
yet for me. And please do spend some time to finish your Alex objective if you haven't done it
already. Goodbye. This video goes over some common methods of factoring. Recall that factoring an
expression means to write it as a product. So we could factor the number 30 by writing it as six
times five, or we could factor it more completely by writing it as two times three times five. As
another example, we could factor the expression x squared plus five x plus six, by writing it as x
plus two times x plus three. In this video, I'll go over how I get from here to here, how I know how
to do the factoring. But for right now, I just want to review how I can go backwards, how I can
check that the factoring is correct. And that's just by multiplying out or distributing. If I
distribute x plus two times x plus three, then I multiply x by x that gives me x squared, x times
three gives me three x, two times x gives me two x and two times three gives me six. So that
simplifies to x squared plus five x plus six, which checks out with what I started with. So you can
think of factoring as the opposite of distributing out. And you can always check your factoring by
distributing or multiplying out. A bit of terminology, when I think of an expression as a sum of a
bunch of things, then the things I sum up are called the terms. But if I think of the same
expression as a product of things, then the things that I multiply together are called
factors. Now let's get started on techniques of factoring. When I have to factor something, I
always like to start by pulling out the greatest common factor. The greatest common factor means
the largest thing that divides each of the terms. In this first example, the largest thing that
divides both 15 and 25x is five. So the GCF is five. So I pull the five out, and then I divide each
of the terms by that number. And so I get three plus five x. Pause the video for a moment and see
if you can find the greatest common factor of x squared y and y squared x cubed. The biggest
thing that divides both x squared y and y squared x cubed is going to be x squared times y. One way
to find this is to look for the power of x that's smallest in each of these terms. So that's x
squared. And the power of y that's smallest in each of these terms is just y to the one or y. Now
if I factor out the x squared y from each of the terms, that's like dividing each term by x squared
y. If I divide the first term by x squared y, I just get one. If I divide the second term by x
squared y, I'm going to be left with an x and a y. I'll write this out on the side just to make it
more clear y squared x cubed over x squared y. That's like two y's on and three x's on the top and
two x's and a y on the bottom. So I'm left with just an x and a y. So I'll write the x y here,
and I factored my expression. As always, I can check my answer by multiplying out. So if I multiply
out my factored expression, I get x squared y is the first term and the second term. I get x,
there now let's see three x's multiplied together and two y's multiplied together,
and that checks out with what I started with. The next technique of factoring I'd like to go over
is factoring by grouping. In this example, notice that we have four terms factoring by grouping
is a handy method to look at if you have four terms in your expression you need to factor.
In order to factor by grouping, I'm first going to factor out the greatest common factor of the
first two terms, and then separately factor out the greatest common factor of the last two terms.
The greatest common factor of x cubed and three x squared is x squared. So I factor out the x
squared and I get x plus three. And now the greatest common factor of four x and 12 is just four.
So I factor out the four from those two terms. Notice that the factor of x plus three now appears
in both pieces. So I can factor out the greatest common factor of x plus three, I think I'll factor
it out on the left side instead of the right. And now I have an x squared from this first piece,
and I have a four from this second piece, and that completes my factoring by grouping.
You might wonder if we could factor further by factoring the expression x squared plus four.
But in fact, as we'll see later, this expression, which is a sum of two squares, x squared plus
two squared does not factor any further over the integers. Next, we'll do some factoring of
quadratics. A quadratic is an expression with a squared term, just a term with x in it, and a
constant term with no x's in it. I'd like to factor this expression as a product of x plus or minus
some number times x plus or minus some other number. The key idea is that if I can find those
two numbers, then if I were to distribute out this expression, those two numbers would have to
multiply to give me my constant term of eight. And these two numbers would end up having to add
to give me my negative six, because when I multiply out, this number will be a coefficient of x and
this number will be also another coefficient of x, they'll add together to the negative six.
So if I look at all the pairs of numbers that multiply together to give me eight,
so that could be one and eight, two and four, four and two, but that's really the same thing
as I had before. And that's sort of the same thing I had before. I shouldn't forget the negatives,
I could have negative one, negative eight, or I could have negative two, negative four, those
also multiply together to give me eight. Now I just have to find, see if there's a pair of these
numbers that add to negative six. And it's not hard to see that these ones will work. So now I can
write out my factoring as that would be x minus two times x minus four. And it's always a good idea
to check by multiplying out, I'm going to get x squared minus four x minus two x plus eight.
And that works out to just what I want. Now the second example is a bit more complicated because
now my leading coefficient, my coefficient of x squared is not just one, it's the number 10.
Now there are lots of different methods for approaching a problem like this. And I'm just
going to show you one method, my favorite method that uses factoring by grouping. But to start out,
I'm going to multiply my coefficient of x squared by my constant term. So I'm multiplying 10 by negative
six. That gives me negative 60. And I'll also take my coefficient of x, so you'll number 11,
and write that down here. Now I'm going to look for two numbers that multiply to give me negative
60 and add to give me 11. You might notice that this is exactly what we were doing in the previous
problem. It's just here we didn't have to multiply the coefficient of x squared by eight, because the
coefficient of x squared was just one. So to find the two numbers that multiply to negative 60 and
add to 11, you might just be able to come up with them in your head thinking about it. But if not,
you can figure it out pretty systematically by writing out all the factors, pairs of factors,
that multiply to negative 60. So I can start with negative one and 60, negative two and 30,
negative three and 20, and keep going like this until I have found factors that actually add
together to give me the number 11. And now that I look at it, I've already found them.
15 minus four gives me 11. So I don't have to continue with my chart of factors.
Now, once I found those factors, I write out my expression 10x squared, but instead of writing 11x,
I write negative 4x plus 15x. Now I copy down the negative six. Notice that negative 4x plus 15x
equals 11x, that's how I chose those numbers. And so this expression is, evaluates as the same
as this expression. I haven't changed my expression. But I have turned it into something that I can
apply factoring by grouping on, look, I've got four terms here. And so if I factor out my greatest
common factor of my first two terms, that's, let's see, I think it's 2x. So I factor out the 2x,
I get 5x minus two. And then I factor out the greatest common factor of 15x and negative six,
that would be three, I get a 5x minus two again, this is working beautifully. So I have a 5x minus
two in each part. And so I put the 5x minus two on the right, and I put what's left from these terms
in here. So that's 2x plus three. And I have factored my expression.
There are a couple of special kinds of expressions that appear frequently,
that it's handy to just memorize the formula for. So the first one is the difference of squares.
If you see something of the form a squared minus b squared, then you can factor that as a plus b
times a minus b. And let's just check that that works. If I do a plus b times a minus b and multiply
that out, I get a squared minus a b plus b a minus b squared, and those middle two terms cancel out.
So it gives me back the difference of squares just like I want it. So for this first example,
if I think of x squared minus 16 as x squared minus four squared, then I can see that's a
difference of squares. And I can immediately write it as x plus four times x minus four. And the second
example, nine p squared minus one, that's the same thing as three p squared minus one squared.
So that's three p plus one times three p minus one. Notice that if I have a sum of squares,
for example, x squared plus four, which is x squared plus two squared,
then that does not factor. The difference of squares formula doesn't apply. And there is no
formula that applies for a sum of squares. There is, however, a formula for both a difference of
cubes and a sum of cubes. The difference of cubes formula, a cube minus b cubed is a minus b times
a squared plus a b plus b squared. The formula for the sum of cubes is pretty much the same,
you just switch the negative and positive sign here and here. So that gives us a plus b times
a squared minus a b plus b squared. As usual, you can check these formulas by multiplying out.
Let's look at one example of using these formulas, y cube plus 27 is actually a sum of two cubes,
because it's y cubed plus three cubed. So I can factor it using the sum of cubes formula
by plugging in y for a and three for b. That gives me y plus three times y squared minus
y times three plus three squared. And I can clean that up a little bit to read y plus three times
y squared minus three y plus nine. So in this video, we went over several methods of factoring.
We did factoring out the greatest common factor. We did factoring by grouping. We did factoring
quadratics. And we did a difference of squares. And we did a difference and a sum of cubes.
In more complicated problems, you may need to apply several of these techniques in order
to get through a single problem. For example, you might need to start by pulling out a greatest
common factor, and then do a factoring of quadratics or something similar. Now go forth and factor.
This video gives some additional examples of factoring. Please pause the video and decide
which of these first five expressions factor and which one does not.
The first expression can be factored by pulling out a common factor of x from each term.
So that becomes x times x plus one. The second example can be factored as a difference of two
squares. Since x squared minus twenty five is something squared minus something else squared.
And we know that anytime we have something like a squared minus b squared, that's a plus b times
a minus b. So we can factor this as x plus five times x minus five. The third one is a sum of
two squares. There's no way to factor a sum of two squares over real numbers. So this is the one
that does not factor. Just for completeness, let's look at the next two. This next one does factor
by grouping. When we factor by grouping, we pull the biggest common factor out of the first two
terms. That would be an x squared. That becomes x squared times x plus two. And then we factor
as much as we can out of the next two terms. That would be a three times x plus two. Notice that the
x plus two factor now occurs in both of the resulting terms. So we can pull that x plus two out
and get x plus two times x squared plus three. We can't factor any further because x squared plus
three doesn't factor. Finally, we have a quadratic. This also factors. And I like to factor these
also using a factoring by grouping trick. So first, what I do is I multiply the coefficient of x
squared and the constant term five times eight is 40. I'll write that on the top of my x. Now I
take the coefficient of the x term that's negative 14. And I write that on the bottom part of the x.
Now I'm looking for two numbers that multiply to 40 and add to negative 14. Sometimes I can just
guess numbers like this. But if not, I start writing out factors of 40. So factors of 40,
I could do one times 40. Well, now I just noticed I'm trying to add to a negative number. So if I
use two positive factors, there's no way there's going to add to a negative number. It's better
for me to use negative numbers that factor 40. A negative times a negative still multiplies to 40,
but they have a chance of adding to a negative number. So but negative one and negative 40 of
course don't work. They don't add to negative 14. They add to negative 41. So let me try some other
factors. The next biggest number that divides 40 besides one is two. So I'll try negative two and
negative 20. Those add to negative 22. That doesn't work. Next one that divides 40 would be four. So
I'll try negative four and negative 10. Aha, we have a winner. So negative four plus negative 10
is negative 14. Negative four times negative 10 is positive 40. We've got it. All right. So the next
step is to use factoring by grouping. We're going to first split up this negative 14 x as negative
four x minus 10 x and carry down the eight and the five x squared. Notice that this works because
I picked negative four negative 10 to add up to negative 14. So so negative four x minus 10 x will
add up to negative 14 x. So I've got the same expression just just expanded out a little bit.
Now I have four terms I can do factoring by grouping. So I can group the first two terms
and factor out the biggest thing I can. That would be an x times five x minus four. And now I'll
factor the biggest thing I can out of these two numbers including the the negative. So that becomes
let's see I can factor out a negative two and that becomes five x minus four since negative two times
minus four is eight. All right, I've got the same five x plus four in both my terms. So factoring
by grouping is going swimmingly. I can factor out the five x minus four from both those terms
and I get the x minus two and I factored this quadratic. If I want to of course I can always
check my work by distributing out by multiplying out. So a check here would be multiplying five x
times x is five x squared five x minus times minus two is minus 10 x minus four times x is minus
four x and minus four times minus two is plus eight. So let's see this does check out to exactly
what it should be. So that was the method of factoring a quadratic. And all of these factor
except for the sum of squares. So we saw that factoring by grouping is handy for factoring
this expression here. It was also handy for factoring the quadratic indirectly after splitting up
the middle term into two terms. So how can you tell when an expression is is appropriate to
factor by grouping? There's an easy way to tell that it might be a candidate and that's that it
has four terms. So if you see four terms or in the case of the quadratic you can split it up into
four terms then that's a good candidate for factoring by grouping because you can group the
first two terms, group the second two terms. Factoring by grouping won't always work on
expressions with four terms but that's like the first thing to look for. So let's just review
what are the same main techniques of factoring. We saw these on the previous page. We saw there was
pull out common factors. There's difference of squares.
There's factoring by grouping. There's factoring quadratics.
And one more that I didn't mention is factoring sums and differences of cubes.
That uses the formulas a cubed minus b cubed is a minus b times a squared plus a b plus b
squared and a cubed plus b cubed is a plus b times a squared minus a b plus b squared.
One important tip when factoring, I always recommend doing this first. Pull out the common
factors first. That'll simplify things in making the rest of factoring easier.
One more tip is that you might need to do several of these factoring techniques in one problem.
For example, you might have to first pull out a common factor then factor a difference of squares
and then you might notice that one of your factors is itself a difference of squares and you have to
apply a difference of squares again. So don't stop when you factor a little bit. Keep factoring as
far as you can go. Here are some extra examples of factoring quadratics for you to practice.
Please pause the video and give these a try. For the first one, let's multiply two times negative
14. That gives us negative 28 and then we'll bring the three down in the bottom of the x. Now
we're looking for two numbers that multiply to negative 28 and add to three. Well to multiply
two numbers to get a negative 28 will need one of them to be negative and one of them to be positive.
So let's see one negative 128 or one negative 28. Those don't work. Let's see negative 214 or two
negative 14. Those don't work. Hey, I just noticed the positive number had better be bigger than the
negative number so they add to a positive number. Let's see what comes next. How about
negative 4 times 7, 4 times negative 7. I think 4, negative 4 times 7 will work. So I'll write
those here negative 4, 7. Copy down the 2 z squared and I'll split up the 3 z into negative 4 z plus
7 z and then minus 14. Now factoring by grouping pull out a 2 z that becomes z minus 2 pull out a 7
and that becomes z minus 2 again looking good. I've got 2 z plus 7 times z minus 2 as my factored
expression. My second expression I could work at the same way drawing my x and factoring by grouping
that kind of thing but it's actually going to be easier if I notice first that I can pull out a
common factor from all of my terms. That'll make things a lot simpler to deal with. So notice that
a 5 divides each of these terms and in fact I'm going to go ahead and pull out the negative 5 because
I don't like having negatives in front of my squared term. So I'm going to pull out a common
factor of negative 5. Again, it would work if I forgot to do this but it would be a lot more
complicated. So negative 5 v squared this becomes minus, no this becomes plus 9v
since 9 times negative 5 is negative 45 and this becomes minus 10 since negative 10 times
negative 5 is positive 50. Now I can start my x and my factoring by grouping or I can use kind of a
shortcut method which you may have seen before so I can just put v's here and then I know that
whatever numbers go here they're going to have to multiply to the negative 10 and they're going to
have to add to the 9. So that would be a plus 10 and a minus 1 will do the trick.
Those are all my factoring examples for today. I hope you enjoy your snow morning and have a
chance to spend some time working in Alex. Bye. This video is about working with rational
expressions. A rational expression is a fraction usually with variables in it something like
x plus 2 over x squared minus 3 is a rational expression. In this video we'll practice adding,
subtracting, multiplying and dividing rational expressions and simplifying them to lowest terms.
We'll start with simplifying to lowest terms. Recall that if you have a fraction with just
numbers in it something like 21 over 45 we can reduce it to lowest terms by factoring the numerator
and factoring the denominator
and then canceling common factors. So in this example the 3's cancel and our fraction reduces
to 7 over 15. If we want to reduce a rational expression with variables in it to lowest terms
we proceed the same way. First we'll factor the numerator that's 3 times x plus 2
and then factor the denominator. In this case it factors to x plus 2 times x plus 2 we could
also write that as x plus 2 squared. Now we cancel the common factors and we're left with
3 over x plus 2. Definitely a simpler way of writing that rational expression.
Next let's practice multiplying and dividing. Recall that if we multiply two fractions with
just numbers in them we simply multiply the numerators and multiply the denominators. So in
this case we would get 4 times 2 over 3 times 5 or 8 fifteenths. If we want to divide two fractions
like in the second example then we can rewrite it as multiplying by the reciprocal
of the fraction on the denominator. So here we get 4 fifths times 3 halves and that gives us
12 tenths but actually we could reduce that fraction to 6 fifths. We use the same rules when we
compute the product or quotient of two rational expressions with the variables in them. Here
we're trying to divide two rational expressions so instead we can multiply by the reciprocal.
I call this flipping and multiplying and now we just multiply the numerators
and multiply the denominators.
It might be tempting at this point to multiply out to distribute out the numerator and the denominator
but actually it's better to leave it in this factored form and factor it even more completely.
That way we'll be able to reduce the rational expression to cancel the common factors. So let's
the x squared plus x factors as x times x plus 1 and x squared minus 16 that's a difference of
two squares that's x plus 4 times x minus 4. The denominator is already fully factored so we'll
just copy it over and now we can cancel common factors here and here and we're left with x times
x minus 4. This is our final answer. Adding and subtracting fractions is a little more complicated
because we first have to find a common denominator. A common denominator is an expression that both
denominators divide into. It's usually best of the long run to use the least common denominator
which is the smallest expression that both denominators divide into. In this example
if we just want a common denominator we could use 6 times 15 which is 90 because both 6 and 15
divide evenly into 90 but if we want the least common denominator the best way to do that is to
factor the two denominators so 6 is 2 times 3 15 is 3 times 5 and then put together only the factors
we need for both 6 and 15 to divide our numbers so if we just use 2 times 3 times 5 which is 30
we know that 2 times 3 will divide it and 3 times 5 will also divide it and we won't be able to get
a denominator any smaller because we need the factors 2, 3, and 5 in order to ensure both
these numbers divide it. Once we have our least common denominator we can rewrite each of our
fractions in terms of that denominator. So 7, 6 I need to get a 30 in the denominator so I'm going
to multiply that by 5 over 5. I multiply by the factors that are missing from the current
denominator in order to get my least common denominator of 30. For the second fraction
4 15, 15 times 2 is 30 so I'm going to multiply by 2 over 2. Now I can rewrite this as 35 30th
minus 8 30th and now that I have a common denominator I can just subtract my two numerators
and I get 27 30th. If I factor I can reduce this to 3 squared over 2 times 5 which is 9 tenths.
The process for finding the sum of two rational expressions with variables in them
follows the exact same process. First we have to find the least common denominator. I'll do that by
factoring the two denominators. So 2x plus 2 factors as 2 times x plus 1, x squared minus 1
that's a difference of 2 squared so that's x plus 1 times x minus 1. Now for the least common
denominator I'm going to take all the factors I need to get an expression that each of these
divides into. So I need the factor 2, I need the factor x plus 1, and I need the factor x minus 1.
I don't have to repeat the factor x plus 1, I just need to have it one time
and so I will get my least common denominator 2 times x plus 1 times x minus 1. I'm not going to
bother multiplying this out, it's actually better to leave it in factored form to help me simplify
later. Now I can rewrite each of my two rational expressions by multiplying by whatever's missing
from the denominator in terms of the least common denominator. So what I mean is I can rewrite 3 over
2x plus 2. I'll write the 2x plus 2 as 2 times x plus 1 already in factored form. And then I noticed
that compared to the least common denominator I'm missing the factor of x minus 1. So I multiply
the numerator and the denominator by x minus 1. I just need it in the denominator but I can't get
away with just multiplying by the denominator without changing my expression. I have to multiply
by it on the numerator and the denominator so I'm just multiplying by 1 in a fancy form and not
changing the value here. So now I do the same thing for the second rational expression. I'll
write the denominator in factored form to make it easier to see what's missing from the denominator.
What's missing in this denominator compared to my least common denominator is just the factor 2.
So I'll multiply the numerator and the denominator by 2. Now I can rewrite everything. So the first
rational expression becomes 3 times x minus 1 over 2 times x plus 1 x minus 1 and the second one
becomes 5 times 2 over 2 times x plus 1 x minus 1. Notice that I now have a common denominator
so I can just add together my numerators. So I get 3 times x minus 1 plus 10 over 2
times x plus 1 x minus 1. I'd like to simplify this and the best way to do that is to leave the
denominator in factored form but I do have to multiply out the numerator so that I can add
things together. So I get 3x minus 3 plus 10 over 2 times x plus 1 x minus 1 or 3x plus 7 over 2
times x plus 1 x minus 1. Now 3x plus 7 doesn't factor and there's therefore no factors that I
can cancel out. So this is already reduced as much as it can be. This is my final answer.
In this video we saw how to simplify rational expressions to lowest terms by factoring and
canceling common factors. We also saw how to multiply rational expressions by multiplying the
numerator and multiplying the denominator, how to divide rational expressions by flipping and
multiplying, and how to add and subtract rational expressions by writing them in terms of the least
common denominator. This video is about solving quadratic equations. A quadratic equation is
an equation that contains the square of the variable say x squared but no higher powers of x.
The standard form for a quadratic equation is the form ax squared plus bx plus c equals zero
where a, b, and c represent real numbers and a is not zero so that we actually have an x squared
term. Let me give you an example. 3x squared plus 7x minus 2 equals zero is a quadratic equation in
standard form. Here a is 3, b is 7, and c is minus 2. The equation 3x squared equals minus 7x plus 2
is also a quadratic equation. It's just not in standard form. The key steps to solving quadratic
equations are usually to write the equation in standard form and then either factor it
or use the quadratic formula which I'll show you later in this video.
Let's start with the example y squared equals 18 minus 7y. Here our variable is y and we need to
rewrite this quadratic equation in standard form. We can do this by subtracting 18 from both sides
and adding 7y to both sides. That gives us the equation y squared minus 18 plus 7y equals zero
and I can rearrange a little bit to get y squared plus 7y minus 18 equals zero. Now I've got my
equation in standard form. Next I'm going to try to factor it. So I need to look for two numbers
that multiply to negative 18 and add to 7. Two numbers that work are 9 and negative 2,
so I can factor my expression on the left as y plus 9 times y minus 2 equals zero.
Now anytime you have two quantities that multiply together to give you zero,
either the first quantity has to be zero or the second quantity has to be zero or I suppose they
both could be zero in some situations. This is really handy because that means that I know
that either y plus 9 equals zero or y minus 2 equals zero. So I can as my next step set my
factors equal to zero. So y plus 9 equals zero or y minus 2 equals zero which means that y equals
negative 9 or y equals 2. It's not a bad idea to check that those answers actually work by
plugging them into the original equation negative 9 squared does that equal 18 minus 7 times negative
9 and you can work out that it does and similarly 2 squared equals 18 minus 7 times 2.
In the next example, let's find solutions of the equation w squared equals 121. This is a
quadratic equation because it's got a square of my variable w. I can rewrite it in standard form
by subtracting 121 from both sides. Notice that a is equal to one b is equal to zero because there's
no w term and c is equal to negative 121 in the standard form a w squared plus b w plus c equals
zero. Next step, I'm going to try to factor this expression. So since 121 is 11 squared,
this is a difference of two squares and it factors as w plus 11 times w minus 11 is equal to zero.
If I set the factors equal to zero, I get w plus 11 equals zero or w minus 11 equals zero. So w
equals minus 11 or w equals 11. In this example, I could have solved the equation more simply. I
could have instead said that if w squared is 121, then w has to equal plus or minus the square root
of 121. In other words, w is plus or minus 11. If you solve the equation this way, it's important
to remember the plus or minus since minus 11 squared equals 121 just like 11 squared does.
Now let's find the solutions for the equation x times x plus 2 equals 7. Some people might be
tempted to say that, oh, if two numbers multiply to equal seven, then one of them better equal one
and the other equals seven or maybe negative one and negative seven. But that's faulty reasoning
in this case, because x and x plus two don't have to be whole numbers. They could be crazy
fractions or even irrational numbers. So instead, let's rewrite this equation in standard form.
To do that, I'm first going to multiply out. So x times x is x squared, x times 2 is 2x,
that equals seven, and I'll subtract the seven from both sides to get x squared plus 2x minus
seven is zero. Now I'm looking to factor it, so I need two numbers that multiply to negative seven
and add to two. So it's the only way to factor negative seven is as negative one times seven or
seven times negative one. It's easy to see that there are no whole numbers that will
work. So there's no way to factor this expression over the integers. Instead, let's use the quadratic
equation. So we have our leading coefficient of x squared is one. So a is one, b is two, and c is
minus seven. And we're going to plug that into the equation, quadratic equation, which goes x
equals negative b plus or minus the square root of b squared minus 4ac all over 2a.
Different people have different ways of remembering this formula. I'd like to remember it by seeing
it. x equals negative b plus or minus the square root of b squared minus 4ac all over 2a. But you
can use any new monarchy like. Anyway, plugging in here, we have x equals negative 2 plus or minus
the square root of two squared minus four times one times negative seven. It's important to remember
the negative seven there, all over two times one. Now two squared is four, and four times one times
negative seven is negative 28. So this whole quantity under the square root sign becomes four
minus negative 28 or 32. So I can rewrite this as x equals negative two plus or minus the square
root of 32 all over two. Since 32 is 16 times two, and 16 is a perfect square, I can rewrite this as
negative two plus or minus the square root of 16 times the square root of two over two, which is
negative two plus or minus four times the square root of two over two.
Next, I'm going to split up my fraction as negative two over two plus or minus four square
root of two over two, and then simplify those fractions. This becomes negative one plus or
minus two square root of two. So my answers are negative one plus two square root of two,
and negative one minus two square root of two. And if I need a decimal answer for any reason,
I could work those out on my calculator. As our final example, let's find all real solutions for
the equation one half y squared equals one third y minus two. I'll start as usual by putting it in
standard form. So that gives me one half y squared minus one third y plus two equals zero. I could
go ahead and start trying to factor or use the quadratic formula right now. But I find fractional
coefficients kind of annoying. So I'd like to get rid of them by doing what I call clearing the
denominator. That means I'm going to multiply the whole entire equation by the least common
denominator. In this case, the least common denominator is two times three or six. So I'll
multiply the whole equation by six. I have to make sure I multiply both sides of the equation,
but in this case, six times zero is just zero. And when I distribute the six, I get three y squared
minus two y plus 12 equals zero. Now, I could try to factor this, but I think it's easier
probably just to plunge in and use the quadratic formula. So I get x equals negative b, that's
negative negative two or two plus or minus the square root of b squared minus four times a times
c all over two a. Working out the stuff on the square root sign negative two squared is four.
And here we have, let's see 144. So this simplifies to x equals two plus or minus the square root of
four minus 144, that's negative 140 all over six. Well, if you're concerned about the
negative number under the square root sign, you should be, we can't take the square root of a
negative number and get and get a real number as our answer, there's no real number whose square is
a negative number. And therefore, our conclusion is we have no real solutions to this quadratic
equation. In this video, we solve some quadratic equations by first writing them in standard form
and then either factoring or using the quadratic formula. In some examples, factoring doesn't
work. It's not possible to factor the equation. But in fact, using the quadratic formula will
always work, even if it's also possible to solve it by factoring. So you can't really lose by using
the quadratic formula. It's just sometimes it'll be faster to factor instead. This video is about
solving equations with absolute values in them. Recall that the absolute value of a positive
number is just the number, but the absolute value of a negative number is its opposite. In general,
I think of the absolute value of a number as representing its distance from zero on the number
line. The number four and the number negative four are both at distance four from zero. And so the
absolute value of both of them is four. Similarly, if I write the equation, the absolute value of x
is three, that means that x has to be three units away from zero on the number line. And so x would
have to be either negative three or three. Let's start with the equation three times the absolute
value of x plus two equals four. I'd like to isolate the absolute value part of the equation.
I can do this by starting with my original equation,
subtracting two from both sides, and dividing both sides by three.
Now I'll think in terms of distance. On a number line, the absolute value of x is two thirds,
means that x is two thirds away from zero. So x could be here, or here, at negative two thirds,
or at two thirds. And the answer to my equation is x is negative two thirds, or two thirds.
I can check my answers by plugging in three times the absolute value of negative two thirds
plus two. I need to check if that equals four. Well, the absolute value of negative two thirds
is just two thirds. So this is three times two thirds plus two, which works out to four.
Similarly, if I plug in positive two thirds, it also works out to give me a correct answer.
This second example is a little different, because the absolute value sign is around
a more complicated expression, not just around the x. I would start by isolating the absolute value part,
but it's already isolated. So I'll just go ahead and jump to thinking about distance
on the number line. So on my number line, the whole expression three x plus two
is supposed to be at a distance of four from zero. So that means that three x plus two is here at four,
or three x plus two is at negative four. I'll write those as equations. Three x plus two equals four,
or three x plus two is minus four, and then I can solve. So this becomes three x equals two,
or x equals two thirds. And over here, I get three x equals minus six, or x equals minus two.
Finally, I'll check my answers. I'll leave it to you to verify that they both work.
A common mistake on absolute value equations is to get rid of the absolute value signs,
like we did here, and then just solve for one answer instead of solving for both answers.
Another mistake sometimes people make is once they get the first answer, they just assume
that the negative of that works also. But that doesn't always work. In the first example,
our two answers were both the negatives of each other. But in our second examples,
our two answers were not just the opposites of each other. One was two thirds, and the other was
negative two. In this third example, let's again isolate the absolute value part of the equation.
So starting with our original equation, we can subtract 16 from both sides,
and divide both sides by five, or equivalently multiply by one fifth.
Now let's think about distance on the number line. We have an absolute value needs to equal
negative three. So that means whatever is inside the absolute value sign needs to be at distance
negative three from zero. Well, you can't be at distance negative three from zero.
Another way of thinking about this is you can't have the absolute value of something and end up
with a negative number. Absolute value is always positive or zero. So this equation doesn't actually
make sense. And there are no solutions to this equation. In this video, we solved absolute
value equations. In many cases, an absolute value equation will have two solutions. But in some cases,
it'll have no solutions. And occasionally, it'll have just one solution. This video is about solving
rational equations. A rational equation like this one is an equation that has rational expressions
in it. In other words, an equation that has some variables in the denominator.
There are several different approaches for solving a rational equation, but they all start
by finding the least common denominator. In this example, the denominators are x plus three and x,
we can think of one as just having a denominator of one. Since the denominators don't have any
factors in common, I can find the least common denominator just by multiplying them together.
My next step is going to be clearing the denominator. By this, I mean that I multiply
both sides of my equation by this least common denominator, x plus three times x. I multiply
on the left side of the equation. And I multiply by the same thing on the right side of the equation.
Since I'm doing the same thing, the both sides of the equation, I don't change the value of the
equation. Multiplying the least common denominator on both sides of the equation is equivalent to
multiplying it by all three terms in the equation. I can see this when I multiply out.
I'll rewrite the left side the same as before pretty much. And then I'll distribute the right
side to get x plus three times x times one plus x plus three times x times one over x.
So I've actually multiplied the least common denominator by all three terms of my equation.
Now I can have a blast canceling things. The x plus three cancels with the x plus three on the
denominator. The here are nothing cancels out because there's no denominator. And here the x
in the numerator cancels with the x in the denominator. So I can rewrite my expression as
x squared equals x plus three times x times one plus x plus three. Now I'm going to simplify.
So I'll leave the x squared alone on this side, I'll distribute out x squared plus three x plus
x plus three. Hey look the x squareds cancel on both sides. And so I get zero equals four x plus
three. So four x is negative three and x is negative three fourths. Finally I'm going to plug in my
answer to check. This is a good idea for any kind of equation. But it's especially important for a
rational equation because occasionally for rational equations you'll get what's called extraneous
solutions. Solutions that don't actually work in your original equation because they make the
denominator zero. Now in this example I don't think we're going to get any extraneous equations
because negative three fourths is not going to make any of these denominators zero. So it should
work out fine when I plug in. If I plug in I get this. I can simplify the denominator here negative
three fourths plus three. Three is twelve fourths. That becomes nine fourths. And this is one I'll flip
and multiply to get minus four thirds. So here I can simplify my complex fraction. It ends up being
negative three ninths and one minus four thirds is negative one third. So that all seems to check out.
And so my final answer is x equals negative three fourths. This next example looks a little trickier
and it is. But the same approach will work. First I'll find the least common denominator. So here my
denominators are c minus five, c plus one, and c squared minus four c minus five. I'm going to
factor that as c minus five times c plus one. Now my least common denominator needs to have
just enough factors to that each of these denominators divide into it. So I need the factor
c minus five. I need the factor c plus one. And now I've already got all the factors I need for
this denominator. So here is my least common denominator. Next step is to clear the denominators.
So I do this by multiplying both sides of the equation by my least common denominator. In fact,
I can just multiply each of the three terms by this least common denominator.
I went ahead and wrote my third denominator in factored form to make it easier to see what
cancels. Now canceling time not dies. This dies and both of those factors die. Canceling out the
denominators the whole point of multiplying by the least common denominator. You're multiplying by
something that's big enough to kill every single denominator. So you don't have to deal with
denominators anymore. Now I'm going to simplify by multiplying out. So I get let's see c plus one
times four c that's four c squared plus four c. Now I get minus just c minus five. And then over
here I get three c squared plus three. I can rewrite the minus quantity c minus five as minus c plus
five. And now I can subtract the three c squared from both sides to get just a c squared over here.
And the four c minus c that becomes three c. And finally I can subtract the three from both
sides to get c squared plus three c plus two equals zero. I've got myself a quadratic equation
that looks like a nice one that factors. So this factors to c plus one times c plus two equals zero.
So either c plus one is zero or c plus two is zero. So c equals negative one or c equals negative two.
Now let's see we need to still check our answers. Without even going to the trouble of
calculating anything, I can see that c equals negative one is not going to work. Because if I plug
it in to this denominator here, I get a denominator zero, which doesn't make sense. So c equals minus
one is an extraneous solution. It doesn't actually satisfy my original equation. And so I can just
cross it right out. c equals negative two. I can go if I go ahead and that doesn't make any of my
denominator zero. So if I haven't made any mistakes, it should satisfy my original equation. But
I'll just plug it in to be sure. And after some simplifying, I get a true statement.
So my final answer is c equals negative two. In this video, we solved a couple of rational
equations using the method of finding the least common denominator and then clearing the denominator.
We cleared the denominator by multiplying both sides of the equation by the least common denominator
or equivalently multiplying each of the terms by that denominator. There's another equivalent
method that some people prefer. It still starts out the same, we find the least common denominator,
but then we write all the fractions over that least common denominator. So in this example,
we'd still use the least common denominator of x plus three times x. But our next step would be to
write each of these rational expressions over that common denominator by multiplying the top and
the bottom by the appropriate things. So one, in order to get the common denominator of x plus
three x, I need to multiply the top and the bottom by x plus three times x, one over x, I need to
multiply the top and the bottom just by x plus three, since that's what's missing from the denominator
x. Now if I simplify a little bit, let's see, this is x squared over that common denominator. And
here I have just x plus three times x over that denominator. And here I have x plus three over
that common denominator. Now add together my fractions on the right side. So they have a
common denominator. So this is x plus three times x plus x plus three. And now I have two
fractions that have that are equal that have the same denominator, therefore their numerators have
to be equal also. So the next step is to set the numerators equal. So I get x squared is x plus three
times x plus x plus three. And if you look back at the previous way we solved this equation,
you'll recognize this equation. And so from here on, we just continue as before.
When choosing between these two methods, I personally tend to prefer the clear the denominators
method because it's a little bit less writing, you don't have to, you get rid of those denominators
earlier, you don't have to write them as many times. But some people find this one a little bit
easier to remember a little easier to understand either of these methods is fine.
One last caution, don't forget at the end to check your solutions and eliminate any extraneous
solutions. These will be solutions that make the denominators of your original equations go to zero.
This video is about solving radical equations. That is equations like this one that have square
root signs in them, or cube roots or any other kind of radical. When I see an equation with a
square root in it, I really want to get rid of the square root. But it'll be easiest to get rid
of the square root. If I first isolate the square root. In other words, I want to get the term with
the square root in it on one side of the equation by itself, and everything else on the other side
of the equation. If I start with my original equation x plus the square root of x equals 12,
and I subtract x from both sides, then that does isolate the square root term on the left side
with everything else on the right. Once I've isolated the term with the square root, I'm going
to get rid of the square root. And I'll do that by squaring both sides of my equation. So I'll
take the square root of x equals 12 minus x and square both sides. Now the square root of x squared
is just x, taking the square root and then squaring those operations undo each other.
To work out 12 minus x squared, I'll write it out and distribute 12 times 12 is 144.
12 times minus x is minus 12 x. I get another minus 12 x from here.
And finally minus x times minus x is positive x squared. So I can combine my minus 12 x, so that's
minus 24 x. And now I can subtract x from both sides to get zero equals 144 minus 25 x plus x
squared. That's a quadratic equation. I'll rewrite it in a little bit more standard form here.
So now I've got a familiar quadratic equation with no radical signs left in my equation.
I'll just proceed to solve it like I usually do for a quadratic. I'll try to factor it. So I'm going
to look for two numbers that multiply to 144 and add to minus 25. Well, I know I'm going to need
negative numbers to get to negative 25. And in fact, I'll need two negative numbers. So they
still multiply to a positive number. So I'll start listing some factors of 144. I could have negative
one and a negative 144, negative two, and negative 72, negative four, negative 36, and so on.
Once I've listed out the possible factors, it's not hard to find
the two that add to negative 25. So that's negative nine and negative 16. So now I can factor my
quadratic equation as x minus nine times x minus 16 equals zero. That means that x minus nine is zero
or x minus 16 is zero. So x equals nine or x equals 16. I'm almost done. But there's one last
very important step. And that's to check the solutions so that we can eliminate any extraneous
solutions. An extraneous solution is a solution that we get that does not actually satisfy
our original equation. And extraneous solutions can happen when you're solving equations with
radicals in them. So let's first check x equals nine. If we plug in to our original equation,
we get nine plus the square root of nine and we want that to equal 12. Well, the square root of
nine is three, and nine plus three does indeed equal 12. So that solution checks out. Now let's
try x equals 16. Plugging in, we get 16 plus the square root of 16. And that's supposed to equal
12. Well, that says 16 plus four is supposed to equal 12. But that most definitely is not true.
And so x equals 16 turns out to be extraneous solution. And our only solution is x equals nine.
This next equation might not look like an equation involving radicals. But in fact, we can think
of a fractional exponent as being a radical in disguise. Let's start by doing the same thing
we did on the previous problem by isolating. This time, we'll isolate the part of the equation
that involves the fractional exponent. So I'll start with the original equation,
two times p to the fourth fifths equals one eighth, and I'll divide both sides by two,
or equivalently, I can multiply both sides by one half. That gives me p to the fourth fifths
equals one sixteenth. And I've effectively isolated the part of the equation with the
fractional exponent as much as possible. Now, in the previous example, the next step was to get rid
of the radical. In this example, we're going to get rid of the fractional exponent. And I'm going
to actually do this in two stages. First, I'm going to raise both sides to the fifth power.
That's because when I take an exponent to an exponent, I multiply my exponents,
and so that becomes just p to the fourth equals one sixteenth to the fifth power.
Now I'm going to get rid of the fourth power by raising both sides to the one fourth power
or by taking the fourth root. There's something that you need to be careful about, though, when
taking an even root, or the one over an even number power, you always have to consider
plus or minus your answer. It's kind of like when you write x squared equals four, and you
take the square root of both sides, x could equal plus or minus the square root of four, right,
x could equal plus or minus two, since minus two squared is for just as well as two squared.
So that's why when you take an even root, or a one over an even power of both sides,
you always need to include the plus or minus sign. When it's an odd root or one over an odd power,
you don't need to do that. If you had something like x cubed equals negative eight, then x equals
the cube root of negative eight, which is negative two would be your only solution. You don't need
to do the plus or minus because positive two wouldn't work. So that aside explains why we need this
plus or minus power. And now p to the four to the one fourth, when I raise a power to a power,
I multiply by exponents. So that's just p to the one, which is equal to plus or minus
one sixteenth to the fifth power to the one fourth power. Now I just need to simplify this
expression. I don't really want to raise one sixteenth to the fifth power, because 16 to the
fifth power is like a really huge number. So I think I'm actually going to rewrite this first
as p equals plus or minus one sixteenth, I'll write it back as the five fourth power again.
And as I continue to solve using my exponent rules,
I'm going to prefer to write this as one sixteenth to the fourth root to the fifth power,
because it's going to be easier to take the fourth root. Let's see the fourth root of one
sixteenth is the same thing as the fourth root of one over the fourth root of 16,
raise all that to the fifth power, fourth root of one is just one, and the fourth root of 16 is two,
raise that to the fifth power. That's just going to be one to the fifth over two to the fifth,
which is plus or minus one 30 seconds.
The last step is to check answers. So I have the two answers p equals one 30 second and p
equals minus one 30 seconds. And if I plug those both in one 30 second to the fourth fifth power,
that gives me two times one to the fourth fifth power over 32 to the fourth fifth power,
which is two times one over 32 fifth rooted to the fourth power, fifth root of 32 is two,
raise that to the fourth power, I get 16. So this is two times one sixteenth, which is one eighth,
just as we wanted in the original equation up here. Similarly, we can check that the p equals
negative one 30 second actually does satisfy the equation. I'll leave that step to the viewer.
So our two solutions are p equals one over 32 and p equals minus one over 32.
I do want to point out an alternate approach to getting rid of the fractional exponent.
We could have gotten rid of it all in one fell swoop by raising both sides of our equation
to the five fourths power. Five fourths is the reciprocal of four fifths. So when I use my
exponent rules, and say that when I raise the power to the power, I multiply my exponents,
that gives me p to the four fifths times five fourths is plus or minus one sixteenth to the
five fourths. In other words, p to the one power, which is just p is plus or minus one sixteenth
to the five fourths. So that's an alternate and possibly faster way to get to the solution.
Once again, the plus or minus comes from the fact that when we take the five fourth power,
we're really taking an even root of fourth root. And so we need to consider both positive and
negative answers. This video is about solving radical equations, that is equations like this one
that have square root signs in them, or cube roots or any other kind of radical.
In this video, we solved radical equations by first isolating the radical sign or the fractional
exponent, and then removing the radical sign or the fractional exponent by either squaring
both sides or taking the reciprocal power of both sides. This video is about solving inequalities
that have absolute value signs in them. Let's look at the inequality absolute value of x is
less than five on the number line. Thinking of absolute value as distance, this means that the
distance between x and zero is less than five units. So x has to live somewhere in between
negative five and five. We can express this as an inequality without absolute value signs
by saying negative five is less than x, which is less than five, or we can use interval notation,
soft bracket, negative five, five, soft bracket. Both of these formulations are equivalent to
the original one, but don't involve the absolute value signs. In the second example, we're looking
for the values of x for which the absolute value of x is greater than or equal to five.
On the number line, this means that the distance of x from the zero is got to be
bigger than or equal to five units. A distance bigger than five units means that x has to live
somewhere over here, or somewhere over here, where it's farther than five units away from zero.
Of course, x could also have a distance equal to five units. So I'll fill in that dot and
shade in the other parts of the number line that satisfy my inequality. Now I can rewrite the
inequality without the absolute value symbols by saying that x is less than or equal to negative
five, or x is greater than or equal to five. I could also write this in interval notation,
soft bracket, negative infinity, negative five, hard bracket. And the second part is hard bracket,
five, infinity, soft bracket. I combine these with a U for union, because I'm trying to describe
all these points on the number line together with all these other points. Let's take this analysis
a step further with a slightly more complicated problem. Now I want the absolute value of three
minus two t to be less than four. An absolute value less than four means a distance less than four on
the number line. But it's not the variable t that lives in here at a distance of less than four from
zero. It's the whole expression three minus two t. So three minus two t lives somewhere in here. And
I can rewrite this as an inequality without absolute value signs by saying negative four is less than
three minus two t is less than four. Now I have a compound inequality that I can solve the usual
way. First, I'll subtract three from all three sides to get negative seven is less than negative
two t is less than one. And now I'll divide all three sides by negative two. Since negative two
is a negative number, this reverses the directions of the inequalities. Simplifying I get seven halves
is greater than t is greater than negative one half. So my final answer on the number line
looks like all the stuff between negative a half and seven halves,
but not including the endpoints and an interval notation I can write this soft bracket negative
a half seven halves soft bracket. Please pause the video and try the next problem on your own.
Thinking in terms of distance, this inequality says that the distance between the expression
three minus two t and zero is always bigger than four. Let me draw this on the number line.
If three minus two t has a distance bigger than four from zero, then it can't be in this region
that's near zero, it has to be on the outside in one of these two regions.
That is, three minus two t is either less than negative four, or three minus two t is bigger than
four. I'll solve these two inequalities separately. The first one subtracting three from both sides,
I get negative two t is less than negative seven, dividing by negative two, I get t is
bigger than seven halves. And then on the other side, I get negative two t is greater than one.
So t is less than negative one half. I had to flip inequalities in the last step
due to dividing by a negative number. So let's check this out on the number line again.
The first piece says that t is greater than seven halves. I'll draw that over here.
And the second piece says that t is less than negative one half. I'll draw that down here.
Because these two statements are joined with an or, I'm looking for the t values
that are in this one, or in this one. That is, I want both of these regions put together.
So an interval notation, this reads negative infinity to negative one half soft bracket union
soft bracket seven halves to infinity. This last example looks more complicated.
But if I simplify first and isolate the absolute value part, it looks pretty much like the previous
ones. So I'll start by subtracting seven from both sides. And then I'll divide both sides by two.
Now I'll draw my number line. And I'm looking for this expression for x plus five to always have
distance greater than or equal to negative three from zero. Wait a second distance greater than
equal to negative three. Well distance is always greater than or equal to negative three, it's
always greater than or equal to zero. So this in fact is always true. And so the answer to my
inequality is all numbers between negative infinity and infinity. In other words, all real numbers.
When solving absolute value inequalities, it's good to think about distance.
An absolute value of something that's less than a number means that whatever's inside the absolute
value signs is close to zero. On the other hand, an absolute value of something being greater than
a number means that whatever's inside the absolute value sign is far away from zero.
Because its distance from zero is bigger than a certain number. Drawing these pictures on the
number line is a helpful way to rewrite the absolute value inequality as an inequality that
doesn't contain an absolute value sign. In this case, it would be negative three is less than x
plus two is less than three. And the other case, it would be either x plus two is less than negative
three or x plus two is greater than three. This video is about solving linear inequalities.
Those are inequalities like this one that involve a variable here x, but don't involve any x squared
or other higher power terms. The good news is, we can solve linear inequalities just like we'd
solve linear equations by distributing, adding and subtracting terms to both sides and multiplying
and dividing by numbers on both sides. The only thing that's different is that if you
multiply or divide by a negative number, then you need to reverse the direction of the inequality.
For example, if we had the inequality negative x is less than negative five, and we wanted to
multiply both sides by negative one to get rid of the negative signs, we'd have to also switch
or reverse the inequality. With this caution in mind, let's look at our first example.
Since our variable x is trapped in parentheses, I'll distribute the negative five to free it from
the parentheses. That gives me negative five x minus 10 plus three is greater than eight.
Negative 10 plus three is negative seven. So I'll rewrite this as negative five x minus seven is
greater than eight. Now I'll add seven to both sides to get negative five x is greater than 15.
Now I'd like to divide both sides by negative five, since negative five is a negative number
that reverses the inequality. So I get x is less than 15 divided by negative five. In other words,
x is less than negative three. If I wanted to graph this on a number line, I just need to put down
a negative three, an open circle around it, and shade into the left. I use an open circle
because x is strictly less than negative three and can't equal negative three. If I wanted to
write this in interval notation, I've read it as soft bracket, negative infinity, negative three,
soft bracket. Again, the soft bracket is because the negative three is not included.
This next example is an example of a compound inequality. It has two parts. Either this statement
is true or this statement is true. I want to find the values of x that satisfy either one.
I'll solve this by working out each part separately and then combining them at the end.
For the inequality on the left, I'll copy it over here. I'm going to add four to both sides,
then subtract x from both sides, and then divide both sides by two.
I didn't have to reverse the inequality sign because I divided by a positive number.
On the right side, I'll copy the equation over, subtract one from both sides, and divide both
sides by six. Nine, six is the same as three halves. Now I'm looking for the x values that make
this statement true or make this statement true. Let me graph this on a number line.
x is less than or equal to negative two means I put a filled in circle there and graph everything
to the left. x is greater than three halves means I put an empty circle here and shade in everything
to the right. My final answer includes both of these pieces, which I'll reshade in green because
x is allowed to be in either one or the other. Finally, I can write this in interval notation.
The first piece on the number line can be described as soft bracket negative infinity
negative two hard bracket. And the second piece can be described as soft bracket three halves
infinity soft bracket. To indicate that x can be in either one of these pieces, I use the union sign,
which is a U. That means that my answer includes all x values in here together with all x values in
here. This next example is also a compound inequality, this time joined by an and the and
means I'm looking for all y values that satisfy both this and this at the same time. Again,
I can solve each piece separately. On the left, to isolate the y, I need to multiply by negative
three halves on both sides. So that gives me y is less than negative 12 times negative three halves,
the greater than flipped to a less than because I was multiplying by negative three halves,
which is a negative number. If I clean up the right side to get y is less than 18.
On the right side, I'll start by subtracting two from both sides. And now I'll divide by negative
four, again, a negative number so that flips the inequality. So that's y is less than three over
negative four, in other words, y is less than negative three fourths. Again, I'm looking for the y
values that make both of these statements true at the same time. Let me graph this on the number line.
The y is less than 18. I can graph that by drawing the number 18.
I don't want to include it. So I use an empty circle and I shaded everything to the left.
The statement y is less than negative three fourths, I need to draw in negative three fourths.
And again, I don't include it, but I do include everything on the left. Since I want the y values
for which both of these statements are true, I need the y values that are in both colored blue
and colored red. And so that would be this part right here. I'll just draw it above so you can
see it easily. So that would be all the numbers from negative three fourths and lower, not including
negative three fourths. Since those are the parts of the number line that have both red and blue
colors on them. In interval notation, my final answer will be soft bracket negative infinity
to negative three fourths soft bracket. As my final example, I have an inequality
that has two inequality signs in it negative three is less than or equal to six x minus two is less
than 10. I can think of this as being a compound inequality with two parts negative three x is
less than or equal to six x minus two. And at the same time, six x minus two is less than 10.
I could solve this in two pieces as before. But instead, it's a little more efficient to just solve
it all at once by doing the same thing to all three sides. So as a first step, I'll add two to
all three sides. That gives me negative one is less than equal to six x is less than 12. And now
I'm going to divide all three sides by six to isolate the x. So that gives me negative one six
is less than or equal to x is less than two. If we'd solved it instead in two pieces above,
we'd end up with the same thing. Because we get negative one six is less than or equal to x from
this piece. And we get x is less than two on this piece. And because of the and statement, that's
the same thing as saying negative one six is less than or equal to x, which is less than two.
Either way we do it. Let's see if what it looks like on the number line. So on the number line,
we're looking for things that are between two and negative one six, including the negative one six,
but not including the two. In interval notation, we can write this as hard bracket negative one six
to soft bracket. In this video, we solved linear inequalities, including some compound inequalities
joined by the conjunctions and and or. Remember, when we're working with and we're looking for
places on the number line, where both statements are true. That is, we're looking for the overlap
on the number line. In this case, the points on the number line that are colored both red and blue
at the same time. When we're working with or statements, we're looking for places where
either one or the other statement is true or both. On the number line,
this corresponds to points that are colored either red or blue or both. And in this picture,
that would actually correspond to the entire number line. In this video, we'll solve inequalities
involving polynomials like this one, and inequalities involving rational expressions like this one.
Let's start with a simple example, maybe a deceptively simple example. If you see the inequality
x squared is less than four, you might be very tempted to take the square root of both sides and
get something like x is less than two as your answer. But in fact, that doesn't work.
To see why it's not correct, consider the x value of negative 10. Negative 10 satisfies
the inequality x is less than two, since negative 10 is less than two, but it doesn't satisfy the
inequality x squared is less than four, since negative 10 squared is 100, which is not less than
four. So these two inequalities are not the same. And it doesn't work to solve a quadratic
inequality just to take the square root of both sides. You might be thinking part of why this
reasoning is wrong is we've ignored the negative two option, right? If we had the equation x squared
equals four, then x equals two would just be one option, x equals negative two would be another
solution. So somehow our solution to this inequality should take this into account.
In fact, a good way to solve an inequality involving x squared or higher power terms
is to solve the associated equation first. But before we even do that, I like to pull
everything over to one side so that my inequality has zero on the other side.
So for our equation, I'll subtract four from both sides to get x squared minus four is less than
zero. Now, I'm going to actually solve the associated equation, x squared minus four is equal
to zero. I can do this by factoring to x minus two times x plus two is equal to zero. And I'll set
my factors equal to zero, and I get x equals two and x equals minus two.
Now, I'm going to plot the solutions to my equation on the number line. So I write down negative two
and two. Those are the places where my expression x squared minus four is equal to zero.
Since I want to find where x squared minus four is less than zero, I want to know where
this expression x squared minus four is positive or negative. A good way to find that out is to
plug in test values. So first I'll plug in a test value in this area of the number line,
something less than negative two say x equals negative three. If I plug in negative three
into x squared minus four, I get negative three squared minus four, which is nine minus four,
which is five. That's a positive number. So at negative three, the expression x squared minus
four is positive. And in fact, everywhere on this region of the number line, my expression is going
to be positive, because it can't jump from positive to negative without going through a place where
it's zero. I can figure out whether x squared minus four is positive or negative on this region,
and on this region of the number line, by plugging in test values similarly.
A value to plug in between negative two and two, a nice value is x equals zero, zero squared minus
four, that's negative four, a negative number. So I know that my expression x squared minus four
is negative on this whole interval. Finally, I can plug in something like x equals 10, something
bigger than two, and I get 10 squared minus four. Without even computing that, I can tell that that's
going to be a positive number. And that's all that's important. Again, since I want x squared
minus four to be less than zero, I'm looking for the places on this number line, where I'm getting
negatives. So I'll shade that in on my number line, it's in here, not including the endpoints,
because the endpoints are where my expression x squared minus four is equal to zero, and I want
it strictly less than zero. I can write my answer as an inequality, negative two is less than x is
less than two, or an interval notation as soft bracket negative two to soft bracket.
Our next example, we can solve similarly. First, we'll move everything to one side,
so that our inequality is x cubed minus five x squared minus six x is greater than or equal to
zero. Next, we'll solve the associated equation by factoring. So first, I'll write down the equation.
Now I'll factor out an x. And now I'll factor the quadratic. So the solutions to my equation
are x equals zero x equals six and x equals negative one. I'll write the solutions to the
equation on the number line. So that's negative one, zero, and six. That's where my expression x times
x minus six times x plus one is equal to zero. But I want to find where it's greater than or equal
to zero. So again, I can use test values. I can plug in, for example, x equals negative two,
either to this version of expression, or to this factored version. Since I only care whether my
answer is positive or negative, it's sometimes easier to use the factored version. For example,
when x is negative two, this factor is negative. But this factor x minus six is also negative
when I plug in negative two for x. Finally, x plus one, when I plug in negative two for x,
that's negative one, that's also negative. And a negative times a negative times a negative
gives me a negative number. If I plug in something between negative one and zero, say x equals negative
one half, then I'm going to get a negative for this factor, a negative for this factor,
but a positive for this third factor. Negative times negative times positive gives me a positive.
For a test value between zero and six, let's try x equals one. Now I'll get a positive for
this factor, a negative for this factor, and a positive for this factor. Positive times a negative
times a positive gives me a negative. Finally, for a test value bigger than six, we could use
say x equals 100. That's going to give me positive, positive, positive. So my product will be positive.
Since I want values where my expression is greater than or equal to zero, I want the places where it
equals zero and the places where it's positive. So my final answer will be close bracket negative
one to zero close bracket union close bracket six to infinity. As our final example, let's consider
the rational inequality x squared plus six x plus nine divided by x minus one is less than or equal
to zero. Although it might be tempting to clear the denominator and multiply both sides by x minus
one, it's dangerous to do that, because x minus one could be a positive number, but it could also
be a negative number. And when you multiply both sides by a negative number, you have to reverse
the inequality. Although it's possible to solve the inequality this way by thinking of cases where
x minus one is less than zero or better than zero, I think it's much easier just to solve the same
way as we did before. So we'll start by rewriting so that we move all terms to the left and have zero
on the right. Well, that's already true. So the next step would be to solve the associated equation.
That is x squared plus six x plus nine over x minus one is equal to zero.
That would be where the numerator zero x squared plus six x plus nine is equal to zero. So where x plus
three squared is zero or x equals negative three. There's one extra step we have to do for rational
expressions. And that's what we need to find where the expression does not exist. That is,
let's find where the denominator is zero and that's at x equals one. I'll put all those numbers on
the number line, the places where my rational expression is equal to zero, and the place where
my rational expression doesn't exist. Then I can start in with test values. For example, x equals
minus four, zero and two work. If I plug those values into this expression here, I get a negative
answer, a negative answer and a positive answer. The reason I need to conclude the values on my
number line where my denominator zero is because I can my expression can switch from negative to
positive by passing through a place where my rational expression doesn't exist, as well as
passing by passing through a place where my rational expression is equal to zero. Now I'm
looking for where my original expression was less than or equal to zero. So that means I want the
places on the number line where my expression is equal to zero, and also the places where it's
negative. So my final answer is x is less than one or an interval notation negative infinity to one.
In this video, we solved polynomial and rational inequalities by making a number line
and using test values to make a sign chart. The distance formula can be used to find the
distance between two points if we know their coordinates. If this first point has coordinates
x one, y one, and the second point has coordinates x two, y two, then the distance between them
is given by the formula, the square root of x two minus x one squared plus y two minus y one
squared. This formula actually comes from the Pythagorean theorem. Let me draw a right triangle
with these two points as two of its vertices.
Then the length of this side is the difference between the two x coordinates. Similarly, the
length of this vertical side is the difference between the two y coordinates. Now the Pythagorean
theorem says that for any right triangle with sides labeled A and B and hypotenuse labeled C,
we have that A squared plus B squared equals C squared. Well, if we apply that to this triangle
here, this hypotenuse is the distance between the two points that we're looking for.
So Pythagorean theorem says the square of this side length, that is x two minus x one squared
plus the square of this side length, which is y two minus y one squared
has to equal the square of the hypotenuse, that is D squared. Taking the square root of both sides
of this equation, we get the square root of x two minus x one squared plus y two minus y one
squared is equal to D. We don't have to worry about using plus or minus signs when we take the
square root because distance is always positive. So we've derived our distance formula. Now let's
use it in an example. Let's find the distance between the two points negative one five, negative one
five, maybe over here, and four two. This notation just means that P is the point with
coordinates negative one five. And Q is the point with coordinates four two.
We have the distance formula. Let's think of P being the point with coordinates x one y one
and Q being the point with coordinates x two y two. But as we'll see, it really doesn't matter
which one is which. Plugging into our formula, we get D is the square root of x two minus x one.
So that's four minus negative one squared. And then we add y two minus y one. So that's two minus
five squared. Working out the arithmetic a little bit four minus negative one, that's four plus one
or five squared plus negative three squared. So that's the square root of 25 plus nine,
or the square root of 34. Let's see what would have happened if we'd called this first point
x two y two instead and the second point x one y one. Then we would have gotten the same distance
formula. But we would have taken negative one minus four. And added the difference of y squared.
So that's y two five minus two squared. So that gives us the square root of negative five squared
plus three squared, which works out to the same thing. In this video, we use the distance formula
to find the distance between two points. When writing down the distance formula, sometimes
students forget whether this is a plus or minus and whether these are pluses or minuses. One way
to remember is to think that the distance formula comes from the Pythagorean theorem. That's why
there's a plus in here. And then a minus in here because we're getting the difference between the
coordinates to find the lengths of the sides. The midpoint formula helps us find the coordinates
of the midpoint of a line segment, as long as we know the coordinates of the endpoints.
So let's call the coordinates of this endpoint x one y one, and the coordinates of this other
endpoint x two y two. The x coordinate of the midpoint is going to be exactly halfway in between
the x coordinates of the endpoints. To get a number halfway in between two other numbers,
we just take the average.
Similarly, the y coordinate of this midpoint is going to be exactly halfway in between
the y coordinates of the endpoints. So the y coordinate of the midpoint is going to be the
average of those y coordinates. So we see that the coordinates of the midpoint
are x one plus x two over two, y one plus y two over two.
Let's use this midpoint formula in an example. We want to find the midpoint of the segment
between the points negative one, five, and four, two.
Let me draw the line segment between them. So visually the midpoint is going to be somewhere
around here. But to find its exact coordinates, we're going to use x one plus x two over two,
and y one plus y two over two, where this first point is coordinates
x one y one. And the second point has coordinates x two y two. It doesn't actually matter which
point you decide is x one y one and which one is x two y two. The formula will still give you
the same answer for the midpoint. So let's see I take my average of my x coordinates. So that's
negative one plus four over two, and the average of my y coordinates. So that's five plus two over
two. And I get three halves, seven halves, as the coordinates of my midpoint. In this video,
we use the midpoint formula to find the midpoint of a line segment, just by taking the average
of the x coordinates and the average of the y coordinates. This video is about graphs and
equations of circles. Suppose we want to find the equation of a circle of radius five centered at the
point three two. It'll look something like this. For any point x y on the circle, we know that
that the distance of that point x y from the center is equal to the radius, that is five.
From the distance formula, that distance of five is equal to the square root of the difference of
the x coordinates. That's x minus three squared, plus the difference of the y coordinates, that's
y minus two squared. And if I square both sides of that equation, I get five squared is this square
root squared. In other words, 25 is equal to x minus three squared plus y minus two squared,
since the square root and the squared undo each other. A lot of times people will write the x minus
three squared plus y minus two squared on the left side of the equation and the 25 on the right
side of the equation. This is the standard form for the equation of this circle. The same reasoning
can be generalized to find the general equation for a circle with radius r centered at a point hk.
For any point with coordinates x y on the circle, the distance between the point with coordinates
x y and the point with coordinates hk is equal to the radius r. So we have that the distance
is equal to r, but by the distance formula, that's the square root of the difference between the x
coordinates, x minus h squared, plus the difference in the y coordinates, y minus k squared.
Squaring both sides as before, we get r squared is the square root squared, canceling the square root
and the squared and rearranging the equation that gives us x minus h squared plus y minus k squared
equals r squared. That's the general formula for a circle with radius r and center hk.
Notice that the coordinates h and k are subtracted here. The two squares are added because they are
in the distance formula and the radius is squared on the other side. If you remember this general
formula, that makes it easy to write down the equation for a circle. For example, if we want the
equation for a circle of radius six and center at zero negative three, then we have r equals six
and hk is our zero negative three. So plugging into the formula, we get x minus zero squared plus
y minus negative three squared equals six squared, or simplified, this is x squared plus y plus three
squared equals 36. Suppose we're given an equation like this one, and we want to decide if it's the
equation of a circle. And if so, what's the center and what's the radius? Well, this equation matches
the form for a circle x minus h squared plus y minus k squared equals r squared.
If we let h be five, y be negative six, since that way, subtracting a negative six is like
adding a six. Five must be our r squared. So that means that r is the square root of five.
So this is our radius. And our center is the point five negative six. And this is indeed
the equation for a circle, which we could then graph by putting down the center
and estimating the radius, which is a little bit more than two.
This equation might not look like the equation of a circle, but it actually can be transformed
to look like the equation of a circle. We're trying to make it look like something of the form
x minus h squared plus y minus k squared equals r squared. First, I'd like to get rid of the
coefficients in front of the x squared and the y squared. So I'm going to divide everything by nine.
This gives me x squared plus y squared plus eight x minus two y plus four equals zero. Next,
I'm going to group the x terms together, the x squared and the eight x. So I'll write x squared
plus eight x. I'll group the y terms together, the y squared minus two y.
And I'll subtract the four over to the other side.
This still doesn't look much like the equation of a circle. But as the next step,
I'm going to do something called completing the square. I'm going to take this coefficient
of x eight, divide it by two and then square it. In other words, eight over two squared,
that's four squared, which is 16. I'm going to add 16 to both sides of my equation.
So add the 16 here. And on the other side. Now I'm going to do the same thing to the
coefficient of y negative two divided by two is negative one square that and I get one. So now I'm
going to add a one to both sides, but I'll put it near the y terms. So add a one there. And then
to keep things balanced, I have to add it to the other side. On the right side, I have the number
13. On the left side, I can wrap up this expression x squared plus eight x plus 16
into x plus four squared. To convince you that's correct. If we multiply out x plus four times x
plus four, we get x squared plus four x plus four x plus 16, or x squared plus eight x plus 16,
the same thing we have right here. Similarly, we can wrap up y squared minus two y plus one as
y minus one squared. Again, I'll work out the distribution down here. That's y squared minus
y minus y plus one or y squared minus two y plus one, just like we have up here.
If you're wondering how I knew to use four and minus one, the four came from taking half of eight,
and the minus one came from taking half the negative two. Now we have an equation for a
circle in standard form. And we can read off the center, which is negative four, negative one,
and the radius, which is the square root of 13. It might seem like magic that this trick of taking
half of this coefficient and squaring it and adding it to both sides, let's us wrap up this
expression into this expression, that's perfect square. But to see why that works, let's take a
look at what happens if we expand out x minus h squared, the thing that we're trying to get to.
So if we expand that out, x minus h squared, which is x minus h times x minus h is,
which multiplies out to x squared minus hx minus hx plus h squared, or x squared minus two hx plus
h squared. Now if we start out with this part, with some x squared term and some coefficient of x,
and we're trying to decide what to add on in order to wrap it up into x minus h squared,
the thing to add on is h squared here, which comes from half of this coefficient squared,
right, because half of negative two h is eight negative h, square that you get the h squared.
And then when we do wrap it up, it's half of this coefficient of x that appears right here.
This trick of completing the square is really handy for turning an equation for a circle in
disguise into the standard equation for the circle. In this video, we found the standard
equation for a circle, x minus h squared plus y minus k squared equals r squared, where r is the
radius, and hk is the center. We also showed a method of completing the square. When you have
an equation for a circle in disguise, completing the square will help you rewrite it into the standard
form. This video is about graphs and equations of lines. Here we're given the graph of a line,
we want to find the equation. One standard format for the equation of a line is y equals mx plus b.
Here m represents the slope and b represents the y intercept, the y value where the line crosses
the y axis. The slope is equal to the rise over the run, or sometimes this is written as the change
in y values over the change in x values, or in other words, y2 minus y1 over x2 minus x1, where
x1, y1, and x2, y2 are points on the line. While we could use any two points on the line to find
the slope, it's convenient to use points where the x and y coordinates are integers, that is
points where the line passes through grid points. So here would be one convenient point to use,
and here's another convenient point to use. The coordinates of the first point are one, two,
and the next point, this is, let's see, five, negative one. Now I can find the slope by looking
at the rise over the run. So as I go through a run of this distance, I go through a rise of that
distance, it's actually going to be a negative rise or a fall because my line is pointing down.
So let's see, counting off squares, this is a run of one, two, three, four squares and a rise of
one, two, three, so negative three. So my slope is going to be negative three over four.
I got that answer by counting squares, but I could have also gotten it by
looking at the difference in my y values over the difference in my x values.
That is, I could have done negative one minus two, that's from my difference in y values,
and divide that by my difference in x values, which is five minus one, that gives me negative three
over four as before. So my m is negative three fourths. Now I need to figure out the value of b,
my y intercept. Well, I could just read it off the graph, it looks like approximately 2.75,
but if I want to be more accurate, I can again use a point that has integer coordinates that I know
its exact coordinates. So either this point or that point, let's try this point. And I can start
off with my equation y equals mx plus b, that is y equals negative three fourths x plus b,
and I can plug in the point one two for my x and y. So that gives me two equals negative three fourths
times one plus b, solving for b, let's see that's two equals negative three fourths plus b,
so add three fourths to both sides, that's two plus three fourths equals b. So b is
eight fourths plus three fourths, which is 11 fourths, which is actually just what I eyeballed it
to be. So now I can write out my final equation for my line y equals negative three fourths x plus
11 fourths by plugging in for m and b. Next, let's find the equation for this horizontal line.
A horizontal line has slope zero. So if we think of it as y equals mx plus b,
m is going to be zero. In other words, it's just y equals b, y is some constant. So if we can figure
out what that that constant y value is, it looks like it's two, let's see that's three,
three and a half, we can just write down the equation directly, y equals 3.5.
For a vertical line, like this one, it doesn't really have a slope. I mean, if you tried to do
the rise over the run, there's no run. So I guess you'd be dividing by zero and get an infinite slope.
But but instead, we just think of it as an equation of the form x equals something.
And in this case, x equals negative two. Notice that all of the points on our line have the same
x coordinate of negative two and the y coordinate can be anything. So this is how we write the
equation for a vertical line. In this example, we're not shown a graph of the line, we're just
told that it goes through two points. But knowing that it goes through two points is enough to find
the equation for the line. First, we can find the slope by taking the difference in y values
over the difference in x values. So that's negative three minus two over four minus one,
which is negative five thirds. So we can use the standard equation for the line,
this is called the slope intercept form. And we can plug in negative five thirds.
And we can use one point, either one will do, we'll still get the same final answer. So let's
use one two and plug that in to get two equals negative five thirds times one plus B. And so B is
two plus five thirds, which is six thirds plus five thirds, which is 11 thirds. So our equation
is y equals negative five thirds x plus 11 thirds. This is method one. Method two uses a slightly
different form of the equation. It's called the point slope form. And it goes y minus y not
is equal to m times x minus x not, where x not y not is a point on the line. And am again is the
slope. So we calculate the slope the same way, by taking a difference in y values over difference
in x values. But then we can simply plug in any point. For example, the point one two will work,
we can plug one in for x not and two in for y not in this point slope form, that gives us y
minus two is equal to minus five thirds x minus one. Notice that these two equations while they may
look different are actually equivalent. Because if I distribute the negative five thirds, and then
and then add the two to both sides,
I get the same equation as above.
So we've seen two ways of finding the equation for the line, using the slope intercept form
and using the point slope form. In this video, we saw that you can find the equation for a line
if you know the slope. And you know one point. You can also find the equation for the line if
you know two points, because you can use the two points to get the slope, and then plug in one of
those points to figure out the rest of the equation. We saw two standard forms for the
equation of a line. The slope intercept form y equals mx plus b, where m is the slope, and b is the
y intercept. And the point slope form y minus y not equals m times x minus x not, where m again
is the slope, and x not y not is a point on the line. This video is about finding parallel and
perpendicular lines. Suppose we have a line of slope three fourths, in other words, the rise
over the run is three over four. Then any other line that's parallel to this line will have the same
slope, the same rise over run. So that's our first fact to keep in mind. Parallel lines have the same
slopes. Suppose on the other hand, we want to find a line perpendicular to our original line with
its original slope of three fourths. A perpendicular line, in other words, a line at a 90 degree
angle to our original line, will have a slope that's the negative reciprocal, the opposite
reciprocal of our original slope. So we take the reciprocal of three fourths, that's four thirds,
and we make it its opposite by changing it from positive to negative. So I'll write this as a
principle that perpendicular lines have opposite reciprocal slopes. To get the hang of what it
means to be an opposite reciprocal, let's look at a few examples. So here's the original slope,
and this will be the opposite reciprocal, which would represent the slope of our perpendicular
line. So for example, if m1 was two, then the opposite reciprocal, the reciprocal of two is
one half opposite means I changed the sign. If the first slope turned out to be say negative one
third, the reciprocal of one third is three over one or just three. And the opposite means I change
it from a negative to a positive. So my perpendicular slope would be would be three. One more example,
if I started off with the slope of say seven halves, then the reciprocal of that would be
two sevenths, and I change it to an opposite reciprocal by changing the positive to a negative.
Let's use these two principles in some examples.
In our first example, we need to find the equation of a line that's parallel to this one,
and goes through the point negative three two. Well, in order to get started, I need to figure
out the slope of this line. So let me put this line into a more standard form the the slope intercept
form. So I'll start with three y minus four x plus six equals zero, I'm going to solve for y to put
it in this this more standard form. So I'll say three y equals four x minus six, and then divide
by three to get y equals four thirds x minus six thirds is divided all my terms by three, I can
simplify that a little bit y equals four thirds x minus two. Now I can read off the slope of my
original line. And one is four thirds. That means my slope of my new line, my parallel line will
also be four thirds. So my new line will have the equation y equals four thirds x plus b for some b,
of course, b will probably not be negative two, like it was for the first line, it'll be something
else determined by the fact that it goes through this point negative three two. To figure out what
b is, I'll plug in the point negative three two for negative three for x, and two for y. So that
gives me two equals four thirds times negative three plus b, and I'll solve for b. So let's see.
First, let me just simplify. So two equals, this is negative 12 thirds plus b, or in other words,
two is negative four plus b. So that means that b is going to be six. And my my parallel line will
have the equation y equals four thirds x plus six. Next, let's find the equation of a line
that's perpendicular to a given line through and go through a given point. Again, in order to get
started, I need to find what the slope of this given line is. So I'll rewrite it. Well, first
I'll just copy it over six x plus three y equals four. And then I can put it in the standard slope
intercept form by solving for y. So three y is negative six x plus four, divide everything by
three, I get y equals negative six thirds x plus four thirds. So y is negative two x plus four thirds.
So on my original slope of my original line is negative two, which means my perpendicular slope
is the opposite reciprocal. So I take the reciprocal of negative two, that's negative
one half and I change the sign. So that gives me one half as the slope of my perpendicular line.
Now my new line, I know it's going to be y equals one half x plus b for some b. And I can plug in
my point on my new line. So one for y and four for x and solve for b. So I get one equals two
plus b. So b is negative one. And so my new line has equation one half x minus one.
These next two examples are a little bit different, because now we're looking at
a line parallel to a completely horizontal line. Let me draw this line y equals three. So the y
coordinate is always three, which means that my line will be a horizontal line through that height
at height y equals three. If I want something parallel to this line, it will also be a horizontal
line. Since it goes through the point negative two one, let's see negative two one, it has to go
through that point there. It's going to have always have a y coordinate of one, the same as
the y coordinate of the point it goes through. So my answer will just be y equals one.
In the next example, we want a line that's perpendicular to the line y equals four, another
horizontal line y equals four. But perpendicular means I'm going to need a vertical line. So I need
a vertical line that goes through the point three, four. Okay. And so I'm going to draw a vertical
line there. Now vertical lines have the form x equals something for their equation. And to find
what x equals, I just need to look at the x coordinate of the point I'm going through,
this point three, four. So that x coordinate is three. And all the points on this, this perpendicular
and vertical line have x coordinate three. So my answer is x equals three.
In this video, we use the fact that parallel lines have the same slope. And perpendicular lines
have opposite reciprocal slopes to find the equations of parallel and perpendicular lines.
This video introduces functions and their domains and ranges.
A function is a correspondence between input numbers, usually the x values,
and output numbers, usually the y values, that sends each input number to exactly one output
number. Sometimes a function is thought of as a rule or machine in which you can feed in
x values as input and get out y values as output. So a non-mathematical example of a function might
be the biological mother function, which takes as input any person and gives as output their
biological mother. This function satisfies the condition that each input number object person
in this case gets sent to exactly one output person because if you take any person, they just
have one biological mother. So that rule does give you a function. But if I change things around
and just use the mother function, which sends to each person their mother, that's no longer going
to be a function because there are some people who have more than one mother, right? They could have
a biological mother and adopted mother or a mother and a stepmother or any number of situations.
So since there's at least some people who you would put it as input and then you'd
get like more than one possible output, that violates this rule of functions. It would not be
a function. Now most of the time we'll work with functions that are described with equations, not
in terms of mothers. So for example we could have the function y equals x squared plus one.
This can also be written as f of x equals x squared plus one. Here f of x is function notation
that stands for the output value of y. Notice that this notation is not representing multiplication.
We're not multiplying f by x. Instead, we're going to be putting in a value for x as input
and getting out a value of f of x or y. For example, if we want to evaluate f of two,
we're plugging in two as input for x either in this equation or in that equation. Since
f of two means two squared plus one, f of two is going to equal five. Similarly f of five means I
plug in five for x. So that's going to be five squared plus one or 26. Sometimes it's useful
to evaluate a function on a more complicated expression involving other variables. In this
case, remember the functions value on any expression is just what you get when you
plug in that whole expression for x. So f of a plus three is going to be the quantity a plus
three squared plus one. We could rewrite that as a squared plus six a plus nine plus one,
or a squared plus six a plus 10. When evaluating a function on a complex expression, it's important
to keep the parentheses when you plug in for x. That way, you evaluate the function on the whole
expression. For example, it would be wrong to write f of a plus three equals a plus three squared
plus one without the parentheses, because that would imply we were just squaring the three and
not the whole expression a plus three. Sometimes the function is described with a graph instead
of an equation. In this example, this graph is supposed to represent the function g of x. Not all
graphs actually represent functions. For example, the graph of a circle doesn't represent a function.
That's because the graph of a circle violates the vertical line test, you can draw a vertical line,
and I'll intersect the graph in more than one point. But our graph at left satisfies the vertical
line test. Any vertical line intersects the graph and at most one point. That means it's a function
because every x value will have at most one y value that corresponds to it. Let's evaluate
g of two. Note that two is an x value. And we'll use the graph to find the corresponding y value.
So I look for two on the x axis, and find the point on the graph that has that x value. That's
right here. Now I can look at the y value of that point looks like three, and therefore g of two is
equal to three. If I try to do the same thing to evaluate g of five, I run into trouble. Five is an
x value. I look for it on the x axis. But there's no point on the graph that has that x value.
Therefore, g of five is undefined, or we can say it does not exist. The question of what x values and
y values make sense for a function leads us to a discussion of domain and range. The domain of a
function is all possible x values that make sense for that function. The range is the y values that
make sense for the function. In this example, we saw that the x value of five didn't have a
corresponding y value for this function. So the x value of five is not in the domain of our function
g. To find the x values in the domain, we have to look at the x values that correspond to points on
the graph. When we do that is to take the shadow or projection of the graph onto the x axis, and see
what x values are hit. It looks like we're hitting all x values starting at negative eight and continuing
up to four. So our domain is the x's between negative eight and four, including those end points,
or we can write this in interval notation as negative eight comma four with square brackets.
To find the range of the function, we look for the y values corresponding to points on this graph.
We can do that by taking the shadow or projection of the graph onto the y axis.
We seem to be hitting all y values from negative five up through three.
So our range is wise between negative five and three or an interval notation negative five three
with square brackets. If we meet a function that's described as an equation instead of a graph,
one way to find the domain and range are to graph the function. But it's often possible to find the
domain at least more quickly by using algebraic considerations. We think about what x values
it makes sense to plug into this expression, and what x values need to be excluded because they
make the algebraic expression impossible to evaluate. Specifically, to find the domain of a function,
we need to exclude x values that make the denominator zero since we can't divide by zero.
We also need to exclude x values that make an expression inside a square root sign negative
since we can't take the square root of a negative number. In fact, we need to exclude values that
make expression inside any even root negative because we can't take an even root of a negative
number even though we can take an odd root like a cube root of a negative number. Later,
when we look at logarithmic functions, we'll have some additional exclusions that we have to make.
But for now, these two principles should handle all functions we'll see. So let's apply them to
a couple examples. For the function in part a, we don't have any square root signs, but we do have
a denominator. So we need to exclude x values that make the denominator zero. In other words,
we need x squared minus 4x plus three to not be equal to zero. If we solve x squared minus 4x plus
three equal to zero, we can do that by factoring. And that gives us x equals three or x equals one.
So we need to exclude these values. All other x values should be fine. So if I draw the number line,
I can put on one and three and just dig out a hole at both of those. And my domain includes
everything else on the number line. In interval notation, this means my domain is everything
from negative infinity to one together with everything from one to three together with
everything from three to infinity. In this second example, we don't have any
denominators to worry about, but we do have a square root sign. So we need to exclude any x values
that make three minus 2x less than zero. In other words, we can include all x values for which three
minus 2x is greater than or equal to zero. Solving that inequality gives us three is greater than
or equal to 2x. In other words, x is less than or equal to three halves. I can draw this on the
number line or write it in interval notation. Notice that three halves is included. And that's
because three minus 2x is allowed to be zero, I can take the square root of zero, it's just zero.
And that's not a problem. Finally, let's look at a more complicated function that involves
both a square root and a denominator. Now there are two things I need to worry about.
I need the denominator to not be equal to zero. And I need the stuff inside the square root sign
to be greater than or equal to zero. From our earlier work, we know that the first condition
means that x is not equal to three, and x is not equal to one. And the second condition
means that x is less than or equal to three halves. Let's draw both of those conditions
on the number line. x is not equal to three and x is not equal to one means we've got everything
except those two dug out points. And the other condition x is less than or equal to three halves
means we can have three halves and everything to the left of it. Now to be in our domain and to
be legit for our function, we need both of these conditions to be true. So I'm going to connect
these conditions with an and. And that means we're looking for numbers on the number line that are
colored both red and blue. So I'll draw that above in purple. So that's everything from three halves
to one. I have to dig out one because one was a problem for the denominator. And then I can
continue for all the things that are colored both both colors red and blue. So my final domain
is going to be let's see negative infinity up to but not including one together with
one but not including it to three halves and I include three halves since that was colored
both red and blue also. In this video, we talked about functions, how to evaluate them, and how
to find domains and ranges. This video gives the graphs of some commonly used functions that I call
the toolkit functions. The first function is the function y equals x. Let's plot a few points on
the graph of this function. If x is zero, y is zero. If x is one, y is one. And so on y is always
equal to x doesn't have to just be an integer, it can be any real number. And while connecting the
dots, we get a straight line through the origin. Let's look at the graph of y equals x squared.
If x is zero, y is zero. So we go through the origin again. If x is one, y is one.
And if x is negative one, y is also one. The x value of two gives a y value of four and the x
value of negative two gives a y value of four also. Connecting the dots, we get a parabola.
Notice that this function is an even function. That means it has mirror symmetry across the y
axis, the left side looks like exactly like the mirror image of the right side. That happens because
when you square a positive number like two, you get the exact same y value as when you
square its mirror image x value of negative two. The next function y equals x cubed. I'll call that
a cubic. Let's plot a few points when x is zero, y is zero. When x is one, y is one. When x is
negative one, y is negative one. Two goes with the point eight way up here and an x value of negative
two is going to give us negative eight. If I connect the dots, I get something that looks kind of like
this. This function is what's called an odd function, because it has 180 degree rotational
symmetry around the origin. If I rotate this whole graph by 180 degrees, or in other words,
turn the paper upside down, I'll get exactly the same shape. The reason this function has this odd
symmetry is because when I cube a positive number and get its y value, I get and cube the
corresponding negative number to get its y value, the negative number cubed gives us exactly the
negative of the y value we get with cubing the positive number. Let's look at the next example,
y equals a square root of x. Notice that the domain of this function is just x values bigger
than or equal to zero because we can't take the square root of a negative number. Let's plug in
a few x values, x is zero gives y is zero, x is one, square root of one is one, square root of four is
two. And connecting the dots, I get a function that looks like this.
The absolute value function is next. Again, if we plug in a few points,
x is zero goes with y equals zero, x is one gives us one, the absolute value of negative one is one.
Two two is on the graph and the absolute value of negative two is two. I'm ending up getting
a v shaped graph. It also has even or mirror symmetry.
Y equals two to the x is what's known as an exponential function. That's because the variable x
is in the exponent. If I plot a few points, two to the zero is one, two to the one is two,
two squared is four, two to the minus one is one half. I'll plot these on my graph.
Let me fill in a few more points. So let's see, two cubed is eight, that's way up here.
And negative two gives me one fourth, one eighth. Connecting the dots, I get something that's shaped
like this. You might have heard the expression exponential growth when talking about, for example,
population growth. This is function is represents exponential growth. It grows very, very steeply.
Every time we increase the x coordinate by one, we double the y coordinate.
We could also look at a function like y equals three to the x or sometimes y equals e to the x,
where e is just a number about 2.7. These functions look very similar. It's just the
bigger base makes us rise a little more steeply. Now let's look at the function y equals one over x.
It's not defined when x is zero. But I can plug in x equals one half, one over one half is two.
One over one is one. And one over two is one half. If I connect the dots, I get this shape
in the first quadrant, but I haven't looked at negative values of x. When x is negative, one over
negative one is negative one. One over negative a half is negative two. And I get a similar looking
piece in the third quadrant. This is an example of a hyperbola. And it's also an odd function,
because it has that 180 degree rotational symmetry. If I turn the page upside down,
it'll look exactly the same. Finally, let's look at y equals one over x squared.
Again, it's not defined when x is zero, but I can plug in points like
one half for x. Let's see one over one half squared is one over one fourth, which is four.
And one over one squared, one over two squared is a fourth. It looks pretty much like the previous
function. It's just a little bit more extreme rises a little more steeply, falls a little more
dramatically. But for negative values of x, something a little bit different goes on. For
example, one over negative two squared is just one over four, which is a fourth. So I can plot
so I can plot that point there. And one over negative one squared, that's just one. So my
curve for negative values of x is going to lie in the second quadrant, not the third quadrant.
This is an example of an even function, because it has perfect mirror symmetry across the y axis.
These are the toolkit functions. And I recommend you memorize the shape of each of them.
That way you can draw at least a rough sketch very quickly without having to plug in points.
That's all for the graphs of the toolkit functions.
If we change the equation of a function, then the graph of the function changes or transforms
in predictable ways. This video gives some rules and examples for transformations of functions.
To get the most out of this video, it's helpful if you're already familiar with the graph of
some typical functions, I call them toolkit functions, like y equals square root of x,
y equals x squared, y equals the absolute value of x, and so on. If you're not familiar with those
graphs, I encourage you to watch my video called toolkit functions first before watching this one.
I want to start by reviewing function notation. If g of x represents the function the square root of
x, then we can rewrite these expressions in terms of square roots. For example, g of x minus two
is the same thing as the square root of x minus two.
g of quantity x minus two means we plug in x minus two everywhere we see an x.
So that would be the same thing as the square root of quantity x minus two.
In this second example, I say that we're subtracting two on the inside of the function,
because we're subtracting two before we apply the square root function. Whereas on the first
example, I say that the minus two is on the outside of the function. We're doing the square root
function first and then subtracting two. In this third example, g of three x, we're multiplying
by three on the inside of the function. To evaluate this in terms of square root, we plug in the entire
three x for x and the square root function. That gives us the square root of three x.
In the next example, we're multiplying by three on the outside of the function.
This is just three times the square root of x. Finally, g of minus x means the square root of
minus x. This might look a little odd because we're not used to taking the square root of a
negative number. But remember that if x itself is negative, like negative two, then negative x will
be negative negative two or positive two. So we'll really be taking the square root of a positive
number in that case. Let me record which of these are inside and which of these are outside of my
function. In this next set of examples, we're using the same function g of x is square root of x.
But this time we're starting with an expression with square roots in it and trying to write it
in terms of g of x. So the first example, the plus 17 is on the outside of my function,
because I'm taking the square root of x first and then adding 17. So I can write this as g of x
plus 17. In the second example, I'm taking x and adding 12 first, then I take the square root of the
whole thing. Since I'm adding the 12 to x first, that's on the inside of my function. So I write
that as g of the quantity x plus 12. Remember that this notation means I plug in the entire x plus
12 into the square root sign, which gives me exactly square root of x plus 12. In this next
example, I'm doing the square root first and then multiplying by negative 36. So my minus 36
multiplication is outside my function. I can rewrite this as minus 36 times g of x. Finally,
in this last example, I take x multiply by a fourth and then apply the square root of x.
So that's the same thing as g of one fourth x, my one fourth x is on the inside of my function.
In other words, it's inside the parentheses when I use function notation.
Let's graph the square root of x and two transformations of this function.
y equals the square root of x goes through the points zero zero one one and four two,
since the square root of four is two, and looks something like this.
In order to graph y equals the square root of x minus two, notice that the minus two is on the
outside of the function. That means we're going to take the square root of x first and then subtract
two. So for example, if we start with the x value of zero and compute the square root of zero, that's
then we subtract two to give us a y value of negative two.
An x value of one, which under the square root function had a y value of one, now has a y value
that's decreased by two, one minus two is negative one. And finally, an x value of four, which under
the square root function had a y value of two, now has a y value of two minus two or zero. Its y
value was also decreased by two. If I plot these new points, zero goes with negative two, one goes
with negative one, and four goes with zero, I have my transformed graph. Because I subtracted two on
the outside of my function, my y values were decreased by two, which brought my graph down by two units.
Next, let's look at y equals the square root of quantity x minus two. Now we're subtracting two on
the inside of our function, which means we subtract two from x first and then take the square root.
In order to get the same y value of zero as we had in our blue graph, we need our x minus two to be
zero. So we need our original x to be two. In order to get the y value of one that we had in our blue
graph, we need to be taking the square root of one. So we need x minus two to be one, which means
that we need to start with an x value of three. And in order to reproduce our y value of two from
our original graph, we need the square root of x minus two to be two, which means we need to start
out by taking the square root of four, which means our x minus two is four. So our x should be up
there at six. If I plot my x values with my corresponding y values of square root of x minus
two, I get the following graph. Notice that the graph has moved horizontally to the right by two
units. To me, moving down by two units makes sense because we're subtracting two. So we're
decreasing y's by two units. But the minus two on the inside, that kind of does the opposite of what
I expect. I might expect it to move the graph left. I might expect the x values to be going
down by two units. But instead, it moves the graph to the right. Because the x units have to go up by
two units in order to get the right square root when I then subtract two units again.
The observations we made for these transformations of functions
hold in general, according to the following rules. First of all, numbers on the outside of the function,
like in our example, y equals the square root of x minus two. Those numbers affect the y values
and result in vertical motions, like we saw. These motions are in the direction you expect. So
subtracting two moves just down by two. If we were adding two instead, that would move us up by two.
Numbers on the inside of the function, that's like our example, y equals the square root of
quantity x minus two, those affect the x values and results in a horizontal motion.
These motions go in the opposite direction from what you expect. Remember, the minus two on the
inside actually shifted our graph to the right. If it had had a plus two on the inside, that would
actually shift our graph to the left. Adding results in a shift, those are called translations,
but multiplying, like something like y equals three times the square root of x, that would result
in a stretch or shrink. In other words, if I start with the square root of x,
and then want to graph y equals three times the square root of x, that stretches my graph
vertically by a factor of three, like this. If I want to graph y equals one third times the
square root of x, that shrinks my graph vertically by a factor of one third. Finally, a negative sign
results in reflection. For example, if I start with a graph of y equals a square root of x,
and then want to graph y equals the square root of negative x, that's going to do a reflection
in the horizontal direction because the negative is on the inside of the square root sign.
A reflection in the horizontal direction means a reflection across the y axis.
If instead I want to graph y equals negative the square root of x, that negative sign on the outside
means a vertical reflection, a reflection across the x axis. Pause the video for a moment and see
if you can describe what happens in these four transformations. In the first example, we're
subtracting four on the outside of the function. Adding and subtracting means a translation or
shift, and since we're on the outside of the function, it affects the y values, that's moving
us vertically. So this transformation should take the square root of graph and move it down
by four units. That would look something like this. In the next example, we're adding 12 on the
inside. That's still a translation, but now we're moving horizontally. And so since we go
the opposite direction we expect, we are going to go to the left by 12 units. That's going to look
something like this. In the next example, we're multiplying by three and introducing a negative
sign, both on the outside of our function. Outside our function means we're affecting the y values.
So and multiplication means we're stretching by a factor of three. The negative sign means we reflect
in the vertical direction. Here's stretching by a factor of three vertically before I apply the
minus sign. And now the minus sign reflects in the vertical direction. Finally, in this last
example, we're multiplying by one quarter on the inside of our function. We know that multiplication
means stretch or shrink. And since we're on the inside, it's a horizontal motion. And it does the
opposite of what we expect. So instead of shrinking by a factor of one fourth horizontally, it's
actually going to stretch by the reciprocal, a factor of four horizontally. That'll look something
like this. Notice that stretching horizontally by a factor of four looks kind of like shrinking
vertically by a factor of one half. And that's actually borne out by the algebra, because the
square root of one fourth x is the same thing as the square root of one fourth times the square root
of x, which is the same thing as one half times the square root of x. And so now we can see algebraically
that a vertical shrink by a factor of one half is the same as a horizontal stretch by a factor of
four, at least for this function, the square root function. This video gave some rules for
transformations of functions, which I'll repeat below. Numbers on the outside correspond to changes
in the y values, or vertical motions. Numbers on the inside of the function affect the x values
and result in horizontal motions. Adding and subtracting corresponds to translations or shifts.
Multiplying and dividing by numbers corresponds to stretches and shrinks. And putting in a negative
sign corresponds to a reflection. A horizontal reflection, if the negative sign is on the inside
and a vertical reflection, if the negative sign is on the outside. Knowing these basic rules about
transformations empowers you to be able to sketch graphs of much more complicated functions,
like y equals three times the square root of x plus two, by simply considering the transformations
one at a time. A quadratic function is a function that can be written in the form f of x equals
ax squared plus bx plus c, where a, b, and c are real numbers. And a is not equal to zero.
The reason we require that a is not equal to zero is because if a were equal to zero,
we'd have f of x is equal to bx plus c, which is called a linear function.
So by making sure that a is not zero, we make sure there's really an x squared term,
which is the hallmark of a quadratic function. Please pause the video for a moment and decide
which of these equations represent quadratic functions. The first function can definitely
be written in the form g of x equals ax squared plus bx plus c, in fact it's already written in
that form, where a is negative five, b is 10, and c is three. The second equation is also a
quadratic function, because we can think of it as f of x equals one times x squared plus zero times
x plus zero. So it is in the right form, where a is one, b is zero, and c is zero. It's perfectly
fine for the coefficient of x and the constant term to be zero for a quadratic function. We
just need the coefficient of x squared to be nonzero, so the x squared term is preserved.
The third equation is not a quadratic function. It's a linear function, because there's no x
squared term. The fourth function might not look like a quadratic function, but if we rewrite it
by expanding out the x minus three squared, let's see what happens. We get y equals two times x
minus three times x minus three plus four. So that's two times x squared minus three x minus three x
plus nine plus four. Continuing, I get two x squared minus 12 x's plus 18 plus four. In other
words, y equals two x squared minus 12 x plus 22. So in fact, our function can be written in the right
form, and it is a quadratic function. A function that is already written in the form y equals a x
squared plus b x plus c is said to be in standard form. So our first example g of x is in standard
form. A function that's written in the format of the last function, that is, in the form of y equals
a times x minus h squared plus k for some numbers a, h, and k, that's said to be in vertex form.
I'll talk more about standard form and vertex form in another video.
In this video, we identified some quadratic functions and talked about the difference between
standard form and vertex form. This video is about graphing quadratic functions. A quadratic function,
which is typically written in standard form, like this, or sometimes in vertex form, like this, always
has the graph that looks like a parabola. This video will show how to tell whether the parabola is
pointing up or down, how to find its x-intercepts, and how to find its vertex. The bare bones basic
quadratic function is f of x equals x squared. It goes to the origin since f of zero is zero
squared, which is zero, and it is a parabola pointing upwards like this. The vertex of a parabola
is its lowest point if it's pointing upwards, and its highest point if it's pointing downwards.
So in this case, the vertex is at zero zero. The x-intercepts are where the graph crosses the
x-axis, in other words, where y is zero. And in this function, y equals zero means that x squared is
zero, which happens only when x is zero. So the x-intercept, there's only one of them, is also zero.
This second function, y equals negative three x squared, also goes through the origin,
since the function's value when x is zero is y equals zero. But in this case, the parabola is
pointing downwards. That's because thinking about transformations of functions, a negative sign on
the outside reflects the function vertically over the x-axis, making the parabola instead of pointing
upwards, reflecting the point downwards. The number three on the outside stretches the graph
vertically by a factor of three, so it makes it kind of long and skinny, like this.
In general, a negative coefficient to the x squared term means the parabola will be pointing
down, whereas a positive coefficient, like here the coefficient's one, means the parabola's pointing
up. I'll write that rule over here. So if a is bigger than zero, the parabola opens up,
and if the value of the coefficient a is less than zero, then the parabola opens down.
In this second example, we can see again that the vertex is at zero zero, and the x intercept is x
equals zero. Let's look at this third example. If we multiplied our expression out, we'd see
that the coefficient of x squared would be two, a positive number. So that means our parabola is
going to be opening up. But the vertex of this parabola will no longer be at the origin. In fact,
we can find the parabola's vertex by thinking about transformations of functions.
Our function is related to the function y equals two x squared by moving it to the right by three
and up by four. Since y equals two x squared has a vertex at zero zero, if we move that whole
parabola, including the vertex right by three, and up by four, the vertex will end up at the point
three, four. So a parabola will look something like this. Notice how easy it was to just read
off the vertex when our quadratic function is written in this form. In fact, any parabola,
any quadratic function written in the form a times x minus h squared plus k has a vertex
at hk. By the same reasoning, we're moving the parabola with a vertex at the origin
to the right by h and up by k. That's why this form of a quadratic function is called the vertex
form. Notice that this parabola has no x intercepts because it does not cross the x axis.
For our final function, we have g of x equals five x squared plus 10x plus three.
We know the graph of this function will be a parabola pointing upwards because the coefficient
of x squared is positive. To find the x intercepts, we can set y equals zero. Since the x intercepts
is where our graph crosses the x axis, and that's where the y value is zero. So zero equals five x
squared plus 10x plus three, I'm going to use the quadratic formula to solve that. So x is
negative 10 plus or minus the square root of 10 squared minus four times five times three,
all over two times five. That simplifies to x equals negative 10 plus or minus the square root
of 40 over 10, which simplifies further to x equals negative 10 over 10 plus or minus the
square root of 40 over 10, which is negative one plus or minus two square root of 10 over 10,
or negative one plus or minus square root of 10 over five. Since the square root of 10 is just a
little bit bigger than three, this works out to approximately about negative two-fifths and
negative eight-fifths. So somewhere around right here. So our parabola is going to look something
like this. Notice that it goes through, crosses the x axis at y equals three. That's because when
we plug in x equals zero into here, we get y equals three. So the y intercept is at three.
Finally, we can find the vertex. Since this function is written in standard form, the y equals
ax plus x squared plus bx plus c form, and not in vertex form, we can't just read off the vertex
like we could before. But there's a trick called the vertex formula, which says that whenever you
have a function in a quadratic function in standard form, the vertex has an x coordinate
of negative b over 2a. So in this case, that's an x coordinate of negative 10 over two times five
or negative one, which is kind of like where I put it on the graph. To find the y coordinate
of that vertex, I can just plug in negative one into my equation for x, which gives me y equals
five times negative one squared plus 10 times negative one plus three, which is negative two.
So I think I better redraw my graph a little bit to put that vertex down at
a y coordinate of negative two, where it's supposed to be.
Let's summarize the steps we use to graph these quadratic functions. First of all,
the graph of a quadratic function has the shape of a parabola.
The parabola opens up if the coefficient of x squared, which we call a is greater than zero,
and down if a is less than zero. To find the x intercepts, we set y equal to zero,
or in other words, f of x equal to zero, and solve for x. To find the vertex, we can either read it
off as hk if our function is in vertex form, or we can use the vertex formula
and get the x coordinate of the vertex to be negative b over two a, if our function is in
standard form. To find the y coordinate of the vertex in this case, we just plug in the x coordinate
and figure out what y is. Finally, we can always find additional points on the graph by plugging in
values of x. In this video, we learned some tricks for graphing quadratic functions.
In particular, we saw that the vertex can be read off as hk if our function is written
in vertex form, and the x coordinate of the vertex can be calculated
as negative b over two a if our function is in standard form. For an explanation of why this
vertex formula works, please see it in my other video. A quadratic in standard form looks like
y equals ax squared plus bx plus c, where a, b, and c are real numbers, and a is not zero.
A quadratic function in vertex form looks like y equals a times x minus h squared plus k,
where a, h, and k are real numbers, and a is not zero. When a function is in vertex form,
it's easy to read off the vertex. It's just the ordered pair hk. This video explains how to get
from vertex form to standard form and vice versa. Let's start by converting this quadratic function
from vertex form to standard form. That's pretty straightforward. We just have to distribute out.
So if I multiply out the x minus three squared,
I get minus four times x squared minus six x plus nine plus one, distributing the negative four,
I get negative four x squared plus 24x minus 36 plus one. So that works out to minus four x squared
plus 24x minus 35. And I have my quadratic function now in standard form.
Now let's go the other direction and convert a quadratic function that's already in standard form
into vertex form. That is, we want to put it in the form of g of x equals a times x minus h squared
plus k, where the vertex is at hk. To do this, it's handy to use the vertex formula.
The vertex formula says that the x coordinate of the vertex is given by negative b over two a,
where a is the coefficient of x squared, and b is the coefficient of x. So in this case,
we get an x coordinate of negative eight over two times two or negative two.
To find the y coordinate of the vertex, we just plug in the x coordinate into our formula for g
of x. So that's g of negative two, which is two times negative two squared plus eight times negative
two plus six. And that works out to be negative two by coincidence. So the vertex for our quadratic
function has coordinates negative two, negative two. And if I want to write g of x in vertex form,
it's going to be a times x minus negative two squared plus minus two. That's because
remember, we subtract h and we add k. So that simplifies to g of x equals a times x plus two
squared minus two. And finally, we just need to figure out what this leading coefficient a is.
But notice if we were to multiply distribute this out, then the coefficient of x squared would end
up being a. So therefore, the coefficient of x squared here, which is a has to be the same as
the coefficient of x squared here, which we conveniently also call a. In other words, our a down
here needs to be two. So I'm going to write that as g of x equals two times x plus two squared
minus two, lots of twos in this problem. And that's our quadratic function in vertex form.
If I want to check my answer, of course, I could just distribute out again, I'd get
two times x squared plus four x plus two minus two. In other words, two x squared plus eight x
plus six, which checks out to exactly what I started with. This video showed how to get from
vertex form to standard form by distributing out and how to get from standard form to vertex form
by finding the vertex using the vertex formula.
Suppose you have a quadratic function in the form y equals a x squared plus b x plus c,
and you want to find where the vertex is when you graph it.
The vertex formula says that the x coordinate of this vertex is at negative b over two a.
This video gives a justification for where that formula comes from.
Let's start with a specific example. Suppose I wanted to find the x intercepts and the vertex
for this quadratic function. To find the x intercepts, I would set y equal to zero and solve
for x. So that's zero equals three x squared plus seven x minus five. And to solve for x,
I use the quadratic formula. So x is going to be negative seven plus or minus the square root of
seven squared minus four times three times negative five all over two times three.
That simplifies to negative seven plus or minus the square root of 109 over six.
We could I could also write this as negative seven six plus the square root of 109 over six,
or x equals negative seven six minus the square root of 109 over six.
Since the square root of 109 is just a little bit bigger than 10, this can be approximated
by negative seven six plus 10 six and negative seven six minus 10 six.
So pretty close to I guess about what a half over here and pretty close to about negative
three over here. I'm just going to estimate so that I can draw a picture of the function.
Since the leading coefficient three is positive, I know my parabola is going to be opening up
and the intercepts are somewhere around here and here. So roughly speaking, it's going to look
something like this. Now the vertex is going to be somewhere in between the two x intercepts. In fact,
it's going to be by symmetry, it'll be exactly halfway in between the two x intercepts.
Since the x intercepts are negative seven six plus and minus 100 square root of 109 over six,
the number halfway in between those is going to be exactly negative seven six.
Right, because on the one hand, I have negative seven six plus something. And on the other hand,
I have negative seven six minus that same thing. So negative seven six will be exactly
in the middle. So my x coordinate of my vertex will be at negative seven six.
Notice that I got that number from the quadratic formula.
More generally, if I want to find the x intercepts for any quadratic function,
I set y equal to zero and solve for x using the quadratic formula negative b plus or minus
the square root of b squared minus four ac all over two a the x intercepts will be at these two
values. But the x coordinate of the vertex, which is exactly halfway in between the two x intercepts
will be at negative b over two a. That's where the vertex formula comes from.
And it turns out that this formula works even when there are no x intercepts, even when the
the quadratic formula gives us no solutions, the vertex still has the x coordinate negative b over
two a. And that's the justification of the vertex formula. This video is about polynomials
and their graphs. Recall that a polynomial is a function like this one, for example,
whose terms are numbers times powers of x. I'll start with some definitions. The degree of a
polynomial is the largest exponent. For example, for this polynomial, the degree is four.
The leading term is the term with the largest exponent. In the same example, the leading term
is five x to the fourth. It's conventional to write the polynomial in descending order of powers
of x, so the leading term is first. But the leading term doesn't have to be the first term. If I
wrote the same polynomial as y equals, say, two minus 17 x minus 21 x cubed plus five x fourth,
the leading term would still be the five x to the fourth, even though it was last. The leading
coefficient is the number in the leading term. In this example, the leading coefficient is five.
Finally, the constant term is the term with no x's in it. In our same example, the constant term
is two. Please pause the video for a moment and take a look at this next example of polynomial.
Figure out what's the degree, the leading term, the leading coefficient, and the constant term.
The degree is again four, since that's the highest power we have. And the leading term
is negative seven x to the fourth. The leading coefficient is negative seven, and the constant
term is 18. In the graph of the polynomial shown here, the three marked points are called turning
points, because the polynomial turns around and changes direction at those three points.
Those same points can also be called local extreme points, or they can be called local
maximum and minimum points. For this polynomial, the degree is four, and the number of turning
points is three. Let's compare the degree and the number of turning points for these next three
examples. For the first one, the degree is two, and there's one, two, three, four, five, six,
and there's one turning point. For the sixth example, the degree is three, and there's two
turning points. And for this last example, the degree is four, and there's one turning point.
For this first example, and the next two, the number of turning points is exactly one less than
the degree. So you might conjecture that this is always true. But in fact, this is not always true.
In this last example, the degree is four, but the number of turning points is one, not three.
In fact, it turns out that while the number of turning points is not always equal to the
degree minus one, it is always less than or equal to the degree minus one. That's a useful fact to
remember when you're sketching graphs or recognizing graphs of polynomials.
The end behavior of a function is how the ends of the function look as x gets bigger and bigger
heads towards infinity, or x gets goes through larger and larger negative numbers towards negative
infinity. In this first example, the graph of the function goes down as x gets towards infinity,
and as x goes towards negative infinity, I can draw this with two little arrows pointing down on
either side, or I can say in words that the function is falling as we had left and falling
also as we had right. In the second example, the graph rises to the left and rises to the right.
In the third example, the graph falls to the left, but rises to the right. And in the fourth
example, it rises to the left and falls to the right. If you study these examples and others,
you might notice there's a relationship between the degree of the polynomial, the leading coefficients
of the polynomials, and the end behavior. Specifically, these four types of end behavior
are determined by whether the degree is even or odd, and by whether the leading coefficient
is positive or negative. When the degree is even, and the leading coefficient is positive,
like in this example where the leading coefficient is one, we have this sorts of end behavior rising
on both sides. When the degree is even and the leading coefficient is negative, like in this
example, we have the end behavior that's falling on both sides. When the degree is odd, and the
leading coefficient is positive, that's like this example, with a degree three and a leading
coefficient three, then we have this sort of end behavior. And finally, when the degree is odd,
and the leading coefficient is negative, like in this example, we have this sort of end behavior.
I like to remember this chart just by thinking of the most simple examples, y equals x squared,
y equals negative x squared, y equals x cubed, and y equals negative x cubed, because I know by
heart what those four examples look like. Then I just have to remember that any polynomial with a
any polynomial with an even degree and positive leading coefficient has the same end behavior
as x squared. And similarly, any polynomial with even degree and negative leading coefficient
has the same end behavior as negative x squared, and similar statements for x cubed and negative x
cubed. We can use facts about turning points and end behavior to say something about the equation
of a polynomial just by looking at its graph. In this example, because of the end behavior,
we know that the degree is odd. We know that the leading coefficient
must be positive. And finally, since there are one, two, three, four turning points,
we know that the degree is greater than or equal to five. That's because the number of
turning points is less than or equal to the degree minus one. And in this case, the number of turning
points we said was four. And so solving that inequality, we get the degree is bigger than
or equal to five. Putting some of that information together, we see that the degree could be
five or seven or nine, or any odd number greater than or equal to five. But it couldn't be, for
example, three or six, because even numbers and and also numbers less than five are right out.
This video gave a lot of definitions, including the definition of degree, leading coefficients,
turning points, and end behavior. We saw that knowing the degree and the leading coefficient
can help you make predictions about the number of turning points and the end behavior,
as well as vice versa. This video is about exponential functions and their graphs.
An exponential function is a function that can be written in the form f of x equals a times b to
the x, where a and b are any real numbers, as long as a is not zero, and b is positive.
It's important to notice that for an exponential function, the variable x is in the exponent.
This is different from many other functions we've seen. For example, a quadratic function
like f of x equals three x squared has the variable in the base. So it's not an exponential function.
For exponential functions, f of x equals a times b to the x, we require that a is not equal to zero,
because otherwise, we would have f of x equals zero times b to the x, which just means that f of x
equals zero. And this is called a constant function, not an exponential function. Because f of x is
always equal to zero. In an exponential function, we require that b is bigger than zero, because
otherwise, for example, if b is equal to negative one, say, we'd have f of x equals a times negative
one to the x. Now, this would make sense for a lot of values of x. But if we tried to do something
like f of one half with our b's negative one, that would be the same thing as a times the square root
of negative one, which is not a real number. We'd get the same problem for other values of b, if the
values of b were negative. And if we tried b equals zero, we'd get a kind of ridiculous thing a times
zero to the x, which again is always zero. So that wouldn't count as an exponential either. So we can't
use any negative bases, and we can't use zero bases if we want an exponential function.
The number a in the expression f of x equals a times b to the x is called the initial value.
And the number b is called the base. The phrase initial value comes to the fact that if we plug in
x equals zero, we get a times b to the zero, well, anything to the zero is just one. So this is equal
to a. In other words, f of zero equals a. So if we think of starting out, when x equals zero, we get
we get the y value of a. That's why it's called the initial value.
Let's start out with this example, where y equals a times b to the x, an exponential function,
and we've set a equal to one and b equals the two. Notice that the y intercept, the value when x is
zero is going to be one. If I change my a value, my initial value, the y intercept changes.
The function is stretched out. If I make the value of a go to zero and then negative,
then my initial value becomes negative and my graph flips across the x-axis.
Let's go back to an a value of say one and see what happens when we change b.
Right now, the b value, the base is two. If I increase b, my y intercept sticks at one,
but my graph becomes steeper and steeper. If I put b back down close to one, my graph becomes
more flat. At exactly one, my graph is just a constant.
As b gets into fractional territory, 0.8, 0.7, 0.6, my graph starts to slope the other way.
It's decreasing now instead of increasing, but notice that the y intercept still hasn't changed.
I can get it more and more steep as my b gets farther and farther away from one. Of course,
when b goes to negative territory, my graph doesn't make any sense.
So a changes the y intercept and b changes the steepness of the graph, whether it's increasing
for b values bigger than one and decreasing for values of b less than one.
We'll summarize all these observations on the next slide. We've seen that for an exponential
function, y equals a times b to the x, the parameter or number a gives the y intercept.
The parameter b tells us how the graph is increasing or decreasing. Specifically,
if b is greater than one, the graph is increasing. And if b is less than one, the graph is decreasing.
The closer b is to the number one, the flatter the graph.
So for example, if I were to graph y equals 0.25 to the x, and y equals 0.4 to the x,
they would both be decreasing graphs, since the base for both of them is less than one.
But 0.25 is farther away from one, and 0.4 is closer to one. So 0.4 is going to be flatter,
and 0.25 is going to be more steep. So in this picture, this red graph would correspond to
0.25 to the x, and the blue graph would correspond to 0.4 to the x.
For all these exponential functions, whether the graphs are decreasing or increasing,
they all have a horizontal asymptote along the x axis, in other words, at the line y equals zero.
The domain is always from negative infinity to infinity. And the range is always
from zero to infinity, because the range is always positive y values. Actually, that's true
if a is greater than zero. If a is less than zero, then our graph flips over the x axis. Our domain
stays the same, but our range becomes negative infinity to zero. The most famous exponential
function is f of x equals e to the x. This function is also sometimes written as f of x equals x of
x. The number e is Euler's number, and it's approximately 2.7. This function has important
applications to calculus and to some compound interest problems. In this video, we looked at
exponential functions, functions of the form a times b to the x, where the variable is in the exponent.
We saw that they all have the same general shape, either increasing like this, or decreasing like this,
unless a is negative, in which case they flip over the x axis.
They all have a horizontal asymptote at y equals zero, the x axis.
In this video, we'll use exponential functions to model real world examples.
Let's suppose you're hired for a job. The starting salary is $40,000, with a guaranteed
annual raise of 3% each year. How much will your salary be after one year? Two years, five years,
and in general after t years. Let me chart out the information. The left column will be the
number of years since you're hired, and the right column will be your salary.
When you start work, that's zero years after you're hired, your salary will be $40,000.
After one year, you'll have gotten a 3% raise. So your salary will be the original 40,000
plus 3% of 40,000. 0.03 times 40,000. I can think of this first number as one times 40,000.
And I can factor out the 40,000 from both terms to get 40,000 times one plus 0.03.
Let me rewrite this as 40,000 times 1.03. This is your original salary
multiplied by a growth factor of 1.03. After two years, you'll get a 3% raise
from your previous year salary. Your previous year salary was 40,000 times 1.03,
but you'll add 3% of that. Again, I can think of the first number as one times 40,000 times 1.03.
And I can factor out the common factor of 40,000 times 1.03 from both terms to get 40,000
times 1.03 times one plus 0.03. Let me rewrite that as 40,000 times 1.03 times 1.03,
or 40,000 times 1.03 squared. We can think of this as your last year's salary
multiplied by the same growth factor of 1.03. After three years, a similar computation will
give you that your new salary is your previous year's salary times that growth factor of 1.03.
That can be written as 40,000 times 1.03 cubed. And in general, if you're noticing the pattern
after T years, your salary should be 40,000 times 1.03 to the T power. In other words, your salary
after T years is your original salary multiplied by the growth factor of 1.03 taken to the T power.
Let me write this as a formula. S of T, where S of T is your salary, is equal to 40,000 times 1.03
to the T. This is an exponential function, that is a function of the form A times B to the T,
where your initial value A is 40,000, and your base B is 1.03. Notice that your base
is the amount that your salary gets multiplied by each year. Given this formula, we can easily
figure out what your salary will be after, for example, five years by plugging in five for T.
I worked that out on my calculator to be 46,370 dollars and 96 cents to the nearest cent.
Exponential functions are also useful in modeling population growth.
The United Nations estimated that the world population in 2010 was 6.79 billion, growing at
a rate of 1.1 percent per year. Assuming that the growth rate stayed the same and will continue
to stay the same, we'll write an equation for the population at T years after the year 2010.
1.1 percent, written as a decimal, is 0.011. So if we work out a chart as before,
we see that after zero years since 2010, we have our initial population, 6.79 billion.
After one year, we'll take that 6.79 billion and add 1.1 percent of it, that is 0.011 times 6.79.
This works out to 6.79 times
1 plus 0.011 or 6.79 times 1.011. Here we have our initial population
of 6.79 billion and our growth factor of 1.011. That's how much the population
got multiplied by in one year. As before, we can work out that after two years,
our population becomes 6.79 times 1.011 squared since it got multiplied by 1.011 twice. And after
two years, it'll be 6.79 times 1.011 to the T power. So our function that models population
is going to be 6.79 times 1.011 to the T. Here, T represents time in years since 2010.
Just for fun, I'll plug in T equals 40. That's 40 years since 2010. So that's the year
2050. And I get 6.79 times 1.011 to the 40th power, which works out to 10.5 billion.
That's the prediction based on this exponential model.
The previous two examples were examples of exponential growth. This last example
is an example of exponential decay. The drug Cerroquel is metabolized and eliminated from the
body at a rate of 11% per hour. If 400 milligrams are given, how much remains in the body 24 hours
later? I'll chart out my information where the left column will be time in hours since the dose
was given. And the right column will be the number of milligrams of Cerroquel still in the body.
Zero hours after the dose is given, we have the full 400 milligrams in the body.
One hour later, we have the 400 milligrams minus 11% of it. That's minus 0.11 times 400.
If I factor out the 400 from both terms, I get 400 times 1 minus 0.11, or 400 times 0.89.
The 400 represents the initial amount. The 0.89, I'll call the growth factor,
even though in this case, the quantity is decreasing, not growing. So really, it's kind of a shrink factor.
Let's see what happens after two hours. Now I'll have 400 times 0.89. My previous amount,
it'll again get multiplied by 0.89. So that's going to be 400 times 0.89 squared. And in general,
after t hours, I'll have 400 multiplied by this growth or shrinkage factor of 0.89
raised to the t power. Since each hour, the amount of Cerroquel gets multiplied by 0.89,
that number less than one. I'll write my exponential decay function as f of t equals 400
times 0.89 to the t, where f of t represents the number of milligrams of Cerroquel in the body,
and t represents the number of hours since the dose was given.
To find out how much is in the body after 24 hours, I just plug in 24 for t.
This works out to about 24.4 milligrams. I hope you noticed the common form for the functions
used to model all three of these examples. The functions were always in the form f of t equals
a times b to the t, where a represented the initial amount, and b represented the growth factor.
To find the growth factor b, we started with the percent increase or decrease.
We wrote it as a decimal. And then we either added it or subtracted it from one,
depending on whether the quantity was increasing or decreasing. Let me show you that as a couple
examples. In the first example, we had a percent increase of 3% on the raise. As a decimal, I'll
call this r, this was 0.03. And to get the growth factor, we added that to 1 to get 1.03. In the
world population example, we had a 1.1% increase. We wrote this as 0.011 and added it to 1
to get 1.011. In the drug example, we had a decrease of 11%. We wrote that as a decimal.
And we subtracted the 0.11 from one to get 0.89. In fact, you can always write the
growth factor b as 1 plus the percent change written as a decimal. If you're careful to
make that percent change negative when the quantity is decreasing and positive when the
quantity is increasing, since here one plus negative 0.11 gives us the correct growth factor of 0.89,
which is less than one. As a good check, remember that if your quantity is increasing,
the base b should be bigger than one. And if the quantity is decreasing,
then b should be less than one. Exponential functions can also be used to model bank accounts
and loans with compound interest, as we'll see in another video. This video is about
interpreting exponential functions. An antique car is worth $50,000 now, and its value increases by
7% each year. Let's write an equation to model its value x years from now. After one year, its value
is the 50,000 plus 0.07 times the 50,000. That's because its value has grown by 7% or 0.07
times 50,000. This can be written as 50,000 times one plus 0.07. Notice that adding 7%
to the original value is the same as multiplying the original value by one plus 0.07, or by 1.07.
After two years, the value will be 50,000 times one plus 0.07 squared, or 50,000 times
1.07 squared. That's because the previous year's value is multiplied again by 1.07.
And in general, after x years, v of x, the antique car's value will be 50,000
times 1.07 to the x. That's because the original value of 50,000 gets multiplied by 1.07
x times one time for each year. If we dissect this equation, we see that the
number of 50,000 comes from the original value of the car. The 1.07, which I call the growth factor,
comes from 1 plus 0.07. The 0.07 being the percent increase written as a decimal.
So the form of this equation is an exponential equation, v of x equals a times b to the x,
where a is the initial value, and b is the growth factor. But we could also write this as a times
one plus r to the x, where a is still the initial value, but r is the percent increase written
as a decimal. This same equation will come up in the next example. Here, my Toyota Prius is
worth only 3,000 now, and its value is decreasing by 5% each year. So after one year, its value
will be 3,000 minus 0.05 times 3,000. That is 3,000 times 1 minus 0.05. I can also write that as
3,000 times 0.95. Decreasing the value by 5% is like multiplying the value by one minus 0.05 or by
0.95. After two years, the value will be multiplied by 0.95 again. So the value will be 3,000 times
0.95 squared. And after x years, the value will be 3,000 times 0.95 to the x. So my equation for
the value is 3,000 times 0.95 to the x. This is again an equation of the form v of x equals a
times b to the x, where here a is 3,000, the initial value, and b is 0.95. I'll still call that the
growth factor, even though we're actually declining in value, not growing. Now remember where this
0.95 came from, it came from taking one and subtracting 0.05 because of the 5% decrease in value.
So I can again write my equation in the form a times, well this time times 1 minus r to the x,
where r is our 0.05, that's our percent decrease written as a decimal. Please take a moment to
study this equation and the previous one. These say that when you have an exponential function,
the number here is the initial value. If it's written in this form, b is your growth factor,
but you can think of b as being either 1 minus r, where r is the percent decrease,
or 1 plus r, where r is the percent increase. In this example, we're given a function f of x
to model the number of bacteria in a Petri dish, x hours after 12 o'clock noon.
We want to know what was the number of bacteria at noon and by what percent the number of bacteria
is increasing every hour. We can see from the equation that the number of bacteria is increasing
and not decreasing because the base of the exponential function, 1.45, is bigger than 1.
Notice that our equation f of x equals 12 times 1.45 to the x has the form of a times b to the x,
or we can think of it as a times 1 plus r to the x. Here a is 12, b is 1.45, and r is 0.45.
Based on this familiar form, we can recognize that the initial amount of bacteria is going to be 12,
12,000, since those are our units. And this value 1.45 is our growth factor,
what the number of bacteria is multiplied by each hour, while r, the 0.45, is the rate of increase.
In other words, a 45 percent increase each hour. So our answers to the questions are 12,000 and 45
percent. In this example, the population of salamanders is modeled by this exponential function,
where x is the number of years since 2015.
Notice that the number of salamanders is decreasing, because the base of our exponential function,
0.78, is less than 1. So if we recognize the form of our exponential function, a times b to the x,
or we can think of this as a times 1 minus r to the x, where a is our initial value and r is our
decrease, written as a decimal. Our initial value is 3000. So that's the number of salamanders
zero years after 2015. Our growth factor b is 0.78. But if I write that as 1 minus r, I see that r
has to be 1 minus 0.78 or 0.22. In other words, our population is decreasing by 22 percent each year.
In this video, we saw that exponential functions can be written in the form f of x equals a times
b to the x, where a is the initial value, and b is the growth factor.
We also saw that they can be written in the form a times 1 plus r to the x, when the amount is
increasing, and as a times 1 minus r to the x, when the amount is decreasing.
In this format, r is the percent increase, or the percent decrease, written as a decimal.
So a 15 percent increase will be an r value of 0.15 and a growth factor b of 1.15, whereas a 12
percent decrease will be an r value of 0.12 and a b value of 1 minus 0.12 or 0.88.
These observations help us quickly interpret exponential functions. For example, here we have
an initial value of 100 and a 15 percent increase, and here we have an initial value of 50 and
a 40 percent decrease.
Exponential functions can be used to model compound interest for loans and bank accounts.
Suppose you invest $200 in a bank account that earns 3 percent interest every year.
If you make no deposits or withdrawals, how much money will you have accumulated after 10 years?
Because 3 percent of the money that's in the bank is getting added each year,
the money in the bank gets multiplied by 1.03 each year. So after one year, the amount will be
200 times 1.03 after two years, 200 times 1.03 squared, and after T years, 200 times 1.03 to
the T power. So the function modeling the amount of money, I'll call it P of T, is given by 200
times 1.03 to the T. More generally, if you invest A dollars
at an annual interest rate of R for T years,
in the end, you'll have P of T equals A times 1 plus R to the T.
Here, R needs to be written as a decimal, so 0.03 in our example for the 3 percent annual interest rate.
Going back to our specific example, after 10 years, the amount of money is going to be P of 10,
which is 200 times 1.03 to the 10, which works out to $268.78 to the nearest cent.
In this problem, we've assumed that the interest accumulates once per year. But in the next few
examples, we'll see what happens when the interest rate accumulates more frequently, twice a year,
or every month, for example. Let's deposit $300 in an account that earns 4.5 percent annual
interest compounded semi-annually. This means two times a year, or every six months.
A 4.5 percent annual interest rate compounded two times a year means that we're actually getting
4.5 over 2 percent interest every time the interest is compounded, that is, every six months.
That's 2.25 percent interest every half a year. Note that 2.25 percent is the same as 0.025 as a
decimal. So every time we earn interest, our money gets multiplied by 1.025. Let me make a chart of
what happens. After zero years, which is also zero half years, we have our original $300.
After a half a year, that's one half year, our money gets earns interest one time. So we multiply
the 300 by 1.025. After one year, that's two half years, our money earns interest two times.
So we multiply 300 by 1.0 225 squared. Continuing this way, after 1.5 years, that's three half years,
we have 300 times 1.0 225 cubed. And after two years, or four half years, we have 300 times
1.0 225 to the fourth. In general, after T years, which is two T half years, our money will grow to
300 times 1.0 225 to the two T power, because we've compounded interest two T times. Our formula for
our amount of money is P of T equals 300 times 1.0 225 to the two T, where T is the number of years.
To finish the problem, after seven years, we'll have P of $7, which is 300 times 1.0 225 to the
two times seven or 14 power. And that works out to $409.65 to the nearest cent.
In this next example, we're going to take out a loan for $1,200 at an annual interest rate of 6%
compounded monthly. Although loans and bank accounts might feel different, they're mathematically the
same. It's like from the bank's point of view, they're investing money in you and getting interest
on their money from you. So we can work them out with the same kind of math. 6% annual interest rate
compounded monthly means you're compounding 12 times a year. So each time you compound interest,
you're just going to get 6 over 12% interest. That's 0.5% interest. And as a decimal, that's
0.005. Let's chart out again what happens.
Time zero, of course, you'll have the original loan amount of 1200. After one year, that's 12 months,
your loan has had interest added to it 12 times. So it gets multiplied by 1.005 to the 12th.
After two years, that's 24 months, it's had interest added to it 24 times. So it gets
multiplied by 1.005 to the 24th power. Similarly, after three years or 36 months,
your loan amount will be 1200 times 1.005 to the 36th power. And in general, after T years,
that's 12 T months. So the interest will be compounded 12 T times. And so we have to raise
the 1.005 to the 12 T power. This gives us the general formula for the money owed is P of T equals
1200 times 1.005 to the 12 T, where T is the number of years.
In particular, after three years, we'll have to pay back a total of 1200 times 1.005
to the 12 times three or 36 power, which works out to
$1,436.02 to the nearest cent. These last two problems follow a general pattern.
If A is the initial amount of the loan or bank account, and R is the annual interest rate,
compounded N times per year, then our formula for the amount of money is going to be A times
1 plus R over N to the NT. This formula exactly matches what we did in this problem. First,
we took the interest rate R, which was 6%, and divided it by the number of compounding periods
each year, 12. We wrote that as a decimal and added one to it. That's where we got the 1.005
from. We raised this to not to the number of years, but to 12 times the number of years.
That's the number of compounding periods per year times the number of years.
And we multiplied all that by the initial amount of money, which was 1200.
This formula for compounded interest is a good one to memorize, but it's also important to be able
to reason your way through it, like we did in this chart. There's one more type of compounded
interest, and that's interest compounded continuously. You can think of continuous compounding
as the limit of compounding more and more frequently. 10 times a year, 100 times a year,
1,000 times a year, a million times a year. In the limit, you get continuous compounding.
The formula for continuous compounding is p of t equals a times e to the rt,
where p of t is the amount of money. t is the time in years.
a is the initial amount of money.
And r is the annual interest rate written as a decimal.
So 0.025 in this problem from the 2.5% annual interest rate.
e represents the famous constant Euler's constant, which is about 2.718.
So in this problem, we have p of t is 4,000 times e to the 0.025 t.
And after five years, we'll have p of 5, which is 4,000 times e to the 0.025 times 5,
which works out to $4,532.59 to the nearest cent.
To summarize, if r represents the annual interest rate written as a decimal,
that is 2% would be 0.02, and t represents the number of years, and a represents the initial
amount of money, then for just simple annual interest compounded once a year, our formula
is p of t is a times 1 plus r to the t. For compound interest compounded n times per year,
our formula is p of t is a times 1 plus r over n to the nt. And for compound interest
compounded continuously, we get p of t is a times e to the rt.
In this video, we looked at three kinds of compound interest problems.
Simple annual interest, interest compounded n times per year, and continuously compounded interest.
This video introduces logarithms.
Logarithms are a way of writing exponents. The expression log base a of b equals c means that
a to the c equals b. In other words, log base a of b is the exponent that you raise a to to get b.
The number a is called the base of the logarithm. It's also called the base when we write it in
this exponential form. Some students find it helpful to remember this relationship log base a of b
equals c means a to the c equals b by drawing arrows a to the c equals b. Other students like
to think of it in terms of asking a question. log base a of b asks, what power do you raise a to
in order to get b? Let's look at some examples. log base two of eight is three, because two
to the three equals eight. In general, log base two of y is asking you the question,
what power do you have to raise two to to get y? So for example, log base two of 16 is four,
because it's asking you the question to to what power equals 16. And the answer is four.
Please pause the video and try some of these other examples. log base two of two is asking,
what power do you raise two to to get two? And the answer is one.
two to the one equals two. log base two of one half is asking two to what power gives you one
half. Well, to get one half, you need to raise two to a negative power. So that would be two
to the negative one. So the answer is negative one. log base two of one eighth means what power do
we raise two to in order to get one eighth. Since one eighth is one over two cubed, we have to raise
two to the negative three power to get one over two cubed. So our exponent is negative three.
And that's our answer to our log expression. Finally, log base two of one is asking to to what
power equals one. Well, anything raised to the zero power gives us one. So this log expression
evaluates to zero. Notice that we can get positive negative and zero answers for our
logarithm expressions. Please pause the video and figure out what these logs evaluate to
to work out log base 10 of a million. Notice that a million
is 10 to the sixth power. Now we're asking the question, what power do we raise 10 to to get
a million? So that is what power do we raise 10 to to get 10 to the sixth? Well, of course,
the answer is going to be six. Similarly, since point 001 is 10 to the minus three,
this log expression is the same thing as asking what's log base 10 of 10 to the minus three.
Well, what power do you have to raise 10 to to get 10 to the minus three? Of course, the answer
is negative three. log base 10 of zero is asking, what power do we raise 10 to to get zero?
Well, if you think about it, there's no way to raise 10 to an exponent to get zero.
Raising 10 to a positive exponent gets us really big positive numbers.
Raising 10 to a negative exponent is like one over 10 to a power. So that's giving us
tiny fractions, but there's still positive numbers, we're never going to get zero.
Even if we raise 10 to the zero power, we'll just get one. So there's no way to get zero. And the
log base 10 of zero does not exist. If you tried on your calculator using the log base 10 button,
you'll get an error message. Same thing happens when we do log base 10 of negative 100, we're
asking 10 to what power equals negative 100. And there's no exponent that will work.
And more generally, it's possible to take the log of numbers that are
greater than zero, but not for numbers that are less than or equal to zero.
In other words, the domain of the function log base a of x, no matter what base you're using for
a, the domain is going to be all positive numbers. A few notes on notation. When you see ln of x,
that's called natural log, and it means the log base e of x, where e is that famous number that's
about 2.718. When you see log of x with no base at all, by convention, that means log base 10 of x,
and it's called the common log. Most scientific calculators have buttons for natural log and for
common log. Let's practice rewriting expressions with logs in them. log base three of one ninth
is negative two can be rewritten as the expression three to the negative two equals one ninth.
log of 13 is shorthand for log base 10 of 13. So that can be rewritten as 10
to the 1.11394 equals 13. Finally, in this last expression, ln means natural log or log base e.
So I can rewrite this equation as log base e of one over e equals negative one. Well, that means
the same thing as e to the negative one equals one over e, which is true. Now let's go the opposite
direction. We'll start with exponential equations and rewrite them as logs. Remember that log base
a of b equals c means the same thing as a to the c equals b. The base stays the same in both
expressions. So for this example, the base of three in the exponential equation is going to be the
same as the base in our log. Now I just have to figure out what's in the argument of the log
and what goes on the other side of the equal sign. Remember that the answer to a log is an exponent.
So the thing that goes in this box should be my exponent for my exponential equation. In other
words, you and I'll put the 9.78 as the argument of my log. This works because log base three of
9.78 equals you means the same thing as three to the you equals 9.78, which is just what we started
with. In a second example, the base of my exponential equation is e. So the base of my log is going to
be e. The answer to my log is an exponent. In this case, the exponent three x plus seven.
And the other expression, the four minus y becomes my argument of my log. Let me check
log base e of four minus y equals three x plus seven means e to the three x plus seven equals four
minus y, which is just what I started with. I can also rewrite log base e as natural log.
This video introduced the idea of logs and the fact that log base a of b equals c
means the same thing as a to the c equals b. So log base a of b is asking the question
what power or exponent do you raise a to in order to get b?
In this video, we'll work out the graphs of some log functions and also talk about their domains.
For this first example, let's graph a log function by hand by plotting some points.
The function we're working with is y equals log base two of x. I'll make a chart of x and y values.
Since we're working this out by hand, I want to pick x values
for which it's easy to compute log base two of x. So I'll start out with the x value of one
because log base two of one is zero, log base anything of one is zero.
Two is another x value that's easy to compute log base two of two, that's asking what power do I
raise two to to get two? Well, and the answer is one.
Other powers of two are easy to work with. So for example, log base two of four, that's saying
what power do I raise two to to get four? So the answer is two. Similarly, log base two of eight
is three, and log base two of 16 is four. Let me also work with some fractional values for x.
If x is one half, then log base two of one half, that's saying what power do I raise two to
to get one half? Well, that needs a power of negative one. It's also easy to compute by hand
the log base two of one fourth and one eighth log base two of one fourth is negative two since
two to the negative two is one fourth. And similarly, log base two of one eighth is negative three.
I'll put some tick marks on my x and y axes. Please pause the video and take a moment to
plot these points. Let's see, I have the point one zero. That's here to one. That's here for two.
That is here. And then eight three, which is here. And the fractional x values one half goes
with negative one, and one fourth with negative two, one eighth with negative three. And if I
connect the dots, I get a graph that looks something like this. If I had smaller and smaller
fractions, I would keep getting more and more negative answers when I took log base two of
them. So my graph is getting more and more negative, my y values are getting more and more negative
as x is getting close to zero. Now I didn't draw any parts of the graph over here with
negative x values, and I didn't put any negative x values in my chart. That omission is is no accident
because if you try to take the log base two or base anything of a negative number, like say negative
four or something, there's no answer. This doesn't exist because there's no power that you can raise
two two to get a negative number. So there are no points on the graph for negative x values. And
similarly, there are no points on the graph where x is zero, because you can't take log base two of
zero, there's no power you can raise two to to get zero. I want to observe some key features of
this graph. First of all, the domain is x values greater than zero. In interval notation, I can
write that as a round bracket because I don't want to include zero to infinity. The range is going to
be the y values. Well, they go all the way down into the far reach of the negative numbers. And the
graph gradually increases y values getting bigger and bigger. So the range is actually all real numbers
or an interval notation negative infinity to infinity. Finally, I want to point out that
this graph has a vertical asymptote at the y axis, that is at the line x equals zero.
I'll draw that on my graph with a dotted line. A vertical asymptote is a line that
our functions graph gets closer and closer to. So this is the graph of y equals log base two of x.
But if I wanted to graph say, y equals log base 10 of x, it would look very similar. It would still
have a domain of x values greater than zero, a range of all real numbers, and a vertical asymptote
at the y axis. It would still go through the point one zero, but it would go through the point 10 one
instead, because log base 10 of 10 is one. It would look pretty much the same, just a lot flatter
over here. But even though it doesn't look like it with the way I've drawn it, it still gradually
goes up to and towards infinity. In fact, the graph of y equals log base any a of x for a bigger than
one looks pretty much the same, and has the same three properties. Now that we know what the basic
log graph looks like, we can plot at least rough graphs of other log functions without plotting
points. Here we have the graph of natural log of x plus five. And again, I'm just going to draw a
rough graph. If I did want to do a more accurate graph, I probably would want to plot some points.
But I know that roughly a log graph, if it was just like y equals ln of x, that would look something
like this, and it would go through the point one zero with a vertical asymptote along the y axis.
Now if I want to graph ln of x plus five, that just shifts our graph up by five units. It'll still
have the same vertical asymptote since a vertical line shifted up by five units is still a vertical
line. But instead of going through one zero, it'll go through the point one five. So I'll draw a rough
sketch here. Let's compare our starting function, y equals ln x, and the transformed version,
y equals ln x plus five, in terms of the domain, the range, and the vertical asymptote.
Our original function, y equals ln x had a domain of zero to infinity. Since adding five on the
outside affects the y values, and the domain is the x values, this transformation doesn't change
the domain. So the domain is still from zero to infinity. Now the range of our original y equals
ln x was from negative infinity to infinity. Shifting up by five does affect the y values,
and the range is talking about the y values. But since the original range was all real numbers,
if you add five to all set of all real numbers, you still get the set of all real numbers. So in
this case, the range doesn't change either. And finally, we already saw that the original vertical
asymptote of the y axis x equals zero, when we shift that up by five units, it's still the vertical
line x equals zero. In this next example, we're starting with a log base 10 function. And since
the plus two is on the inside, that means we shift that graph left by two. So I'll draw our basic log
function. Here's our basic log function. So I'll think of that as y equals log of x going
through the point one zero. Here's its vertical asymptote. Now I need to shift everything left
by two. So my vertical asymptote shifts left. And now it's at the line x equals negative two instead
of at x equals zero. And my graph, well, let's see my point one zero gets shifted to, let's say
negative one zero, since I'm subtracting two from the x's. And here's a rough sketch of the resulting
graph. Let's compare the features of the two graphs drawn here. We're talking about domains. The
original had a domain of from zero to infinity. But now I've shifted that left. So I've subtracted
two from all my x values. And here's my new domain, which I can also verify just by looking at the
picture. My range was originally from negative infinity to infinity. Well, shifting left only
affects the x value. So it doesn't even affect the range. So my range is still negative infinity
to infinity. My vertical asymptote was originally at x equals zero. And since I subtract two from
all my x values, that shifts it to x equals negative two. In this last problem, I'm not
going to worry about drawing this graph. I'll just use algebra to compute its domain. So let's
think about what's the issue when you're taking the logs of things? Well, you can't take the log
of a negative number or zero. So whatever's inside the argument of the log function, whatever's
being fed into log had better be greater than zero. So I'll write that down. We need two minus three x
to be greater than zero. Now it's a matter of solving an inequality. Two has got to be greater
than three x. So two thirds is greater than x. In other words, x has to be less than two thirds.
So our domain is all the x values from negative infinity to two thirds, not including two thirds.
It's a good idea to memorize the basic shape of the graph of a log function.
It looks something like this goes through the point one zero and has a vertical asymptote
on the y axis. Also, if you remember that you can't take the log
of a negative number or zero, then that helps you quickly compute domains for log functions.
Whatever's inside the log function, you set that greater than zero and solve.
This video is about combining functions by adding them, subtracting them, multiplying them, and
dividing them. Suppose we have two functions f of x equals x plus one and g of x equals x squared.
One way to combine them is by adding them together. This notation f plus g of x means the function
defined by taking f of x and adding it to g of x. So for our functions, that means we take x plus one
and add x squared. I can rearrange that as the function x squared plus x plus one.
So f plus g evaluated on x means x squared plus x plus one.
And if I wanted to evaluate f plus g on the number two, that would be two squared plus two plus one
or seven. Similarly, the notation f minus g of x means the function we get by taking f of x and
subtracting g of x. So that would be x plus one minus x squared. And if I wanted to take
f minus g evaluated at one, that would be one plus one minus one squared or one.
The notation f dot g of x, which is sometimes also written just as f g of x,
that means we take f of x times g of x. In other words, x plus one times x squared,
which could be simplified as x cube plus x squared.
The notation f divided by g of x means I take f of x and divide it by g of x. So that would be x
plus one divided by x squared. In this figure, the blue graph represents h of x. And the red
graph represents the function p of x. We're asked to find h minus p of zero.
We don't have any equations to work with, but that's okay. We know that for any x,
h minus p of x is defined as h of x minus p of x. So for x equals zero, h minus p of zero
is going to be h of zero minus p of zero. Using the graph, we can find h of zero
by finding the value of zero on the x axis and finding the corresponding y value for the function
h of x. So that's about 1.8. Now p of zero, we can find similarly by looking for zero on the x axis
and finding the corresponding y value for the function p of x. And that's a y value of one.
1.8 minus one is 0.8. So that's our approximate value for h minus p of zero.
If we want to find p times h of negative three, again, we can rewrite that as p of negative three
times h of negative three. And using the graphs, we see that for an x value of negative three,
the y value for p is two. And the x value of negative three corresponds to a y value of negative
two for h. Two times negative two is negative four. So that's our value for p times h of negative
three. In this video, we saw how to add two functions, subtract two functions, multiply two
functions, and divide two functions in the following way. When you compose two functions,
you apply the first function. And then you apply the second function to the output of the first
function. For example, the first function might compute population size from time in years.
So its input would be time in years, since a certain date, and its output would be
number of people in the population. The second function g might compute healthcare costs
as a function of population size. So it will take population size as input, and its output
will be healthcare costs. If you put these functions together, that is, compose them,
then you'll go all the way from time in years to healthcare costs. This is your composition,
g composed with f. The composition of two functions, written g with a little circle
f of x, is defined as follows. g composed with f of x is g evaluated on f of x.
We can think of it schematically in this diagram. f acts on a number x and produces
a number f of x. Then g takes that output f of x and produces a new number g of f of x.
Our composition of functions g composed with f is the function that goes all the way from x
to g of f of x. Let's work out some examples where our functions are defined by tables of values.
If we want to find g composed with f of four, by definition, this means g of f of four.
To evaluate this expression, we always work from the inside out. So we start with the x value of four
and we find f of four using the table of values for f of x. When x equals four,
f of x is seven. So we can replace f of four with the number seven.
Now we need to evaluate g of seven. Seven becomes our new x value in our table of values for g.
The x value of seven corresponds to the g of x value of ten. So g of seven is equal to ten.
We found that g composed with f of four is equal to ten. If instead we want to find f composed with g
of four, well we can rewrite that as f of g of four and again work from the inside out. Now we're
trying to find g of four. So four is our x value and we use our table of values for g to see that g
of four is one. So we replace g of four by one and now we need to evaluate f of one. Using our
table for f values, f of one is eight. Notice that when we've computed g of f of four, we got a
different answer than when we computed f of g of four. And in general, g composed with f is not the
same thing as f composed with g. Please pause the video and take a moment to compute the next two
examples. We can replace f composed with f of two by the equivalent expression f of f of two.
Working from the inside out, we know that f of two is three and f of three is six.
If we want to find f composed with g of six, rewrite that as f of g of six using the table
for g, g of six is eight. But f of eight, eight is not on the table as an x value for the for the f
function. And so there is no f of eight. This does not exist. We can say that six is not
in the domain for f composed with g. Even though it was in the domain of g, we couldn't follow all
the way through and get a value for f composed with g of six. Next, let's turn our attention to
the composition of functions that are given by equations. p of x is x squared plus x and q of
x is negative two x. We want to find q composed with p of one. As usual, I can rewrite this as q
of p of one and work from the inside out. p of one is one squared plus one. So that's two.
So this is the same thing as q of two. But q of two is negative two times two or negative four.
So this evaluates to negative four. In this next example, we want to find q composed with p of some
arbitrary x. I'll rewrite it as usual as q of p of x and work from the inside out. Well, p of x,
we know the formula for that, that's x squared plus x. So I can replace my p of x with that
expression. Now, I'm stuck with evaluating q on x squared plus x. Well, q of anything is negative
two times that thing. So q of x squared plus x is going to be negative two times the quantity
x squared plus x. What I've done is I've substituted in the whole expression x squared plus x,
where I saw the x in this formula for q of x. It's important to use the parentheses here so
that we'll be multiplying negative two by the whole expression and not just by the first piece.
I can simplify this a bit as negative two x squared minus two x. And that's my expression
for q composed with p of x. Notice that if I wanted to compute q composed with p of one,
which I already did in the first problem, I could just use this expression now negative two times
one squared minus two, and I get negative four, just like I did before. Let's try another one.
Let's try p composed with q of x. First, I read write this p of q of x working from the inside
out, I can replace q of x with negative two x. So I need to compute p of negative two x.
Here's my formula for p to compute p of this expression, I need to plug in this expression
everywhere I see an x in the formula for p. So that means negative two x squared plus negative
two x. Again, being careful to use parentheses to make sure I plug in the entire expression
in for x. Let me simplify, this is four x squared minus two x. Notice that I got different expressions
for q of p of x, and for p of q of x. Once again, we see that q composed with p is not
necessarily equal to p composed with q. Please pause the video and try this last example yourself.
Rewriting and working from the inside out, we can replace p of x with its expression x squared
plus x. And then we need to evaluate p on x squared plus x. That means we plug in x squared plus x
everywhere we see an x in this formula. So that's x squared plus x quantity squared plus
x squared plus x. Once again, I can simplify by distributing out that gives me x to the fourth
plus two x cubed plus x squared plus x squared plus x or x to the fourth plus two x cubed plus
two x squared plus x. In this last set of examples, we're asked to go backwards. We're given a formula
for a function of h of x, but we're supposed to rewrite h of x as a composition of two functions
f and g. Let's think for a minute, which of these two functions gets applied first?
f composed with g of x, let's see, that means f of g of x. And since we evaluate these expressions
from the inside out, we must be applying g first, and then f. In order to figure out what
f and g could be, I like to draw a box around something inside my expression for h. So I'm
going to draw a box around x squared plus seven. Then whatever's inside the box, that'll be my
function g of x the first function that gets applied. Whatever happens to the box, in this case
taking the square root sign, that becomes my outside function, my second function f. So here,
we're going to say g of x is equal to x squared plus seven. And f of x is equal to the square root
of x. Let's just check and make sure that this works. So I need to check that when I take the
composition, f composed with g, I need to get the same thing as my original h. So let's see,
if I do f composed with g of x, well by definition, that's f of g of x, working from the inside out,
I can replace g of x with its formula x squared plus seven. So I need to evaluate f of x squared
plus seven. That means I plug in x squared plus seven into the formula for for f. So that becomes
the square root of x squared plus seven. Tada, it works because it matches my original equation.
So we found a correct answer, a correct way of breaking h down as a composition of two functions.
But I do want to point out, this is not the only correct answer. I'll write down my formula for h
of x again. And this time I'll put the box in a different place. I'll just box the x squared.
If I did that, then my inside function, my first function g of x would be x squared. And my second
function is what happens to the box. So my f of x is what happens to the box. And the box gets
added seven to it and taken the square root. So in other words, f of x is going to be
the square root of x plus seven. Again, I can check that this works. If I do f composed with
g of x, that's f of g of x. So now g of x is x squared. So I'm taking f of x squared. When I
plug in x squared for x, I do in fact get the square root of x squared plus seven. So this is
an alternative correct solution. In this video, we learned to evaluate the composition of functions
by rewriting it and working from the inside out. We also learned to break apart a complicated
function into a composition of two functions by boxing one piece of the function. And letting
the first function applied in the composition, let that be the inside of the box. And the second
function applied in the composition be whatever happens to the box.
The inverse of a function undoes what the function does. So the inverse of tying your shoes would
be to untie them. And the inverse of the function that adds two to a number would be the function
that subtracts two from a number. This video introduces inverses and their properties.
Suppose f of x is the function defined by this chart. In other words, f of two is three,
f of three is five, f of four is six, and f of five is one. The inverse function for f,
written f superscript negative one x undoes what f does. Since f takes two to three,
f inverse takes three back to two. So we write this f superscript negative one of three is two.
Similarly, since f takes three to five, f inverse takes five to three.
And since f takes four to six, f inverse of six is four. And since f takes five to one,
f inverse of one is five. I'll use these numbers to fill in the chart. Notice that the chart of
values when y equals f of x and the chart of values when y equals f inverse of x are closely
related. They share the same numbers, but the x values for f of x correspond to the y values
for f inverse of x. And the y values for f of x correspond to the x values for f inverse of x.
That leads us to the first key fact. Inverse functions reverse the roles of y and x.
I'm going to plot the points for y equals f of x in blue. Next, I'll plot the points for y equals f
inverse of x in red. Pause the video for a moment and see what kind of symmetry you observe in this
graph. How are the blue points related to the red points? You might have noticed that the blue
points and the red points are mirror images over the mirror line y equals x. So our second key fact
is that the graph of y equals f inverse of x can be obtained from the graph of y equals f of x by
reflecting over the line y equals x. This makes sense because inverses reverse the roles of y and x.
In this same example, let's compute f inverse of f of two. This open circle means composition. In
other words, we're computing f inverse of f of two. We compute this from the inside out. So that's
f inverse of three, since f of two is three, and f inverse of three, we see as two. Similarly, we can
compute f of f inverse of three. And that means we take f of f inverse of three. Since f inverse
of three is two, that's the same thing as computing f of two, which is three. Please pause the video
for a moment and compute these other compositions. You should have found that in every case, if you
take f inverse of f of a number, you get back to the very same number you started with. And similarly,
if you take f of f inverse of any number, you get back to the same number you started with.
So in general, f inverse of f of x is equal to x, and f of f inverse of x is also equal to x. This
is the mathematical way of saying that f and f inverse undo each other. Let's look at a different
example. Suppose that f of x is x cubed. Pause the video for a moment and guess what the inverse
of f should be. Remember, f inverse undoes the work that f does.
You might have guessed that f inverse of x is going to be the cube root function. Now we can
check that this is true by looking at f of f inverse of x, that's f of the cube root of function,
which means the cube root function cubed, which gets us back to x. Similarly, if we compute f
inverse of f of x, that's the cube root of x cubed, and we get back to x again. So the cube
root function really is the inverse of the cubing function. When we compose the two functions,
we get back to the number that we started with. It'd be nice to have a more systematic way of
finding inverses of functions besides guessing and checking. One method uses the fact that inverses
reverse the roles of y and x. So if we want to find the inverse of the function f of x equals
five minus x over three x, we can write it as y equals five minus x over three x. Reverse the
roles of y and x to get x equals five minus y over three y, and then solve for y. To solve for y,
let's multiply both sides by three y. Bring all terms with y's in them to the left side,
and all terms without y's in them to the right side. Factor out the y
and divide to isolate y. This gives us f inverse of x as five over three x plus one.
Notice that our original function f and our inverse function f inverse are both rational
functions, but they're not the reciprocals of each other. And in general, f inverse of x is not
usually equal to one over f of x. This can be confusing, because when we write two to the minus
one, that does mean one over two. But f to the minus one of x means the inverse function and not
the reciprocal. It's natural to ask if all functions have inverse functions. That is, for any
function you might encounter, is there always a function that is its inverse? In fact, the answer
is no. See if you can come up with an example of a function that does not have an inverse function.
The word function here is key. Remember that a function is a relationship between x values and
y values, such that for each x value in the domain, there's only one corresponding y value.
One example of a function that does not have an inverse function is the function f of x equals x
squared. To see that the inverse of this function is not a function, note that for the x squared
function, the number two and the number negative two both go to number four. So if I had an inverse,
it would have to send four to both two and negative two. The inverse would not be a function.
It might be easier to understand the problem when you look at a graph of y equals x squared.
Recall that inverse functions reverse the roles of y and x and flip the graph over the line y equals
x. But when I flip the green graph over the line y equals x, I get this red graph. This red graph
is not the graph of a function because it violates the vertical line test. The reason
that violates the vertical line test is because the original green function violates the horizontal
line test and has two x values with the same y value. In general, a function f has an inverse
function if and only if the graph of f satisfies the horizontal line test, i.e. every horizontal line
intersects the graph in at most one point. Pause the video for a moment and see which of these
four graphs satisfy the horizontal line test. In other words, which of the four corresponding
functions would have an inverse function? You may have found that graphs A and B
violate the horizontal line test. So their functions would not have inverse functions.
But graphs C and D satisfy the horizontal line test. So these graphs represent functions that
do have inverses. Functions that satisfy the horizontal line test are sometimes called
one-to-one functions. Equivalently, a function is one-to-one if for any two different x values,
x1 and x2, the y values f of x1 and f of x2 are different numbers. Sometimes as I said,
f is one-to-one if whenever f of x1 is equal to f of x2, then x1 has to equal x2.
As our last example, let's try to find p inverse of x, where p of x is the square root of x minus
2 drawn here. If we graph p inverse on the same axis as p of x, we get the following graph,
simply by flipping over the line y equals x. If we try to solve the problem algebraically,
we can write y equal to square root of x minus 2, reverse the roles of y and x,
and solve for y by squaring both sides and adding 2.
Now if we were to graph y equals x squared plus 2, that would look like a parabola. It would look
like the red graph we've already drawn together with another arm on the left side.
But we know that our actual inverse function consists only of this right arm.
We can specify this algebraically by making the restriction that x has to be bigger than or equal
to zero. This corresponds to the fact that on the original graph for the square root of x, y was
only greater than or equal to zero. Looking more closely at the domain and range of p and p inverse,
we know that the domain of p is all values of x such that x minus 2 is greater than or equal to
zero, since we can't take the square root of a negative number. This corresponds to x values
being greater than or equal to 2, or an interval notation, the interval from 2 to infinity.
The range of p we can see from the graph is all y values greater than or equal to 0, or the interval
from 0 to infinity. Similarly, based on the graph, we see the domain of p inverse is x values greater
than or equal to 0, the interval from 0 to infinity, and the range of p inverse is y values greater
than or equal to 2, or the interval from 2 to infinity. If you look closely at these domains
and ranges, you'll notice that the domain of p corresponds exactly to the range of p inverse,
and the range of p corresponds to the domain of p inverse. This makes sense because inverse
functions reverse the rules of y and x. The domain of f inverse of x is the x values for f inverse,
which corresponds to the y values, or the range of f. The range of f inverse is the y values for
f inverse, which correspond to the x values, or the domain of f. In this video, we discussed five
key properties of inverse functions. Inverse functions reverse the roles of y and x.
The graph of y equals f inverse of x is the graph of y equals f of x
reflected over the line y equals x. When we compose f with f inverse, we get the identity
function y equals x. And similarly, when we compose f inverse with f, that brings x to x.
In other words, f and f inverse undo each other. The function f of x has an inverse function,
if and only if the graph of y equals f of x satisfies the horizontal line test.
And finally, the domain of f is the range of f inverse. And the range of f is the domain of f
inverse. These properties of inverse functions will be important when we study exponential functions
and their inverses logarithmic functions.
