I want to start with a quote to get things moving from from Mr. Voltaire, and I'm curious
your perception of it. I feel like you'll probably have some thoughts.
A quote that I find interesting is, if God did not exist, it would be necessary to invent
him. So I think it's interesting that Voltaire chooses him. I think that's worth discussing
as well, and also the necessity to invent said God. If it, she, him did not exist in
some absolute manner. What do you think about all that?
I mean, I understand the impetus behind the quote in the sense that one of the things
I think we're seeing more easily right now is we had a moment where we, some people,
at least some people thought that we could just be rational and scientific and we could
just get rid of all these superstitions, then we would, we'd be good, we'd be fine.
And what we're noticing is that that's not what's happening. People are becoming nihilistic,
you know, they're moving into despair. We're noticing we don't have much to hold us together
in terms of societies. We don't have things that bind us anymore as we get rid of, as
we get rid of religion, as we get rid of God. And so I think that that's probably what Voltaire
was perceiving was the notion that we need something above us, something transcendent
to unify us, or else we tend to fragment and to scatter. So I think that the intuition
behind, behind Voltaire is right. And you see a lot of people that say today, taking
that very cynically in the sense that they realize we need something to bind us together
so it could be anything, we could just put something up there. And we just need, we need
it, or else we need to celebrate something together, or else why are we something, why
are we a country, why are we a nation, why are we a family, why are we a group rather
than just a bunch of individuals slamming against each other.
I reflect on that quite regularly, internally at a deeper level, I have a sensation of like,
I can have a sensation of like, aimlessness. And a part of that I have these various, like
what I would concede to be like illusions of perceived progress. And that's something
that I, I ask a lot of, I feel like most people can kind of collectively agree of like, yeah,
like progress, like, well, let's, let's do progress. And then that presents the question
of like, okay, perfect, I love, love that love the morale, but like progress towards
what? Like what is our ultimate end goal here? What are we progressing toward?
No, I totally agree that that's definitely a problem, especially in terms of modern kind
of atheist progressive narrative, which is that, what are we aiming at? Because in order
to progress, you need an aim, you need to be moving in a direction or else you're just
aimlessly wandering. And so the question is, what is it that's happening? It's easier.
I think one of the mistakes that we've seen in the, in with the enlightenment and, and
it's, and what came after is we had this idea that if we progress in terms of technical
knowledge, that is, if we accumulate technical knowledge, then that's similar to the manner
in which we're going to progress morally as a nation, as nations, as people, but those
are not, they're not the same. The accumulation of technical knowledge is not the same as
morality or, or understanding what it is that makes a life worth living. These are not the
same thing. And I don't think that we have progressed in that at all. I think on the
contrary, I think that we have traded one for the other. We've traded a kind of comfort,
technical comfort and material comfort. We've traded that for purpose and we've traded that
for virtue and for a sense that we are moving towards something valuable. And because of
it, people are, people are lost. Well, not everybody, but there's definitely a sense
around us. When I look at young people, especially, you know, the despair is palpable.
Yeah. Yeah. And so you, so you asked before, we press record, like, why, like, why the heck
do you have me here? I'm like a theologian icon, iconographer, philosopher, like, what does
this have to do with like, this is supposed to be like a health thing or something? One,
there's like, I had John Revekey on recently, and I know that you guys are close. And one
of the things that came up with that was like the, the meaning crisis, like we're going
to be like a, like a meaning crisis of, is there some kind of ground to stand on? Are
we just on this kind of slippery, illusory, hollow sensation of progress towards some
technological financial gain, like towards what? And I think it's interesting that within
like disease or dis-ease, you know, probably a hundred percent of diseases or there's
some root of stress involved in that somewhere in the system. And we can address that
topically or allopathically and say, aha, here, here is the tumor, but then you can wind it
back. And, you know, at some point, there's, there's something to cause friction in the
system to eventually manifest as some type of, you know, physical expression of disease. And
so when the majority of people that are visiting a hospital are there for something that's
stress related or something that's like psychosomatic, mental, emotional, you know,
lifestyle related or something that would just pass on its own, but we're seeking out for this
pill or solution, at the root there, I feel like we can start to address some of our medical
experiences through like these, this internal lens, you know, and through starting to establish,
you know, maybe starting to address that, like that, that, that meaning crisis that, that I
personally experience, you know, I feel like many other people resonate with that. So what do you,
what do you think about that? Like that, that, that internal experience, eventually expressing
out into, you know, a physical manifestation and some path maybe towards like finding relationship
or balance or homeostasis between the two, the internal and the external, I guess, is maybe
like why I was, I wanted to have this conversation with you. Yeah. I think you're right. I think
that you definitely, the idea that there is a relationship between, let's say our own inner
direction and our exterior manifestations in the body is definitely something which happens.
I think the mistake that we make, especially us today, is that we, we look for, we think that
we're going to find that in some kind of like comfort, like we think we're going to find that in
some kind of, you know, if I could just be relaxed enough, if I could just rest enough, if I could
just, you know, let's say, serve myself enough, like if I could take care of my needs, you know,
I need to, I need some me time, like that's the, that's the, the, the modern way of looking at it,
that actually accentuates the problem. And it, I think that the, the more ancient solution would
have been something like give yourself. If you give yourself, then a lot of those other things,
they tend to diminish. Not that you won't be sick, maybe you will, but it won't matter so much,
because you'll be living, you'll be living a purposeful life and you'll be living towards,
towards, because what do you do, what do you want? You just want to live until you're 99 years old and
be miserable, you know, and internally and be physically, you could be physically fit and
kind of looking to be relaxed and to, to live as long as possible. Or it seems like the,
the more ancient vision is something like give yourself. If you give yourself, then you actually
might have a very short life. You might have a very short and painful life, but that short and
painful life will be bright. It'll be shining. And look at the people that we admire. Like we,
we, we don't admire, we admire people that have done that, right? Those are the people that shine
to us. Like, like stars, people who, who give themselves for a cause, who give themselves to
others, you know, they become something else. And so the image that we have, for example,
Christianity is actually the opposite of it's, it really is the image of someone who's willing
to die for his friends, who's willing to die for others. That is actually what brings the real
balance. But I, but I do feel like right now we have a kind of weird twisted version of that,
which is trying to heal my own, all my own issues, like heal my stuff. And then,
then I'll find homeostasis. But yeah, there's a book I've mentioned here a bunch of times called
whatever you think, think the opposite by Paul Arden. I think that's comes up in what you're
saying now. I think it is like, you would, I would think that by focusing on the individual,
the individual will start to get, you know, become more and more robust and, and like well
developed and complex and content, you know, and all of those things. But in fact, it takes
like relinquishing the attachment to the self in order to come back around and heal the self
and like grow the self. So it's like in the forgetting of the self, the self is actually
has the spaciousness to, to grow and heal and do all the things. Whereas when there's excessive
focus on the self and losing that connection outward, then it's like, I feel like the self
like suffocates on itself. Yeah, but there is like, there is a possibility of practicing,
of practicing doing certain practices, you know, on yourself, with yourself, like meditation prayer,
some kind of a schesis, you know, when you, and I think people who also do physical activity
have a different version of that, which is that you feel your limit, you know, you feel your limit
constantly, and you're trying to push further than your limit. Those are, those are practices that
can actually help you understand how it works. Like it's not about, it's not, it's not comfort
doesn't give meaning at all. Like, you know, feeling good about yourself is not, is not the
way to go. People are going to hate hearing that. But actually trying to, anything that makes you
transcend yourself is going to start with pain. It's going to start with a sense of disease,
exactly a disease in general. Like I am, I'm not where I should be. I need, I need, I need to, to,
to kind of move in the right direction. Of course, we can beat ourselves up too. And that's not
helpful. Usually beating ourselves up for not being where we want to be is another kind of
weird self centered thing. Like it's a weird kind of a kind of moving it back, moving into
experience and just feeling sorry for yourself or feeling guilty all the time. That's probably not,
that's not the right way to go about it either. But you do need to feel some pain in order to
move towards meaning. Yeah, they're so back to Viveki, something that I learned from him as the,
the origin of the word religion is religio or something of the sort. And it means to bind
or to bring together, like to unite, which is also the origin of the word yoga, yoke union
connection. I mean, it's like it like spans across so many different ideologies, this idea of like
connection. Yeah. And so I feel like the word religion, the word God, the word spirit, spirituality,
all of those have so many meanings and kind of like these crusty old barnacles attached to them.
Yeah. And so that like at the, at the, at the root of most of those words is like, oh, it's pretty
good. It's valuable. But then the outside, there's just a lot of flaky. Yeah, a lot of flakes attached
to it. I totally agree. And now, and now it's, now there's a confusion for the flake for the actual,
like the root. No, you're right. And it's, and it's actually the fault, a lot of it is the fault
of the religious people, where they started, I think there was a lot of forgetting, like just a
forgetting of what all this stuff is about. And it becoming more and more arbitrary in the modern
world. As people became materialists, it's as if a lot of this stuff became arbitrary. So it was
like, you're a Christian, so you believe that some guy died on a cross, and now you're going to go to
heaven. If you believe that, that's, that's what, that's what a Christian is, really? Like, that's
it? That's pathetic. That's really lame, if that's what it is. But it was really, it's really cute.
It's like childish, right? It's like, like really beautiful, actually. It's like, wow, like you are
a 50 year old woman or man. And this is like a Disney, which, you know, I think there's a lot of
meaning in, in fictional novels and tales and all that stuff. And they're, they're relating back to
that core root truth, typically. But it's, I mean, I think it's not, not having like a pessimistic
feeling of like, oh my God, I can't believe it. It's also kind of like, wow, that's amazing. Like,
I find that beautiful. Well, I mean, I think that for a lot of people, having that maybe that simple
faith could probably be totally fine. But it also, there also needs to be, there needs to be an
intellectual version of that. And it has always existed. It was always there. If you read the
early church fathers, you read the mystics, like it's all there. It's just that a lot of it has
been forgotten. And it's interesting, because right now there's an interesting moment, like people
like John Revecki are part of that, where because of the space, because of the space where cognitive
science is now introducing itself into the discourse, and we realize that we can't escape
perception, like we can't escape this experience of the world, and that we can't pretend like it's
not there and just talk about science as if it's outside of that. So coming back to this experience
and this experience of quality of this experience of, you know, of patterns and of embodiment,
then we can start to realize what religion is. Again, we can start to understand it, that we can
we can see that the world presents itself as so multifaceted, that unless we have things which
bind phenomena together, then everything scatters, especially at the human level. If we don't have
ritualization, we don't have story, we don't have orders, which bind even yourself, like your
own personal self, and your family, and then you scale that up, you know, cosmically, then the
world doesn't exist. And then you realize, oh, well, that's what religion is. It's the it's the
man in which things bind together that ends up looking like ritual, it ends up looking like
story, it ends up looking like all the things what people think are silly and superstitious.
But actually without them, reality scatters, and you can you can apply to your life, you realize
actually that most of the things you do are ritualized, and there's nothing superstitious
about them, like brushing your teeth is a ritualized act towards a purpose. But you have
ritualized acts towards purposes that are higher than just getting your teeth clean, that are about
how can we bind together as a group, how can we recognize what it is that we have in common?
And then it looks like processions, it looks like circumambulation, it looks like
singing together, it looks like all these things which which the modern person found silly,
they kind of flow back in. I feel like there can be like, I mean, like you're saying like you can't
escape religion, you can't escape dogma, we didn't say you can't, you can't even say exactly, but
I imagine you probably align with that to some degree, or maybe not. But so today, you can see
Christianity seems at least in my bubble of a world that I exist in, seems to be waning
popularity of it. You know, there's a lot more like spirituality in quotations. There's like,
we're certainly worshiping, you know, we worship our cell phones, we worship our
notifications, we worship our financial status, we worship our socio economic status where we're
at on the ladder, you know, so we're like, we're worshiping a lot, a lot, maybe more than ever,
really. As far as like compulsive worship, we might be at the highest, you know, not that it's a
competition, but we may be at like the highest state of worship ever, at least from the lens of
like compulsive worship. Yeah, but there's also, there's also prescribed, there's also like prescribed
worship, which is actually pretty strong right now, people don't really realize it, but you know,
it's just because people have separated the notion of religion from other ritualized aspects of
their life. But if, for example, you realize, you could say that recycling is a form of worship,
you know, because you are ritually acting in a way which is prescribed to you from above,
in order to participate in a story and a purpose together. And so we all, you know,
on one day, this day a week, we all put out our separated materials or whatever. And so
there is a ritualized procession about that, which is similar to a religious procession,
it's just that it's ordered towards something else. And you can say what's different because
that's really valuable, like saving the environment is really valuable. And I would say, yeah,
you're right, saving the environment is really valuable. But us binding together, let's say,
under the transcendent source of love is probably pretty valuable too, right? It probably has a
value that is powerful as well. So I think we can re-understand a lot of the practices of our
ancestors, even if we're able to notice, like you said, that we worship. And the problem is exactly
what you said is that addiction is a form of worship, especially addiction. It's one of the
most easy. If you want to understand worship, like addiction is one of the best ways because
it's a ritualized cycle of attention, you know, and you get possessed by it. And it actually ends up,
let's say, reorganizing your life around its attention, right, around its existence. And so
it actually uses you as a body in order to make sure that you are sacrificing and propitiating to
this God. But you can see how it's like a demon, right? It's like a parasitic God, you could say.
It's a God that actually ultimately wants to destroy you. But it can help you understand
what worship is, which is that when we would do that, like if a person would go through the beads
of their prayer rope or whatever, that's similar in terms of this binded attention,
which is ritualized in order to get you somewhere. Yeah, there's a quote from Alan Watts. I mean,
I think it's from Alan Watts. I've heard it from Alan Watts. They said that we're confusing the
menus for the meal. And so we're eating, you know, the words duck confit, you know, like chewing on
the paper duck confit. But there's no like fat, you know, an omega threes and like there's just
not there's no calories there. Yeah. And so that's the reason that that that quote's coming to mind
is like, I wonder if there is some hierarchy of worship. I think often as we can romanticize
the ancients, you know, and romanticize hunter gatherers and like everything we're doing now is
wrong. Yeah, everything that happened yesterday was the way. It's like, what is like, is there like
some ultimate absolute better, you know, or is there like, how do we parse apart like where is
the menu? Where is the meal? Does it matter in the first place? Are we all just going to end up in
the same place anyway? Yeah, well, I think there is. I think there's an objective, I think there's
an objective hierarchy of worship for sure. And you can actually see it kind of playing itself out
in the story of religion or the man in which religion developed through the centuries. And it
does have to do with understanding where the good lies, you could say, what is it, the good that
binds us? What is it? You know, and I would say that it moves towards something like love, towards
something like compassion, self giving or self sacrifice. And I think that you can find that,
you know, of course in Christianity, but I think you see some of that in Buddhism, although it's
not personalized so much in Buddhism. But you do find this idea that the highest, let's say the
highest value, the thing that should bind us together is actually paradoxically a giving away,
like it's a self emptying. And this self emptying becomes the thing which makes it possible for
us to exist as more than just these selfish little beings. And so I think that that is a
true hierarchy of being. And so you can imagine local gods, for example, in the time of hunter
gatherers that had some function and some power over the group and would bind them together,
would give them a totem, would give them some type of identity and characteristics that they could,
that they could celebrate and participate in. But ultimately, that leads to constant war,
like it just leads to nonstop war. Because you're, you're, these gods are fighting in the heavens,
right? These different gods, these different totems and gods are fighting amongst each other.
As the tribes fight and are constantly at war, we always forget that the Greeks,
even though they saw themselves as being one people, they were always fighting nonstop. Every
year, people would go to war. So the idea of binding towards higher goods, I think is something
which happened for a reason. As far as like making this conversation actionable towards some,
you know, directionality in one's life, something that I think I could use more of,
and me being like a product of the culture that I've been, you know, grown in.
I've heard you mentioned before, and then it caused me to look it up that the
Plato's transcendentals, the three transcendentals is beauty, goodness and truth is what I've
read on the internet. And that I think is something that is, is kind of can easily be
forgotten in the modern era, to pick on the modern era. You know, and that's like I just
got back from Greece, thankfully, it was really like an exceptional experience. And we went to
various different islands there and, you know, learned about the God of Sculpeyus, the God of
medicine and the way that they approached medicine. And the way that they approached medicine, one
theaters were, were built beside or very close to hospitals, which I thought was very interesting.
So that concept of theater was like an entrenched within medicine. And when you enter into the
hospital, it was, it was really beautiful. And there was, there was art, and you'd get into,
you know, a body of water and you, you know, cold plunge and hot tub. And, you know, there was,
it was, and what that, the way that the tour guides described to me was through art that,
like that, that the emotive power of art and also senses, you know, so like Tantra in a way,
you could say maybe that kind of softens up and opens up some space within, like the tour guide
said, like the soul, you know, so whatever, whatever word you want to put that deeper part.
And I feel like in the modern era, there's a bit of a jump to just what is the physical
expression. Now let's like attack that physical expression, as opposed to allowing spaciousness
and using some of these softer tactics to kind of go through and, and, and open up some space to be
able to get into like what night, what lies beneath that outer physical expression. So that's
something I think that was very wordy. But essentially, the question or curiosity is, is
from your perception, what do you see that the value in Plato's three transcendentals,
beauty, goodness and truth in supporting us as modern people, at least from like a medical
perspective? I think you're definitely onto something and you, you understand, it's a good
way to understand the moment in which we are now, that is, right now, we, we have the, we have exactly
this idea that if we're treating the, the body, like if someone's sick, we're just going to treat
the body. So we bring someone to horrendous place, like our horrendous place of fluorescent lights,
you know, and, and green plastic things and, you know, and metal bars that metal beds that
look like prison bars. And that's where we bring people to heal because crazy. We think that it's
like, well, it's just, it's just like, it's just a car, right? We're just fixing a car.
So we're going to, we're going to bring someone, we're going to, we're going to put them in
the rooms with several people, and we're going to, we're going to embarrass them, have them,
you know, wear these horrible nightgowns or whatever. Like everything about it is this
reduction of the human person to, to a machine. And that's exactly the problem. That's exactly
the problem that, that we mentioned a little earlier, which is that with the return of something
like cognitive science, we're realizing that no, you can't pretend like there is no experience of
the world and that that experience of the world doesn't participate in, in your, in, in, in,
in the medical, in your healing. Like the, for example, the placebo effect is a great example,
right? So we believe every medical doctor believes that there's a placebo effect to medicine,
but they try to reduce that effect as much as possible because they want to reduce you to a
machine. And if you could prove that augmenting the placebo effect could actually help you heal
faster, they don't care because they don't like that idea. They don't like the idea that, that
mind, that experience participates in, in your, in your experience. And so when they look at
ancient medicine and they see the ritualization, they see the drama, like you said, in, in relationship
to the medical practice, they think it's all hocus pocus nonsense, but they still believe that
there's, that there's a placebo effect. It's hilarious. It's like, why wouldn't you, why
couldn't you use the best of medicine and then create a ritualized drama of practice in which
you would enter into the medical relationship as, you know, as a, like you said, like as a, as a
being and counting beauty, it's not possible. Like our world is too gone, at least for now,
it's too gone for that. So we're stuck with these horrible cement parking garages that are called
hospitals. Yeah, I wonder anytime someone uses the, the term they, I always, my mind always
jumps to like, who is they? And then also want is another curiosity. Like I don't know that
I'd love for you to define they in, in relation to that statement. And then also drawing back on,
on want. So they want to reduce us to a machine. It feels to me kind of just like it is reducing
itself to a machine. So what is the it now in this way? It would be the zeitgeist,
like the totality of culture moving together. And then we have these individual nodes that
pop up and they're wearing, you know, a lab coat and their names, Dr. Sanders or whatever.
All right, so let's, let's, let's frame it this way. So the movement, the same movement which
moved against religio and described religio as being hocus pocus magic and, and superstition
and ridiculous things people did or things people did that were imposed by power and, and, and
and patriarchy or whatever, however you want to describe it, this, the same, let's say narrative,
you could call it like the worst of the enlightenment narrative, the worst of the, of the
materialist scientific narrative that narrative leads at the same time to parking garage hospitals.
You know, because, because there's a coherence in the reduction of everything to its material
causes that brings about, you know, the, the, the, the medical establishment that we're,
that we're dealing with. And so it's, of course, it's a side effect. Like I don't think that
Locke and Hobbs thought that we would get to where we are. I don't think that they would,
that they, that they could have predicted that their ideas about, about rationality and Occam's
razor and, you know, there's these scientific revolutions that we went through would lead us
to a kind of dehumanized machine body. But that is what happened in the, in those causes.
But like I said, I do think so it's, you're right, when I say they, I don't mean, I can't, I can't,
it's not the doctors, it's not their fault. It's not, it's not the, it's not even the medical
establishment's fault at this point. But it is a movement, like it is a, it is a line that you
can draw from certain changes which happened in history, which brought us to this point.
But at the same time, I do think that seeing that now, there are possibilities of, of alternatives.
It's harder in the medical world, but there are other places where you can, where you can,
where someone can do that. For example, the same thing with schools, like schools are basically,
you know, they're factories for children, like they're, they're just factories pumping out children
into the world. Now that, there's a place where you can, where someone can find better alternatives,
you know, homeschool, private schools, whatever, schools that are more integrative and integrate
storytelling and culture and ritual and practice into, into a child's life rather than just have
them go through the system. But medical stuff is harder because it's so, so big and there's such a,
yeah. And there's also cranks, like that, a real cranks that exist in that, in that world of healing
too. It feels to me when I say like the they and like, you know, the it and all that as opposed to,
to personalizing an individual, having any type of intention, which that's a question
I have as, as well as like how much sovereignty do we have in our choices? And how much are we just
a part of this collective consciousness? And we're just, you know, a barrel of water just sloshing
about, you know, within that, if we are just this sloshing, sloshing barrel of water really works as
an analogy, but I'll try to force it. No, but I said what you mean, like we're just in the current,
like we're just going down stream. And there's not much we can do, we can notice that this isn't
pleasant, but it's not easy to understand how to go, how to go upstream. Like it's just not that
simple. Yeah. And so it feels to me like perhaps since the, at one point there was more, you know,
nature worship and animism and, and, you know, probably more like matriarchal societies were
more common and things of the sort. And then there was a shift. So the, the metaphoric
water sloshing about going to one side. And then I feel like, you know, I'll say like maybe Cartesian
times or Newtonian times and kind of entering into like, aha, no, like scientism. This is the
solution, you know, and pragmatism and everything needs to be rationalized. And I need to be able
to hold it and measure it. And that is truth. I don't know that culture as a whole is like, aha,
like, yes, I think it's, it feels to me kind of, it's just like a pendulum swinging. And right now
we're kind of, I don't know where we're at. If it is a pendulum swinging, I don't know where on the
swing we are, but we're certainly in some pragmatic reductionist rational swing phase. And it feels
like there's a yearning to kind of find some center or maybe wildly swing back to the other side.
Yeah. Well, there's, you could, I think you could see the extremes at the same time. So I think
that's probably the best way to understand, especially the modern, like the modern world
is to understand it as extremes manifesting themselves. There is a bit of a pendulum, but
you can also see it happening at the same time. So if you look at the, in the rationalism right
after the rational, like the hyper-rationalist phase was romanticism and symbolism and the
kind of degenerate symbolic thinking that we saw, you know, in the 18th, 19th century,
which was about fantastical imagination, all that stuff, you know, and the occultism that came
with that type of thinking as well. So if you look at the modern world is both the rationalism,
hyper-rationalism and all that stuff, but it's also like weird occultism and, you know,
Crowley and the return of witchcraft and Lovatsky and Theosophy and all that kind of,
that other side of modernity, which happens at the same time. So right now we could see that
the internet is a great example. The internet is a mix of hyper-rationality and control and,
you know, like furry avatars in the metaverse, which is like complete explosion of rationality
into idiosyncrasy in ways that you could never, ever imagine in the past. Like you can be anything
that you can possibly imagine in the metaverse, but that's also, that's happening at the same
time as this hyper-rational kind of strange control. And so I think that's probably the best
way because it's hard to, it would be hard to understand our moment if we didn't see those
two things happening at the same time. And I'd like to at some point probably try to draw back
to some kind of like ashmole, what can we do type scenario. But something that I was listening to
your podcast with Makayla Peterson in preparation to this one. And one of the things that I heard
her saying throughout that seemed like she was kind of like at least acknowledging with herself
historically speaking, and seems like a little bit present as well, leaning towards like rationality
and logic and pragmatism as like a safe haven. And I think that that's very common. Like I can,
I can notice that with myself. And I think many, many people we can oftentimes not projecting
any of this on hers or something I noticed now, like just back to speaking about me. I think I
can lean on pragmatism as a way because I feel like there's almost like a fear of chaos.
And that deeper underpart, you know, like there's a quote that I
from Marianne Williamson, who I've also had on here. So our deepest fear is not
that we are inadequate, our deepest fears that we are powerful beyond measure.
And I feel like that, that undercurrent, that underpart that sometimes I think in this,
in this modern era, that's kind of, it can be like masked by rationale and science and logic
and imperial research. And it's not a thing until it's been studied and all the peers have reviewed
it. And then we can start to like actually have a conversation. But there's also this welling,
this well beneath that it's like, oh, like, perhaps access to, you know, all the power and
answers to, you know, every, everything you could possibly imagine. But I feel like there's a little
bit almost like of a, for me, I can notice like, like almost like a fear or resistance around that
part. And so I'll just lean on science and lean on rationality and lean on, you know, because I
don't want to kind of touch the chaos of what's inside. Yeah, but I also think that it's important,
this is something that is difficult because unions are popular right now, I guess, in part because
of Jordan Peterson. But there's a tendency to confuse two things, like there's, there's a
trans rational space. And there's a pre rational space or, you know, there's something like this
subconscious, you could say, there's something like super consciousness and those,
they can look the same to people that are just trapped in consciousness. But if you read any
traditional text from any religion, they clearly demarcate those as not being the same. And so
the kind of chaos, the dream kind of chaos that that kind of emotional, romantic feeling that you
get is not the same as the sense that things culminate into a unity, which is beyond the
particulars, right, that there's this drive up towards something which is pulling me beyond
the world. Now, I understand why it can seem like sometimes it's the same in your experience, but
there's a, you could understand the rationality or the rational world is, is this like buffered
space that exists between those two poles, something which is pulling you up towards,
you could say the way to understand it would be that as an individual, for example, right,
if you give yourself to a higher cause, right, that higher cause is not in the individual,
it's not, it's not there. So if you take the world of the individual and you analyze it every
single aspect of it, you're never going to get the highest cause to which you're willing to sacrifice
yourself for. Does that make sense? And so now think of that for everything, like there's a world
of structured causality, but that world of structured causality gives itself up towards
higher participations, you could say. And then there's also a way in which it dissolves into
nothingness. So you as an individual, let's say the manner in which you could dissolve into all
kinds of idiosyncratic bad habits or passions or the way you could become obsessed with things and
kind of devolve into something which is not rational at all, right? It's like there's nothing,
if you, once, if you analyze you becoming addicted to things, you realize this is not
rational. Like this is, this is, this is breaking me apart. It's fragmenting me completely. But
that is different from this giving up, you could say, the way in which you participate. I don't
know if that makes sense. It's important, I think, because people are right now are so confused. They
think that spirituality is, sometimes they think that spirituality is this lower stuff
down here. Like it's about feeling and about, you know, how I, you know, how I, how I feel about
myself or how I feel about others or these like, these kind of vague intuitions that you get about,
about, about things. But the world, the higher world or the world of spiritual participation is
in some ways it, it's trans-rational. But once you grasp it, it's super clear. Like it's,
right? It's like the clearest thing you'll ever see. It appears as a, as a beacon of, of light
that's kind of guiding you beyond your limited world. Yeah. The, the only issue I have with
the idea of like higher and, and lower and placing a hierarchy on states of consciousness and like
aspects of, I don't know, existence life is, I think there can be a fragmentation or divorcing
or separation within self through that separation and the idea that something is higher than something
else. I understand why you say that, but it's also because this is the issue, the problem of
like equalizing everything is that hierarchies don't compete with their levels. That is that
if you are a healthy individual and all your thoughts and your passions are joined together,
then you will actually become the best part of a higher participation. So you will actually be a
better member of your family if you are united in that, in the, in the individual part. And so
it doesn't compete. That's what cults do. Cults, you want to know the difference between a real
religion and a cult? A cult will try to compete with lower levels of participation. Like a cult
will say you have to deny your family. You have to deny all these lower participation. And so it's
the same with like a, it's the same with any hierarchy of, of anything, right? So if you,
if you understand, for example, that love is the highest virtue, right? And so you can also
understand that being good at something at a lower scale, it doesn't compete with that. So you could
be good at your job, but that if you're good at your job, I don't know, like if you're good at,
at making shoes, it's like that good can embed itself in love because you can do it in a way
that serves your community or you could do it in a way that's selfish and is just to fill your
pockets. But, but there's a manner in which those goods that scale up, they actually don't compete
with each other. They fit into each other like of this beautiful fractal dance, right? Everything
kind of embeds itself into, into the rest. They're probably some way to literally define
the experience of love being like a higher vibratory state. And then within that, it's like,
maybe, maybe you could relate it to like spectrums of light. And there's been kind of a war against
blue light recently. I don't know if you, if you pay attention to things of this sort, like
yeah, exactly, exactly, like where your blue blockers, you know, like the blue light, it's
bad, you know, and it's like, no, no, no, no, it's not bad. It's just one frequency that serves a
purpose. It's just serves a purpose at, at specific time for specific functions, you know, and so
low, low frequency light and that, you know, infrareds and reds and oranges and all that stuff
incredibly valuable. Really high frequency light, you know, the blues and all that, like that's like
really valuable. And when, if we're playing the game where like, oh, I'm, I'm tribe blue light and
like, no, no, no, I'm tribe orange light or red light, you know, this is better. It's more healthy.
It's like, well, the, the, going back to like the original derivative of health, health comes back to
wholeness. So again, like all of this comes back to like, okay, how do we get, if, if what one's
intention is a sensation, probably of, I don't know, like cellular function, you know, and, and
satisfaction, probably the conjoining of all of the tribes and being able to actually be able to see
that there really is value in, in all of it and not kind of casting any of it out, but actually
coming through, I'm kind of going out into the weeds here, but I think, I think there's the
availability to perceive everything through that lens of, of love and acceptance, but not necessarily
swallow the pill entirely and say, okay, I'm going to see this state or frequency or whatever
through love and acceptance. So I'm just going to become that and that is all of me. Like I'm able
to actually absorb and be with all things, but not get trapped in the kind of the tribalistic
thing that tends to happen where we start to create more segregation, more isolation,
and then oftentimes it's in the guise of some higher power. The idea, so in Dante, for example,
you see the way that he presents things is perfect. He says that all, let's say, all sin is something
like misplaced love or too much love or too little love or not, or love that is kind of twisted.
And so the idea is that all things are good if they're properly aligned. Like nothing is bad
in itself. That's ridiculous. Like it's not a, that's definitely not a Christian way of seeing
the world. All things are good and that they just have to be in their proper place. So the
urinality of light is a good example. Like, well, obviously, blue light isn't bad. It's, it's just
that it has to, it has to be in the proper proportion for what a human being is. And you
could say that about things that are maybe, maybe more human, for example. So you could imagine
something like entertainment is, is entertainment good or is entertainment bad? And you could say,
well, entertainment is good if it's in the proper proportion to other things in your life that are,
that are aimed towards, towards bringing all things together in the good. But if you live a
life of just entertainment, right? It's like saying is eating dessert bad? It's not bad if,
if it's properly ordered, but if you just eat dessert nonstop, then you're going to get sick.
Like it's actually going to affect you. And if you just spend your whole day watching movies and
playing video games, then it's actually going to, it's actually going to affect you. But the other
one is true as well. Right? If you spend your whole day working, if you spend your whole day
doing whatever it is that you do without giving room for the things that are, that are also good,
then you will, then you, you'll have the same problem from the other side. Well, you're,
you're going to become like someone who's super strict with themselves that doesn't leave any
room for some play, let's say in terms of personal discipline, is going to crack. Like they're just,
at some point they crack and they, they, they kind of collapse. Yeah. There's another, I'll be less
quotacious after this, I think, but there's another quote from Victor Frankel. He said,
something like paraphrase, some long lines of, of those who lack purpose will seek
pleasure instead as like a replacement. And I think that kind of turns into like this,
this like hungry ghost type sensation, like this ongoing reaching out for those little hits.
Yeah. Now, because there's that, that lack of foundation of like
actually feeling held and supported in a part of a fabric of something bigger than just this self.
Yeah. Well, you could say that that's the, so the drug epidemic in the, in the North America is,
seems to be really a product of the meaning crisis, like a product of people not having
direction and purpose. And so kind of spiraling into exactly what you said into this,
this more and more extreme desire to, to, to feel something, you know.
Yeah, we just want to feel. Yeah.
How do you, how are you with feeling? Do you feel like, where are you with all these
conversations? Like, do you, do you have like a, like any type of, of like,
unquenched yearning sensations that, that I experienced, for example?
Oh, of course. I think that's really part of being human, you know? I mean, it's just,
of course that happens. And, and I think that it's also, if you're conscious about it and you're
aware of it, then you can also realize what it is that, what that's for. Now, I think especially
sexual desire, the thing that once we, you know, one of the things that happened, right,
in the sixties and then ongoing from there, but there were ways of that before and kind of decadent
end of century times is that we had this sense that if we could just satisfy our sexual desires
and proclivities, then, you know, everybody would get along and we'd all be happy. But it turns out
that if you focus on that, then it's an unlimited source of frustration because your desires just
get more and more idiosyncratic and bigger and bigger and more and more, you know, you need more
in order to feel, it's almost like it's the same as drugs. Like, it's like, you need more
in order to feel taken further, you could say. The hedonic, the hedonic treadmill.
Exactly. And so if, what, but if you realize that, then you're like, okay, well, you know,
how am I going to deal with this? Right? So this, so for example, marriage is a good way to do it
because it's hard to do it on your own. It's really hard because it's like, but if you're married to
someone that you love, that person will act as both a, to take a place for your sexual desire,
but also a limit to your sexual desire because it's one person. And it's like,
that person has a limit. Like they have a sexual, they have, especially, especially for men, like
if you're married to a woman, like that woman has a certain limit at some point, it's going to
start manifesting itself. And so then you were like, okay, so that feeling, then you feel it,
right? Then you feel that, you feel that longing or you feel that lack or that whole that it's
causing in you. And then you can realize too, but you can realize that actually the problem
is that the sex doesn't fill that hole. It's, it's fine. There's nothing wrong with sex. Like,
sex is great, but it's never going to fill that hole completely because that hole keeps getting
bigger for some reason. It just keeps getting, or more weird and more, you know, idiosyncratic.
And so that's, I think that's the real idea of sublimation, you could say. Where it's like,
you realize, wait a minute, that suffering and that longing is energy. It's actual, it's actual
fuel. And if, and I can redirect that fuel towards other things, and you don't even realize that
you, that that exists until you feel it, right? If you're just always kind of somewhat satisfied,
you're not going to realize that the, this longing, this longing that you have can be redirected,
and it can be redirected towards projects. It can be redirected towards, you know,
accomplishing some great task. It can be redirected towards prayer. It can be redirected
in all kinds of directions. And then you, then you can see almost what that longing is for,
actually. So definitely, of course, I have, I have that. And I hope that I'm
doing as much as possible to make it, to make it fruitful, to make that longing fruitful.
How often do you misdirect that energy into like self-destruction and burning yourself up?
Yeah, probably all the time, in little ways. I mean, like little moments, it's not, it's not
like big things, but like little moments where you, you have a frustration or you have a sense that,
you know, you're not getting what you should in terms of care. I mean, it's not just sex, but it's
like, in terms of love, in terms of attention, in terms of this, like, you can feel that every day,
if you're, if you're careful to how you, especially when you're in a family and you,
you have all these dynamics. So I would say it happens quite a bit, but, but it's, it's like
these little moments where you kind of have to, you have to wake up, you know, and then until
you wake up, then you, you end up in these spirals of frustration. But yeah, definitely. I mean,
I'm a human being, so it happens quite a bit. The sex one, I think, is especially interesting,
because it seems clear that from an evolutionary perspective, it would make sense for humans to
yearn to have sex with more than one person. Like, you know, spread the seeds, spread the species,
spread the genetics. What else, you know, what else are we going to do? Yeah. You know, and,
and, you know, build shelter, you know, weather the storm, spread your genes, hunt, do it over again.
Yeah. And then there's like this, you know, this kind of new world that we exist in and nuclear
families and the social contracts and, you know, agreements that kind of in a way sits on top,
but also we're working on integrating the two to make it be whole, make it like be health,
make it be, you know, religio, make it, you know, all of that. But it feels almost like there's two
intersecting tracks in that, like your, your, your primal carnal urges to spread the genes.
Yep. And then, you know, like from a, from an evolutionary perspective, males would be
sexually selected based off of those that like the Genghis Khan's of the world would be more
spread. But it's your, your insight is great. It's great, but it's important to understand it,
that, that it's important to understand it in terms of these higher goods that we talk about.
Right. And so sexuality is probably the easiest way or the best way to understand it,
which is that at some point we understand that we have to give up that, some of that,
for something which binds us at a higher level. And actually that would be necessary at any,
at any scale, like it would be necessary if you just had one male, like in the human species,
if you just had one male that was mating with all the women and there, and the other males had no
access to women, you would have carnage. If you would just have fighting all the time. And, and,
and the truth is that like people idealize hunter-gatherer societies, but you can imagine
that people were fighting all the time. And I've been in contact with, with groups that aren't
necessarily hunter-gatherers, but have more of that kind of ancient pagan way of being. And that's
what happens. People fight over girls non-stop. They fight over women all the time. And people will
kill for women, you know. And so this is something which is, and so there's a sense in which you
can understand that giving up some of that desire towards higher participation in a society,
you can understand that that's fractal, that that's also what you do in you, which is that
you realize, oh, if I just focus on pleasure, then I'm not going to be able to
accomplish my goals. And so I have to sacrifice some of that. And I have to redirect it towards
something higher, which I perceive as higher, as a, as a higher good. It doesn't mean that
those desires are bad or that pleasure is bad. None of that is bad. But I do have to concentrate it
and re, reorient it. And then I realize, wait a minute, actually what I get from
above, when I, what I get from that is really valuable. And the kind of pleasure that I get,
let's say, the pleasure of accomplishing something or the pleasure of, of intellectual,
intellectual understanding, it's a, it's subtle. It's more subtle than an orgasm.
But it calls you like it, it calls you and it has a, it has a force that I think that,
especially as you get older, like if when you're like 17, it's hard to argue with that with someone
who's like just exploding with, with testosterone. But like, as you kind of get into your thirties
and you, you kind of get older, you start to see how actually giving up towards these higher
participations, they offer you a type of pleasure, which is very different, but is,
but is maybe even more valuable. Yeah. My buddy I've had on here called Chris Williamson. I feel
like you guys have maybe, have you done the modern wisdom podcast Chris Williamson? I don't think so.
Anyways, he's sweet. A term that I got from him is, is post nut clarity.
And everything you're saying is true. Yeah. Post ejaculation. Yeah. Yeah. To be able to like
sacrifice that like the before, I feel like this kind of comes into, comes back to like,
you know, probably a lot of religious philosophies or, or religions or ideologies,
but like, like the value of, of sacrifice, you know, and God sacrificing his only son,
you know, on the cross to save us all from his sins. And like, yeah, like the, the ethics within
that, like they, they, they're, they've been around for a while. And it seems like, so that's
kind of at a more macro, you know, like God level. And then individually, I think we can
experience that as well. And then I think that's where there is value. But let me give you just
an example based on what you just said, which is that think about, like when I say giving yourself
to a higher good. So think about you're in a situation and you could sleep with your friend's
girlfriend, like she's up for it, but you know the consequence of that, right? You know what
that's going to cost you. And so you decide that actually the friendship I have, my friend,
is more valuable than the immediate pleasure. And so you sacrifice that moment, that possibility
in order to be bound to a relationship, right? So you can imagine that at multiple levels,
like that kind of decision. That's the kind of decision that I'm talking about, which is that
you're actually, you're sacrificing immediate, I mean, it's just like delayed satisfaction. But
I mean, you can think of it even at a higher level, which is not just that you delay it for later,
you're giving it up towards something higher, something more that is less bodily pleasure,
but it is a more kind of spiritual pleasure, you could say.
So we're not going to have enough time to actually go into the Bible and religion
in the way that I would like to, because I was raised very Christian doing Bible study,
hanging out with my bros, talking about Jesus, sharing scriptures and such, then got into psychedelics
and kind of Buddhism and like other versions of isms and that kind of the concept of like hell
seems quite unreasonable. So I wonder your perspective on the, how literal could one take
the Bible from your perspective? Like, is it meant to be symbolism, metaphor, allegory,
is it meant to be 100% literal? How does one define how literal the Bible is?
So or the Quran or the literal thing, I hate that word.
First of all, the word literal means according to the text, like that's what the word literal
means. People think that the word literal means that what is described is a description of events
in the way that I think events should be described. And sometimes I'm not even sure what that is.
It's like the way that you would describe events to a police officer, maybe,
like if it was the scene of a crime, some kind of forensic, like encyclopedic description of
an event, like that's what it should be. And so we think that when we say the Bible is literal,
then that's what we're describing. And I think that that's just not what's going on there.
The Bible is definitely a description of events, but it's not trying to describe those events
in a way that would satisfy a modern rationalist in any way. Like it is a description of events
which compresses elements together in order to make them meaningful over a very long span of time.
And so because of that, they have a certain form and a certain trope, which is necessary,
because if you don't do that, if you don't compress elements of a story into something like
universal imagery, then it's going to, no one's going to understand it. So think about,
so think about like if someone watched, someone from the 15th century watched pulp fiction,
like they would have no idea what they're watching. Like what am I watching? What are these things
people have in their hands and what are these things that people are drawing, like putting up
their nose or like, what are they, what is this? Like this doesn't mean anything because it's so
idiosyncratic. In the Bible, what you have is you have stories that have been compressed and
condensed and are telling the events in a way that that's just what it is. And so the idea that
the first chapter of Genesis is like some is, could be seen as a scientific description is
absolute nonsense. Like it's complete nonsense. And so I'm sorry to all the creationists who
think that that's what's going on there. It's just not, it's just not. And but the problem is that
it doesn't have to be the idea that that's what's valuable. The idea that a scientific
description of an event is what is supremely valuable and everything should conform to that
standard is pure nonsense. And so the description of let's say the creation in the first chapter of
Genesis is in my, I think is the most powerful and accurate description of the manner in which the
world exists. But it is not doing it in a way that like I said, it's not a biologist description.
It's the description of a hierarchy of meaning, a hierarchy of participation, you know,
so the centrality of consciousness, the centrality of recognizing the good in the world, these things
have nothing to do with what they have very little to do with the way that that that a kind of
forensic description would be. So I think that all the stories in scripture have to be taken very
seriously. Now that you're taken seriously out of description of events, but we don't have to
figure out what the mechanical causes are behind some of the things that are there.
So people are like reading. So like, I don't know, you read in the book of Joshua that the sun
stopped, you know, for 24 hours and people are like, well, how is that possible? Trying to
figure out like how the earth could move and what this could happen? How could I describe the
mechanical causation of that? It's like, dude, stop it. What are you doing? Who cares? There's a
reason why things are described that way. The reason have to do with their meaning. And so you
don't have to understand what it is that if you had a video camera, you would be filming and you
could you could capture on a video camera. But it also doesn't mean that what it's saying is just
something someone made up. It's a description of something in a way that emphasizes its meaning.
And it's, you know, it's it's so it's a it's a it's a kind of mythological language. But in the
Bible, at least it's it they they they're describing some kind of event, maybe from a distance, maybe
from, you know, several generations after maybe from that type of memory, but it but it is a memory
of something. Yeah, I analogy, and it's too bad we only have a little bit of time left because
I feel like this would be I'm like unpacking something that would be probably several hours of
conversation. So, you know, maybe we can come back another time or something. But but an example
to my is like last night, I've been writing my dreams down last night, I had a dream where I was
like, in this German war zone scenario, and I was like, on my hands and knees and crawling around
through puddles and hiding behind car tire things. And I had a gun, and I like lost the gun, and I
was trying to find the gun. And then I had to report back. It was all this stuff. And within
that, I think if I were to like retrace and be like, Okay, I need to understand this dream. So,
I'm going to go to Germany. I'm going to try to find this place. I'm going to try to like,
in account of this guy's like, no, no, like, no, it was like, there was a gun. There was truth
within the dream. It just wasn't exactly as you know, literal as like your waking consciousness
may want to define it as this kind of what I'm maybe perhaps gathering and that might be a little
bit of a stretch, but but even like your waking consciousness. Now, so think about how right
now, let's say around you, there, there's millions of things happening at the same time. There's like
billions and billions of things happening simultaneously around you. And so in order
for you to make sense of that, you have to draw phenomena into coherent through a coherent line.
So even if it's just your day, like you went through your day, you get home, like there are
millions of things that happen to you that day, like millions and millions and millions. And so
but then you tell the story of your day, what you're going to do is you're going to compress,
you're going to take the elements that are meaningful, and you're going to compress them
together in a manner in which you are going to show the line that connects these elements together.
Okay, so that's how we do it. Now, think of that now over a thousand years instead of over one day.
Think of how I can do that in a manner in which I would have to tell the story of my day to someone
in a thousand years. And so there's a kind of compression that happens. And that compression
doesn't mean that it's like I said, it doesn't mean that you didn't have a day or that
but it means that there are so many examples that I could give you. But like, let's say
a simple example would be, let's say in that story of the German story,
your dream, you're trying to tell that to someone. You're trying to tell that to someone who lives,
who's a Maasai in Kenya, right, from 500 years ago. And so are you going to say you had a gun?
No, you're going to say I had a weapon, right? You're going to say something like I had a
weapon in my hands. But that Maasai, they only understand a weapon to be something like a lance.
But they might have the same dream or a totally different dream with the same like undercurrent
of truth. They'll have a lance in their hand instead of a gun. Yeah. And so that's the type
of contraction that I'm saying. It's like if I say a sword, that has way more power than if I say
a Glock. Because a Glock is like a super reduced version. And even if I say a gun is better than
if I name like the brand of the thing. It's like this, it's this compression of elements
that is what ancient storytelling was doing and what you find in scripture. So some of them reach
levels that are so high, like a serpent, you know, like a tree, like a, like a garden. These
elements are now universal and so compressed. I'm going to ask about something just to generally
put it into the ether to reflect upon. I'm curious to your perception of things like the ancient
fertility cults, like the sacred mushroom and the cross book, the John Allegro book and
Ellucinian mysteries and, you know, all of like the mystery cults of Greece, etc. And the potential
of, you know, ergot or LSD being used to as like these like death, death and rebirth ceremonies.
And a lot of what we gather from the Bible in fact has influenced from the psychedelic experience
and conflation of these different like ancient practices into what we now call, you know,
Bible and God and death and rebirth and. Well, let me say this. I think that it is 60 seconds.
What do you think about that? No, but I what I do think is that it is exactly a
it is exactly an image of the reductionism at which we've arrived in terms of modern
scientism, which is that we want to find the substance. What's the chemical? Like what's the
chemical? What's the what's the binding thing? You know, what's the what's the what's the medicine?
And that's what we think is happening. So the whole psychedelic Ellucinian mysteries things
is hilarious. I find it just hilarious, which is that the Ellucinian ministries lasted what three
days, four days of nonstop like rituals, all like that would take you through an entire process
that was extremely complex and that no one knows about because everybody has kept it a secret.
And then you get to the end of it. And then you have a final revelation. Now, whether or not that
revelation might have been supplemented by some chemical is possible. But the idea that that's
what it is is absolutely ridiculous. It's completely ridiculous. And even people who talk
about the psychedelics, it's like, how about if we talk about, let's at least talk about the vision
instead of talking about the stupid mushroom, like it's like they just people get obsessed with the
stupid mushroom, like let's at least talk about the vision and see the coherence of the vision
across the different traditions. Let's at least talk about that. But the idea that so for example,
like the only thing that's closest to the so called mystery cults right now in the world is
the Christian liturgy. That's the closest thing that you can have, because it is it is a a death
and rebirth ritual through baptism. It is a movement into a scandalous mystery, which is
the Eucharist, a revelation at the end of participation and eating the body of a God.
Like that is that's what Christianity is. But the idea that if we could just have psychedelics,
well, no, no, no, no, that's, that's more just, that's more just like an interesting kind of thing
to hang to like a handle to grab one toes, like, oh, interesting. I think that there's like,
or deal poisoning, you know, like the form of like fasting, and, you know, there's, there's
like the sun dance, Native American sun dance thing, or you're fasting for several days, and
you're dancing around a tree, and then you're hung from the tree, and you're going through this like
death and rebirth, like losing of the body, you're finally coming to a point where
your body is so drained, you think you're on the edge of of transitioning out of the body,
and suddenly there's this like, oh, okay, I'm rebirthed again, you know, I'm born again,
like that, I think that happens many in many different scenarios, like a right of passage
in culture is very common, but it's something that, you know, I don't know that there's a definitive
right of passage in Western culture, for the most part, but it doesn't need to be psychedelics per
say, just something. Well, we have something called baptism, which is, which is, which is that, and
it is, it is definitely a death and rebirth. There's also the, so the idea of reaching these
states through fasting is probably much better, because the problem with the psychedelics, and I
can see it, it's that at least my, my encounter with people that have just done psychedelics is that
I don't think they come back with, not sure they come back with much, like I'm not that impressed
with, with the things that I've heard people come back with. Some of it seems really confused,
like some of it seems, because it's like you rip the veil off, and then you enter into a world of,
of encounters with, let's say, transpersonal beings, but it's like they're all kinds of
transpersonal beings, like it's not as if everything that exists in the, in the invisible
is there to help you and is good, like that's not true. And so I, I feel like there's a lot of,
and so I'm not, I'm not totally discounting it, like I'm not saying that it's evil or whatever,
I'm just, I just am not super impressed, and like I, I'm not impressed at what psychedelics did
to, in the 60s, to our culture, and I am very wary about them coming back right now, because
we, we're in a worse place than we were in the 60s, like we are, we are in a more disjointed,
broken, narcissistic space than people were in the 60s. So imagining that coming back, I don't know,
man. I mean, it'd be tough. I mean, now it's becoming like more of like a passionate conversation,
and now we're going to, we're going to close it, but I mean, it's tough to say that anything as
an absolute, like you could, like there's suggestions that Francis Crick, part of his
discovery of the triple helix model was a product of him using, I think it was LSD,
and taking this huge, you know, massive information that he's been aggregating,
and then through that psychedelic experience or, you know, whatever you work on, psychedelics,
another one of those words, kind of like Spirit of God, whatever, it's got a lot of,
a lot of flakes on it. Those seemingly like disparate connections that he was, he was in
these different tunnels, suddenly like fused for a moment, and then he comes out of that
experience because he's done so much work in his like, his other world.
Yeah, so you could understand it, you could understand that that's probably
what something that the Ellucian Mysteries were offering. They would create a massive ritual that
lasted several days, and then in the last moment, there would be some, they would use some supplement,
and that that would, so you can imagine like, there's a little residue, a little residue of that
in Christian communion, especially in the monastic sphere where someone would be fasting for,
would be fasting probably for a whole day, or at least maybe more before they would take communion,
and then there would be a little bit of that with, in terms of, obviously it's not psychedelic,
but a little bit of, let's say, a little help to kind of break down some things with taking
wine after having fasted for a few days. Yeah, and I think the confusion as well could
make sense, the sensation of like, oh, like what you're saying doesn't feel so cogent,
and perhaps within some of those, I don't know, like super conscious states, for lack of better
words, maybe a person kind of stumbles in territory that's not as effable as like what they would
read or, you know, or regurgitate out of a book, and it's kind of like- Yeah, well, they don't,
people rarely talk about the bad trip. People don't talk about the bad trip for some reason,
because I mean, I have witnessed people, like I have witnessed people in my
surrounding kind of just go down that route, and I mean, I don't know if it's because they were
already psychologically fragile, but like I've watched them break apart, like I've watched them
go into a psychotic state as soon as really hard things started to present themselves to them.
So yeah, so I think that I do worry about this cold resurgence of psychedelics right now. I
definitely, I worry about it because I'm afraid people are going to see it as an easy way in.
It's like, well, just take this pill, you know, you want to know what spirituality is? Just take
this pill. Yeah, yeah, yeah, there's a lot to say there. At least for some people, it seems to be
that like- Certainly, you can, I think a person can develop a dependence on, you know, a clergy
person can develop a dependence on the idea of God, you know, and then wearing that as a mask,
and putting on the robe and putting on the cross, and there's that, that exists, a spiritual person
can do that with the beads, you know, like there's a lot of different versions of that, and someone
could wear an ayahuasca route around their neck, and like that's their thing, and they go back and
they do their own psychedelic baptism every six months, but they don't actually resource themselves
in their waking life to be able to fulfill some of the lessons that they garnered during that
experience. So they just go back to their previous momentum, and that's when it becomes kind of
bullshitty, where it's like, no, no, like the window gets opened in various different ways.
You can have a near-death experience, you could fall in love, you could eat way too many mushrooms,
you know, or whatever, you know, wow, like the window is out, the veil has been thinned,
and now the window closes, now what do you do with it? And I think that's the difference between
someone that's like a Michael Pollan, for example, where people seem to like respect his perspective,
and like the rainbow gathering person that still doesn't have a job, and you know, still
isn't really like that effective in society, which effective, I don't really like, you know,
it's a dumb thing to say, but you know what I mean? So that's, there's nuance to everything,
including religion, including the psychedelic experience, including, you know, everything.
Yeah, well, I've never done psychedelics, so I'm definitely not, I don't, I want to be careful
that I'm not, that I'm not being too harsh, but I do see, like, I don't know, I do see that it's,
the fact that it's so public, and everybody's talking about it so publicly, I think it worries
me, you know. For good reason. Even at the time of the, if there was part of something like the
Elusinian mysteries, and if it was part of some of the rituals that existed in the past, and it
would always have been like secret, it would always have been something that was kept, because
it's also very dangerous. So, and it doesn't get conflated into like an egoic badge of honor,
which then it's kind of tripping back into that previous momentum of, you know, egotism or whatever.
Now, suddenly, you're like, the ego is so strong, that you had so much momentum in that, now you're
taking this divine quotations, or maybe not in quotations experience, and you're actually
leveraging the divine to bolster the ego. And that's like, oh, like, all right, what do we do with
that? You know, and then, you know, that's a whole other conversation. Thanks, man. I hope.
I'm gonna, yeah, I need to go now, but it was good to, it was good to meet you, took me in
surprising places. Good times. Is there a place that people ought to be directed to go from here,
if they want to go deeper into your stuff, your podcast and YouTube? And people can check out the
symbolicworld.com. That's my website. And that's where you'll find most of the, like, I have a
presence on YouTube, and there's a podcast version of what I'm doing. And there's a group, like a
kind of community of people around that are writing articles about this kind of symbolic thinking,
a symbolic vision of the world. So yeah, people can check that out.
Right. Thank you, man. At some point, we'd love to run it back and maybe start with the
start with the Bible stuff. Start with the Bible stuff.
All right. That is it. That is all. Thank you all for tuning in. And I'll see you all soon.
