Some of them are formal, others playful, some are scary, ironic, important, timeless,
trans, weird, wonderful, and some of them should not be used as subtitles for Avatar.
This is the story of Fox, but it's also the story of civilization, creativity, innovation, power,
obsession, war, love, and human connection. Okay, I can hear it in my voice,
and if right now you're thinking, dude, that sounds like way too much to derive from
Jokerman, don't worry. Because before I made this doco, that's what I thought too. Also,
just want to say a big thanks to Shopify for sponsoring this video, more on them later though.
For now, let's get weird. So this video started because I asked myself a pretty simple question.
I was looking at the fonts on my computer and I just thought, where do all of these fonts come from?
I thought the answer would be simple. I thought it was just people designing stuff for word
processors. I pulled that thread and it was long before computers, so I was thinking, yeah,
maybe it starts at the printing press. But then I was like, well, how do we have all those
symbols? How do we know what to put in the printing press? So then I pulled that thread,
then I pulled another thread, then I pulled another thread, and you know what, let's just say we
have to go back. Like, way back. Our story starts 10,000 years ago in ancient Mesopotamia.
Yep, we're starting at the start. Basically, imagine you're a guy, you've got some goats,
they've got some chickens, but really what you want is oil. Because you can't make a
trade immediately, you need something that represents chicken, goats, wheat, oil, all of
the stuff that you would be trading. And so the ancient Mesopotamians made something called
clay boulay, basically big clay symbols that would represent various things. They had them
in about 16 categories. So imagine you've got a goat stone or a grain stone or an oil stone.
Now, the reason that this is important to our story is because of the mechanic that is going on
here. Things are being represented by the image of things. Instead of chickens, you have a clay
rock that says chickens. And this idea of representing things with symbols would go on to form the basis
of cuneiform. This is an actual fish. This is a pictogram of a fish. This is that pictogram
sideways. Here's it abstracted. And this right here is cuneiform for fish. Graphic symbols
depicting things. Cuneiform is some of the earliest forms we have of a formal written
language. In terms of font properties, one thing that we can note here is that cuneiform was often
read left to right. And the leading thesis is that more people were right-handed, so they wouldn't
smudge the clay that they were carving in as they wrote. It's kind of cool. But what is also very
cool is that cuneiform would eventually become one of the most famous ancient alphabets, the hieroglyphics
of ancient Egypt. So at this point in the video, you might be thinking, cool, man, but what does
this all have to do with the fonts of my computer? Well, let me get there. So time ticks on, various
civilizations rise and fall, and we get all of these cool little examples of alphabets popping up
in various forms of writing coming across the globe. But our next stop in this history tour
comes in ancient Greece. What the Phoenicians did is they took a good look at the hieroglyphics.
Now, like, yeah, love that. But what if we made the symbols even more abstract? And what if we
atomized their value so that they could form larger words as opposed to just being symbols?
These 22 letters, these symbols carved into stone are called Greek lapidary letters. It's an amazing
innovation because you could write so many things. And these stone carvings right here are among the
first formal use of Western letter forms. Now, there were a couple of problems with this early
alphabet from the Greeks. They only had uppercase. And while it was written in rows, the way that
you would read it would change. Sometimes you'd read left to right, other times right to left.
This is a format known as Bustrefidon, or as the Greeks called it, as the ox plows.
One second this way, one second that way. You just wait till they hear about palindromes.
Do nine men interpret nine men I nod? Oh, sure. But yeah, basically, there's a couple of kinks
to be ironed out. Enter the Romans. Yeah. Welcome to Rome. Ancient Rome took those Greek lapidary
letters and they turned them into their own alphabet, the Roman alphabet, the Latin alphabet,
the one that we still kind of use today. Now, at this point in the story, I've mostly been
talking about alphabets, but the Romans also did something in terms of font. When they had
their characters written out, they gave them little hats and little feet. These hats and feet
are what we call serifs. More on that later. For now, let's talk about mass production.
Like with so many inventions, as the old phrase goes, there's always something pretty cool going
on in dynastic China. What you're looking at right here is a movable type system. It was invented
in the 11th century in the Song Dynasty in China by Vixiang. It was a typing machine that was made
from ceramics that allowed the user to reprint words onto clay. It saved them time and meant that
you can mass produce messaging. Over the next four centuries, there were certain innovations
made to this, mostly using materials. The earliest metal ones that we've seen are from Korea in 1230,
but the machine that really got things going, as you guessed it, was the printing press. The year
is 1440, and a goldsmith named Johannes Gutenberg invents this contraption right here. This printing
press was a machine that could mass produce lettering. The way it worked was you'd have these
letters that you'd put into a machine, and they would almost act like a stamp on the paper,
and then that paper could go off and form books. But books were around before 1440, I hear you say,
yeah, that is true. But those books just weren't printed. They were actually written by hand.
Imagine writing a Bible by hand. In fact, this is a task that was done by monks, and when they did
write those Bibles by hand, they would use a calligraphy style, which we now know is black
letter. And because that was Gutenberg's reference for books, his printing press's first ever font
was a black letter font. A grandchild of this might be like the old English font, you know,
the one that people get like their birth years tattoo on them with, that. In any case, what you
are looking at right here is the first ever printed book, the Gutenberg Bible, with the first ever
printed Roman typeface, black letter. So I've got the printing press going on, and it has its one
typeface. But 30 years later, we get a new innovation. A fella called Nicholas Jensen comes
along and he's like, man, I don't reckon that black letter stuff. I just don't think it's that
legible. What if we changed it? He was inspired by some of the cleaner letters, the serif letters
from the ancient Romans. And so he created what he called a Roman typeface. This less cluttered,
more legible style was naturally an immediate hit. In fact, it's still kind of a hit today.
Open up a random book in your bookshelf, and you'll probably see a Roman type font. Now,
as you can imagine, once this new font drops, all of these other designers and innovators,
they also want to put their mark on history. They want to contribute. And what we start to see
is a rise in foundries all over Europe, places whose job it was to make typefaces. The humanist
spirit that was driving the Italian Renaissance also came with its own style of writing. Cursiva
humanistica, the thing that paved the way for italics. So meanwhile, right in mid century 16th
France, there's this other fella, this designer called Claude Garamond, who kept writing like this.
This elegant style was so revolutionary that we still actually use his font to this day. Garamond.
Great work, Claude. So over the next few centuries, we see designers like Fleischmann,
Baskerville, Badoni, but all of these designers had one thing in common. While their fonts were
amazing and brilliant, they were still riffing on a familiar theme. Seraphs. It's a variation on
the same font that the Romans were using, almost two millennia prior. But what about something simpler?
Sands without Seraph. Seraph. They didn't have Seraphs. Also known as grotesque. Now,
Sands Seraph was actually used, but it didn't enter the printing game until 1816. And this is
partially just because people didn't see it as formal enough to warrant its own typeface in a
printing press. Until this guy enters, William Kelsen IV. What up? What you're looking at here
is Kelsen Egyptian, the first known Sands Seraph typeface. Pretty cool. I actually really like it.
So 12 years later, right? This other dude, Vincent Figgins, he makes the second ever
Sands Seraph typeface. And as you can see, they are completely different. The first obvious difference
is the line weight. The Figgins font is huge, which means, oh yeah, it commands attention.
So in the 1800s, we're starting to see the rise of advertisements and posters. And for these people
making this type of communication, this Sands Seraph font was a godsend. It commanded attention,
it dictated page hierarchy, and of course, it was legible at a decent distance. So all of these
practical uses, plus the fact that the aesthetic just said new, it made Sands Seraph get pretty
popular pretty damn quick. We all know Muk of the Artist, but let's talk about Muk of the
Typographer. This is from an era known as Art Nouveau, which translates in French to literally
new art. Stylistically, it had a lot of organic elements and lots of plants and nature, which
were contrast with big, harsh lines. And all of the typefaces that came along with it naturally
followed suit. The mix of ornate, gooey lines with straight, harsh lines was just perfect for the
Latin alphabet. And as for the impact of Art Nouveau, it sent a message to designers all around the
world. You can morph the letters more than you think, and they will still be legible. After years
and years of focusing so heavily on the function of typography, we now put form in the spotlight.
And naturally, some people used form as a weapon.
Cue Marinetti and his futuristic criticism of English traditions, of course,
written in chunky Sands Seraph type. This designer Marinetti in this letter, he calls out
basically all of the old British stuff, and he calls it the cream of snobbish earth.
Typographically, that snobbery could be seen in a new font that had just hit the streets.
In 1931, in Britain, there was this paper, The Times, that commissioned a guy called Stanley
Morrison to create their new body copy typeface. And he was like, well, I guess I'll base it on
maybe like those old Roman letters, that clarity, and it's for The Times. You know what, I'm gonna
call it Times New Roman. Oh yeah, little did he know that he was going to create one of the most
popular fonts of all time, bonkers. Now back to Marinetti in that letter, right? So this all comes
at the dawn of the First World War, which as you can imagine plays a major role in our story.
So during the war, you've got all these futurists and artists and creative people who all need a
safe haven, and quite a lot of them end up fleeing to Zurich. Now in Zurich, you've got all these
diverse backgrounds, various influences, you've got all these bright people, but you've also got
this backdrop of chaos, the world around them is falling to pieces. So naturally, this breeds a
new movement. Dadaism. This is a Dadaist typographic poster by Ilya Zdanovich. Notice the combination
of seraphs, sans seraphs, and dingbats. What are dingbats, you ask? So do you remember the
whole printing press thing? Basically when they would make pages, they might put these like
ornate symbols and stuff at the top and the bottom, and they were their own stamps. Dingbats.
So if that's the great grandfather, the great grandchild is Wingdings, but we'll get there later.
For now, for the Dadaists, they're symbols. Why symbols? There's a pretty good Marcel Duchamp
quote that kind of sums it up. The only thing worse than a seraph typeface is a sans seraph typeface.
This was the attitude, and it led to quite a lot of people doing things like using punctuation
instead of letters, as well as other people just generally criticising the limitations of the Roman
alphabet. Now meanwhile, a couple of borders east, right? We've got some pretty cool stuff going on.
We have the Russian typographic revolution. Artists like Vavara Stepanova are shooting
constructivist designs. This meant big, harsh geometry, quite a lot of symmetry, and harsh
blocky fonts that would conform to both it as well as the page. Complimenting Stepanova was
Alexander Rodchenko. His ability to blend graphics and shapes and text, it was just honestly flawless.
While I know the roots of modern graphic design are debatable, I always feel like Rodchenko and
Stepanova should get just a little bit more credit. Just a little bit more, you know?
So with all of these different aesthetics going on, was there a golden standard? Was there a
unified way where everybody agreed that this was the way that we should write a letter? Well,
those were the questions that were asked by pioneers of the Bauhaus movement. They sought to
create a uniform, perfect aesthetic, which of course came with a uniform, perfect typeface.
This guy. Herbert Bayer. In 1925, he set out to create the universal typeface,
a geometric alphabet based only on bars and circles. So this Herbert guy has got this idea,
which was basically as we progress into a society that uses more and more technology,
we would need a universally accepted way to communicate letters in the most efficient
map. The great grandchild of Bayer's dream font can still be found today on computers everywhere,
and it's simply called Bauhaus. What I love about this movement is that within it is a
genuine hope for utopia, but sadly utopia didn't happen. World War II did. After the Second World
War, thanks to constructivism and Bauhaus, we start to get a rise of a new style. This sort of
Swiss modernism. The key feature of modernism is that it is without ornament. No frills. You can
see it best in a font like Helvetica. Now, because this Swiss style was just embracing modernism,
what it meant is that there were no ties to the old world, which also meant that there were no ties
to that huge tragedy that just happened. The Second World War. But it was actually quite well
understood across the globe. Because of this, the Swiss style is also sometimes known as the
international typographic style. For a minute, there was this glimmer of hope that this international
Swiss style would unite people into that utopia that Bauhaus had dreamed of. But ironically,
one of the biggest adopters of the international style was the American corporation.
TV shows, record companies and advertisers all embraced it wholeheartedly, and you can see it
so much in the pop culture from that era. This isn't to say it was bad. It was amazing. From
the 50s and the 60s, we get these cool grotesque letters, mid-century letters, the droopy kind
of hippie font that sort of looks a bit Art Nouveau, this Art Deco revival, Western Slab Serif,
even cool sci-fi stuff. It was a cool time for graphic design, which means it's probably about
the time that we bring up Paul Rand. It is quite hard to properly articulate just how influential
Paul Rand is on the world of graphic design. So I'm just going to use a Steve Jobs quote.
Steve Jobs called Paul Rand the greatest living graphic designer, obviously when he was alive,
rest in peace. And looking at his work, it's not hard to say why. Paul Rand's theory was that
graphic design had this amazing ability to be a universal language based on simplicity and geometry.
He just loved it. In fact, he loved it so much that he even changed his name. It's a sad reason
why he did. He had a Jewish name, Peretz Rosenbaum, and he anglicised it to be a little bit more
Madison Avenue friendly. But when he did pick this name, he thought, four letters, four letters,
that'll make a great graphic symbol. He even put graphic design in his freaking name, man. Wow.
So that's a very brief overview of the international style and the gigantic design boom that it
created. But as you can imagine, not everybody was on board with this futuristic dream. And they
really, really wanted you to know it. The font rebels are back. Critics of the international
style, they felt like all this clean, flawless modernity. It was trying to say that life was
perfect. And life just wasn't. Enter the pop artist of the 1960s, most notably Andy Warhol,
people who were on a mission to satirise modernism in all of its icon heavy glory.
Now it's one thing to satirise a movement, but in the 1970s, there emerged a group of people
who wanted to just rebel against it all together. Punks. Remember that guy, Marinetti, who called
the old English stuff snobbish? Punks were feeling the same about modernism. They felt like it just,
I don't know, lacked humanity, lacked realness. There were no mistakes. What's up with that?
So the punks rebelled. And typographically, we can see it really clearly through things like
zines and album covers. These zines were full of handwriting, typographic errors, and letra
set transfers that broke all the rules. And while we're on the topic, let's talk about Jamie Reed.
He quite literally tore apart designs to make new ones. And in doing so, he sent a very powerful
message. Mainstream culture sucks, and we're here to destroy it. God save the queen.
All right, quick little break to talk about this shirt. So the first thing you might notice is,
wow, what a silly and fun font. How whims are cool. Second thing you might notice is it says
Struthless. That's my freaking channel name because that's my freaking shirt, baby. And where do I
sell that shirt? Shopify. That's right. We are going into today's relevant sponsor. All right,
so Shopify, if you don't know, they're a commerce platform. Definitely come across the Shopify
website online. They power like millions of businesses in hundreds of different countries.
But what is really cool at the moment, if you have been thinking lately, damn, I wouldn't
mind starting my own shop, you know, getting creative, building little something. Well,
Shopify right now has something called a starter plan. What this is, is you can make your own shop
literally like within minutes without code, put up products, use all the tools for just five dollars.
If it goes great, you then have the option to upgrade it and turn it into a full store. If it
doesn't, hey, gave it a shot. And that's pretty cool too. If you're keen, if you want to build
shop for five bucks, use this link, which I will put in the description and enjoy.
There you are. Back to the video. So what happens next? What is next in our typographic story?
Welcome to the 1980s. There was New Wave, radical modernism, 8-bit, and things that were being
inspired not by what technology could do, but by the constraints that they put on the designers.
And of course, the rise of the graphic designer getting taken seriously as an artist. And I think
the person who probably best embodied this era of graphic design and typography was Tibor Carman.
Carman had this strong belief that design was a path to ethical justice. He was the editor of
Colors Magazine, which was a magazine dedicated to uniting the world and promoting social good and
making actual change. He would vocally oppose working with unethical companies and who goes
far as to call out designers who would. He was a provocateur and a bad boy, but ultimately he was
also a strong moral compass in the design landscape. I think his legacy lies not as much in his work
as in who he was. Sure, he was a typographer. Sure, he was a designer, but because he was so
outspoken with his beliefs, he made the job of graphic design not only known, but really,
really cool. And this is basically around the time that Hollywood and TV get on board.
Let's say you've got a quirky character, but you also want to give him a professional streak.
What do you do? I'm a graphic designer. I'm a graphic designer. Graphic designer. Graphic design.
Graphic design. You're a graphic designer. You must be really artistic. And with great
graphic design comes great typography. Uncle Ben. Sans. So you've got all this graphic design
grounds well, and people are getting more curious about the profession. But the thing that made
it really take off was a certain guy in a certain turtleneck. Steve Brecken Jobs. The guy who found
at Apple, the guy who thought Paul Ram was so brilliant, and the guy who inspired my 2015
Halloween costume. Sexy Steve Jobs. And he was also the guy who, yes, as the legend goes,
took a calligraphy class in college and then a couple of years later decided, you know what,
computer should have all of those silly words on him too. He brought fonts to the Apple computer.
To do this, you've got a designer slash art historian slash all-around genius called Susan
Care. She's responsible for a bunch of fonts named after a bunch of cities like Chicago,
Geneva, Monaco, Los Angeles. And she's also the designer behind the Happy Max symbol.
What a resume. Steve Jobs gets a lot of credit for this font revolution moment,
but I feel like the designer should too, and Susan Care is clearly one of the best.
So as you can imagine, fonts go onto computers and basically this is like a huge typographic
explosion. Imagine it's the late 80s and you're just a casual user of your computer,
and then all of a sudden you're like, whoa, dude, I can change the writing on this word doc. That
is wild. I know it sounds normal to us, but back then it gave people a lot of agency when it came
to designing stuff. It really put the power into their hands. Now, I have a bit of a confession.
I have been using the words font and typeface relatively interchangeably up until this point.
And that's actually not technically correct. What we know as a font, like a computer font,
that's actually just called a typeface. And a font technically is the way that you alter that
typeface. So things like line weight, italics, boldness, even size, technically aerial size 12
is a different font to aerial size 14. Now, the reason that these two words are confused in our
modern day vocabulary is because of Steve Brick and Jobs. He, when he put them onto his Apple
computer, he was just like, you know what, let's call them fonts. And I don't know whether for
him it was a genuine mistake or whether he just liked the word fonts and was just like, screw it,
they're fonts now. See ya. But in any case, Steve Jobs is why we call typefaces fonts. But before
we critique his mistake, we also must remember that putting fonts on personal computers was
pretty much the biggest typographic shift since the printing press. So what do people do with all
this power? Stylistically grunge was pretty much the polar opposite of the international style.
This is David Carson. He was a surfer from California who sprung into the spotlight when
he was made head graphic designer for Ray Gunn magazine. With this alternative publication,
David Carson turned graphic design on its head. Carson saw type in pretty much like the least
functional way possible. He saw text as like an image or a texture or a decoration. There's this
one time. This is like one of those graphic design legends that you always hear where basically
Ray Gunn magazine had this interview with Brian Ferry and Carson and the editors took one look
and they're like, dude, this interview is super boring. So Carson's like, I've got an idea.
How about instead of printing this in a normal font, we print the entire interview in Zapf dingbats,
basically windings, symbols. He really didn't care if you could read it or not. Legibility was
not at the forefront of his priorities. So just like grunge music, Carson had his critics as well.
They would say things like, ah, you're killing the legibility of typography. Ah, it sucks. Nobody
likes this. But just like with grunge music, Carson doubled down. And yeah, it worked. This
typography, this design aesthetic, it gets cool. And then all of a sudden corporate America wants
a slice to appeal to the youth. All they had to do was use a Carson like aesthetic, right?
How do you do, fellow kids? But Carson had a career to make and he ended up working with a lot of
these people. Here's a grunge piece that was literally made for Microsoft. How cool is that?
And speaking of Microsoft, I think it's about time that we talk about it. The elephant in the room?
Are you ready? The thing that happened in 1994?
Some of you might feel a temptation to skip this section. Some of you might feel a temptation to
call me out or drag me or try and cancel me for saying the words that I'm about to say.
But I promise you, if you can stomach them, we will all be better because of it.
In 1994, Microsoft came out with one of the most iconic fonts of all time.
Comic Sans. I don't know. He has terrible taste in fonts. Now, a lot of us today, we see Comic
Sans as a meme. It's sort of the font that it's fun to hate or the font that, you know,
you might use if you're trying to convey irony. But in researching this, I found out that the
impact of Comic Sans is like way bigger than I thought. So this dude here, his name is Vincent
Conair. He made fonts like Trebuchet, Wild Style, Magpie, Webdings. Actually, one of his
dingbats from that font would eventually become this emoji. Side note, this is the greatest
emoji of all time. And yes, this is a hill I will die on. And he also made, this is super random,
but the Ministry of Sound logo. And yes, Vincent Conair also made Comic Sans.
The story of how it came to be was basically it was a solution to a problem that I guess
a designer would probably notice before many other people. There was this dog called Rover,
who when you would start up a Microsoft computer, the dog's job was to guide you through how to
use the computer, bucko. And basically the dog had these speech bubbles. But Vincent Conair was
like, man, sort of not that appropriate for this dog to be talking in this harsh times new Roman.
You know, it's a bit formal for a dog. Woof, woof, sir. So he was like, well, let's make something
a bit more playful. And he was a fan of comic books like DC, Watchmen. And he's like, maybe I can
make a font sort of based on comic books. Comic Sans blew up immediately. It was just an instant
hit. And the reason is, well, let's say you are making a birthday invite for a four year old.
Hello, children. Nah, we're not going to use the times new Roman. It just doesn't work. We need
something that tonally suits playful or cheerful or whimsical. You got church flyers, school
certificates, friendly emails, birthday cards. There were so many pieces of writing all around
the world that just didn't warrant formality. And Comic Sans was the missing puzzle piece.
But of course, with popularity comes haters. Maybe you were one of them. There's lots and lots
of examples of people inappropriately using Comic Sans, which is such a strange sentence,
but I'll just give you one which I think illustrates it best. In 2012, there was this
Dutch World War II Memorial that was set up, right? And you know what font they chose?
Comic Sans. Now, eventually they would scrap it and the people who made it said it was for
legibility. But I think we all know why. But even in that act is such a strange graphic design
question. How is the way that you write a letter somehow inappropriate? That's weird, right?
Now, Comic Sans on the more positive end of the spectrum actually has a couple of really cool
features that make it quite practical. For example, it doesn't really use mirrored glyphs. So a glyph
might be like a B, which when mirrored might look like a lowercase D. Comic Sans didn't do that.
They had two individual letters. And because of this, Comic Sans is really good for people with
dyslexia. And also, Comic Sans really opened the floodgates for all of the fun 90s text moments.
You know, Comic Sans warped so that word art could fly so that all of the crazy fun 90 stuff
could soar. Thanks, Comic Sans. Now, of course, this is probably a time to mention that it is not
the only controversial font. Let's have a little moment for the rest of them. Papyrus by Chris
Costello. Trayan by Carol Twombly, aka the movie poster font. Jokerman by Andrew K. Smith. And Curls
MT by Carl Crossgrove and Steve Madison. Just taking a moment. Just a little moment for them.
Now, to sum up this section on Comic Sans, I think I'm just going to go ahead and quote
Vincent Cornere himself. If you love Comic Sans, you don't know much about typography. But if you
hate Comic Sans, you really don't know much about typography either. Amen. The 2000s. We're too
now in our typographic journey. You know, we've got fonts on computers. Comic Sans starting to get
a little couple of haters. We've got the Y2K aesthetic. There's a bit going on. Mostly the
thing that defines this era is technology. Digital design was getting easier. Your company's like
Adobe pumping money into these products that were just facilitating more complex designs. And from
that, we've got more complex typography. The 2000s saw a lot of 3D lettering, skeuomorphism,
and maximalism. On top of this, there were far more articulated trend cycles. If one tech company
had a cool 3D logo, then all of a sudden, all the tech companies had a cool 3D logo. Or if a
rapper was like, you know what, I'm going to make all my Slab Serif font have this gold stroke and
be encrusted with diamonds. Yeah, a bunch of other rappers followed suit. So if that's the 2000s,
we all know what happens next, right? We're back here now. Neat. So the internet starts to hit
critical mass and maturity. So between that, all these font sharing websites, indie foundries popping
up, memes, and of course, Photoshop piracy, typography starts to have a big moment. One
interesting font to mention here is one that had a revival. It was created in the 1960s by Jeffrey
Lee, but it found a new home online. Impact. Or I should say it's the typeface impact and the font
was white stylized with that black stroke impact font. It was the font for memes. That's huge.
That's like getting your dream job as a font. The other very important macroeconomic force to
mention is hipsters. Yeah, hipsters bought two main movements into the spotlight. The first was
the revival of the signwriting aesthetic, multiple clashing fonts designed to look good and compliment
each other in one big sign. The fonts that defined this era weren't the ones that came standard
with your computer. They were the ones that you downloaded from the internet. It was fonts like
Babis New by Rayu Chitsukinawa or Lobster by Pablo Impallari, every burger shop font ever,
and the smooth and chunky glorious Cubano by Charles Van Der Water. So if that's the first
movement, what was the second? Sleek minimalism. That international style is back. Let's go,
Switzerland. Whoo. Like I said before, no font epitomized this movement better than Helvetica.
Helvetica was created in 1957 by the Haas type foundry as part of that international typographic
style. And true to its name, it is very much international. We've since seen Helvetica in
multiple different alphabets. While I know that this video is mostly about the Roman alphabet,
Helvetica is one of those ones that transcends. But the real question is, why did this font from
the 50s suddenly get a breath of new life in the 2010s? The answer is once again, Steve freaking
jobs. Yep, Helvetica was the main choice of the Apple iOS pretty much up until 2015, which of course
gave it a huge cop following a documentary and visibility in so many other corporate identities.
Helvetica was used as a corporate wordmark for the following companies.
But of this international age, the most important thing was just how accessible
typeface creation became. Technology just got real good and anybody can make a font. In the same
way anyone can now just make a YouTube video. It's really, really cool. Yep, Cambrian explosion of
fonts. There are indie designers making fonts upon fonts upon fonts and it is amazing. And honestly,
it's kind of beautiful because I feel like that is the whole aim of typography. It's sharing,
it's communicating and it's collaborating. And it's also probably I think how we should sum this all up.
From clay carvings and cuneiform to comic sans and cubano, I feel like the aim of typography
has always sat alongside with the aim of the idealist. Symbols were originally made to facilitate
trade and a better life and they ushered in civilization. Fonts are one of those things that
honestly before starting this, I sort of overlooked as just a nice quirky feature of design. And I've
realized now that's because they're meant to be overlooked. When they're at their best, they are
facilitating information. Half the time fonts are working without anybody even knowing that
they're working. So I guess the right place to end this is by answering that original question
that I asked. Where do all these fonts come from? They come from Dynastic China, the Phoenicians,
the Renaissance, they come from Switzerland, they come from you and me, they come from people on
the internet uploading fonts that they think are cool. And what do all these people have in common?
They all contributed to a multiple millennia long ongoing mission, the mission to connect.
They all knew that words could only ever say so much and so they morphed the glyphs to say
even more. These people were so eager to convey meaning with words, they looked beyond the words
themselves. And yeah, the written word, the actual content, it really does show our desire to
communicate. But fonts, fonts show just how deep that desire goes. So I guess what I am trying to say
is this. The next time you feel like humanity is doomed, we're all isolated and everything
is going downhill. Just uh, I don't know man. Stare a little longer at something that you've
overlooked. Because that desire to connect and the depth of that desire, you can see it in
everything. Fonts and all.
