In our last lecture, we talked about Morten Deutsch's great breakthrough in the discovery
of the concept of win-win.
We noted how that concept really was not really helpful in itself, but that it also
launched a great deal of research by himself and other scholars.
And that research over the years, from about 1950 until now, has produced a number of really
useful insights that help us understand what's going on in a conflict and therefore help
us manage conflicts better.
So in this and the next several lectures, we're going to look at some of those additional
insights that are produced.
One of the most important of those that I want to talk about in this lecture is the
role of perception and the role of perspective, the perspective from which we look at a conflict
that we have when conflict occurs.
You see, conflict arises not so much from a difference itself, but from the perception
that we have of that difference.
So in this lecture, what we're going to do is explain how understanding perception and
how that's related to the perspective from which we look at a conflict, how those understandings
can help us deal with the conflict itself and do a job of managing it better.
And we're going to explain the process of attributing meaning that happens when we do
perception.
We attribute meaning.
When somebody does something or says something, we're not only listening to what they say
and taking in the direct meaning, we're thinking, why did he or she do that?
Why did they say that?
We're assigning meaning to it.
And we're going to look at that part because that happens as part of our perception and
we're going to explain something called the fundamental attribution error.
We'll also describe how you can develop the skills of taking the other person's perspective
to see things and listening with empathy as we pay attention to what the other person
has to say.
So that's the point of this lecture, perception and perspective.
Here we go.
Let's begin by noting that conflict exists not so much when a difference itself exists,
but when one party perceives a difference and that perception of difference causes the person
to be uncomfortable with it.
We're responding to what we perceive to be the case, which may be closely resembling
what's the case, but it may not necessarily be the case.
What's perception?
Well, a definition by Lulofson Kahn, who do a wonderful textbook on conflict management,
goes like this.
Perception is a cognitive activity that it's the process of assigning meaning to the things
that we say that people say or do or the things that we see.
It's assigning meaning to what we hear or see from other people.
In a conflict, what happens is that the parties usually have differing perceptions about what's
going on.
One may perceive a difference where there's no real difference, or another may perceive
a different difference from the one the first party saw.
So they're going to have differences about perception.
And conflict not only arises around that, but we can get off track in attempting to deal
with it because we're working with different perceptions of what's really going on.
Here's a really common kind of example.
Let's suppose, for instance, that I and my spouse are getting ready to take a nice trip.
I'm very excited about the trip.
I tend to be excited about upcoming trips.
And I say something expressing my excitement.
Then my spouse nicely says, but with some stress in her voice, but that's going to be
awfully expensive.
I listen to that stress, and I perceive a difference.
And I tune into the stress maybe and perceive more difference than she intended.
And I think she doesn't want to go, now I'm having a conflict.
You really don't want to go.
The perceptions are different.
She may not perceive any lack of interest in her part, on her part in going, but I do.
So we're having conflict about that.
Now there may be some truth in my perception.
She might not be as excited about this trip as I am.
She may not really want to go all that much.
But notice that in either case, it's what the two of us are each feeling as a result
of what we perceive to be the case that's driving the conflict.
We may not be sure whether there's a real conflict here or exactly what it is.
So we have to pay attention to perception about what's going on, because it's how we
respond to those and what we do with them that really matters most.
So there's a real difference, but it's the perceived difference that's really going
to matter.
Okay, let's look at some examples.
And we're going to use some dramatizations to show you some of examples of how things
can go wrong when we have perceived differences, or maybe that we fail to perceive a difference
that's there.
So let's go for a drama here to a team meeting of an engineering firm.
Al is the boss, and he's summing up the tasks that everybody's got to do.
There's not much time for this team to get a job done here.
They're going to have to work closely together.
Okay, we only have eight days to deliver this proposal, but I think we can make it.
Just a review.
Pete's nailing down personal and resources, Ellen's drafting the project design, Jane's
on the budget.
I'll put the numbers together once I get your pieces, give it a quick edit, and get it out
the door.
Any questions?
No?
Okay, let's get started.
No perceived conflict here.
We all seem to be on the same page.
At least the perception is that we don't have a conflict.
But let's go look a little bit further.
Let's go back to our dramatization, only pick it up about four days later, at which point
we're going to discover that Ellen seems to have a problem with Pete.
Hey, Pete, where's the resource list for me to use on the proposal?
It's been four days.
I haven't seen a thing from you yet.
What?
You're saying you haven't done anything in four days?
That's just crazy.
I can't give you resources until you give me your plans for the design.
How should I give him me the design plan?
I'd have it done by now.
Actually Pete and Ellen perceived differently.
Each of them is feeling indignant at this point, and we've got a conflict here and it's
a problem.
They're both stuck waiting for the other to do something that isn't getting done yet.
So now it's become evident we've got a problem, but it may not be evident that the problem
is a function of the perceptions.
Let's see where it goes from here.
Let's follow this conflict a little bit further.
Let's go to the break room where Ellen's going to share her perspective on this with
Jane.
Boy, Jane, I can't believe Pete.
He can't follow through on a simple assignment.
You know, it's been four days and he hasn't lifted a finger to give me that list of resources
for the project.
You're kidding me.
I've still got to get the budget together.
Seriously?
If we don't get this proposal done on time, it'll be his fault, not ours.
Wow.
Well, I've got another meeting I've got to get to.
So I will see you later.
Well, everything was fine after that first meeting.
Now we're seeing some very different perspectives and this conflict is spreading because now
Jane's worried too.
And we're thinking that people didn't do their jobs and everybody's thinking somebody else
didn't do his or her job.
So we do have a growing problem with this conflict as we proceed and nobody's noticed
yet that it's about perceptions.
Let's follow it one step further.
Let's go back to the boss's office where Pete's going to step in to tell Al about his
own perspective on the problem.
I guess it's a complaint when Pete gets to Al.
Hey, Al.
Got a minute?
Sure.
What's up?
Listen, we're in trouble on this proposal.
It's been four days and Ellen still hasn't gotten started on the project design.
How come?
Says she's waiting for me to deliver a list of personnel and resources before she can
start.
She's got the process backwards and she's holding it up.
If I were heading up this design, we'd be done by now.
All right, where are we now?
The fact is Pete's right and one thing at least, we are in trouble at this point.
This team's in trouble.
Half the time for getting this thing done and out the door is gone.
Everybody's got hard feelings.
These people are not interacting closely with one another and talking well at all at
this point.
They've got a serious conflict to resolve and I want you to notice that none of them
yet has figured out that the problem is their perception and it's not just their perception
of the conflict, which is different.
It's their perceptions of what the assignments were to begin with.
None of them were as clear on that as they thought they were, although it seemed reasonably
clear at the time.
That's very, very human.
These are not bad people.
These are all good professionals trying to do a job together and generally speaking,
they probably know each other well and respect one another, but they've gotten themselves
in trouble on this one with a conflict arising from different perceptions, different perceptions
of the assignments that weren't perfectly clear to begin with and now different perceptions
of who's doing what and what's going wrong in the conflict.
The thing's going to rise and the culprit here is perception.
Let's talk about how to do better with perception as we go.
We need to understand one another's perceptions and consider what it would look like from
their perspective in order to get somewhere.
How are we going to do that?
Well, there are two skills that people talk about a lot that scholars talk about that
really help with this.
Their empathy and then what's called perspective taking.
It's interesting when I say empathy, not everybody wants to think of that as a skill,
but in the communication business, we very much talk about empathy as a skill.
It is literally a communication skill.
It's the skill of being able to see things from the other person's point of view.
It involves an awareness that I'm looking from a perspective myself, that I have a point
of view and I'm looking at it from my direction and then it involves the skill of being able
to get over to the other person's side and seeing it from their position.
In the psychology field, psychologists tend to view that as what they call the skill of
perspective taking.
That really requires, as they say it, adopting the other person's psychological viewpoint.
How would this feel and look to me from the other person's position?
Ellen might do well to be thinking, how does this feel to Pete who must have reasons for
what's going on with him?
When I come to him and just complain that I don't have those numbers yet, Pete would
do well to think about how Ellen feels in this situation and how it would look from
her perspective and then you know what, if they could do that, they might sit down and
talk and work something out.
So that's empathy and perspective taking.
Now I want to talk about a piece that's closely related to that, a concept called punctuation.
Interesting, interesting piece that we deal with in the field of communication a lot.
And most of us think who had English grammar, I know what punctuation is, it's putting periods
on the end of a sentence and putting the comma in the right place.
Well this concept that we label punctuation in communication research is closely related
to that.
It refers to the timing that parties assign to events when they notice what's happening.
When did that event begin and when does another event end?
When I think about where something started, where this conflict started, that's punctuation
for my marking the beginning and where a certain episode ends is punctuation for the ending.
That affects the way I'm going to perceive what's going on in it.
It's that thing that we all, we all understood this as three and four year olds when we got
in scraps with our siblings or our little playmates and we got in a scrap and then we
pointed at each other and said he started it, no she started it.
Who started it depends on when we think it began.
So punctuation, where did it start, where does it end, that's really going to affect
how we perceive what happens in a conflict.
In the example we did in the dramatizations, Pete thinks it starts with Ellen getting unreasonable
with him and making demands when he couldn't have delivered what she wanted without having
what she was supposed to give him first.
He thinks the conflict starts with Ellen being unreasonable.
Ellen thinks the conflict starts with Pete sitting in his office maybe not getting anything
done.
And the fact is the conflict probably started in the meeting earlier when it wasn't clear
about the sequence of how things were going to get passed between people except for everybody
getting this stuff to Al for him to finish it at the end.
So how we punctuate when we think this thing starts is really going to be a matter that
makes a great deal of difference.
Starting points matter a whole lot.
If we're thinking that it started at a certain point and the other person's thinking started
at a different point, we're going to have conflict over what's going on in this conflict.
All right, let's look at a tool for giving us a way to work with understanding perceptions
better and that'll include punctuation.
And for this we're going to go to William Wilmont and Joyce Hocker who present this
in a wonderful text called Interpersonal Conflict.
We cited their definition of conflict in lecture one.
It's a great tool for looking at this and they call it the lens model.
Here's how the lens model works.
If you can picture this and we do the picture in the guidebook but picture this in your
mind as we do it here.
Parties are viewing each other in a conflict as if they're each looking through a camera
lens.
And you know when you look at things through a camera lens several things happen.
One is the lens slips things over to upside down.
It turns them the other way.
The other thing is if you think about looking through a camera lens at something, if you're
closer it's closer.
If you back away it takes in a larger framework and if you look at something through a camera
lens from different angles you get a very different picture.
Even moving a little bit you get a very different picture.
So it's a nice metaphor for viewing each other in a conflict that Wilmont and Hocker offer
us.
If you think of Pete and Ellen's views of the conflict that they were having looking
at it through a lens model, each party if they look at themselves they've got a view
of themselves which is straight up and it's right there but the view of the other party
looks very different and it depends on where they're standing and how far back, how wide
the frame is which is kind of like punctuation in the time frame that you give it.
Each of them has a lens to look at each other through and to look at the conflict through.
It's just like a picture being shot through a camera lens.
And the meaning is going to vary a great deal depending on the angle and the direction
and the distance that you have from what's really going on in that conflict.
It's the lens model for seeing.
So a nice tool for thinking about how perception could be different on the other person's side
is this lens model.
If I think of it that way just picture it in my mind, put myself around on that person's
side of the camera, look at this conflict and look back at myself through the lens that
I think they see through.
How does it look?
And what's the punctuation they may be given and how large is it?
And how do I look to them in this situation?
That would help me.
That, using that metaphor helps me go and look at things from the other person's point
of view.
It enables me to get some empathy.
It's literally a tool for doing what psychologists call perspective taking.
So think about the lens model and it's a wonderfully useful tool that we can apply.
Now let's go to one additional point that we have to consider here that's a problem
area we got to look out for even using the lens model.
And that's this business of attributions of meaning and what we call the fundamental
attribution error.
This is near universal among human beings.
This is something that's been very well studied.
Here's how that error works.
What we do when we view ourselves through our own lens and we see things, if we do something
wrong or fail at something, looking at ourselves, we're going to explain that.
We're going to attribute the meaning of what we did not to the way I am, but most of us
are going to attribute meaning to external events that happen.
Well, that's a concern because this happened and this happened and this happened.
In that example that I started with where I'm all excited about a trip and my spouse
is worried about the cost, I would, I might attribute her statement to lack of interest
in the trip.
But she might be attributing her statement to, well, I was looking at the budget and
I know where we are with this and it was external things causing me to be that way.
But the error, that's the error side of this is that when I look at the other person's
behavior and I'm not satisfied with it, I will tend almost always to attribute it not
to external causes that made them be that way, but to their own character, their own personality
or their own emotions.
And that would be in the way I perceive to that is she doesn't really want to go.
I'm attributing her statement about the cost to her emotions.
That's that fundamental attribution error to do that automatically when that may not
be the case at all.
When it's ourselves and our own behavior when we fall short, it's like excuses.
We think of it in terms of external events that happened that pressed us or caused us
to behave in that way.
Now if you notice what a problem this would be in dealing with a conflict, if when I'm
unhappy with something you did and I'm attributing that to just the way you are and you're attributing
it to external factors that you couldn't help, we're not going to have an easy time
resolving that and I'm going to push you into being much more defensive because it'll feel
like an attack when I think that when I say it as though that's just the way you are.
And conversely, if you have that attribution error toward me, then you're doing the same
thing.
You don't care as much, Michael's just a hostile kind of a guy, whatever.
So that attribution error that's fundamental really gets in our way and it's a basic mistake
we almost always make when we're attributing meaning to one another when we're not really
doing a good job of taking into account the other person's perspective in terms of what's
going on.
Well, how do we get beyond that?
How do we get beyond it?
Let's talk about that a little bit.
This approach is what communications scholars call person-centered communication as opposed
to position-centered or rule-centered communication.
Let's talk about these three, rule-centered, position-centered, and person-centered communication.
Rule-centered communication focuses on asserting the facts and their relationship to the rules.
It's just like the forensic reasoning we talked about in lecture two.
What's the rule and what are the facts relative to the rules?
In our example with Pete and Ellen, if the specs for the proposal that Pete and Ellen
were working on required, say, a complete detailed budget that provided, and they provided
numbers that were fairly general and served that up, whoever was reviewing that proposal
when it went in might review the thing and say, this doesn't meet specifications.
We don't have a detailed budget here and reject the proposal for that reason.
It's yes or no, it's rule-centered to the facts match the rule.
You need that in bureaucratic thinking, and you need it in the law, and you need it in
certain places.
Now, I don't mean there might not be perception involved.
That reviewer's perception of what's complete and detailed might be different from what
Pete and Ellen's or Elle's perceptions were, but still it might make sense in that kind
of a process that the communication be about what the rule, what its rule mean, what is
the rule required, that would be rule-centered thinking.
It's appropriate.
It's necessary in places like the court, like bureaucracies, various places, but it's
not what's going to help Pete and Ellen solve their conflict here.
Well, what about position-centered communication?
As it comes along, suppose Pete takes a position relative to his conflict with Ellen.
What might Pete say?
Pete might say, look, you were supposed to do this, and he's going to defend that position.
That's position-centered communication, as if he's negotiating.
He might negotiate later while I can back down a little bit, but he's taken a position
on it, and he's trying to establish that he has the correct position.
Ellen, on the other hand, takes the position that Pete is wrong and that she's got the
correct position, and if the communication back and forth is about whose position is
correct, that's going to be in the way of dealing with a win-win.
It's not going to help us get to a win-win very much the same way that rule-centered
communication isn't going to.
Those two kind of dance together.
They're both necessary at times, but they're not what's going to help this group sit down
together and work out a win-win resolution.
Now they're down to four days if they want to talk about it.
They're going to have to work out a win-win and figure out how to work together quickly
and get the whole thing done.
If they want to do that, if they want to win-win, they have to get to this third kind that communication
scholars talk about, which we call person-centered communication.
In person-centered communication, I'm willing to understand the other side.
I want to take into account what the other party is thinking and feeling.
I want to try to see it from their point of view.
It's not thinking from the standpoint of what does the rule require here or what does the
assignment say, but what did Pete get as his assignment in his mind?
What did Ellen think her assignment was?
How can we make these mesh and work out so that we can work the thing together?
It's concern about Pete's perception, concern about Ellen's perception, and how can we make
them match?
That's person-centered communication.
It requires listening.
It requires checking my own perceptions.
It requires willingness to adjust that I might not have perceived correctly, or at least
that I've perceived differently from the other person.
What we want to do is get our perceptions on the same page with one another.
It takes a conscious effort to let go of being real-centered or position-centered, which
a lot of us are used to being.
Person-centered communication can be very challenging.
It does require me to be able to check my own punctuation of events, the time I'm in,
timing, when did it start, how far does it go back.
It might be that the other person isn't being problematic at all, except in response to
something I did or said, which he took to indicate that he should behave that way.
It requires questioning my own punctuation and my own perspective.
It requires asking about and really listening to the other party's perspective and what
factors might be contributing to that perspective.
It requires moving together to achieve one another's goals, like really constantly trying
to pursue a win-win, working on it together.
If we think about that and take it back to our example of the co-workers, we're not going
to act this one out for you, but just go back and imagine what if at the initial meeting
they had stopped and checked their perceptions, wait a minute, I'm going to do this, and thought
through how they were going to do it.
I know they were in a hurry.
They had to get on with the work, but if they had checked and found out the different perceptions,
they might have discovered the sequencing problem and worked out better how to proceed
from there.
They could actually do this now four days in.
They could go and look and check with one another and see how it's supposed to work.
We'll talk about ways that they could negotiate that in lectures 10, 11, 12, and 13.
We're going to get there.
We're going to talk about what they could have done instead if they were doing person-centered
communicating and actually working out negotiations.
I do want to emphasize though that when we're doing person-centered communicating, that does
not mean that the reality, the facts, what the rules are, what the specs are, what the
objective facts are.
It doesn't mean those are irrelevant.
Perceptions in their own way are their own set of facts that need to be taken into account,
but the objective facts in any given instance still matter.
Rules are still rules.
Deadlines are still deadlines.
Standards are standards.
They really might have happened and needs to be taken into account.
Reality doesn't go away when we get person-centered, and we do have to take that into account.
It's really a good idea as well to be checking both parties' claims about facts.
Those skills we talked about in lecture two in argumentation matter at this point.
What are the facts of the situation and how does that work here?
A last thing to say about this, in addition to the facts still matter, is I want to note
that it takes courage to really listen to the other party and to look at the fact that
I might be wrong in a given situation.
I don't know about you, but I hate most having to look at a situation and figure out that
I might be wrong and when it turns out that I am, admit it and be willing to change opinions.
That's pretty daunting stuff.
I think it takes courage to open ourselves up to that consideration of the other person's
perspective, to open up to punctuating differently, and that the other person may not be wrong,
so I may share some of the wrong in this.
That takes courage, so be gentle with yourself as you try to do this.
It's a courageous thing to do, taking the other person's perspective.
All right, what have we learned in this lecture?
Several things that are really key here.
First is that conflict arises not directly from the differences, but indirectly from
our perceptions of differences that exist between us.
Secondly, we learned that we need to interact on a personal, psychological, and full human
level without abandoning the objective realities that we face in a given situation.
We need to be person-centered, but that doesn't mean we can abandon the facts.
Three, we learned that in order to achieve win-win resolutions, we need to avoid thinking
in terms of what's correct and who's right, and we need to just think in terms of what
did you think, what did I think, and how can we put this together and work something out.
Fourth, we learned that we need to try to understand our own and the other party's perceptions
of any given situation.
We need to understand those well if we're going to work out a good resolution.
Five, we learned that each person's perception is influenced by his or her perspective, and
sixth, we learned that that perception is influenced by the punctuation, the point
at end time at which that person took notice of the situation, the way they think it works
depends on point of time.
Seventh, we need to especially be careful to avoid that fundamental attribution error
that most of us make most of the time, which leads us to excuse ourselves and to blame
the other person when it wasn't necessary.
If we do the work of speaking and listening honestly and openly to each other, understand
the other person's perceptions in pursuit of real win-win resolutions, doing that with
person-centered communication, we've got a much better shot at resolving our conflicts
well.
Okay, perception lecture.
Let me give you an assignment at the end of this one.
I want you to think of a conflict in which you were involved, and then use that lens
model provided by Hacher and Willmont.
Use that as your metaphor to think through your perspective versus their perspective,
and therefore how your perception might have differed from the other parties.
Try to identify the differences in punctuation that the two of you might have made that I
think it began in a different time from the other party, and how did that affect each
of our perceptions of the event?
What I'm asking you to do in this assignment is use the lens model and try to do some
real perspective taking retroactively on a conflict that occurred, and think through
how things might have worked out differently had you been able to see things from one another's
perspective.
Where are we going to go in the next lecture?
Lecture five.
It's going to work this way.
We've now talked about perception and punctuation.
We know how that is, and we know that they generate our sense of what the conflict is.
They also generate how we feel about the conflict.
Our emotions are driven by our perceptions of what's going on, and our emotions are
tricky to deal with in a conflict.
They're multiple.
They tend to be mixed.
They tend to be complex.
In a conflict, they tend to be negative, including anger.
They stir us to action.
Actions that we do in a conflict can make things a lot worse, especially if we're angry.
So we better look at emotions.
We better consider how emotions work, and especially how they work in a conflict, and how we can
deal with them in a conflict, and that's our subject in our next lecture.
