Religion is a subject of today's lecture, and let me say straight off that nothing is
more challenging than trying to think yourself inside the head of a worshipper who belongs
to a belief system that is different from your own. But the Egyptians win first prize
for presenting us with an almost insurmountable challenge. My suspicion is that the average
Egyptian probably found his religious system almost as big a challenge as we do, since
it was an extremely secretive system. The priests seem to have gone out of their way
to conceal it as much as possible. Perhaps it was a way of protecting and enhancing their
importance, or perhaps they wish to keep the gods completely unsullied by you, the smelly
hoi paloi, or probably a bit of both. The worship of many of the Egyptian gods began
in the pre-Dynastic period, the period before the kings. As in our other lectures, however,
we're going to be focusing on the New Kingdom, the period from 1570 to 1070, which was when
the Egyptians first began to build impressive temples to their gods. Previously, funerary
chapels and the like had been far more impressive structures than temples to the gods. But now
the gods moved to centre stage, and it was also in this period that a professional priesthood
first evolved. What we can say without qualification is that the Egyptians were intensely religious
in the sense that most of them believed wholeheartedly in the gods. That's demonstrated by the fact
that they expended so much money, as many as proportionately any other nation in history
on both their gods and on their dead. The subject of all their sculpture was either images
of the gods or images of the dead, which was also true by the way of Greek sculpture. Unless
you happen to be the pharaoh, or in the pharaoh's immediate circle, you couldn't commission a
portrait statue for display either in public or in the home. What you could do, however,
was to commission a portrait statue for your tomb in the belief that it would guarantee
your immortality. And likewise, the only buildings that the Egyptians constructed out of stone
were either tombs, including of course the pyramids, and from the New Kingdom onwards
temples, along with all the other structures connected to temples. Private dwellings, including
palaces, were typically made of mud brick. Egyptian religion was supported by a vast
bureaucratic and economic substructure. It's been estimated that by the end of the New
Kingdom, approximately one-fifth of the entire population was working in the service of religion,
and that one-third of the land was owned by the gods. Like the Mesopotamians and like
other polytheistic peoples, you held to a system of belief that allotted each god or
goddess among many a limited amount of power. What distinguished your deities from those
of Mesopotamia, however, was that many of them were hybrids. They were half human and
half animal, or at least that is how they were frequently depicted in art with human
bodies and animal heads. There's the fulcrum god Horus, god of the sky, and protector of
the pharaoh, who is depicted either as a fulcrum or as a man with the head of a fulcrum. Then
there's Hathor, the goddess of motherhood, who is depicted either as a cow or as a woman
wearing a crown consisting of a pair of cow's horns surrounding the sun. There's the jackal-headed
god Anubis, patron of embalmers, the arabis-headed god Thoth, the scribe of the gods, and the
inventor of writing and so on. The intriguing question is this. Did the Egyptians actually
think of their gods in this form as half animal or half human, or did they think of them in
a more abstract way, combining the qualities of both animals and humans?
One theory is that the prehistoric Egyptians did indeed worship animals, cats, cows, jackals,
crocodiles, etc. because of their special powers. Cats, for instance, dispose of rats
and rodents and therefore would have been highly valued and esteemed. Perhaps as early
as 3000 BC, however, the Egyptians had come to think of their gods not only in animal
form but also in human form. In other words, they anthropomorphised them. Incidentally,
the same theory has been applied to the Greeks. The goddess Athena, for instance, was closely
associated with the owl, the god Zeus, with the eagle, and so on. But whereas the Greeks
almost wholly dispensed with the belief that their gods had animal forms as well, the Egyptians
never did. Why? The most likely explanation is that they were a highly conservative people
who retained the old ideas even when they introduced the new ones.
Not all the Egyptian gods have their origins in animal worship, however, and one of the
most important gods was Tar, the chief god of Memphis who was credited with creating
the world by simply imagining it in his mind and then giving it palpable form by giving
utterance to his thought. The Egyptians believed that words had magical powers. It's rather
like the creation story in Genesis. God said, let there be light and there was light. There
was significant deity. Tar never achieved national, quote unquote, importance, unlike
Amun Re. The name Amun means the hidden one. He was called the hidden one because his form
was unknown, though for the sake of convention he was represented as a man with an ostrich
plume crown. He became Amun Re by acquiring the power of the sun god Re or Ra. Amun Re
rose to unrivaled dominance in the new kingdom due to the fact that Thebes, which was the
home of his principal sanctuary, now became the capital of Egypt. And that event reflects
the rise to power of his priesthood at this time, a distinctive feature of the Egyptian
gods. One that distinguishes them sharply from the Greek gods is that they didn't have
the same highly specific powers. Whereas the Greek god Poseidon say was the god of the
sea and of earthquakes, Amun's powers were indefinable. Another national deity was Osiris,
the protector of the dead, who was depicted as a mummy form figure and Arton, who was
shown as a sun disk. Incidentally, the Nile wasn't worshipped as a god. He was a lesser
semi divine being appropriately depicted as a fat man holding a tray laden with food.
All the gods had myths attached to them. And as an Egyptian, you would have been familiar
with many of these myths. There was no official version of any myth, however. And the versions
that circulated tended to vary greatly from place to place and time to time, all adding
to the confusion. It's a characteristic of myths that they are open to varied interpretation
and manipulation for political purposes to promote this or that deity and therefore this
or that priesthood. Egyptian religion was inseparable from Egyptian politics. So for instance, there
were three different Egyptian creation myths associated with three different cities, all
competing for power. Though the version that came to prevail was that the world emerged
from a kind of watery chaos. Probably the most important myth involved the struggle
between Horus and Seth, between good and evil, in a way. And we'll talk about that
in the next lecture. As an ordinary Egyptian, however, you left the worship of the gods
other than domestic deities entirely in the hands of the priesthood, whose principal task
it was to perform services on their behalf every day. You yourself weren't even permitted
to enter a temple ever. Now that's because the temple was the dwelling of the god and
had to be kept completely pure. If you'd entered it, you would have polluted it. You were however
permitted to pass through the monumental gateway that gave access to the temple complex and
stand in the forecourt. The monumental gateway consisted of two tapering towers known as
pylons erected on either side of the entrance. You enter the forecourt, which has colonnades
along two sides with an altar for performing sacrifices in the middle. And it's here, if
at all, that you would experience the numinous presence of the deity. Beyond the forecourt
lay a covered hall and beyond the covered hall lay the temple itself. If you were a
person of some rank, you might deposit a valuable votive offering in the forecourt. A votive
offering is an offering made in fulfilment of a vow. In making your offering, you would
pray to the god or goddess as follows. If you restore my wife to health, then I will
give you such and such a gift. Or alternatively, you might make a votive offering in expectation
that the deity will answer your request. There were also places on the outer walls of the
temple complex, which are described as chapels of the hearing ear, where you could whisper
your prayer into a sculptural representation of a pair of ears. As well, there were lots
of small local shrines devoted to specific gods dotted throughout Egypt, where you could
leave your own votive offering or make a sacrifice. So as an ordinary person, you weren't completely
cut off from the major state gods. However, the only occasion when you as an ordinary
Egyptian would see the cult statues of the deities that were housed inside the temples
was at festival times, when they left their homes and were born in procession. If you
are lucky, you might even get to ask one of the gods a question as he or she resided
temporarily in a wayside shrine on his or her journey. The deity would give a simple
yes or no answer to whatever your question was. Many of the festivals coincided with
important junctures in the agricultural calendar, such as the beginning and end of the inundation
season, that's to say in June and September respectively. But what would you have made
of a festival? You would no doubt have been greatly impressed by the splendor of the pageantry.
You would also have believed that the cult statue was in a real sense the deity himself
or herself. But I doubt that you would have understood much more than that. It was not
the business of the priesthood to explicate what they did on behalf of the gods or to
enlighten you about the nature of the gods. They had much more important things to be
doing. So for the most part at festival time you would probably have gawked. It would have
been a day off work, that's always nice, but hardly an occasion to express your piety.
In fact it's difficult to understand what piety might have meant in an Egyptian context.
Festivals were opportunities for jollity and to some extent frivolity. There would have
been a lot of free food and free booze going around and all of this would have been accompanied
by much singing and dancing. If you lived long enough you might get to attend the sed
festival which was held at Memphis. That celebrated the union of upper and lower Egypt. In other
words the creation of Egypt as a single nation. The sed festival was normally held after the
pharaoh had reigned for 30 years and it was then repeated at 3 year intervals after that.
Many of the major gods were invited to pay their respects to the pharaoh on this occasion.
That's to say their statues were removed from their temples and brought by boat down
the Nile to Memphis. Unfortunately we know very little about the details of the festival.
What we do know is that it culminated in the pharaoh running a circuit to prove that he
was still virile and athletic. He did so clutching a vase, an ore and a carpenter's square and
alternately wearing the white crown of upper Egypt and the red crown of lower Egypt. No
doubt you would have cheered him for all you were worth as you stood there watching
the old boy panting as he trotted past. No doubt your heart was in your mouth when you
saw him trip. Probably priests accompanied him on either side ready to prop the old fellow
up if he should stumble. Even so it would have been a pretty bad omen if he couldn't
complete the circuit unaided. There's even a theory that the sed festival was originally
instituted to replace the ritual murder of a pharaoh who was deemed no longer capable of
performing his job. It's always possible of course that you might choose to become a priest
yourself though in order to qualify you'd have to be educated in order to read and write
hieroglyphics. The hope is too that your parents would have chosen this career for you at birth
because you had to be circumcised and probably the priesthood mostly ran in families. We don't
know why circumcision was performed for priests. It may have represented a covenant to the gods
similar to the covenant that is established between Abraham and the Lord in Genesis through
circumcision. The Egyptian priesthood was very hierarchical. At the top was a pharaoh.
A pharaoh was the son of Ra and a god in his own right and when he died he went to join
the other gods. Members of the upper class had to kneel and bow their heads to the floor
in his presence whereas the hoi paloi had to prostrate themselves. Directly under him
was an official called the overseer of the temples and prophets of all the gods. The
overseer had to administer the enormous wealth that the gods possessed deriving partly from
their estates and partly from taxation. Below the overseer came the high priests, one for
each of the gods who were worshipped throughout Egypt and below the high priests were the
chief priests, one for each temple. It was the task of the chief priests to supervise
the lesser priestly officials of whom the most important were the wab priests. So imagine
you've finished your training and you've become a wab priest yourself. It's your primary
duty to attend to the cult statue of the god or goddess whom you served. Each morning you
break open the clay seals of the doors of the shrine in which the cult statue was housed
and then you solemnly remove the statue from the shrine. No cult statue has survived but
we do have a description of the statue of Amun from an inscription dating to the time
of the boy pharaoh to Tunk Amun. We're told it was covered in electrum lapis lazuli turquoise
and quote every precious stone. The core of the statue would have been wooden and while
you were removing it you intoned prayers, sang hymns, swung censors and made obeisance.
You then solemnly removed the garments that the statue was wearing. Next you bathed it,
you purified it and you provided it with fresh clothing and jewelry and after that you placed
it back in its shrine and laid out a ritual meal consisting of food and drink on an offering
table which you then presented to it in symbolic form. After a decent lapse of time while the
cult statue digested you removed the offering and when you were done you sealed the doors
again and purified the whole sanctum brushing away all traces of your footprints as you
backed towards the exit. You did all this to protect the deity from forces of disorder
and chaos and you performed this same ritual three times a day and the next day you did
it all again three times it seems rather boring to us but we must remember that Egypt's security
depended on it so I suspect you were required to be on your toes in case anything went amiss
so do your best. There were also other lesser priests including the scroll carriers who read
and looked after the sacred texts that were housed in each temple and the horologues or
prophets who observed the heavens in order to determine the exact timing of daily rites
and who also kept track of the festival calendar. As a priest you would reside inside the temple
complex along with the rest of the temple staff that's to say people who looked after
the buildings cooked your meals and so forth. The temple complex also included a school
which is where you trained to become a priest. As we've noted being a Wab priest was rather
repetitive. The good news is that you would typically work for one month and then have
three months off like all Egyptian priests and during your month on you had to remain
ritually clean by bathing frequently. You had to shave your head where a long white linen
killed and refrain from sexual intercourse. During your three months off however you were
not bound in any way by your priestly functions. You could wear what you liked do what you
liked and there's nothing to suggest that you had to be what we might call being spiritual
or devout. So far we've talked exclusively about official religion and I now want to
turn to private religion. Most of what we know about private religion has to do with
death which I'm leaving till the next lecture. Mainly what you do is pray to the domestic
deities whenever you have need of their assistance. One of the most frequently invoked domestic
deities was Bess a greening male dwarf with the facial features feet and tail of a lion
and a bloated stomach. Bess guarded your home in part by warding off snakes always a danger
in Egypt. Women also invoked Bess when they were giving birth. We find his image depicted
on headrests, beds, mirror handles, other domestic objects and on amulets that had been
carved from hippopotamus ivory. Another domestic deity was Taweret. Taweret was depicted as
a pregnant hippopotamus standing upright on lion's feet and carrying a crocodile on her
back. She too protected women in labor. You might too occasionally pray to one of the
major gods. We have a prayer that was written by a workman called Netharabu who lived in
Der El-Madina in which he confesses that he has sworn falsely by the god Ta who has now
blinded him as a punishment and he humbly asks for Ta's mercy and forgiveness. Religion
was a stabilizing force in Egyptian society. Only once was there an attempt made to shift
its course dramatically. The attempt was made by the pharaoh Aminhotep IV who reigned from
1350 to 1334 BC. Aminhotep took the bold and revolutionary step of seeking to replace polytheism
with monotheism or at least something close to monotheism. He abolished the worship of
the traditional gods and promulgated the sun-disk, the artan, and changed his name to Akenartan
which means beneficial to the artan. And when I say he abolished them what I mean is that
he sent his agents up and down the land armed with their chisels to expunge the names of
all the traditional gods from all the temples and other monuments that bore their names.
The experiment to replace the traditional gods was deeply resented both by the priesthood
who saw their livelihoods put at risk. Imagine too being an ordinary Egyptian. Everything
that everyone has believed in for 1500 years is now denounced. Overnight you have to change
your whole way of seeing the world. How would you feel? I bet you'd be deeply concerned
for your country's safety. The gods will be angry. There's a very good chance that the
world will come to an end. Unfortunately we know very little about what steps Akenartan
took to educate the ordinary Egyptian people into this new belief. Indeed we don't actually
know whether he took any steps at all. He may simply have handed down a directive forbidding
the worship of the traditional gods and the closing of their temples. Whatever the facts
it's more appropriate to think of Akenartan's bold venture as an experiment in henotheism,
the elevation of one deity above all others rather than as monotheism to core with a single
transcendental godhead. Our best insight into the challenge that any people faces in making
the switch from polytheism to monotheism is provided by the book of Exodus which describes
the first thumbling attempts by the Hebrews to abandon polytheism in favor of monotheism.
Thou shalt worship no other gods before me, says the First Commandment, implying that
there are other gods around whom other peoples worship. Very likely you have been worshiping
them yourself. Henceforth however you're only permitted to worship the one god Yahweh.
In the course of their exodus after their escape from Egypt we see the Hebrews constantly
complaining and even reverting to polytheism by worshiping a golden calf. Akenartan as
I said was way ahead of his time and when he died Egypt returned to its old ways. No doubt
the traditional priesthood breathed a collective sigh of relief. In conclusion Egyptian religion
seems to have placed remarkably few demands upon the common man and woman. The Hebrew god
as we learn from the Jewish Bible was a jealous god who struck terror and guilt into the entire
race. The Egyptians by contrast were spared both terror and guilt. You didn't have to worry
about placating angry gods. That was handled by experts. That was why you paid your taxes
to leave the difficult and mysterious business of handling the gods to those best qualified.
And if things did go wrong you could always blame the priests or the pharaoh. If you experienced
a domestic difficulty or anxiety you could invoke Bess or Tawaret but for that you didn't
need any expertise. All you had to do as far as the state gods were concerned was to turn
up at the festivals and that meant having a good time drinking dancing and merry making.
You didn't need to seek spiritual guidance or to conduct yourself in accordance with
a moral code that was sanctioned by religion. So just get on with your daily life secure
in the knowledge that the Nile will flood. Your crops will sprout up. Your wife will
give birth to a healthy child. Egypt will stand firm against its enemies and all will
continue as before in its time hallowed way. In the next lecture we're going to look at
the other aspect of Egyptian religion which did require very considerable input from ordinary
Egyptians namely death and the dead. We'll see how they sought to prolong the pleasures
of human existence into the afterlife and we'll also see that so much of what has been
handed down through the centuries has its roots in Egyptian belief.
