Well, in the last several lectures, we've been discussing some of these key factors that
are complex, sometimes difficult to understand and manage, but they really affect how we
can deal with the conflict and what's going on in a conflict. We've talked about perception
and how these can differ. We've talked about emotions, which are powerful and complex and
sometimes contradicting one another. And we've talked about our goals, which are also complex
and may contradict one another. And we may have always more than one goal at a time.
We've talked about those factors. There's one more major factor we really need to consider
before we move forward to talking about specific ways to handle conflict. And that's the element
of power. It turns out that every conflict, every conflict, even conflicts with people we love,
is a power struggle. There's power in play. There's a struggle over power in every conflict. So
that's our focus in this lecture. We have to talk about power in conflict situations. We have to
identify some erroneous ideas about power in conflict situations, and we have to replace them
with some correct ideas. We also have to consider how much power an individual needs when we're
in a conflict. How much power do I need to get a resolution that's going to work? We'll
introduce the concept of leverage that I use for helping assess power in a conflict. And
we'll offer some specific suggestions for how to deal with power in any conflict situation.
That's our subject of this lecture. So let's get started. We need to start with a definition.
What is power, and then what is power not? Definition first. I would define power as the
ability to cause or influence an outcome. Pay attention to the full definition there, cause
or influence, and I'm deliberate putting the emphasis on the term influence, an outcome.
You know, when we think of power, we often think of power as control, our ability to
control the situation. But most power turns out to be the power we have in the form of
influence, which is less clear and less defined, but it's much more present and much more potent.
Control is always limited. Humans have way less control than we think we have at any given time.
Often control is an illusion. We just don't have as much. Well, we don't need as much either,
so I want to get our focus more on the business of influence that we may have. In understanding
what power is, I also want to call attention again to that notion of interdependence. It
was there in our definition of conflict from Hocker and Willmont early in the course in
lecture one, and it was very present when we talked about what Lewin introduces to in field
theory, the notion of interdependence in relationships, because interdependence is also a source of
power. In an interdependent relationship, each party has some power over the other in the sense
that each of us controls consequences for the other. We actually can behave in ways that will
have effects on the other person. I also want to note that there are three sort of basic kinds
of power that we can have. The first of those would be what you could call personal power.
Personal power is what I have as a person, regardless of the relationship or the situation
that I might be in. Our personal power might be our talents, our skills and abilities that
we've developed, our store of knowledge and information that we may have. We hold that.
That belongs to us as a person, so that's personal power that gives us the ability to
function physical strength even as personal power and intelligence as personal power.
But a second kind of power is what gets called relational power. And actually in conflict,
this is the one that's going to be most obviously in play most of the time.
It's the power that derives from the nature of the relationship between myself and the person
that I'm having conflict with. It's power that comes from the interdependence that we've cited.
So relational power, or perhaps you wouldn't even want to call it interdependence power,
is a second kind of power that we have. But there's a third kind of power here,
and that's power that comes from situations. Call it situational power. Every conflict is a
situation and it arises in the context of situations. And those situations affect what
consequences are going to occur from whom and how that can happen. So every particular situation
has conditions involved that give power to one party or the other or more to this and more to that.
And in most conflicts what you've got is some mix of each individual's personal power,
the relational power that's in play, and these are typically affected by the situations in
which we're operating when we have a conflict. Okay, now let's talk about some wrong ideas about power.
Like our ideas about conflict, an awful lot of our learning about power and the nature of power
came early. And so we've got some ideas and some of those ideas are accurate and right. They had
to be or we wouldn't be managing to get through. And some of them are problematic. Some of them
give us some wrong ways of thinking. One of the most common wrong ideas about power that's been
widely studied by scholars is what they call distributive power. This idea that power is
a single pie kind of thing. And so more power to one party means less power to others. And so
when we're thinking about power, we're distributing a set amount of power. That's why they call it
distributive. And what happens here is this distributive way of thinking about power ties
to that old concept of win-lose. Because if I have more, that means you have less. If you get
more, that means I have less. So it's that win-lose idea of power carried through into win-lose in
a conflict. And if the conflict itself is a power struggle, that's going to be a problem.
So that's one wrong idea. There are some others. One idea that's wrong about power is that lack of
power is a matter of moral weakness. And lack of power isn't weakness. It may be just the state
that I've gone. A converse wrong idea about power is the idea that lack of power is the same thing
as innocence. Like if there was nothing I could do about it, therefore I'm innocent, it's not my
fault. I don't have to be accountable. So lack of power could be lack of accountability, translate
to innocence. You know, there's that marvelous saying that's so often quoted by Lord Acton,
which said power tends to corrupt and absolute power corrupts absolutely. We could flip that one
over upside down and say that lack of power tends to corrupt and absolute lack of power might corrupt
absolutely. Because it would take away all accountability and all sense of responsibility,
it would create irresponsibility. So more power, less power has nothing to do with right or wrong
in terms of being innocent or guilty. Here's some right ideas about power. One is that simply
possession and exercise of power is neither right nor wrong. It just is. We all have it. All humans
exercise power consciously or unconsciously. And you know, I think we exercise a whole lot more
power unconsciously than we do consciously when we're in conflict and at other times as well.
There's some other right ideas that we ought to pay attention to. One of them is that we all give
away a lot of the power we have in many, many situations. We give away power to be liked,
to be loved, to be hired, to be promoted, to escape responsibility, to avoid making effort. We
do a lot of giving away power that we have. It was there in those examples that we had in lecture
five. If you think back to those, remember Carl and Anna, where Carl is the guy who wants Anna to
do some work for him because he needs to get home early and he's leaving asking her to help
in that example. Carl wasn't her supervisor. He was asking her to do something confidently
expecting that she would do it and Anna gave away power to him. She said, okay, I'll do it. She
just gave it away. He's not her supervisor. They're equal in power status, but Anna just gave him
a power that she had. Where does power come from? That's the next thing we have to consider.
There's been a lot of research on this following Deutsch over the years. One of the really classic
studies on this that still gets quoted a whole lot was done by two psychologists, John French and
Bertram Raven, back in the 1950s. What they did was identify what they called five power bases.
That idea of thinking about the bases or some other scholars have called it the currencies
in which power exists. That idea of thinking of bases of power really gets started by French and
Raven and other scholars that followed it through. French and Raven gave us five, what they called
bases of power. They said, we get power from our ability to give rewards. That's reward power.
So ability to give rewards is a power base. Secondly, they said, well, there's coercive power.
The ability to punish, deliver negative consequences is a form of power. That's a power base and they
call that coercive power. Thirdly, they said, it's obvious that there's what we might call
legitimate power. Legitimate power is either explicitly, officially given or assumed to be
legitimate in the roles that are recognized in a culture. A supervisor in an organization has
legitimate power. He or she has the power to order people to do things and to evaluate and
withhold or punish assignments. The officer who stops me for going too fast has legitimate power
in a given situation. Lots of them, parents and children, parents have legitimate power. So we
expect power to be exercised by this person. That's a base of power. They also noted that there's
what they called referent power. We get power from whom we're associated with or attached to
and that connection gives us an ally or status from which we draw power. They called that referent
power. And finally, they said, there's expert power. If we know a lot, if we have a lot of
information and expertise, the knowledge itself, the information is a power base. And they called
that expert power. Now, a good many other scholars have studied this business of power using that
idea of power bases and talked about kinds of power. I'm just going to give you a couple of
examples. And the point with giving you examples, by the way, is not, I don't want you to have 19
lists, but I want you to see that there are variations in the way you think about this.
It's not just the way French and Raven thought about it. An organizational theorist named
Kipnis, the Kipnis back in the 70s, simplified the list. He said, well, in an organization,
you've got these power bases. You have threats, you have promises, you have control over information,
and you have control over reinforcements. Threat, promises, information control,
reinforcement control. That was one way to structure it. If I'm giving examples,
I'm a communication scholar, so I've got to give you one from communication scholars.
And there are three of these that do a lot of wonderful research on conflict,
Joseph Folger, Scott Poole, and Randall Stuttman, who gave us a more exhaustive list.
Their list went like this. They said, well, skills and abilities, a form of personal power,
that's a power base. And then they said expertise, knowledge, information, that's a power base.
And then they said control over rewards and punishments, that's a power base.
Allies, just like referent power with French and Raven, they said it was a source.
And then they also noted possessions, including money, is a power base. That's another list.
The general idea that I want you to get here is that there are a lot of different ways to
construct this list. But what happens is that there are a variety of sources we can draw on
that give us power. And these are going to vary with the relationship we're in,
and the interdependence, and the situation that we're in. And we're going to want to be able
to assess these. Okay, so in a conflict, from whatever collection of sources, however you
conceptualize that, both parties have power. If the conflict in part is going to be a power
struggle, we're really going to need to be able to assess and understand the power that we have,
the power that the other person has, and how these relate to one another.
When we're doing this assessment, we've got our personal power, they have theirs.
There is the situation. But mostly, we have to understand that the power that's in play in a
conflict is going to derive from the interdependence between the two parties in general, and in the
situation that they're in in particular. So, if I'm in a conflict, I really do want to ask,
what power do I have here in this conflict? Where does that come from? What are the bases of it?
What power does the other person in this conflict have, and where does that person's power come
from? From what are the bases of it? We're going to want to know what these things are, even with
someone we love, because I can use power to punish, reward its responsibility that I have, and the
other person too, so we need to know this. Let's think about some examples of these.
Remember Ken, in earlier lectures, Ken and Kate in that conflict. This is a guy who wants to take
a job out west, and his wife, Kate, wants him to stay put, because her career is taking off right
now. Each of these two has relational power. This is a marriage, and we can assume that they love
each other, and it would be painful to split up, so each has power, each wants the other to be happy.
But Kate in this situation also has, well, some personal power. She's obviously excelling at work,
but she has situational power in that now, in this particular time frame, those skills and
efforts are paying off, so her career is taking off, and the situation of her current career
trajectory gives her a kind of power to Trump's Ken's wishes at the present time.
So that situation, though, is temporary. It's a mix of relational power and situational power
that gives Kate the Trump at this point. Let's think about another example. Think of our two
roommates from lecture one with the problem of noise, one making noise, the other trying to study.
Roommates in an apartment will each have the power to greatly affect living conditions of the other.
They can make those conditions easier and more pleasant. They can make them more difficult.
In this case, you've got that general relational basis for power going, but you also have the
situation that on this given night, one of these people is studying for a difficult test.
That should give a situational power base to that person. And if we also go back,
thinking of examples to our folks, Carl and Anna, the work colleagues, in that situation,
though she didn't exercise it, she gave it away, Anna had a great deal of power in that relationship.
It was relational, but in that situation, she held the cards. She was the one who could
do the work, let Carl go. Carl was sort of stuck. He needed to get home. Probably his wife was
expecting him. And she gave it away, but in that instance, she should have known she actually had
more power than Carl, and she didn't have to give it away. So notice in all of these, all of these
examples, the powers derived from the interdependence of the parties, and they're always happening in
the context of a situation. So power in each of these cases is a function of the interdependence
that's in play. It's interesting when I think about interdependence, there's a concept employed
by large organizations when they do strategic planning that helps make this clear. When an
organization wants to do a competent job of strategic planning, what they know they need to do
is go consult with what they call stakeholders. And a stakeholder is a person who has a person,
or for that matter, a group or an institution or organization, who has a stake in what the
organization does. And that stake means that what the organization does or how we do it affects
that person or that group. And conversely, what they may do will have an effect on the organization.
It's a two-way relationship. So when they're going to try to do a strategic plan and figure out where
they're going to go from here for the short term and the long term, organizations who are doing
that competently know that they need to go consult their stakeholders. Why? Because those
stakeholders are in some sense interdependent with the organization, and so they have power to
affect the organization's ability to do what it wants to do. So those relationships work that way,
they're interdependent. How much power then do we need in a conflict is the next question we
got to consider. Remember in lecture one, one of the wrong ideas I listed for you was that
in a conflict we need more power than the other party in order to succeed, in order to get
our needs met, in order to get our conflict resolved well. Well, it turns out that the
right idea is that we do not, we absolutely do not need more power than the other party.
What we need is for there to be enough interdependence there that we affect consequences for the other
party, enough, just enough that they have reason like those stakeholders the organization would
consult. They have reason to give us time and energy to work with us because it matters to them
that we're satisfied with how this works out. To evaluate this and do it quickly in a kind of a
shorthand, a term that I've used over the years is just to use the word leverage. If I ask what's
the leverage that I have in this situation, my leverage can be defined as the other party's
stake in my being satisfied with the way we work this out. Let me say it again, my leverage is
equal to the other party's stake in my being satisfied with the way we work this conflict out.
Get the idea? I can ask that question for myself, what's the other party's stake?
Okay. Examples here. Ken's leverage with Kate in that Ken and Kate issue over whether he's going
to take a job and move. He does have some leverage. Kate is his spouse. She loves him. She doesn't
want him to be unhappy. He's got some leverage in this situation. Of course she has leverage and
more leverage relative to the situation of her career. Anna in her interaction with Carl,
where he's asking her to finish the project for him, has plenty of leverage here. His stake is
that he needs the help that only she can give him at this point. She also has some longer term
leverage here that she apparently isn't thinking about much in the sense that this issue of teamwork,
he's going to need help over time from her. They need to work together on stuff and for that long
term he needs it. Of course the other party also has some leverage with us too. So it's really
useful to understand what's the other party's leverage with me in a conflict. We need to look
at what are the stakes for each of us as we move through these things. How much leverage do I need?
Not more than the other party. Just enough that it's worth the time and energy and a bit of risk
for the other party to listen to us and try to work this thing out well with us. That's what we need
to go pursue a win-win resolution. Okay, now in the 20th century research on this issue,
the most important point that's come through consistently about power in a number of studies
where it just keeps coming back to this point, the most important thing to understand about power in
a conflict is this. The more equal the conflicting parties are in power, the better are the chances
of working out a good resolution. The more equal the better the chance of getting a good resolution
and conversely the greater the disparity in power between the two parties in a conflict,
the less likely we are to achieve a lasting satisfactory resolution. So we're really interested
here in equal power. So we don't have less power of the other party game sum, it would be very nice
to move toward making the power more equal. Bringing theirs up doesn't bring ours down,
our interest is to work to make power more equal. So how do we go about doing that?
Taking together the lessons we've observed so far here, tell us that we should be working
to equalize the power. And whether or not we have more or less power, that's still going to be true.
We should be working to equalize power. If I've got higher power, what I really want to be doing
is moving to exercise restraint and to explicitly recognize the interdependence that's in play
so we can add power for the other person. You know what would help when Carl asks Anna for help here?
If instead of just confidently relying that she's going to do it for him, he really acknowledges
the power that she has, puts it on the table, helps her be aware of it. Because in equalizing the
power here, they're much more likely to work out something that's going to work well for
tonight and work well for the long run. Similarly, Kate, in the issue with her husband Ken,
would really help things. And you can picture this in the marriage. It would really help things if
Kate can explicitly acknowledge that Ken's happiness means a lot to her, that that carries weight,
and that her ability to succeed at work may be affected by having that strong, loving relationship
and that she doesn't want him to be unhappy for the long term. Helping Ken understand
how much power he's got in this situation, which makes it more present and equalizes,
would really help them for the long term. Notice in neither of those examples, with the person
acknowledging the power and moving some to the other person, that person isn't giving up any power
at all. They may be giving up the illusion of power or the lack of knowledge of what the other
Hardy's power is, but they're not losing any real power. So equalizing, bringing it up doesn't cost
me power. At the general level doing this, you know, successful leaders in organizations and
communities really do understand that leadership works best if we can treat others as co-workers
and each having power and importance of their own. That doesn't mean it's equal. If I'm the boss at
consulting my colleagues and people that work with me and listening to them and granting them the
power they have, doesn't mean it's just democracy. Everything's going to a vote. It can be honest
consultation that can really influence me. So I'm acknowledging the power they've got and giving them
more power to influence me, but it doesn't give me less. It's going to give me more information
with which to function effectively. Similarly, more equality in power, if you think about it,
it's going to create the problem of complicating things a little more.
So it may seem more complicated and less simple, but we have to recognize the value of the research
which tells us that we're going to get better management of conflicts and better solving
of problems if we equalize the power and make things work out. You know, it also helps to note
the limits of the power we have. I said at the beginning of the lecture when I was talking about
definition that control is often an illusion. All relationships are two-way relationships,
even ones where we think we have all the power and the other party doesn't have any
relationships or two-way relationships. Power always belongs to all parties. Supervisors,
you know, and organizations which have worked with a lot, have clear, assigned, legitimate power
according to French and Ravens terms. They can give assignments. They can set standards. They can
enforce standards. They can reward. They can punish. But any good supervisor, any supervisor
that's been on the job for a while knows very well that those powers are extremely limited.
A supervisor can work very hard to enforce minimum standards. But you know, when I ask supervisors,
is that what you wanted? Your people are all to meet minimum standards? They all say,
no, I want them to go way beyond that. And my power as a supervisor to get my people to go
way beyond that has very little to do with control. And it doesn't have all that much to do with
handing out rewards and punishments. My ability to listen to them, work with them,
guide and encourage really is going to affect how successful I am as a supervisor.
And it requires me to recognize the limits of my power so that I spend time and energy encouraging
and listening and influencing by consulting rather than trying to enforce or distribute
rewards and punishments. I'll be more successful if I do that, recognizing the limits of my power.
And that applies when I'm in a conflict with an employee too.
What if I have less power than the other party in a conflict? What can I do?
There really are things that I can do to balance this and to be more effective.
One of those, and it's very well backed by the research, is given to us by Wilmont and
Hocker in their book, Interpersonal Conflict. What they say is stay engaged and keep speaking up.
And if you do that, it's kind of like high torque rather than one big punch through.
If you do that, if you stay engaged and keep speaking up, your power will grow and the other
person will begin to listen to you more. The evidence supports that. If we apply this to
our examples, you know, Anna's starting point with Carl in that relationship, the way that
example worked doesn't look all that equal. But if she keeps speaking up about her needs and
interests and time needing to be taken into account, her influence over Carl in this situation will
grow. And you know, I suspect that Rebecca, our graduate student, is probably going to need to
stay engaged and do some persistence speaking up with her roommate Jane to keep that noise down.
Because we're not always thinking about keeping the noise down with the other person.
So we may feel we have less power, but staying engaged and speaking up really makes a big
difference and can be very effective. We also can gain power by seeking allies. Any of us who
ever survived on a playground if we were smaller than some other people know that getting an ally
can help. That's a legitimate thing to do if we need to build our power. But when I mention it,
and it'll come up several times later in the course, I want to suggest that we'd be very
careful in doing this, because we don't want to set off a spiral of getting more allies and
triangulating conflicts and making matters worse. So we have to be careful about it. But we can gain
power by getting allies. We can also gain power by getting more knowledge and information, building
our expertise and increasing our personal skills. And that one can we can pursue at all times.
So finally, I want to note here, we're talking about balancing power that whether you have more
or less than the other party. I've got to be willing to recognize the power that I've got,
and I've got to be willing to act on it. If I'm not willing to act on the power, I've got to be
the same as giving it away. We've got to be willing and able to impose consequences on the other person.
That willingness and ability often motivates the other person to negotiate with us,
helps them think about it, might be a good idea to get with us and work on a win-win resolution.
So we need to be willing and able to exercise power. A kind of extreme example of that,
thinking in terms of our couple, Ken and Kate, might arise if for several years Ken hangs in
there and things aren't changing and Kate just wants to stay where she is. What if Ken at some
point were to say to Kate, look, I need to have a change. I need to get out of here. And we need
to talk about that. And if we can't talk about it and work something out, I'm gone anyway. You know,
at that point, because he was willing to walk away, Ken might have a whole lot more power with
Kate because he was willing to exercise what he had. It's kind of paradoxical. It's a dilemma in a
way, but we have to be willing to exercise our power sometimes even with loved ones in order to
move things to a better place. Ken's power would increase if he did that. Okay, let's summarize
what we've learned about power. What do we know about power in a conflict? First, most important
thing here is that power, that definition is that our ability to influence outcomes, influence is
the most important word. Secondly, power resides in persons, in relationships, and situations.
And it comes from a variety of sources. So it's complex and it's always changing and moving. It's
in all of those things at once. Thirdly, we all have some power in every conflict and we need
to assess the power we've got and the power the other party has. Fourth, we don't really need
more power than the other party. We just need enough to make it worthwhile for that person to
work with us. Fifth, the more power one person has does not mean that the other person has less.
We can both gain more power together. Sixth, the more equal the conflicting parties are in
terms of power, the more likely they are to actually achieve a satisfactory and lasting
resolution. That's the important finding from all the research on this point.
Seventh, if I've got more power from the other person resulting from that idea of equal power,
I need to exercise restraint, explicitly recognize the interdependence, bring things to more equal.
On the other hand, if I've got less power than the other person, I can do things. I can stay
engaged and speak up. I can seek allies, but I want to avoid setting off downward spirals.
I can build up my expertise and my personal skills, but I've always got to, with more or less power,
whatever it is, be willing to recognize and act on the power that I've got.
Power in conflict. All right, here's your assignment from this lecture. I want you to
practice using that concept of leverage, and I want to suggest that a good way for you to do that
is to think back to a conflict you recently experienced. Try working leverage just for that,
how it would have been. Ask yourself, what was the other party's stake in my being satisfied
with the outcome of that conflict? I want you to notice whether you actually had choices or
consequences for that other party that you might or might not have been aware of and might or might
not have been willing to exercise. I want you to ask yourself whether you could have increased your
leverage, and if so, how you might have gone about doing that. I want you to do that as a kind of
practice with a past tense thing so you can get used to beginning to assess your leverage, assess
your power in any given conflict. That's your assignment for this lecture. Okay, where are we
going to go from here? This is a good moment to kind of sum up where we've been. You know, we've
got conflict defined. We've really looked at all these different factors, these key factors that
make a difference that we need to understand. We looked at perceptions, we looked at emotions,
we looked at goals, and we looked at power in conflict. So you've got a lot to work with there.
Now we're going to move forward and begin to focus on strategies for managing conflict.
And first we're going to focus on the strategies that most of us acquired early in our life that
sort of became our default strategies. These come to be called our conflict styles,
and they'll be our subject in lecture eight.
