Well, Martin Deutsch showed us all those years ago that we can have win-win resolutions most
of the time.
So one would expect that most people would turn first to strategies aimed at getting
win-win outcomes, but that's not what happens.
Instead, most people appear to operate with a repertoire of like one or two default strategies
for managing conflicts, regardless of the specific situation, and most of those don't
necessarily have to do with win-win outcomes.
We call default strategies these days conflict styles, and that's what this lecture is about.
It's about recognizing the various conflict styles that people acquired early in life
from their early learning, developed skill in over time, and so they're the sort of default
ways that they turn to to resolve conflicts, and we want to understand them and understand
how to work with that better.
So let's get started.
Actually way back in about the mid-1960s, two management theorists, Robert Blake and
Jane Mouton, developed a theory of management styles.
They referred to it as the management grid, and they laid it out in a square shape thing,
and they talked about the styles that seem to be the default styles that most managers
have.
Well, about 10 years after that, two important social psychologists, K.W. Thomas and R.H.
Kilman, took that concept of styles, and they applied it to managing conflict.
Their notion of conflict styles and the work they did, the research they did to support
that, became an important area for further research, and got lots of general application.
It's held up over time.
It's still useful.
It's still being used in training, and it still continues to spawn more research.
So we want to talk about the basic concept of conflict styles that Thomas and Kilman
gave us.
What did Thomas and Kilman do?
They identified five general conflict strategies that they said there are the default strategies
that we tend, not always, not totally exclusively, but that tend to be the default strategies
that most of us turn to when we have a conflict.
They arranged those five conflict styles into a model according to the degrees to which
each style reflected concern for self, concern for the other person, and the degree to which
each style represented cooperativeness with the other person, or non-cooperativeness.
They laid that conflict description out in a sort of a general square diagram with each
style representing a place in the big square.
So picture the square in your mind if you're not looking at this, and we do have a representation
of it in your guidebook.
Here are the five styles.
First style.
If you think of this one, go down to the lower left-hand corner picturing it.
Here we have the style of avoidance.
Avoidance seems to be a low-risk thing to do.
It's the style in which what we do is we simply act as though the conflict isn't there, and
we hope it will go away.
We just don't do anything about it.
It's not very cooperative, it doesn't cooperate with the other party, and it's lose-lose.
It's low concern for myself, low concern for the other person.
Let's look at an example of what avoidance would look like.
Here's the guy named Hank.
He's the head of an architectural design team, and he's at his desk.
And one of his team members, George, pops his head in to check with Hank about something.
Here's the picture.
Hey, Hank, any word and no designs we sent to Barry?
Well, as a matter of fact, I just got an email.
Barry and his team seem to have a problem with our designs.
They say they don't mesh with our other projects.
Really?
What do you think we should do about it?
Well, let's just see if it blows over.
I hate haggling with those guys.
Yeah, that sounds good.
All right, I'll talk to you later.
Is that you?
Avoiding the conflict?
Hank just doesn't want to deal with it, but it's not going to go away.
And if that's Hank's general pattern, there are lots of things that are just not going
to go away.
So let's look at another kind of a style.
This would be the style of competition.
That in the Kiliman and Thomas model, it moves up.
It's still on the left side, but it's in the top corner.
Competition is attempting to get what I want at the other party's expense.
It treats this thing like a win-lose situation and goes after getting what I want at the
expense of the other party.
It's very high concern for myself.
It's low concern for the other party.
It's mostly not cooperative, although some battles involve a certain amount of cooperation.
But what this is, is a win-lose strategy.
I'm looking for an outcome in which I win, the other party loses.
Let's look what would happen if Hank had a style of competition.
Hank, anywhere in those designs we sent to Barry?
As a matter of fact, I just got an email.
We have a little challenge here to deal with.
Barry and his team seem to have a problem with the designs.
They say they don't mesh with our other projects.
Really?
What do you think we should do?
Our designs are fine.
We know what we're doing.
Those guys just think they know it all.
We need to let Barry know that we're not going to give an inch on this one.
All right.
Sounds good to me.
We'll talk to you later.
All right.
Would that be your style?
Competition?
Hank's treating this as a contest now, and that may not give us the result either.
It's not adapted to the situation.
Let's go look at a third style.
This style would be compromise.
Compromise in the model sits right out there in the middle.
It just muddles around in the middle of the square.
Compromise is giving up something and expecting the other party to do the same thing, kind
of meeting in the middle, I give up something, you give up something.
And some of that, some of us have that as our automatic response, as our default response.
It assumes that the situation is competitive, but it seeks to minimize the damage by splitting
the losses.
It has some concern for itself, some concern for the other.
It's cooperative to an extent, cooperative with boundaries and limits.
It's no win, no lose.
Here's Hank in Georgia again.
Let's see what happens if Hank's a compromiser for his style.
Hank, any word on those designs we sent to Barry?
Well, as a matter of fact, I just got an email.
Really?
Barry and his team seem to have a problem with the designs.
They say they don't mesh with our other projects.
That's all.
What do you think we should do about it?
Let's just split the difference.
Can you get back to Barry and let him know that, well, we'll tweak a few things here
and there.
That ought to keep him happy.
Yeah, I can do that.
I'll keep you posted.
All right.
Is that one you?
Is that your style?
Some of us go to compromise pretty automatically, but you notice it really didn't center on
getting at what the problem was.
Hank's just immediately moving to split the difference.
In that situation, it would be the state if Hank were a compromiser in terms of his conflict
style.
Let's look at one more.
That would be the style of accommodation.
Now, accommodation will be down in the lower right-hand corner of this thing.
It's down there where I'm not going to take very good care of myself down there with avoidance,
but it takes care of the other person.
It's taking care of the other party by giving in, but it's not doing anything to take care
of myself.
Some of us are accommodators as a style.
We're all concerned for the other party and we're not enough concerned for ourselves.
It's totally cooperative, but it doesn't require the other party to be cooperative with us.
So it's a lose win.
I lose.
The other guy wins.
What if Hank were an accommodator?
Maybe a little unlikely as the head of a design team, but what if Hank were an accommodator
in this situation?
What would that look like?
Hey, Hank, any word on those designs we sent to Barry?
Well, as a matter of fact, I just got an email.
Barry and his team seem to have a problem with the designs.
They say they don't mesh with our other projects.
Really?
What do you think we should do about it?
No.
The designs seem fine to me, but we need to keep Barry happy.
I hate to waste the time, but can you ask your team to take another pass at the designs?
Okay.
We'll take another look.
Thanks.
An accommodator.
Hank's ready to give away the store here.
He might have a perfectly good design going, but he's giving it up too easily.
And some of us are accommodators.
It doesn't take good care of us.
And if we're too much accommodators, we don't necessarily take that good care of the other
person either.
We don't let them know who we are.
We don't surface problems that ought to be surfaced.
So accommodation as a default style is its own set of problems, although sometimes we
would have to use it.
Fifth style, let's turn to.
The one that would most suit Martin Deutsch is collaboration.
It's in the top right-hand corner of this model.
Collaboration is working together with the other party to really achieve a win-win outcome.
It treats the conflict like a problem, and attempts to engage in creative problem-solving
to get what's good for both of us.
It's high concern for self, high concern for the other party, and it's cooperative on
both parties' terms.
It's looking for a win-win.
It's the best strategy, but it's certainly not the most common conflict style that we
see in use.
What would it look like, though, if Hank really engaged in collaboration as his style?
Let's look at that one.
Hey, Hank, any word on those designs we sent to Barry?
Well, as a matter of fact, I just got an email.
Uh-huh.
And Barry and his team seem to have a problem with the designs.
They say they don't mesh with our other projects.
Really?
What do you think we should do about it?
Well, I think our designs are solid.
But let's hear what he has to say.
Can you set up a meeting with Barry for tomorrow?
Yeah, sounds good.
I'll get right on it.
Thanks.
All right.
Is that one new?
I hope so.
When we have that as the default style, the one we would go to first, it's easier to back
in to the others.
But we can't do collaboration all the time.
It doesn't work all the time.
We can't get the other party to cooperate all the time.
What we want to know is a style that we'd like to have as our go-to style more often
than not.
All right.
I want to say something about the idea of patterns of styles that come along.
We don't just have one single style.
Most of us are a little more complex than having just one single style.
What we do is we tend to have a pattern.
It's like I'll do this first, I'll try this, and if that doesn't work, and I'm finding
that doesn't work, I have a backup, a number two thing that I turn to.
People tend to have default patterns of styles.
Some common examples.
For instance, let's see, suppose I'm into avoidance, and I'm going to avoid as long
as possible, but some people have that as their first style, and then their go-to style
after that is competition.
So I'll do avoidance, and then if that doesn't work, I'll get angry and compete.
It's backed up by competing.
Another one is they may start by being hostile and being competitive, and then when that
doesn't work, they'll back down.
It's patterns that become the styles that we tend to go by.
So all of us have these.
We learned them early.
We've got this set of conflict styles.
How do we put what Kilman and Thomas taught us to work?
First thing we can do, we can observe the styles and patterns that we have.
In fact, that's a very common thing that's done in training sessions all over the country
with the Kilman and Thomas work.
We can determine what is our default style, and what is our default pattern of styles.
And then once we know what that is, we can sort of intervene on that, aware of it.
We can consider how we might expand our repertoire so that we can better respond with strategies
that are better suited to specific situations and specific relationships.
So if I have a wider repertoire and I start thinking in terms of responding in the conflict
in a way that best suits that situation and my relationship with the other party, then
I'm going to be in better shape.
But as I'm trying to expand these, I want to caution you a little bit.
It's not like I can try the new thing and I'll be as good at it as I was at this thing
that I learned early that's been my default style.
I've got a lot more experience with my default style.
It may be a less desirable style, but I'm better at it.
So I've got to be patient.
But I really want to expand my repertoire and get better and more often at using the
other strategies listed on that list of styles so that instead of one style, what I've got
is skill in each of them.
In fact, Thomas these days calls them not so much styles as he refers to them as modes
for conflict management.
And what I really want, my objective, is to have skill in all five of those modes of conflict
management so that I can choose the one that best applies to the situation and the relationship.
That's what I can do making use of it.
Now, Thomas and Kilman's work not only spawned a lot of research, but it's also had this
direct practical application over the years, and it holds up well over time.
It's still very much in use today, and that's a good dual test of any social science discovery.
I want to talk about one other type of set of styles that take place, although the author
didn't call them that.
It really fits what we're talking about in this instance.
And that's the work that happened more recently when John Gottman, the psychologist, developed
a typology of what he called bids and responses.
He did this about 2001.
It turns out it's very helpful in relationships to get this pattern and to use it to deal
with our conflicts and to improve the relationships as we do.
Gottman talked about bids and responses.
A bid is what happens when one party communicates with the other, seeking a response of some
sort.
If that communication is about a conflict, that bid would be an effort to either negotiate
a compromise or to collaborate.
One party brings a conflict to us, wants a response.
And what Gottman focuses on that makes a huge difference is how the other party responds.
What are the types of responses that I can give when the other party makes a bid in that
sense?
His three types are very easy to understand and follow.
The three types are these.
He calls them turning toward, turning away, and turning against.
Gottman starts on the positive side with turning toward.
So let's put the good one up here first.
Turning toward acknowledges and validates the bid, turns toward the person, and literally
moves closer in the relationship.
Let's look at an example of responding to a bid by turning toward.
Here's one where we have a guy named David.
He's watching a ball game on television.
David has left a mess in the kitchen when he grabbed a snack and his wife just went
in the kitchen and found it.
Let's see what happens.
Holding.
What do you mean holding?
David, you left a mess on the counter.
I'm sorry, hon.
Can I clean it up at halftime?
It's about two minutes from now.
Sure, but please remember to clean up your mess next time, okay?
We'll do one.
Okay, David is really turning toward his wife in that instance.
He's acknowledging that she's got a complaint.
He's not walking away from the game and jumping up and just totally accommodating, but he's
clearly turning toward her and responding in a way that brings in closer.
So that's a pretty good response.
That's turning toward.
Let's go look at what turning away might look like.
What's turning away?
Turning away is a response in which you really just don't acknowledge or validate the bid.
It's indifferent.
It creates distance.
It doesn't object.
It just doesn't acknowledge and respond in a way that does anything.
It's turning away.
What would happen in this same scenario if David used turning away as a response?
Let's take a look and see.
Oh, no.
Come on.
David, you left a mess on the counter.
Honey, the game is on.
I'll clean it up at halftime.
Never mind.
I'll do it myself.
No, no, no, no, no.
Go for it.
Come on.
All right.
What David's done in this instance is just not acknowledged.
She's going to do it herself.
You know, if I'm David, I might be thinking I got by that one and it's no problem, but
I'm going to bet in most marriages David's going to pay a price for this, and his spouse
is not being well-served.
So there's a conflict here that's not being handled.
It'll get under the rug.
So turning away is not a very good response in terms of doing anything to resolve the
conflict, and it's not good for building and strengthening the relationship.
Not the kind of response you'd most want to give.
Let's go to that third type.
Let's look at what turning against would be like.
Turning against acknowledges the bid, but rejects its validity.
Instead of being indifferent, it's hostile, and it creates hostility that counters the
hostility it gives.
So if we go there and we think about turning against, let's consider our example again.
What if David, instead of turning toward or turning away, turns against in this situation?
Come on.
David, you left him out on the counter.
Did you have to complain about every little thing?
I'm trying to watch the game.
Yeah, all you do is watch games and make a mess.
I'm sick of cleaning up after you, and that's your maid.
Come on.
Well, I hope that's not you.
We don't need to be that hostile with each other, and in any ongoing relationship, turning
against really just makes it be a fight and doesn't move things toward resolving the conflict.
Now, we did that one with a married couple example, and that's actually where Gottman
does most of his research.
He's focused on building strong, happy marriages and researching how that can happen, but it
applies to any kind of relationship, turning toward, turning away, turning against.
At work with friends, romantic relationships, it applies to any kind of relationship.
And in this case, the style that we have, the predominant style we're looking for, ought
to be turning toward.
So let's talk about our applications of Gottman.
As I said, Gottman's work really is in close personal relationships.
He's primarily concerned with marriages and getting them stronger, but this applies to
every kind of thing, every kind of relationship we could be in.
He makes it clear that what we need to do is respond in ways that say that we really
want to hear what our partner is saying and that we're happy to work with that other person
to try to get this done.
Now, that requires some risk-taking on our part, and we're going to talk about that more
as we go along.
Turning toward is not an easy thing to do, but he makes it clear that the best answer
most of the time, what really ought to be our style, is turning toward.
What will we do relating that to the Thomas and Kilman Five Styles?
Let's look at these and see how they fit together.
In the first place, collaboration is clearly turning toward.
Carl and Anna, the colleagues working on the fundraising plan could be in a collaborative
mode.
If Carl wants something from Anna, Anna can turn toward him and set boundaries.
In those examples, you can see how collaboration will be turning toward.
Compromise could sometimes be turning toward.
Accommodation might appear to be turning toward that style, but it really is going to involve
withholding.
If I'm just accommodating the person, that's not going to be good for the relationship,
and it's not going to help resolve the conflict.
So accommodating could kind of be bogus turning toward.
What if David jumped up and ran in the kitchen and cleaned the mess up and ran back to the
game?
I don't know that that would have been a very good response really.
So accommodation is not exactly the same as turning toward.
Anna, in the accommodation mode, in that example, if you think about Anna back then, she was
agreeing.
She said, yeah, I'll do it.
But accommodating can be covert.
She could be turning away or turning against later in some other way.
So I might even agree like Anna to go ahead and do something.
I might smile when I do it and then resent, and resent being asked.
And so that doesn't get the conflict resolved.
Accommodating isn't turning toward.
It doesn't really get the conflict resolved.
It just doesn't get it on the table.
It's another version of avoidance.
So if I keep this to myself, and I don't want the other party, no, I'm making distance,
not good for relationships in the long run.
So you can see where, when you lay conflict styles against Gottman's ideas of turning
towards, how many of these don't work.
Compromise is turning toward, but it sets limits and boundaries.
And sometimes it's really the right answer to do, although it draws boundaries and limits.
It might be better to really collaborate.
Competition, how does that play in terms of the thing with Gottman?
Competition is most obviously turning against, but you know there's also some competition
in that just turning away and not acknowledging.
Turning away can be a power game.
Not letting the other person have power like not letting them in on what's going on.
So when we lay these together, we can see the lean where we ought to put it.
Compromise really isn't as good as collaboration, but it is there.
What about avoidance though?
That's the style we started with.
Where does that go?
Avoidance is by definition turning away.
It can also be a way of turning against because it's a way to disengage.
It's a way to show less respect.
It can be less respectful than turning toward and turning against and fighting.
So I remember back that example of Anna the first time Carl asked her and she said,
well I can't promise, but I'll give it a shot.
What's that?
He doesn't know what's happening as he's going away.
So it's there in our examples.
Turning away and turning against can create distance and they don't solve problems.
If we want to solve the problem, if we want to get the conflict resolved,
the best strategy is consistently going to be turning toward.
That's going to be the best mode in Kiliman and Thomas' terms, which is collaboration.
And it ought to be, though we said it isn't, it ought to be our style.
So we want to get moving in that direction.
What have we learned in this lecture?
Well, we learned we have default styles.
We learned that we learned them early.
That those styles are our ways of dealing with or not dealing with the conflict.
And they're what we turn to automatically.
And we have them in patterns as well.
What are the styles?
Avoidance, competition, compromise, accommodation, and collaboration.
Now, as Thomas and Kiliman point out, no one style is appropriate for every situation.
Not even collaboration.
But we really can and we really should try to broaden our conflict repertoire
so that we can respond to any specific conflict in any specific relationship
with what that conflict, that situation, in that relationship demands.
Secondly, we learned that we have three options when another party turns to us in a conflict
and makes a bid and wants a response in a conflict situation.
Those three are turning toward, turning away, and turning against.
You know what?
Not only do conflicts get handled better, but relationships seem to get better and stronger
and to do so consistently if the predominant style of both parties is turning toward.
And they tend to get worse if it's turning away or turning against.
Conflict styles.
Let me give you an assignment relative to that one.
What I'd like to ask you to do is this.
And actually, it's two.
First, I want you to really look at and assess your own conflict style.
Think back across the conflicts you've engaged in over some time
and think about what it is you turn to automatically.
Where do I go first and then maybe what's my backup after that?
And think about how it limits the way I resolve conflicts
and see if I can broaden, begin to broaden my repertoire.
Secondly, I want you to look at those response types.
Sit down with someone with whom you have a close personal relationship
and talk to one another about how you respond in terms of turning toward,
turning away, or turning against.
And if it's not mostly turning toward, talk about how you can make that better over time.
All right.
In our first eight lectures now, we've gotten a good general understanding
of what happens in a conflict
and what are some general options for handling conflict.
In our next several, we're going to get to some more specific strategies,
some to try to avoid, and some very specific processes and principles we can use
to try to be more successful at negotiating win-win resolutions.
In lecture nine, what we're going to do is start with those strategies to avoid,
the strategies I call dysfunctional conflict strategies.
