Alright, in our last lecture we talked about conflict styles, and a conflict style is a
style that you generally revert to as a predominant way of doing things, a kind of default strategy.
And the whole point of understanding conflict styles really is to understand that we need
to have a full repertoire of strategies that we can use depending on the situation rather
than one or two styles that we revert to rather automatically.
In this lecture we're going to talk about strategies in a more specific way, and we're
going to talk about strategies that we ought to avoid if we can.
I call these dysfunctional strategies for managing conflict.
What I really mean is they have harmful side effects that are worse than necessary,
and they might even outweigh the desired effects that you are after.
As a matter of fact, two of these dysfunctional strategies were also on our conflict styles
list.
Those would be avoidance and compromise.
I want to repeat them here and to talk about them just very specifically in terms of why
we really want to avoid them if we can.
So we've got dysfunctional strategies to talk about, and I've got a total of eight
of them to talk about, so let's go ahead and get started.
Let's begin by being clear about the definition of a dysfunctional strategy.
I don't mean they don't get what you want.
A dysfunctional strategy is one that, while it may get us what we were after, will also
get side effects, costs that were significantly greater than necessary, and they might even
outweigh the beneficial effects we were after.
So let's talk about those dysfunctional strategies.
Let's begin with one that was on our styles list, that's avoidance.
We described avoidance in the last lecture.
If you remember our example back then, we had Hank telling George that Barry had a problem
with that design team's design.
And Hank's reaction, if you remember, was he didn't want to do anything with it.
He just wanted to hope it would blow over.
Well it might, but then it probably won't.
That was, by definition, an avoidance strategy.
If it was what Hank did all the time predominantly, it would be his style.
But in this instance at least, that was just an avoidance strategy.
There's a lot of tactics people use for doing this, more than I can really list.
It can be just doing nothing and hoping it'll blow over.
It can be saying, yeah, I'll deal with it, and then sort of not getting around to it.
It can be not responding to a call.
It can be changing the subject.
There's a lot of ways that we use to avoid dealing with a certain conflict.
But it is going to have harmful effects.
The first of which is we just don't solve the problem.
Problem stays.
And you know what?
Problem's not addressed often, faster, and get worse.
There are additional harmful effects.
We can lose our credibility for dealing with things.
So avoidance doesn't get it done.
It's kind of a lose, lose strategy.
Doesn't take care of the other person, doesn't take care of myself.
It just hopes it'll go away.
Still, avoidance is something that we're going to have to use some of the time.
There are occasions when the other party has more power and will impose an unwanted resolution
if this thing comes up, taking care of themselves but hurting you.
And sometimes it's wise to just duck and avoid it if you can.
There's other times when the risk of bringing it up myself is just too great, or the occasion
is just not one on which it's OK to bring it up.
So there are also times when there's no resolution that's possible.
So what that means is there are going to be times when we're going to need to use avoidance.
We need it in our repertoire of strategies that we can use.
But we want to avoid it if possible.
Avoid avoidance if possible, only use it if I have to.
Let's look at another strategy.
Let's turn to withdrawal.
Now withdrawal is partially avoidance, but it goes a little further than avoidance.
We often use it in conjunction with avoidance.
But withdrawal goes a little beyond it.
But is it?
It might be best on this one to start with an example.
So let's do a dramatization here.
Picture this scene.
We're in an office, Elaine is at her desk working, and she looks up and sees her colleague
Margie coming toward her.
But Elaine kind of averts her eyes and looks down and gets busy working some paper.
Margie walks up smiling and speaks.
We're not going to know why Elaine is withdrawing at this point, but we'll probably find that
out later in the lecture.
Let's listen in.
Hi, Elaine.
Didn't see you a happy hour after work on Friday.
Did you have a nice weekend?
It was okay.
Look, I'm really busy.
I'm pulling some numbers for the boss.
Oh, sure.
You okay?
I'm fine.
Okay.
I'll see you later.
Been there?
The other person withdraws from communicating, and you don't know why they did it.
Something's wrong and you don't know why.
We've all been where Margie is in this situation.
It happens at work.
It happens in friendships.
It happens in marriages.
It happens in a lot of relationships.
One person has a conflict, and what they do as a strategy is withdraw.
The definition of this is reducing or eliminating interaction with the other party to avoid
addressing the conflict, avoidance, and or to punish the other party.
And that's very, very common.
Don't you suspect Margie's being punished here?
What are the tactics that might be used in this kind of a situation?
Well, we can avoid encounters with them.
We cannot respond to greetings.
We cannot return phone calls.
We very often do things like avoiding eye contact and averting and turning away and
speaking in a flatter tone emotionally, and Elaine did all of that in our example.
We don't give very forthcoming answers.
We don't know exactly what Elaine is working on.
So a lot of different ways to withdraw.
What are the harms that come from this?
Number one is that tactic is seen and felt as a social slight by the other party.
You generally have some punishment in it, and they feel the hurt.
Well, that party feeling hurt and probably confused as well may get resentful over these
perceived slights, and they may reciprocate.
So this can escalate and go on.
The relationship can be damaged.
Of course, the problem, in the meantime, remains unsolved, and we may compound it and
get it worse by making distance in the relationship and not dealing with it.
When would we want to use it regardless?
When would that be?
Well, on some occasions, if I need to avoid, and the only way I can manage to avoid is
to withdraw and not be there, ducking, avoiding may require some amount of disappearing.
So there are times when I need to withdraw in order to avoid, and if I had to avoid,
well it's the best option.
There are other occasions when the resulting damage to the relationship is just not as
great as the risk of addressing the conflict.
So if I'm feeling that, okay, this strategy.
There's this other occasion, what if I need to withdraw like temporarily?
I just need some time to calm down.
We talked about that relative to emotions.
We'll talk about it again when we talk about the step process to go through to resolve this.
If I need some time to think this through and I need to withdraw to do it, that's okay.
But the best thing to do is let my other partner know why I'm withdrawing, and then make sure
I get back to them and let them know what it was about.
That's withdrawal.
Let's turn to another one.
Let's go next to imposition.
Imposition is doing the power trip.
The definition of this would be a direct exercise of power.
Suppose I unilaterally just impose a resolution, and I want you to notice that this can be
done both overtly, right out front and obvious.
It can also be done covertly by doing it secretly and not getting caught.
Let's think of some examples of this one.
Let's go back to Hank and our architectural design team.
Let's think about Hank sitting at his desk, and suppose he's going to be in the imposition
mode rather than the avoidance mode.
So let's suppose Hank catches Barry and wants to confront him about Barry's problem with
the design.
Let's look at that.
Hey, Barry, can I talk to you for a minute?
Hey, I'm glad you stopped me.
I want to talk to you about those designs.
Listen, Barry, I'm going to stop you right there.
We're in charge of the designs and we know what we're doing.
Your team takes it from there.
But I just wanted to make a- Look, Barry, don't question our designs.
You got it?
Sure.
We'll just have to work with what you sent.
All right, this is obvious overt imposition.
Hank's just imposing on Barry.
But you know, it's usually not helpful.
Hank may think he's exercising his authority and protecting his turf and he's doing that,
but whatever the problem is, isn't getting addressed.
Remember I mentioned covert imposition?
Let's talk about that a second.
You know, Hank may have less power here, less control than he actually thinks he have.
Barry and his crew are working out in the field.
They're actually doing this project that's been designed.
And you know what?
Crews working in the field very often can do things not according to design.
So Barry can go out and use covert imposition and do what he thinks he needs to fix the
design, hoping not to get caught.
Then there's a problem either way, either with Hank's imposition overtly or Barry's
imposition covertly.
How do we do this kind of thing?
It's unilateral action.
It's issuing orders or just doing it visibly.
It could be, if we did it covertly, it could be acting surreptitiously and trying to get
away with it.
It happens all the time, including in construction projects.
What would be the harmful effects?
Well, it may cause the other party to counter with a greater exercise of power and then
you get an escalation and a power struggle going on.
It can create distance and damage in the relationship, especially if the deception is caught.
It creates resentment if the overt thing is caught.
And that decreases morale and makes distance.
And then the problem that might be exposed by dealing with the conflict, is it going
to get solved?
Still, when would we use imposition?
There are times when it's the best thing to do.
There's immediate actions required and there's no opportunity to consult.
You know, in teams that do forest fire fighting, they have a concept called an incident commander.
There isn't any discussion.
They've got to put somebody in command because they're actually fighting a battle with a
fire and decisions have to be made instantly.
There are times when imposition, giving orders and expecting them to be followed overtly
is absolutely the right answer.
So there are times.
And there are other times when the goals are important and I just can't get the other
party to cooperate.
I might need to impose in that kind of condition.
So imposition sometimes, but only when it's needed.
All right, that's three.
Let's talk about a fourth dysfunctional strategy.
Let's talk about triangulation.
Triangulation is exactly what it sounds like.
It's creating triangles.
Let's start here with a dramatized example.
Remember Elaine doing her little withdrawing from communication with Margie?
She's not talking to Margie.
Who is she talking to?
She's talking to her co-worker and ally, Fred, about this.
Let's listen in on that.
Hey, Elaine, you heard Margie pulled on Friday before happy hour.
She went to the boss and tried to snag the new Lockhart account.
Then she came by my desk this morning all friendly as if nothing had happened.
She knows I want that account.
Did he give it to her?
I don't know.
He might still be deciding.
You think you could find out what's going on when you meet with him later today?
Yeah, I can give it a try.
I can't promise anything, but I'll try.
Thanks.
All right, I'll see you later.
All right, Elaine is triangulating here.
He's creating a triangle, putting Fred in the middle with she and Margie at the other
two corners.
When you've been put in the middle like Fred is here, especially if you're not already
an ally with the person bringing it to you, it's very uncomfortable.
It creates a problem.
What's the definition of triangulation?
Definition is this.
It's complaining to a third party instead of addressing the conflict directly with the
other party.
The other party you actually have the conflict with.
So why would we do this?
Well, it can be done to gain an ally, secure a resolution without the other party's participation,
like going over their head.
It's also done to just complain or vent or punish the other person.
There's some things I want to make note of about this.
An awful lot of people believe and a lot of people even advise venting to a third party
to relieve anger, thinking we can get it off our chest.
But you know what?
The studies on this suggest that venting actually can make us matter that what we do when we
wind up and talk about it is we walk away more heated up and more angry rather than
calm down.
A couple other things to note about it.
One is that honestly consulting an appropriate third party, somebody that can be trusted
about how to address it, to help sort it out, is not triangulation and the difference
here is motivation.
If I'm doing that to help myself prepare to talk to the person and that's honest and
that's what I'm doing, I'm not doing it instead of talking to them, I'm doing it as preparation.
That's not triangulation either.
A kind of final note about this and when we talk about the harmful effects is that the
harmful effects on triangulation very, very often, in fact more often than not, tend not
to appear immediately.
They tend to build up over time.
They can be devastating though when they actually explode.
What happens is clicks develop in groups and in organizations and there's a lot of this
grousing back and forth around and people get separate and the teamwork breaks down
in a lot of different ways and then it explodes at some point.
So you really don't want triangulation going on.
Lots of organizations I've worked with could have been described as terrible tangled webs
of triangles.
So you want to avoid that.
The tactics here for this come, well let's see, what would the tactics be?
Well we could complain sometimes under the guise of asking for advice but I'm really
doing it instead of talking.
One of the tactics is present myself as the victim and the other party as the villain
and that one's really problematic.
Another tactic is sort of looking for an ally when I really just want the other person to
feel bad about this character when they can't really do something about it.
So triangulation is really problematic.
It can damage or destroy a relationship.
That's a harmful effect.
Viewing myself as the victim is harmful to me.
Victims have a hard time valuing themselves and recognizing themselves.
A lot of times when we're victimized really we have to go get help to deal with that.
So harm to me and it's unjust to the other person.
It often makes unjust solutions that can happen.
So triangulation is a problem.
But when would we use it anyhow?
Suppose the other party really does have more power and isn't going to work with me to solve
it and I really do need an ally in order to deal with the thing.
In that instance let me go use triangulation.
Let's go to a fifth dysfunctional strategy.
Let's talk about manipulation.
This one can be more subtle but it's at least equally usually more dangerous than triangulation.
Let's do this one with an example too.
Let's go back to Elaine.
Wonder what she was working on in those papers when Margie walked up and tried to chat with
her.
Maybe she was working on some numbers to support her own effort to do an in-run around Margie
and get to the boss and get that Lockhart account for herself.
Let's follow Elaine into the boss's office and check in.
Hi.
You busy?
No.
Come in.
I just reworked some of the numbers on the Jennings account.
We can reduce their expenses and keep them a lot happier.
Can I show you?
Yeah, let's take a look.
OK.
We reallocate here.
Reallocate here.
That results in these reductions.
Total savings.
Very good.
You know, this is exactly the kind of thing we should be doing on the new Lockhart account.
Yeah.
All right.
Elaine is gaming not only Margie here but she's gaming the boss.
She's not honestly making a pitch.
She's maneuvering to look good on this.
It's not honest.
She's working her agenda behind Margie's back and for that matter behind the boss's
back.
That's manipulation.
How would we define it?
We'd say it's using indirect means to achieve a goal without letting the other party know
and without regard to the other party's interests and goals.
I'm taking care of myself.
I'm doing it surreptitiously.
I'm gaming the thing.
And usually when we're doing this kind of a strategy, when we're doing manipulation,
we're manipulating more than one person.
So that one's a problem.
What are the tactics?
Well, we could be planning information, suggestions with third parties who don't know they're
being used in the process.
We can stage events to do things.
We can do things with one motive and pretend it's for another motive.
We can feign emotions or concerns that we don't really have as a way of bringing up
topics.
Manipulation where humans are pretty creative about it.
What are the harmful effects?
The other party's interests are typically going to be damaged.
If the other party learns of this, you know what?
Our own interest and our own credibility is going to be damaged, and especially if more
than one learns about it, there's almost always some real relational damage.
There has to be distance when we're gaming somebody, and when that comes out, it's pretty
rough.
This is self-centered, deceptive behavior, and the question about when to use it is just
don't.
Never use it.
Let's go to a sixth strategy.
Let's talk about absolute framing.
By framing, what I mean is how we conceptualize and define the issue in a conflict, how we
think of what it's really about, how we would think of it and say it.
Let's do this one with an example, too.
How would this look and sound in a conflict?
Let's visit our married couple from lecture one.
Remember, Ken and Kate, and Ken wants to take a job in another city and get himself
out west.
What if Ken tries to deal with this with absolute framing?
Let's listen in.
Honey, take a look at this.
Hmm, sounds like a great job, but it's in Denver.
Yeah, I'm going to apply for it.
You know how much I want to get out west, and I think this is the perfect next step
for me.
Well, that came out of the blue.
You know I can't leave Chicago right now.
I have a real career here.
I can't go somewhere else and start all over.
And what about me?
I might never see a dream job like this again.
I've made up my mind.
I'm sending my resume tonight.
If I get the job, you can come with me or stay here.
Your choice.
All right, no room for discussion here.
There's no consideration of Kate.
There's nothing she can do but say yes or no, because Ken has framed this as a simple
yes or no situation.
He thinks he's right, and she's just to support him in what he thinks.
He's got to set up his absolutes.
And I'm really not sure Ken's in a strong enough position to be doing this here.
What's the definition of absolute framing?
One is that we set up the conflict issue in black and white terms, in absolute terms,
so that the only answers are yes and no are right or wrong.
It's stating what absolutely must or must not happen, what the other party must do or
not do.
It frequently involves making an absolute moral judgment or taking a position.
It's what we call black and white thinking.
The tactics, declaring some absolute principle, making some absolute demand, it's like we
say drawing a line in the sand and daring the other to step over it.
That's absolute framing.
What are the harmful effects of it?
Well, it precludes mutual agreement.
The other party can only surrender or fight, choose to comply or get in and fight.
Tends to lead to escalation.
It often destroys relationships and leaves long-lasting emotional scars.
Still, there are times when we want to use absolute framing.
Occasionally conflicts really do require a clear, definite, moral and relational stand.
What if it's a real moral issue with me that's deeply held?
Or sometimes even I need to set boundaries for myself just in terms of taking care of
myself and I need to take a clear stand.
Sometimes I do need to draw a line in the stand.
When that happens, what I need to do is go ahead and frame it absolutely.
I need to step up to the plate and do that regardless of what it would cost.
Let's go to seven on our eight list of eight dysfunctional strategies.
Let's talk about payback or revenge.
Everybody knows revenge feels good.
One of the things I love about Aristotle is when he listed what he called his seven causes
of human happiness, he put revenge on his list.
I thought that was just deliciously honest of him.
Recent research into the neurology of this kind of thing really shows that when we feel
we've been wronged, humans literally have a craving, literally a craving for something
like revenge.
We want to equalize that.
We want to get even.
But if we want to resolve a conflict and we don't want to make things worse, even if
it feels good in a moment, revenge is a bad idea.
It would be kind of like remember having poison ivy as a kid and scratching it, what it does.
It can work like that.
The definition is doing harm or withholding good from another person in order to balance
a sense of wrong that one feels.
It's getting even.
It's tactics, hell, as many as we can creatively think of, all kinds of ways to get revenge.
And they range from withholding through triangulation all the way up to things like murder.
The term payback that I use actually comes from prison populations where if you're in
a hard prison and somebody does you harm, you've got to pay them back or else it's
going to be open season on you.
The harmful effects or payback adds to the harm.
Differences of perception in the harm done really tend to cause escalation as it goes
along.
I think the harm you did to me is greater than you think it was, so I'll escalate and
we'll just make it worse and worse and worse.
Let's look at a quick example of that one.
Dan, he's had his next door neighbor, Barney, he's talked to him numerous times about not
letting his kids trample the flowers.
They trample them on their way to school.
Kids keep doing it, Dan's had enough.
What would his over the top revenge reaction be like?
Let's look at that.
Well, that'll teach Barney to let his kids tromp all over my flowers.
What are you talking about?
I just accidentally tripped into his tomato and pepper plants.
Let's just see him brag about his salsa from the garden again.
Are you kidding?
How old are you, five?
All right, really not helpful, Dan.
This can set off a negative spiral and escalate and things can get ugly in the neighborhood.
I'm kind of with Sally, his spouse on this one who's just mortified and feels awful.
Not a good reaction.
Revenge might have felt good stumping out those vegetables, but it's not going to do
any good in the long run.
When will we use it regardless?
Well, if you're stuck in prison in one of those awful places, you might need to use
it anyhow.
Let's talk about our last dysfunctional strategy on our list.
That's compromise.
That's one that we actually talked about under conflict styles.
So we don't need to lay out a new example of it for you here.
We described it in lecture eight.
And as we noted in lecture eight, what this is is splitting the difference.
If you remember that scene where Hank confronted with Barry's challenge suggested, well, let's
split the difference.
We'll make a few tweaks, he said, in the design and hope that it'll appease Barry's team.
He's going right away to splitting the difference.
That's compromise.
Why did I put it on my list of dysfunctional strategies?
Compromise is often a really good thing to do, but we do it a whole lot more often than
we should because there's a downside to it.
And so we should really only use it if we have to.
When would that be?
If we've really tried to achieve a win-win and couldn't get it?
The definition of it is splitting the difference.
It's negotiating a solution in which each party gives up something so nobody has to
lose, but then nobody wins.
And if Esmorton Deutsch showed us all those years ago, we probably could have had a win-win.
We're taking a loss we didn't have to take.
So we make those offers and we negotiate.
Those are the tactics.
What are the harmful effects going to be?
Most of the time, the parties could achieve a solution that was better for them both and
they settled for less.
This also takes energy out of relationships and it helps keep us from getting to the best
thing we can get.
So I put it on my list of dysfunctional strategies in order to stress that point.
When would I use it?
Only if we've tried for a win-win solution and couldn't get it.
Once we knew we couldn't get a win-win, it feels okay and it makes good sense to go ahead
and compromise.
So that's our list of eight dysfunctional strategies.
These that give us harmful side effects that are worse than they had to be and as a matter
of fact might very well outweigh the good effects.
We want to avoid them if possible.
Here's our summary.
What are they?
Avoidance.
Use it only if the risk of harm from confronting is really too great.
Avoid avoidance if you can.
Second one was withdrawal.
Use it only if you really need to avoid dealing with the conflict and the only way to avoid
is to withdraw or if the relationship just doesn't matter.
Imposition.
Use it only if you really need to achieve the outcome.
You can't consult with the other parties so imposition is the only way to get it.
Manipulation.
Just don't use it at all.
It's dishonest.
Relationships that matter ought to be built on honesty.
Absolute framing.
Very few matters or matters of absolute principle but you know what some of them are.
So use it but use it only if you think you really need to fight for it even if fighting
means you're going to have to go down fighting.
That would be a good measure.
Triangulation.
Don't create triangles unless you really, really need an outlie in the long run.
It's really not good for anybody.
Seven is payback.
Revenge.
Don't use it unless you're stuck in prison.
That's just going to add to the hurt and probably escalate the conflict.
And lastly compromise.
Compromise only if you really couldn't get a win and you know that because you tried
to get a win-win.
So use of these dysfunctional strategies ought to be rare because I said use them only
if.
They ought to be limited to the conditions when they're really required and they're
going to be especially problematic if they're your patterns, if they're the styles of management
that you use.
Okay.
I've got an assignment for you at the end of this one.
Think through what strategies you used in a recent conflict.
Go back and think through a conflict.
Think of the strategy you used.
There's probably more than one strategy.
I want you to go ask yourself, okay, what were the strategies or strategies that I used?
Why did I use those strategies?
Did I get the results I was after?
And then what other results, unwanted results, especially to the relationship did it produce?
I want you to go check in one of the conflicts you dealt with recently and see if you can
document for yourself the harmful effects of a dysfunctional strategy.
Where do we go from here?
Well, so far we've given attention to the challenges inherent in human conflict and
we've learned about different ways to deal with conflict.
Next we want to turn to some principles and processes that really provide useful guides
when we're really going after seeking a win-win resolution.
In lecture 10 we'll turn to the work of Roger Fisher and William Urie and talk about
principled negotiation.
