In lecture 11, we discussed steps 1, 2, 3 and 4 in our seven-step process.
In those steps, what we did was get the issue defined in terms of voluntary behavior.
We sorted out our goals and got clear on them.
We decided we did want to go ahead and negotiate a resolution with the other person.
And then we went in step 4 and arranged a meeting with that person.
So now we're going to talk about steps 5, 6 and 7.
Conducting the negotiation will be step 5.
Contracting a solid resolution agreement that we can make work will be step 6.
And then following through on what we agreed to will be step 7.
Now these steps very much involve interaction with the other party.
So we're going to have to consider ways to respond to what the other party does as we
go along our way.
We'll do those in the context of talking about what ifs.
So here we go.
Now remember at this point, we've done step 4.
We've decided we've arranged to do a meeting.
So now we're at step 5.
Step 5 would be this.
We go ahead and conduct that meeting.
Do what we agreed to do.
Show up and do it.
Here are the guidelines for your part in conducting that meeting.
First one, come prepared.
Be ready to explain your point of view.
Have suggestions to offer for solving it, but don't be overly committed.
Don't push them to positions that they have to follow.
Be prepared to make some suggestions.
You also ought to prepare yourself to listen to what the other party says.
Listen to their views.
Listen to their feelings.
Be open to their suggestions.
Getting myself prepared in a frame of mind to listen is an important part of preparing.
So I show up.
I'm prepared in those ways.
Then what I want to do is take the lead.
I ask for this meeting.
It's kind of up to me to get it started.
How do I start it?
I want to begin by thanking the other person.
Thank them for agreeing to meet with me and for doing this.
You know, I owe them thanks.
This is my problem.
I own it.
I need their help to resolve it.
And they're willing to take their time, and they're willing to risk carrying something
they didn't want to hear.
So I ought to thank them.
Besides, if they listen to that thank you, take it in and feel good about it, they're
a little more committed now to following through with the meeting in a constructive way.
Having thanked them, what I want to do is state the issue again, just exactly as I stated
it back in step four when I asked for this meeting.
And I also want to state the purpose of the meeting, remind them that what we're looking
for here is a solution to that problem that really does work for both of us.
Having done that, I've set the agenda.
Now I can ask the other person how he or she wants to proceed in the meeting.
They may want to talk first.
They may want to explain further.
They may want to be expressing their own suggestions right away.
I want to ask them how they want to proceed, because they've probably done some thinking
about this, and they're ready to talk too.
Let's look at an example of that.
Let me set it up for you here.
Let's go to Don and Dale.
Let's say they're meeting on a Monday morning to discuss that 8.30 meeting that Don got
himself with Dale, and they want to discuss altering Don's sales territory.
How would that meeting get started?
I'll be right with you just a second.
First off, Dale, thanks for agreeing to talk.
So here's what I'm thinking.
I'm hoping we can figure out a way to reduce my travel time while still increasing my face
time with customers, and then maybe picking up some new sales leads too.
But I want to make sure I'm meeting your needs, and I don't want to cause any problems for
Pat and her customers.
So where do you want to begin?
Look Don, I don't have a lot of options here.
Let me go over what I was thinking when I split up the territory, and then you can break
down how that affects you.
Pat's out of town this week, and we'll need to loop her in on this too.
If we look at the highway, it's sort of the main logical dividing line.
Well, that's a good start.
The issue's on the table.
Dale clearly wants to explain his reasoning.
That's where it all starts for him, so it makes sense for him to get that out first.
They're not going to negotiate much until that's already on the table, what the territory
is and why it's there.
But it looks like Don's got a good opportunity to make his case here.
Dale's really indicating that he's ready to listen and negotiate.
So we've got a good start on this one.
Now we need to think about some what-ifs.
I suppose it didn't go quite that well.
What if the other party wants to talk instead, not about their position on this issue, but
they come with a complaint of their own and they say, if we're going to talk about your
problem, I want to talk about this, and they want to try to hijack the agenda and put their
problem in front of yours.
If they do that, you nicely respond the way you got them to respond in step four.
You agree right away to discuss their issue, but do not put it in front of yours.
You can even do it in this meeting after you talk about yours, or you could offer a time
to negotiate that.
And if they say, why do we have to talk about yours first, and they want to get to theirs
first, you can smile and say, because I asked you first.
Any kid that ever survived on a playground already understands how to do that.
So just don't let it get in front of yours, treat it as a step four.
Let's do an example with that.
Let's go back to Rebecca and Jane.
They're in their living room.
They've agreed to meet at this time to chat about the noise problem, and Jane's just returned
from work.
Let's see how that works.
Hey, Jane.
Hey.
So how was work?
It was good.
We finished beta testing today, so tomorrow I move on to a new project.
That's great.
Listen, thanks for agreeing to talk with me about the noise.
I really want to work it out.
Where do you think we should start?
Well, there's a bunch of stuff that you do that bother me, and I don't say anything.
Like, leaving dirty dishes in the sink and using the last of the detergent.
If we're going to talk about stuff that bothers us, we need to talk about all of this stuff.
Wow.
I didn't realize that stuff was bothering you.
But sure, let's talk about them.
Let's start with the noise, then go down the list.
If we don't get to everything tonight, we can talk more this weekend.
Why do we have to talk about the noise first?
It's no worse than any of your stuff.
Because we agreed to talk about the noise problem tonight.
I do want to talk about all our issues.
Let's just take them one at a time.
All right.
The noise, the TV, my friends.
All right, Rebecca did a really good job here.
She held her ground very nicely about the negotiation.
If you could kind of put yourself in Jane's position, you can understand how Jane would
feel.
She's been sitting on, and here she's got to listen to Rebecca's.
But you would feel pretty much required to listen and negotiate about the noise.
Why?
Because you agreed to.
You already agreed to this.
And Rebecca's very happy to talk about yours.
You're just not getting yours in front of hers.
So you'd feel pretty much able to bring up and discuss what was handed to you, but you'd
really feel like you needed to work with her and deal with her issue first.
So Rebecca did a good job in that discussion.
So now we've got the meeting started.
How does it go from there?
As the discussion proceeds for talking about feelings and making explanations, you don't
want to get stuck in things that repeat.
As I work with people on these, and I facilitated a lot of these conversations, it's as if you
can watch people get into a cycle of repeating.
You don't want to get it going there.
What you want to do is focus on principles and interest, keep pushing it in that direction.
If the feelings and the explanations get repetitive, you can point that out and say,
could we move forward?
What are our interests?
What are our goals here?
How are we going to do them?
Start asking for suggestions once we've started repeating ourselves with explanations.
Focus those suggestions on interests.
Focus them on goals.
Let's see how that would work.
Let's go again to Don and Dale, and they're offering ideas for how to handle this in
Don's in Dale's office about sales territory.
I think we understand where we're each coming from now.
Let's get a little creative and see if we can divvy up the territory in a way that takes
better care of you, but also works for Pat and for the company.
I was thinking I could take east of the river, and Pat could take west, and that's one possibility.
We could do that.
Here's another way we could go with it.
If we look at the highway as the dividing line rather than the river.
This is progress.
If there are really some reasonable alternatives here for adjusting the territories, it's hard
to imagine that some adjustment at least can't be made to make this a little better for Don.
So what we want to do here is we do want to stay on track as we go.
We're making these.
We've got goals clearly in mind.
We're getting suggestions out, and we're considering the suggestions that come up.
You want to steer this conversation towards something you can agree on, and you want to
be choosing these based on some kind of objective criteria.
That's going to fit with what Fisher and Urie told us to do.
Let's look at another example, and let's look at Don and Dale and see what progress they're
made looking how they can choose the best option.
All right, so we come up with four different options here.
How do we decide which one is the best for everyone?
Well, we can look at travel time and total number of miles for both me and Pat and compare
them.
Okay, good.
We've got a number of clients, and they're locations for each option.
Yeah, that matters a lot, and the locations of clients where we already have relationships.
Okay, good.
So let's look at each of the options with three main criteria, equalizing the distribution
of clients, the travel time and miles, and maintaining good relationships with existing
clients.
The option we want is the one that gives us the best balance of all three.
Okay, I'm good with that.
All right.
Good.
This negotiation is going very well.
Don and Dale have several ideas on the table, several ways they could deal with the territory,
and they've got several very specific, very measurable criteria for choosing between them.
They're doing well in this negotiation.
If they're doing that well and they're looking at those, we can get to where we can make a
decision.
We can do step six.
We can begin to contract.
And when you do the contract, and I want to use that term very deliberately, we're going
to agree on what's going to be done, but I want to specify that this is a contract.
You know, a contract exists morally and legally under just certain conditions.
It exists if it's clear what's being agreed to.
It exists if it addresses voluntary behavior from the present tense forward, because a
contract we hold each other responsible for following through on, and the only thing humans
can hold themselves or anybody else responsible for is voluntary behavior.
It also has to be unequivocally agreed to.
So it's got to be clear about voluntary behavior, and it has to be an unequivocal agreement
in order for it to really be a contract.
You know, that's it legally, that's the case.
You think about written contracts, but the written contract with a signature is a document.
It's documentation of the contracting that was done, and the signature is there to be
an unequivocal, clearly identifiable agreement.
It's a contract even if it's just word of mouth.
You've got to state it in simple concrete terms.
You've got to state it in a way that addresses voluntary behavior, and you've got to get
it clearly agreed to.
So the guidelines for this involve making sure that all these conditions are met.
Let's look at those guidelines.
First thing you want to do, if you're running this meeting, you want to state the agreement
very clearly, verbalize it, try to state it clearly, and then check whether the other
party has the same understanding.
This is a communication thing stated very clearly, and don't be bashful about over-clarifying
in this case.
Don't leave it vague.
State it clearly, state it in terms of voluntary behavior.
Double check with yourself to make sure that what it's doing is specifying behavior that
each other can be held responsible for.
Having stated it, ask clearly whether the other party agrees.
Is this what you agree to?
And then confirm that you also agree if they say yes.
So now you've got a clear statement of a voluntary behavior, and you're clearly agreeing to it.
Now sometimes, not always, but sometimes it's very useful to just specify when and how you're
going to check on how that's working and whether it's being followed through.
A lot of times it's let's meet again in two weeks to see how this is working.
You might want to specify how you're going to do it.
But it's usually not a good idea in most conflicts, at least the first or second time you talk
about it, to go beyond a word-of-mouth agreement.
You don't need to be writing that down.
Supervisors in work situations a lot these days think they've got to document everything
in a discussion.
And if I'm an employee who's going to not follow through regularly on what I'm agreeing
to, if that's going to be my pattern enough that you can take disciplinary action, you
can have a few voluntary agreements that I fail to meet before you start writing things
down.
You might want to start putting things in writing after an agreement or two when the
other person's not following through, it's proving not to be clear.
But that's kind of an escalation when you go to writing.
It's fitting after the word-of-mouth agreement hasn't worked for a while.
Let's look at some examples of getting an agreement.
Let's see.
Let's go back to Don and Dale and follow them through.
They're both confident they've determined the best option.
Now they're trying to contract an agreement.
Let's see how that works.
All right, so we're agreed then.
I'll talk with Pat next week and see if she has a problem with making a change.
If she's okay with it, we go with option two.
We give her the near part of your territory west of the river and expand your coverage
into the Woodland Hills area.
If she's not okay with it, then we'll meet together with her included and see what we
can work out.
Is that right?
Yes, that's right.
Thanks.
All right, then I'll get back to you after I talk with Pat.
Great.
Thanks.
I appreciate it, Dale.
All right, Dale and Don have got a clear agreement going.
It's not a final thing because they don't have Pat included yet and she's a party that's
involved.
But they've got a contract.
It's by word of mouth.
It's very clear.
They can hold each other responsible for it and they know when they're going to check
to see and find out if it's actually working very well.
So that's a pretty good agreement that's been reached.
There's some what ifs that we need to talk about relative to those contracts.
What if I encounter some problems making the agreement and what might those be?
What if the other party offers something but it's not clear voluntary behavior?
What are my favorites among these?
It just happens a lot.
I mean, it shouldn't happen.
It's a favorite in the sense that it's interesting to watch and it's not all that hard to fix.
The other party says, I'll try.
Let me give you a marvelous example of this one occurring that I witnessed some years
ago.
I was helping a supervisor and a supervisor work through some issues.
And one of the issues was that this supervisor, the young employee, was a young man.
He was in his mid-20s and he had recently become a single father.
His marriage had broken up and he was trying to take care of a toddler.
Well, he was coming to work late pretty often and his supervisor was trying to work with
them to get this work out.
There was this great moment where he said, I'll try.
You know, I'll try.
She who had raised kids herself understood what his problem was.
He just didn't know how to get a toddler ready and off to daycare and still get himself
to work on time.
And that was a struggle.
And so she said, John, you know, I see that you try.
I see how stressed you look when you come through the door at 20 minutes after eight,
three days a week.
I know you're trying.
Let's talk about what behavior trying is going to be made of.
And then that supervisor, who was a mother who had been around for a while, said, let's
talk about what you do the night before.
And she talked about laying things out.
She talked about things with getting the toddler up, having the breakfast ready, making the
moves to get the kid ready on time.
And the young man felt like that would work.
And what they agreed to do was a list of things that he would do to get ready the night before.
And she said, I'm not going to bother you about being 20 minutes late.
I'm going to bother you about, did you do those things?
He agreed to that.
I checked back with him several months later, and the young man was doing much, much better.
He was getting there on time and feeling better about himself.
So if it's I'll try, you can push it through to what behavior it's made of.
Try the noble thing.
Humans are great because we do that.
But push it to the concrete behavior.
Let's look at another example.
Our roommates, Rebecca and Jane, have come up with a solution.
But let's listen to Jane's agreement to it and see how clear that is and look at that
as a what if kind of problem that can come up.
Okay.
So we agree that you can have friends over any Tuesday or Thursday nights since I'm in
class.
Monday and Wednesday are quiet nights, so nobody comes over.
And you'll turn the TV way down, right?
Friday, Saturday and Sunday are free.
We can both have friends over if we want.
All right, I'll try my best.
Jane, I really appreciate that you'll try, but I don't want to slip back into the same
old routine.
I can't afford to let my grades drop.
Let's stick with this for a month and see how we do.
See, we can't contract on I'll try, I'll try.
Rebecca's really right about that.
And notice that Jane really doesn't sound all that confident that she's going to be
able to keep the noise down.
So if we're Rebecca listening to that, we don't know what we've got from Jane here.
Is this an agreement or is it not?
It's really not very clear.
I think Rebecca handled this one fairly well.
She hung in there and she went to pin it down.
At least she got a time that we're going to move back to go ahead and check on it.
So Rebecca's handling this one pretty well.
Let's think about another what if.
What if you just can't find a true win-win resolution?
If that's the case and sometimes it's really true, you can't get there.
At a certain point, you've got to acknowledge that fact.
It looks like we can't make this work for both of us.
At that point, you might very well want to consider backing into a compromise.
Remember I said compromise is a dysfunctional strategy.
Use it only when you've tried to get a win-win and you can't.
This is a good time to do that.
Let's do an example here.
Let's talk about Don Dale and now Pat's in the room.
The other sales representative, Pat, they're in the conference room and Pat has noticed
some problems with option number two that Dale and Don proposed.
So she didn't want to agree to it right away.
Now you've got the three of them comparing options on the same criteria and every options
got trade-offs.
What happens with that?
Listen, I know you two worked hard on this, but it looks to me like we don't have an option
that's best on all three counts.
Right.
I mean, if we equalize the number of miles, we mess up the balance and the number of clients.
And all of the versions disrupt the customer relationships for at least somebody.
But can we compromise a little, you know, split the difference?
I do still need to cut down on my driving time at least some.
I can understand that.
Now I'd be willing to give up the big Garfield account just east of the city in exchange
for the Schuster account further upstate.
Wow, Pat, that's a big concession.
What do you think, Don?
Yeah, I mean, that'd be great.
Okay.
They really can't get a full-scale win-win.
There are trade-offs with every option.
So compromise really is in this ongoing working relationship, the next best alternative.
And Pat's willing to go ahead and offer compromises and she's doing it.
This is a right time to back into a compromise situation.
All the parties know because they've really worked on getting it that they can't get
a win-win.
So now everybody's going to be much more comfortable resorting to compromise.
That's the place compromise belongs in our repertoire of conflict management behaviors.
So that's the kind of contract you can move to negotiating.
Let's look at another what-if.
What if you just can't find any acceptable solution, not by compromise, not by any means?
If that's the case, you've got to acknowledge that fact and that is sometimes the case.
Deutsch showed us that we can get it most of the time.
Sometimes you can get no resolution at all.
If that's the case, then I'm stuck with having to decide either to escalate or give up or
exit the relationship.
I've got to be willing to walk away from it and make that kind of choice.
It could come to that, but it usually doesn't.
Okay.
So let's just assume now that we've gotten ourselves to the point where we have in fact
gotten an agreement made and we've got it at a contract level.
It's in behavior terms.
It's clearly agreed to.
We all understand it.
We're not finished.
We've done most of what we talk about, but the long run is step seven.
And it can be harder and longer than any of the first six or all the six combined.
Step seven is to follow through.
I've got to follow through on what I agreed to and I got to pay attention to the other
party.
Here's our guidelines.
First one is obvious.
I should go ahead and do what I've agreed to do.
I've got to keep doing it and doing it with persistence.
That's not easy.
I remind myself because those behaviors that we were doing before may have habit to them.
They may be existing patterns, but I got to go ahead and do what I agreed to do.
Secondly, I need to pay attention to whether the other party complies with the agreement.
Is that person doing what he agreed to do?
And when I say pay attention, I'm trying to choose my words kind of carefully here.
I don't want to be camped on their head like cops and robbers ready to catch them the minute
they fail.
But neither do I want to be on the other extreme walking away saying you agreed to it.
I trust you.
I don't have to pay attention.
We do have to pay attention and humans need to hold each other accountable.
That's not a disrespect.
Just blindly trusting is sort of more than we should do for any other human being because
most of us are not up to that absolute level of trust.
So I got to pay attention.
This is very important now.
If the other party does what he or she has agreed to do, especially if it's repeatedly,
what I need to do is take note of that and I got to let them know I take note of that
and I've got to express my appreciation.
I've got to give them positive feedback for doing it.
This one, and there's research to support this one.
You know what's almost bound to happen with a normal human being?
If I get them to change their behavior by an agreement and then I move on and don't pay
any attention to the new behavior, they will almost invariably revert to the old behavior.
That's what normal humans do.
If I want them to keep up that new behavior they agreed to, I've got to positively reinforce
it over time.
There's not a whole lot left that we're sure about from the great psychologist B.F.
Skinner, but that thing about positive reinforcement holds up its true.
That was his idea and it sticks.
So I've got to reinforce it.
All right.
That's if they do it.
What if they don't do what they agreed to?
If they fail to do all or part of the agreement?
This is actually very, very common.
It's very typical to require more than one meeting and more than one discussion to get
an ongoing behavior change and make it stick.
You've got to fine tune things.
So if they're not doing some part of it or all of what they agreed to, I want to go back
and point out that we agreed on this.
It's not happening.
Let's do another conversation and see if we can work it out in a way that we can make
it work.
So I want to go and redo that.
Well then, what if I meet a second time and they agree and it doesn't work out?
And we meet a third time and they agree and it doesn't work out.
What do we do with that?
I call it spinning my wheels.
If after repeated meetings, they're still failing to supply.
Some people call that you're getting jailhouse promises.
Yeah, I agree.
I'll do it and then they don't do it.
If that's what happens, at some point, I've got to decide I'm either going to escalate,
give up or exit because negotiating isn't working.
And some people will agree, they'll negotiate and agree, and then they won't deliver.
So then you're going to have to make a decision if repeated agreements don't work.
If you're making progress each time you discuss it, I'd hang in.
But if we're spinning our wheels and not making progress, I'd stop and make that hard decision.
On the other hand, suppose I've gotten an agreement.
I've made an agreement.
But I'm having difficulty.
Something's here that I didn't foresee.
I didn't think about this when I agreed and now I'm having trouble.
I can certainly go back and ask for another meeting with the other party.
I'm just back to step four.
I go to the other party, explain the problem that I'm having, and ask for another meeting
to discuss it.
That's not really very hard to do.
It usually works out pretty well.
So if this conflict, there's another point I want to get to here beyond that, just ask
for another meeting and go.
What if this conflict that we've done, we've now got it negotiated, we've got an agreement.
Suppose it involves some missteps along the way, and so there are still hurt feelings
or perceived transgressions, or there was some broken trust involved.
We're going to talk about that later when we talk about aftermath.
But there's going to be some forgiving and healing and rebuilding work that you're going
to have to do.
Because sometimes, even though we've got an agreement now, the hard feelings can linger.
You'll have to work on forgiveness and healing in order to make that work.
We'll do a particular lecture on that.
And that'll be lecture 22.
So let's do some final notes now on this business of steps five, six, and seven.
We've done the whole seven-step process, so we've got a sound guide, but any guide.
And I want to repeat that.
Any guide is going to have limits.
It's not a simple cookie cutter, follow this, you'll get an agreement every time.
Every conflict is unique, every person is unique, and we're all different.
So there are no guarantees.
You can do it all perfectly, and not always get a good resolution worked out, even if
you're both trying.
But the odds are really with you if you do it right, and they're certainly much better
than they would be if you did it wrong.
Most of the time, you're going to get good resolutions.
A whole lot depends on the other person and their actions.
And we don't control them.
We can influence outcomes, but we can't guarantee, we can't control our outcomes.
So have it that way.
You're an influence in this situation.
You're one of the actors, but you're not the whole act.
So think it that way.
It'll get you better outcomes, and won't have you reaching for too much.
Get it to that negotiation is an individual art.
You got to personalize this, it's got to fit your own style.
The language can be your own.
Don't be mechanically following someone else's language.
But these seven steps really do give you a set of guidelines.
And you know, if you followed them, if you gave it a good shot, and you know you did
it pretty darn well, you can congratulate yourself.
It helps to know that you did your best, and it's easier to accept the outcome.
That's our seven steps.
Let's summarize where we are.
We outlined the whole seven-step process over the last two lectures.
It gets us win-wins whenever they're possible, and it helps us find compromises when that's
necessary.
Including the preparation steps we just described in lecture 11, the seven steps are.
We're going to walk back through all of them now.
The first step was to find that issue, put it in terms of voluntary behavior.
Second step was identify and clarify your goals.
The third step was decide whether to pursue a resolution through negotiating.
The fourth step, approach that other party, arrange a meeting, get it set up, and make
clear what the agenda of the meeting is, the topic, and the purpose to get a win-win resolution.
Fifth step, go ahead and conduct that meeting.
You take the lead.
Focus it on the issue.
Focus it on goals and interests, both of yours, and focus it on finding a win-win resolution.
When that resolution gets pointed out, you're up to step six, which is get a contract, clear,
unequival agreement, and behave your terms so that you can hold each other responsible.
Finally, step seven is to follow through.
Remember, do what you agree to do, give positive feedback if the other person does what they
agree to do, and renegotiate if that's necessary.
As I said, there's no such thing as a perfect formula that will always guarantee you a good
outcome, but you've really got good odds if you follow this seven-step process.
Let me give you an assignment going from there.
I want to suggest that next time you've got a small conflict, start with a small one,
one that's not extremely emotional or crucial in your life or in that relationship, a nice
little one that's bite-sized, easy to handle.
It's best to start and build skill working with a smaller one.
So pick one out and do it.
You can even tell the other person you want to try this with them.
When it comes up, really try to do the seven-step process.
It's only useful if you give it a try.
Start with the finding, go through the steps in order, and start to build your repertoire
of behavior using the whole seven-step process.
Where are we going to go from here?
We've got a step process laid out, and we've got principles laid out, but we've been focusing
all of these like how to talk to the other person about it.
That only works to the extent that both of us are willing to listen, so we better stop
and do a whole lecture on this challenging matter of listening in a conflict situation.
Listening is the most taken for granted communication skill, and it's one of the most difficult things
to do, and particularly difficult in a conflict.
So next lecture, we'll talk about listening in a conflict.
