You know, conflict is inherent in human interaction, so it does occur in all kinds of relationships.
But in our close personal relationships, the ones involving deep strong emotions, those
kind of relationships, conflict can do its worst damage or it can do its most good.
And that's where we've got lots of opportunity for conflict to happen.
So in this lecture and in the next lecture, we're going to focus on close relationships,
our close personal relationships, and the elements between the nature of the relationships
and the way we handle conflict in them.
We're going to talk about how strong relationships promote constructive conflict management,
and conversely, constructive conflict management makes for good long-term relationships, so
the two help us handle each other.
We're going to take a kind of systems approach here because we need to look at the dynamics
of close relationships so that we can see how they really work, how those dynamics affect
the way we handle conflict.
That'll be useful.
And we want to look at the value for the relationship of handling the conflicts well
and so that we can maintain strong relationships.
We're going to make some suggestions here in this lecture for ensuring that those close
relationships actually support good conflict management.
Let's get going then.
What do we mean?
Let's define close personal relationship.
Researchers who look at this have several key points they use to define it.
They say a close personal relationship is one where there's really significant interdependence.
You have a lot of consequences for each other.
There's emotional involvement.
The parties care.
They're emotionally attached.
Beyond that, there's identity involvement.
Our identities are involved in our close personal relationships.
What I think of myself really is affected by who I'm close friends with and who I'm
married to and who my siblings are, so we've got identity attached to those close relationships.
And these kind of relationships are contexts where conflict is very likely to occur because
there's lots of interaction in them.
And where the consequences of how we handle that conflict are going to matter more for
better or worse because the relationships matter more.
Now most of the research on close personal relationships happens to be on couples.
The reasons for that are two-fold.
One is that we've got a lot of interest in making marriages better.
The other is that couples are easy to identify as a kind of close personal relationship and
it's easier to get subjects in control for factors, so the research has tended to steer
that way.
But really we can extrapolate an awful lot of what we find in those relationships to
other kinds.
We do know that relationships are more challenging now to maintain.
Let's think about why that might be.
You know, we live longer, so our relationships last longer.
We've got more outside interest in attractions that compete for our attention in our time,
so there's more tension between other things and other people and other interests in our
close relationships.
We have more of those individual interests and we've got a lot of social support for
pursuing our interests as individuals.
We've also got more alternatives to maintaining real and close relationships, so it's harder
now than it used to be.
In this harder era, what are the things that we might fight about?
Here, most of the research comes from couples and John Gottman, whom I've cited several
times and has just done lots of wonderful research on couples, has a list of top five
things that couples fight about.
Communication is number one, then sex, then jealousy, then in-laws and step-family members,
and then number five is chores, which includes financial management, who should be doing
what.
Well, conflicts about those top three, communication, sex and the couple and jealousy, really spring
a lot from the dynamics that are inherent in the nature of these kinds of relationships.
So Gottman focuses on couples, but we really can extrapolate.
Communication is a major area of conflict in all relationships.
Chores, who's going to do what?
Major area of conflict in all.
Jealousies, that works in sibling relationships, it's there in close friends' relationships,
so these work very well for us.
Tensions about in-laws can also be tensions about other associates and friendships and
that sort of thing, so we can extrapolate a lot from that kind of research and focus
on communication in close personal relationships.
Now, when I talk about relationships, I'm always a little uncomfortable talking about
them as though they're things, because they're dynamic, they're not static.
Relationships are something we do, we ought to be talking about relating rather than having
a relationship, but we can also abstract and think about the relationship as something
an ongoing pattern of interacting that we're doing.
And the patterns there are very predictable based on the nature of the relationships,
and it turns out that if we can recognize those patterns, the understanding of how they
work and how the dynamics of relationship works and how that drives a number of kind
of conflicts that we're going to have, can really help reduce the threat, reduce the
heat, reduce the blaming.
Just understanding how conflict arises naturally from the dynamics of relationships really
is going to help us deal with conflicts and be less threatened by them.
So in this lecture, we're really going to focus primarily on getting that better understanding.
There are two models that I find most useful when I'm thinking about relationships.
I and my students find it useful to sort of understanding what's going on.
One of these is developed by Leslie Baxter, who studies interpersonal relationships, and
the other is going to be by Mark Knapp, who is also an interpersonal communication scholar.
Let's talk about Leslie Baxter's first.
It really illuminates the pattern of how we do these.
Baxter notes, and there's plenty of evidence of support, that humans have these two things
going at one time.
We're drawn together to bond, so we're motivated to come together and to bond.
Humans are just drawn to do that.
It's natural with us.
But we're also motivated to separate, to carve out our individual space.
So we achieve an individual identity and freedom by separating, but we receive closeness and
affection and belonging by bonding, and we're trying to do those at the same time.
So as Baxter puts it, these are oppositional motivations that create what she calls a dialectical
tension in and out and in and out, and they set off each other.
So she calls this relational dialectics.
She's managed this tension by moving closer and then moving away.
The only thing is, how that relates to conflict, is that this would be fine if we could be
in perfect sync.
I want to be close and bond when you want to be close, and I want to be separate when
you want to be separate.
But who can manage to be in perfect sync, no matter how close the relationship with our
coming together and moving away?
So we move away by communicating less clearly and creating distance.
And then that distance, if the other person wasn't in the moving away mode in sync with
us, can be painful for that person and create jealousies and create costs and create lack
of communication, which is the top thing that we're going to have conflicts about.
And so painful conflict is arising naturally from those relational dialectics that are
happening because we just can't be in perfect sync when we do them.
It's natural.
It's part of relating.
Leslie Baxter helps us a lot with understanding that point.
Now let's look at Mark Knapp's idea of relational stages, because that's going to help us a
little further with doing this.
What Knapp says is that, well, he starts with noting that, wait, relationships are just not
all permanent.
Those relationships are going to be temporary.
So we ought to be able to understand relationships in terms of moving into them and getting close
enough to bond and then moving out and getting beyond where we terminate.
So what Mark Knapp developed, and then he tested and developed a lot of evidence to support
it, was this notion that we have these stages of relating that we go through.
There are a set of stages moving in, leading up to bonding, and then a set of stages moving
out, moving away.
The moving in stages work like this.
The first one he calls the initiation stage.
It's like saying hello.
We get the other person's attention and we initiate an interaction.
That will extend into, and these will overlap some, that will extend into what becomes an
experimentation stage.
We try out being together.
We try out interacting.
We might meet for coffee.
We might have a first date.
We might try out.
We experiment with being together and we see how that goes.
If that goes well, if a series of experiments look positive, overlapping with that, we begin
to intensify.
We get more involved in this emotionally.
We like the person more.
We're having more fun.
The relationship heats up.
It intensifies.
If the intensification keeps going well, we integrate.
We start working things out so we can spend more time together.
We organize.
We love it when my students at school, when they get close, either in a friendship or
a romance that's budding, when it's time to register for courses for next semester, they
get together and work out so they can take some courses at the same time, maybe either
be in the same class, maybe be busy on the same evening.
They work their schedules out so they can spend time together.
That's integrating.
If integrating keeps going well, we get all the way to where we're bonded.
We get to the point where we really feel like an us.
Let's look at some examples of some of these steps.
You know what saying hello looks like.
So let's skip over the first one.
Let's say the initiation took place and let's look at an experimentation stage.
Here we're going to have a woman and a man talking on the phone about working a project
together in the community.
This is awesome.
I'm so glad you're getting involved.
Yeah, I'm excited to help with the campaign to save Smith Park, but I do need to tell
you, Jim, I'm not ready to make any long-term commitment to the project given my schedule,
but let's just talk and see what I can contribute.
I'm free tomorrow after work.
Oh, that's great, Keisha.
How about if we meet at 5.30 in the community room at the library?
We can map out a plan of action.
Sounds good.
I'll see you then.
Okay, great.
Thanks.
Bye.
All right.
They're not sure how much they're going to want to work together, but they're moving
in that direction.
They're pointing that way and they're feeling each other out.
It's interesting to me in that little dialogue that Keisha is setting a little boundary.
She's saying, I don't want to make a long-term commitment.
You'll see.
So she's setting some boundaries and we're experimenting here.
That conversation when they get together and talk tomorrow will be a further experiment
and it might move toward integration.
So now let's go look at an example of integration.
Let's shift the kind of couple for this one.
Let's have it be a romantic couple.
They're getting past experimentation.
They're still experimenting some, but there's clearly affection happening, so we're going
to be intensifying and looking at and moving toward integrating.
Let's see what happens here.
And then he spilled the thing all over himself.
Oh, my gosh.
My stomach hurts from laughing so much.
You know, today has been such a great day.
I really love hanging out with you.
Yeah, I feel the same way.
Listen, what do you say to dinner next Sunday at my folks' place?
They'd love to meet you.
Well, I think that's a great idea, Jack.
I'd really like that.
And my mom makes amazing desserts.
You would not believe her cheesecake.
All right.
We can see in this one they've been experimenting.
That's going well.
Sunday's going to be in one sense a further experiment meeting the family, but this thing
is intensifying.
It's heating up.
You can feel that in the conversation and we're really looking at moving toward integration
when we're talking about meeting the family.
So this relationship is moving forward.
Well, experimenting, then intensifying, and then integrating, we're moving forward.
If this keeps going, we're going to get to bonding.
Now, bonding, I don't know that we can show you an example of that.
You feel that.
It's that honeymoon feeling.
It's that moment when it's really in us.
We really feel good together.
And we'd all like that to be like the fairy tales say happily ever after.
But bonding is never permanent.
That feeling doesn't stay.
You hate for it to go away.
But on the other hand, if you were stuck in it, you'd feel stuck.
You need space and you got to move.
It needs to keep recurring if you want to keep the relationship going and feeling wonderful.
But it's not permanent.
It's temporary.
So now we get to think about moving out.
And here's what happens.
Even in loving long-term relationships, some of this happens, it just doesn't have to go
all the way to termination.
But Mark Knapp's moving out stages work like this.
He says, once bonding has occurred, at some point, and one of you will get there before
the other.
So we'll be out of sync again.
At some point, somebody's going to start differentiating.
Thinking in Leslie Baxter's terms about how am I different doing that separating out.
So I'm differentiating myself, trying to feel different.
And in order to do that, I'm going to slide into what Knapp calls circumscribing.
What do we mean by circumscribing?
Circumscribing is communicating less, carving out more space for myself, more life space
for myself, a room to maneuver without the other person knowing what I'm doing or thinking.
I've got to sense myself independently, separately, and I'm making the space in the way I communicate
and the way I behave to do that.
That would move.
If that continues, that's going to move to stagnation.
The conversation between you, the intensity, is going to go flat if you keep circumscribing
and the conversation will stagnate.
If it keeps going in a negative direction, we're going to start avoiding each other.
Something that will move toward avoidance, one before the other, and that will move it
if the relationship is going to end toward termination.
That's the steps moving out.
So differentiation is going to occur inside somebody's head.
But the outward side of it as it moves on, it's going to slide right into circumscribing
pretty quick.
So let's look at an example of circumscribing.
Remember our pair, the couple that were volunteering to work together on a project?
Well, what if this relationship is not so perfect starting to fray a bit?
How would circumscribing look?
This is Keisha.
Hey, this is Jim.
Are we still on for sex?
We've got to get these flyers posted.
Uh, not sure, maybe a little later.
I have a lot of work to do here at the office and I need to run some errands.
I'll have to call you.
Well, okay, give me a ring.
We'll do, bye.
You know what, we don't know whether Keisha really has all that other stuff to do.
It's probably more likely that she's circumscribing here.
She just needs some life space.
Either way, she's making some space for her to operate independently.
So differentiation, circumscribing is going on.
This moves to stagnating the conversation.
That moves to avoidance.
And all of these things, if the other party isn't in sync, if it's not happening for
both of you equally in an equal ways, all of those elements of moving out, those stages
of separating, generate conflict.
If the conversation's stagnating, somebody's unhappy.
If I don't know why you're not here or you're not seeming to come across to me, I'm unhappy.
So they generate conflict.
So going through the stages when you're not in perfect sync causes conflict.
The dynamics inherently cause conflict.
Let's look at another example.
Let's go back to our romantic couple, but make it later in the relationship.
Hi Maria.
It's Jack.
Do you want to hang out?
Call me back or actually maybe I'll just stop by.
Okay.
Bye.
Things don't look too promising.
Maria is deliberately choosing not to pick up on that call.
And we don't know when she's going to call them back.
So now we're into the avoidance stage.
It would be moving towards separating.
But NAP says most relationships are temporary.
It doesn't say they're all temporary.
So let's talk about the difference in how we handle conflict now between those temporary
relationships that can slide on out with those conflicts and relationships that are
going to stick around.
What's the difference?
The difference is that members in an ongoing relationship, when those conflicts come up,
be it at the circumscribing stage, the stagnating stage or somebody's avoiding, those are triggers.
They call us back.
A conflict arises and it says, wait a minute, this relationship is headed south.
Let's talk.
So in those, when we recognize those, they can cycle back and decide to deal with them
as a conflict or decide to let what's happening go.
It's not a deal breaker.
It'll be all right.
So recognizing the stages is going to help by reducing blaming to start with.
But it's also going to help us if we want to go ahead and resolve conflicts and stay
in the relationship, it's lower than we know what we've got to do.
Well, directly addressing the conflict really has risks to it, but it's going to offer
rewards.
And I want us to think about this a little bit.
What does it mean in terms of NAPS stages of relationship?
To recognize a conflict, put it on the table and set up to negotiate about it.
What it really means in NAPS terms is we're going to cycle back to the experimentation
stage.
We're going to do an experiment again and see if we can work this one out.
That can bring us, it puts the relationship literally on the line, but that can bring
us breakthroughs to a deeper, more satisfying relationship.
What NAPS shows us here is that to keep a relationship close and make it long-standing
and permanent, we're going to need to put it on the line over and over again, cycling
back to that experimental stage and get good at that and develop some trust in each other
to cycle back to that and know we're going to move back toward intensification and integration
and bonding once again.
So we've got to appreciate the courage it takes, we're putting the whole thing at risk.
We risk the relationship itself in order to keep it.
That's not stuff for the faint-hearted.
This is tough stuff to do, but it certainly has its rewards.
When you're doing that tough work, don't chew each other up.
You can be gentle and you can do that pretty well.
Just consider what that might sound like.
Try this.
Maria, I just want to let you know that I really appreciate that you're willing to hang
in there with me and work these issues out.
I know it's hard.
Yeah, it is hard, but I'm glad that we're able to be honest with each other.
I think that we just need a little room to breathe and some time to think things through,
but we'll get there.
I hope so.
You know what?
That doesn't sound like most couples would say if they'd been having spats and struggling,
but it ought to be more like what most couples would say if they're appreciating each other
and struggling in.
And Maria's needing space, but she's also saying she thinks we'll get there.
These two are working it out.
We don't know for sure that they will, but they're working through some hard things together.
And if you get through those hard times together and struggle, you build closeness and trust.
So there's really value in going through the process and doing this.
Let's talk a little bit about what you should not do.
And a good list of what you should not do also comes from John Gottman.
He talks about what's going on in relationships, and he's observed these closely in his research
when things are coming to an end like it's about to go.
He calls it the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse for Relationships.
It's a list of four things.
One is complaining and criticizing.
Second one is showing contempt for each other.
The third is getting defensive, and the fourth is stonewalling each other.
Gottman talks about those four, and in his research he finds that when couples are in
that, this relationship is headed for the dumpster.
They're about through.
It's very predictable that the relationship's not going to survive.
So that's what you don't want to do.
You don't want to get into a pattern of doing those things.
Let's look at an example of that.
Jim has continued to make demands on Keisha, let's say, and Keisha's not meeting these
demands.
She either can't or is not willing to do it.
This working together relationship has really been affected.
It's heading into a downward spiral.
So I want you to listen to this one and consider would you want to stay in a relationship with
somebody who speaks to you like this?
Jim, I just can't do that.
Just forget it, Keisha.
I thought we had this great working relationship.
Turns out I'm the only one working.
Wait a minute, Jim.
I told you before we got started that I only have limited time for this project.
Why can't you understand that?
This relationship is truly headed downhill and you can see it.
You can hear it.
You can feel it in their words and their way they're talking.
They're criticizing.
There's contempt in their voices.
Jim's criticizing Keisha and Keisha's responding with defensiveness and criticism of him.
The conflict has escalated.
This thing's going nowhere but downhill.
That's those four horsemen at work that John Gottman's talking about.
That's what not to do if you want the relationship to continue.
I want to go back and just connect this thing about relationships and understanding your
patterns to some of what we talked about earlier.
The patterns in how people in a given relationship handle conflict can tend to stabilize as patterns.
They can become styles.
You remember back in lecture eight when we talked about conflict styles and we could
apply conflict styles not just to an individual but to a couple, to some business partners,
to teammates or close friends in an ongoing relationship.
That relationship can have conflict styles.
So if the conflict style is avoiding dealing with conflicts and so they weren't there,
that's not going to work.
And in some relationships, that's the style.
In some relationships, the style is more competitive, battle over everything.
That's not pleasant.
In others, it's compromised on all kinds of things.
Okay, that's safe but it saps the life out of the relationship.
It's boring.
There are relationships where one party really accommodates the other too much.
Well, that party's being oppressed and that relationship isn't really close.
So that pattern accommodation isn't good.
Well talking and collaborating really builds stronger relationships.
So I want to suggest to you that every close personal relationship ought to have a conflict
style and that that conflict style should be collaboration.
You may want to have the wider repertoire and you'll need it sometimes but most of
the time in a close relationship, you ought to be going to a collaborative approach to
trying to resolve a conflict.
Relationships are like two parties dancing together and it's a combination of the two
that makes that dynamic.
The nature of the relationship brings dynamics to it like the nature of a dancer doing but
you want to try to do it well together.
In that as you do it, you've got to understand as Baxter says you're going to be moving
closer together and moving away and you've got to understand also that you'll be moving
in and moving out and those elements will create conflict.
But if we go back to collaborating to deal with them, we can maintain and grow the relationship.
If we don't do that, what we're going to do is weaken and perhaps destroy the relationship.
When I say destroy a relationship, I mean that in two ways and let me just spell that
out a little bit for you.
I don't necessarily mean that people have entirely left each other.
There's many a close relationship where there's still something there but it's empty, it's
not tight, it's really not close as a relationship.
It could be two people living in the same house together but living two entirely separate
emotional lives even though they're going through some of the steps together.
That's a destroyed relationship too if you really think about it.
Well, how can we use these insights now to help?
Just the insights that we've got.
I'm going to give you more specific recommendations for relationships in the next lecture.
But how can we use these?
With just recognizing the dynamics of ebb and flow and the tensions they create and knowing,
getting it that that's natural and normal really helps take the threat out of it and
helps us understand what's going on which makes it easier to handle a conflict.
When those conflicts arise from dynamics that can help us not overreact and help us get
to work working through the conflict and get it that that's part of relating.
NAPS stages of relationship in particular can help us when the thing moves towards stagnation.
It helps us to see that as a trigger to pay more attention, give more information and
move back towards a partner.
It can yank us back.
This set of recognitions can also help us understand that what we should do is treat
each conflict as a new instance of the experimentation stage and get it that it takes some guts to
put the relationship on the line, go back to another experiment and push this thing
through.
But there can be rewards and there typically are rewards when we do it.
We can also observe the persistent patterns we have when we interact with each other and
see what those patterns are and look for changes as in how we relate in a conflict when we're
looking at the dynamic in that close relationship.
Finally here in terms of applying these, if I go back to lecture eight and pick up one
more idea, we can pick up the idea from Gottman that in the idea of bids and responses in
a close personal relationship, the pattern of response to a bid, if you remember those
terms, ought to be turning toward rather than turning away or turning against.
Those ought to be the patterns that we follow.
Well, how important is this?
One way to see how important it is is to think about the relationship between relationships,
our interpersonal interactions, and things like even our physical health.
There have been studies going back as far as 1858 when a character named William Farr
did the first effort to document what came to be called the marriage advantage.
What they found was in research since Farr all that time ago has consistently supported
this.
Married people in general are happier, they're less depressed, they're physically healthier,
they live longer, they have less pneumonia, they have less cancer, they have less surgery.
An advantage.
But recent studies are pretty clearly documenting that that so-called advantage does not apply
to what you could call the troubled marriage.
If that relationship isn't handling its conflict well, if it's ugly, if they're not close,
if they're together but they're not really relating well, you know what?
That advantage goes away.
They're just as poorly handled, their health is as poor as the single person who doesn't
ever marriage at all.
So if you think about it in close relationships, handling our conflict well is important not
just to general happiness, it's important for my psychological and even my physical health.
Pretty important stuff.
We want to handle conflicts well in a close personal relationship.
So what are we seeing in this lecture then?
Let's summarize.
Remember, number one, we can apply all the basic conflict management strategies we've
learned about so far, everything up until now in the course to help us resolve conflicts
in close relationships.
But in those close relationships, number two, the stakes are really going to be higher and
the dynamics of those close relationships will pose particular challenges because the dynamics
themselves are going to create conflicts that we need to manage.
Number three, those conflicts are really generated by the natural ebb and flow that happens in
close relationships.
That's going to be going on in the relationship.
Number four, if I get it, that better understanding of those dynamics, that ebb and flow, that
moving through stages, really can help me, because I understand what's going on, reduce
the threat level and help me understand the other person's actions.
Reduces the conflict level, makes it easier to work with.
Number five, if I recognize those patterns, I can more easily see what I need to do and
adjust when it's time to adjust.
If I'm into stagnation, I may get it, then I need to turn the other direction and talk.
I probably should be aware, too, of those end warnings, those four harassment that Gottman
talks about, complaining and criticizing, showing contempt, being defensive and stone-walling.
If we're down there, that's a red light splashing.
You should be hitting the alarm button.
This relationship is really in big trouble.
And finally, this is important, you know, because handling conflicts well in a close
personal relationship matters to my physical health, as well as my psychological health
and happiness.
Pretty important stuff.
All right.
Here's an assignment for you.
I want to suggest that you sit down with a partner in any close relationship, whatever
one works best for you.
And I want you to try to have a conversation about how conflicts get handled in that relationship.
Ask each other whether, and if so, how you would like to handle those conflicts differently.
It's an important conversation you can have.
Then I want you to ask, what might you do to make the relationship safer, a more inviting
place to bring up conflicts and talk about them constructively and work out win-win resolutions?
What could you do to make it more inviting?
Be considerate with each other.
Don't promise the moon in one shot for this, but try to create a specific plan for what
you're going to do to make it a better environment for handling conflicts.
There's your assignment.
Where do we go from here?
We're going to do another lecture on close personal relationships.
What we're going to do in lecture 15 is we'll talk further and make some more specific recommendations
about what you can do to handle conflict better in the close relationship situation now that
we understand those dynamics that we've been talking about here.
Then secondly in lecture 15, we're going to talk about disruptions that can occur, that
change the nature of the relationship.
Every relationship can have that happen.
It's going along in a certain way, and then something can happen that really disrupts
the whole thing.
Those are called critical communication contexts, and we'll talk about those in lecture 15.
