Well, in lecture 16, we considered how concepts of organization and management influence the
way organization members manage their conflicts.
That's how the organization itself, its structure, its culture, influence the behavior of individuals.
In this, our second lecture on conflict management and organizations, what we want to do now
is look at the roles individuals can play and play better to get better conflict management.
We want to look at the roles of managers, supervisors, and the roles of the workers themselves.
What can they do to get better conflict management, which will be better for the organization?
Now, they can do this, of course, when they really better understand those concepts that
we talked about in our last lecture.
So we're assuming we've got them under our belt and we know those as we move into this
one.
And we're going to explain in there that the most important thing all the way through
is to focus on how ordinary everyday conflicts get managed, because that's where the biggest
cost really is.
Let's get started.
Due to better conflict management in every organization, you have to think it begins
with top management.
And I want you to notice in that, just as an aside, that even I, with all that I'm saying,
am still struggling with classical management and the idea that top management is top.
That's that hierarchical structure.
But these are the folks who need to define what's happening.
So they need to be guided, and then down the line managers and even supervisors, by what
I like to think of as seven key principles.
Now, as we move into those, I want us to think about the fact that while conflict is inherent
in any kind of human interaction, there's going to be conflict that can't really be
avoided.
But by gosh, there's also unnecessary conflict in organizations, lots of it that can be avoided.
So let's turn to principle number one.
What we say in this first principle is that managers and supervisors can prevent unnecessary
conflict.
And they can do that by stopping doing those things that generate unnecessary conflict.
What are some of those things?
A big one is that managers cause a lot of conflict by creating inherently competitive
situations.
They do this by failing to clearly define roles and responsibilities and to set boundaries
for areas of authority and lines of authority.
So when managers don't define things clearly, that leaves a lot of gray area in which employees
down the line need to fight over turf and struggle for whose responsibility is what.
And that causes a lot of conflict that didn't have to happen with all the costs that conflicts
bring.
There's a second area where managers bring about a lot of unnecessary conflict.
They do it by making decisions without consulting people who are going to be affected.
Now, that's huge.
I don't like to have to consult people who work for me in the old way of looking at
things and the classical way of looking at things.
You know, I'm in the command and control.
I make the decisions.
They do it.
But from the standpoint of managing conflict, that's not really very smart because people
with the job to do are affected.
They're stakeholders.
If I consult them before I make the decision and listen, A, they'll guide me sometimes
to better decisions.
But B, having been in on it and having things hashed out when they were there, that'll prevent
a lot of unnecessary conflict from occurring.
So that's it.
Prevent unnecessary conflict.
Okay.
Now, in addition to causing unnecessary conflict by just not taking care of business up front,
managers often compound conflict and help generate even new conflicts by failing to
address them properly and transparently when they come up.
So that leads us to principle number two.
And on this one, I want to lead by saying, be courageous in the face of conflict.
Be courageous.
Step up and deal with conflicts openly and constructively when they come up.
Don't sweep them under the rug.
There are certain things that have to be dealt with with confidentiality, certain personnel
issues, but whenever it's not one of those, get it constructively on the table and deal
with it up front.
That's the second principle.
Let's go to another one.
Primary concern.
As I suggested in the introduction, a manager's primary concern really is going to have to
be with that general pattern of the way conflict is managed by all of the employees throughout
the organization.
It's those everyday conflicts.
So principle number three, focus primarily on the general pattern of conflict management
in the organization.
Handling everyday conflicts affects productivity.
It is the biggest cost factor, as I said in lecture 16, in the cost of conflicts.
So that should be our primary concern.
These tend to be, however, for managers, especially top managers, not very visible.
They're hard to see.
In the office upstairs, where I'm dealing abstractly with statistics and numbers on
paper, I don't have a feel for what's going and how the employees throughout are handling.
There's a marvelous principle in a book done by Peterson Waterman some years ago called
In Search of Excellence.
What Peterson Waterman suggested as a principle in there was what they called management by
walking around, MBWA.
Management by walking around really applies here.
If I want to know how conflicts being handled in the everyday situations, I've got to spend
some time out there with the troops walking around knowing what's going on.
I've got to do this myself.
I can't rely on other people to feed it through to me.
So general principle, pay attention to the everyday management of conflict.
Next principle has to do with informal resolution.
As much as possible, we've already said resolutions should be informal and arranged by direct
mutual discussion between the parties involved.
So principle number four is that managers can promote this.
Managers can promote informal resolution of conflict by mutual agreement among the parties.
Promote it.
How do we do that?
Well, one is I've got to address the problem posed by the hierarchical structure that we're
dealing with.
There's a power difference here and a status difference.
So I want to create policies.
I want to create occasions.
I want to create ways to get past that.
And in the human resources approach to management, there's a lot of help with that that we can
turn to.
This can be done by creating a clear policy stating a preference for resolution by discussion.
And that policy can really also state that while mutual agreement is preferred, it's
not necessarily required and you can clearly specify that the person with the authority
will make the decision.
It is, as I said before, consultation.
It's not the same as democracy.
But negotiating requires time and effort.
It is part of the job, as I already said.
I've got to allow for it if it's part of everybody's job.
Let's think about what that would look like and look at a dramatization to help show us.
Here's a scene in an office.
We've got Will, who's a clerical worker.
He's got an issue with another employee, Stacey.
And he'd like to take some work time to deal with it and use the conference room to do
that.
A couple of clericals, time out, go in the conference room.
Will's going to check with his supervisor, Claire, about that.
And let's see how she handles that.
Claire, you got a minute?
Sure, what's up?
Stacey and I have a little problem about which of us should be handling which expense forms.
We can talk about it during break time, but I'd rather not wait.
Can we use the conference room to work this out?
Great.
Go take care of it.
If you need any help, come get me.
And by the way, you shouldn't be working these things out during breaks.
Breaks are breaks.
Sorting out assignments is part of your jobs.
Got it.
All right, an excellent response from Claire.
Handling conflicts, including the small ones, is part of the job, so she does give them
permission to do that.
And you know what?
She not only gave them permission, but did you notice she went beyond that?
She took the occasion to reinforce that principle that it's part of the job.
So she used it as a teaching moment.
Nice job on Claire's part.
Okay.
The employees also are going to need guidance and help to do these kinds of things.
And there's three ways to do that.
We can do it with explicit policy, training, and modeling.
And to be effective, all of that guidance is going to need to be repeatedly reinforced.
So we know that much.
Let's go to another principle.
Let's talk about the formal processes that are going to need to be in place.
What I mean here with formal processes is this.
We've got to have some formal procedures in place with enforcement mechanisms.
And they've got to be there to handle especially issues of grievance and issues of discipline.
There's got to be something to turn to if those informal preferred win-win approaches
are not going to work.
And I want that in place in my organization.
There are some conflicts that really do preclude win-win resolutions and may require an adversarial
process.
You know, there are competitions, for instance, for who's going to get a single promotion.
You can't necessarily split that.
And if someone feels wronged in a decision about that, they may need a formal procedure
to try to appeal that and work with it.
So I've got to have formal processes in place that we can turn to.
I've got to have procedures for adjudicating disciplinary actions and formal grievances.
I need those.
It's not that I want to turn to them all the time, but I need to have them in place.
If they're in place, I want to make sure that they're very clearly described, very explicitly,
and when they happen, the process needs to be very clearly and fully documented.
They have to conform to any applicable laws, wherever you are, and they have to conform
with any employee-employer contractual agreements, a lot they've got to conform with.
They've got to be right.
They ought to be there.
But I want to suggest you not be too careful to over-reli on them, because they are adversarial
processes.
There's a marvelous organizational communications scholar named Linda Putnam, whose work I've
followed over the years in hearing her speak one time.
She pointed out that organizations in their effort to stay out of court can spend a fortune
bringing court inside the organization with elaborate procedures for handling things in
an adversarial way.
Good point, Dr. Putnam, so you don't want to overdo that, but you do need to have those
procedures.
Let's turn to another principle.
As I suggested in the last lecture, not just the formal structures, but there's that whole
set of informal ideas and influences, the organization's culture and climate that have
an effect.
And these are going to influence the way employees handle their conflicts, quite beyond whatever
we say formally should be done.
So I really, as a manager, want to assess and, if appropriate, improve whatever those influences
are.
I can directly control them, but I can take steps that influence those informal things.
I love a definition of organizational culture by a management consultant who's written
some wonderful pieces called Edgar Schein.
And Mr. Schein says that an organization's culture is whatever follows the phrase, the
way it's really done around here is, fill in the blank.
What someone says after that points to the organizational culture.
So I've got to, as a manager, I've got to recognize the limits of my influence, management
and policy effect culture, but I don't really control it.
There are some other terms and concepts that are closely related here.
One of those is organizational climate.
Climate is defined as how it feels to the employee to work here and be here.
There's a term called communication climate that's related to that.
It's how this scene, this environment in the organization, works to invite or prohibit
constructive communication.
Management and policy affect all of those.
And there's a great deal of overlap in those concepts.
Climate, of course, may be more affected locally by the conditions in a particular work unit
even among a few people than by the organization as a whole.
And I'd want to know about that too, but that may be more the concern of a specific supervisor.
I've used the term conflict climate over the years to refer to that collective influence
of the organization culture, the organization climate and the communication climate, all
those elements, the influence of those combined on how an individual behaves to manage a conflict
when one comes up.
Climate factors include, in that sense, the conflict climate factors include relationships
among workers, the power relationships, the communication patterns, the flow of information,
whether there's positive feedback and recognition, the conflict management practices that one
sees around.
What we do when we're in an organization and we think we have a conflict is we do sort
of take in how it happens and how it feels here, and that strongly influences how we're
going to go about trying to deal with it.
So those factors, lots of those factors can be specifically identified and assessed, and
then I can do things as a manager to try to affect those and to try to improve on them.
I should note before we leave this thing about culture and climate that organizations go
through major periods of change, and the change periods themselves create a lot of uncertainty
which generate conflicts, so you might need to be patient and get through one of those
periods.
Let's look at another principle.
This one is fairly obvious.
You've got to model the desired behavior in conflict management.
People are going to see what you do, and they're going to do that.
Gandhi said once, and it's been an oft-coded thing, be the change you wish to see in the
world.
Well, be the conflict manager you wish to see in your employees.
That one doesn't require a lot of explanation.
It's really, really important.
So our employees will follow it.
Now let's go down and think about first-line supervisors a bit.
That's a nice set of principles, but we need to focus attention on those supervisors.
We need to give them particular attention because they have a very pivotal role, and
they operate where the outcomes are concrete.
There's not the kind of wiggle room that you have in the abstraction of the office upstairs.
Things either work or they don't.
This is where the rubber meets the road, and they often deal with employees who have less
in the way of interpersonal and communication skills than people hire up.
So they in a way have a bigger challenge.
And it's tempting if I'm a supervisor to just give orders and expect people to follow.
It's also tempting to duck managing conflicts.
We know the number one complaint about supervisors in conflict management in organizations is
that they avoid them and don't deal with them.
When they do that, that leads to a lot of discontent.
So how should supervisors be handling conflict?
Let's look at another example.
Here's a different office setting.
Two custodial employees, Ben and Jolene.
Let's see how they feel about how their supervisor, Sal, seems to handle conflict.
Just like I said, the night crew's done it again.
Left all the trash cans on the second floor for us to empty, and they didn't mop the bathrooms
like they're supposed to.
I've talked and talked to Sal about this.
He said he'll deal with the night supervisor, and he never does.
Sal's not going to do anything.
You know that.
Maybe we should just do them a favor and leave a little dirty work for the night crew.
Come on, this isn't a joke.
We've got to do something.
All right, avoidance isn't going to work here.
These people need the supervisor's help.
The day shift can't talk to the night shift.
And their concern that he's not helping is damaging his credibility and lowering morale.
You can flip that over and go to the other extreme, which a lot of other supervisors
are known to complain about.
In that other extreme, supervisors are expected to act kind of in local parenis, and people
come to them to arbitrate everything and punish somebody I'm complaining about, even though
I'm not even willing to let the supervisor say who's complaining.
That's a problem, too.
You want to push that back to the employees, but offer to help them resolve things.
Here's an example of doing that.
Let's follow through with Jolene again, and now she's complaining to Sal, the supervisor
about Ben.
Hey, Sal.
Hey, what's up?
Ben's complaining about the night shift again.
OK.
All he does is grumble about what didn't get finished, when we have plenty of time to get
things done.
Right.
Can't you just tell him to stop it?
I hate working with people in a bad mood all the time.
I get that.
Kind of wish you guys would work it out, though, but I can see what I can do.
OK.
OK?
OK.
All right.
I'm getting a little suspicious of Jolene here.
She's triangulating, and we already talked about that as a dysfunctional conflict strategy.
She wasn't being honest a while ago with Ben when she was agreeing with them and helping
him complain about Sal.
She really could have told Ben what her complaint was and asked him to stop complaining.
And look at the trap Sal would be, and if he intervenes and tells Ben to quit complaining,
that's probably really going to make matters worse.
Ben's just going to shut up and go grousing in a different way, but he'll be suspicious
of talking to Jolene.
So when a supervisor has a conflict with you, or a supervisor, excuse me, has a conflict
with you, what do you do?
That's another spot we ought to stop and think about here.
What I want to do if I'm the supervisor is I want to listen and negotiate if it doesn't
require surrendering authority.
Once again, it's consultation, not democracy.
It's hard to listen, but it's useful, so that's something I really, really want to do.
Here's an example with that.
Let's look at Ben again, the custodian, and now he's coming and speaking to Sal, the supervisor.
Let's see how Sal does listening to Ben.
Hey, Sal, I've got a complaint and a request I need to talk to you about.
Okay.
What is it?
When the night crew keeps leaving trash cans for Jolene and me to pick up, I've got a bad
back.
Doctor says I'm not supposed to be lifting and twisting.
I want to be exempt from having to pick up those cans.
You know it's a safety issue.
Yeah, I've talked to the night supervisor about this.
He says they're extremely busy and sometimes has to leave work for us to do.
He also said he talked to his people.
No change?
Nope.
Second floor cans are all waiting to be picked up again this morning.
All right.
I can talk to their super again.
But about your back, you do have a doctor's note, right?
No, but I can get you one.
Yeah.
I'm going to need to see that.
Okay.
Well, good.
Ben's behaving a lot better than Jolene in this particular example.
You know, he can't really negotiate with the crew himself, so he has to go to Sal for
that.
But he has to find the issue in terms of behavior and consequences.
And Sal's doing very well here.
He's listening.
He's offering a response.
He's also checking for some evidence that he may need if he's got to do some harder
bargaining on Ben's behalf.
So Sal's done a good job.
You know, after listening and rethinking any decision you make when an employee complains
though, you can go ahead and make your decision and you ought to go ahead and do that.
And if your employee wishes to appeal that, your decision to a higher place in management,
you don't want to suppress that.
The best thing to do is just support it and cooperate it with it.
If we've got formal procedures in place, an employee wants to use them and has the right
to use them, fine.
Let's go with that.
Let's look at an example of that.
Let's go back to Sal's office a week later.
He has some news to share with Ben.
Hey, Sal.
Hey, Ben.
Hey, I've got an answer for you on the trash can issue.
Great.
Okay.
I talked to the night crew about this and they said they'll make an extra effort to
pick them up, which I think they'll do.
However, I can't make an exemption for the lifting.
Your doctor's note says that light lifting is okay and our trash cans are light.
There's not much I can do.
Now, look, if you come across a heavy can and Jolene can help you, that's great.
It's the best I can do.
This is a safety issue.
I'm going to appeal this.
I'm going to file a grievance.
Well, it's within your right to do that.
I'm okay with that.
And if it's not too excessive, you can use your work time to file it.
Okay.
Well, how Sal has handled this really very well.
It does kind of begin to look like Ben wants to see himself as a victim here.
That's a possibility.
I may even be beginning to have some sympathy for Jolene at this point.
But using formal processes as a policy, if it's appropriate, if it's fitting, he's got
a right to it.
Don't discourage it.
Cooperate and let it play through.
I really don't think Ben's going to get anywhere with this one.
But if the trash can's really heavy, that could play out and be settled in an okay way.
So there.
That's that piece.
I want to strongly suggest with supervisors that we want to make our expectations clear
here.
We want to attempt to resolve differences constructively.
That's the expectation by discussion and mutual agreement.
And with those employees, you want to help them when they need help.
Allow time, create conditions for employees to negotiate and renegotiate resolutions.
When an employee brings a complaint to the supervisor that could be handled by negotiating,
ask if they're willing to try.
Rather than interceding for them with someone else, ask if they're willing to try and offer
them to help them if they need it.
That gives you a chance to be the facilitator and the teacher.
Let's look at an example of that.
Let's return to that first dramatization.
Stacey the clerical worker is now talking to her manager, Claire, on the phone.
When Stacey and her other co-worker will, they've tried to work this out and they've
been unsuccessful on their dispute over the expense report issue.
So Stacey's asking Claire to intervene.
Let's see what Claire does.
This is Claire.
Hi, Claire.
It's Stacey and Will.
We're just not getting anywhere sorting out this expense report thing.
I think you're going to need to come in and settle it for us.
Stacey, I'd rather the two of you figure out a solution if you can, but I'll be glad to
try and help you work through it.
I'll be down in a minute.
Okay, thanks.
All right, good.
Claire did a good job on this.
She didn't get sucked into arbitrating, which is always the temptation, but she is going
to help.
She's going to facilitate and that's going to give her an opportunity to teach Will and
Stacey how to negotiate a little better.
Claire's being an excellent supervisor in this situation.
Let's talk about the next thing that really comes up a lot for supervisors.
Let's talk about feedback.
I want to suggest that relative to conflict management, it's very important to give lots
of informal feedback to employees and to give it to them regularly.
And that mostly needs to be positive feedback.
You've got to catch employees doing things right and comment on it.
You know, about 80% of feedback needs to be positive for employees to operate in an
optimal level.
But that's also important because if they're getting plenty of positive feedback, they're
going to be able to handle negative feedback for conflicts much better.
Let's look at an example of that.
Here's a good one.
Let's go back to the custodial team, Jolene, Ben and their supervisor, Sal.
Hey, you two.
I love what you did in the break room.
It really looks good in there.
Thanks, Sal.
We thought so, too.
It feels nice when they notice what you do around here.
It sure does.
I really like that example.
Like, even Ben is happy at this moment and he's feeling appreciated.
And that wasn't that hard to do.
And he and Jolene are now feeling like a team.
I want you to notice there that that would have been easy to do.
Conflict or positive feedback doesn't cost anything.
It's easy to give and it really helps with motivation.
And it sets up the conditions where you have a safer environment, a more positive environment
to address conflict.
So positive feedback, 80%.
Now while we're talking feedback, I need to talk a little bit about negative feedback.
I also need to provide negative feedback when it's due.
And that's immediately.
It ought to be immediate, it ought to be informal, and it ought to be private whenever performance
falls short.
Do not.
Do not wait for formal evaluations.
Nothing said in a formal evaluation ought to be a surprise.
Take care of it right then.
So then, and if you've got plenty of positive feedback going, that's going to be a whole
lot easier to do.
So work those pieces together.
Let's look at an example with negative feedback.
If we go back to Will and Stacy, who've come to an agreement now with Claire's help with
her facilitating, let's look at Claire definitely handling some poor behavior on Will's part.
And she does it in a timely and a private way.
I'm really glad we got that figured out.
Thanks for your help.
Yeah, thanks, Claire.
You're welcome.
It's part of my job.
Oh, Will.
Janisak.
Sure.
For a while there, you were being awfully difficult.
It was like you made up your mind and just wouldn't listen.
Now, you came around in the end, and I really appreciate that.
Next time, though, start trying to listen right from the get go to what people have to say.
I know it'll make the process work better.
Yeah, you're right.
Maybe next time I'll do a little more listening first.
I think that may have been the problem all along.
OK, that negative feedback was immediate.
It was private.
It was measured.
It was clear.
It acknowledged the context where they ended up with something OK anyhow.
So he was feeling pretty nicely regarded, but recognizing that there was a problem with
that particular behavior, nicely on target feedback from the supervisor.
OK, finally, what I want to suggest with supervisors here is that you've got to model
the behavior that you want from the employees.
I said that for managers, that's true all the way down the line.
Be the conflict manager you want your supervisees to be.
We need to say a little bit about the employees.
We've been talking about managers.
We've been talking about supervisors.
But in a way, we've said what we need to say about employees because we've talked all
the way through the course about how conflict ought to be handled.
And that's what you ought to show up as an employee prepared to do yourself.
So the general principle applies.
Deal directly.
Attempt to resolve conflicts by direct mutual discussion.
Use those seven steps we explained in the lectures 11 and 12.
Pursue mutual interest, not positions, the way we explained it in lecture 10.
That's what you ought to be doing.
But if you're at all in doubt about whether that approach is acceptable or is the norm
in the organization you're in, you need to ask about that.
And if you get a yes answer that's official, check out the culture too to see if that's
comfortable within the culture because it's not going to be safe to be too far out of
line with the way things are done here generally.
Now if it's not that way and you've been in the organization for a while and you've
built some credibility and you're seen as a valued person, you may have the chance to
move conflict management behavior in the same useful direction that I've been talking about
with supervisors and managers.
And if conflicts are handled badly and the handling stays bad and it's affecting you
negatively, what I want to make to you is a hard no suggestion.
You might very well, if at all possible, want to seek another affiliation.
You don't need to stay in a place where things aren't handled well.
Speaking of things not being handled well, I need to just briefly mention a problem that's
really not within the realm of normal conflict management, but it comes up often whenever
I work with people or teach managers and supervisors about conflict management.
And that's the problem with bullies in the workplace.
It's really a very special problem.
It turns out bullies and bullying means it's repeated mistreatment of someone in particular,
someone gets targeted and they're being repeatedly mistreated.
That's verbally or in other ways.
It's very harmful and it's much more commonplace than one would expect.
It causes emotional and physical harm.
It can corrupt the whole workplace culture and climate.
When that happens, if you're the target of that, you need to confront it, stand up to
it if you can, you need to report it, ask for help, get counseling, and if you're a supervisor
and a manager and someone is doing that kind of behavior and you find out about it, that's
especially an occasion when you need to be tough, stand up to it, deal with it and work
on getting it resolved, even if it means that you have to lose a really valued employee
who happened to be the bully.
You got to stand up to that when it'll cost the organization a lot more if you don't.
All right, let's summarize.
What do we want to say now about managers and supervisors and employees handling conflict
in the organization?
One, avoid those inhibiting influences from classical management, think in terms of what
the human resources and organizational systems people and organizational cultures people
have taught us.
Two, primary concern of managers and supervisors ought to be to ensure that everyday conflicts
are handled constructively by all the employees.
Three, establish and communicate clear policies concerning management of conflict and provide
training when it's needed.
Four, provide for formal procedures for disciplinary actions and grievances as needed.
Five, prevent unnecessary conflict by clearly defining roles and responsibilities and then
work with employees to address conflicts promptly when they arise.
Six, managers and supervisors need to model the conflict behavior they wish to see from
their employees.
Seven, supervisors have a pivotal role.
They guide, teach and help and they arbitrate only when necessary.
That's important to recognize.
Better conflict management means better morale, less absenteeism, it means less turnover,
it means stronger employee motivation, better productivity, it's great for the bottom line.
Ample business reasons for better conflict management, so we ought to work on them.
But organizations are not just places where we work and produce things and make money,
they're also human environments where we live, where we spend much of our lives.
And so, you know what, if we manage conflict better there, we'll be happier, we'll be
more joyful, we'll have better lives in organizations and I think the fact that they're human environments
constitute an even better reason for us to manage our conflicts well.
Let me give you an assignment from this lecture.
I want to suggest that you think about the organization where you work or volunteer.
Think about how well everyday conflicts, the ordinary ones are handled there and what
might be the dominant pattern, is it really mutual discussion and agreement?
If it is, count yourself lucky and the assignment's done.
If it's not, couple of hard questions, what do I think is my role in that, am I helping
or hurting and what can I do to make the management of conflict better there?
Let me give you a preview of lecture 18 now.
If we're looking to improve conflict management in general or for help in managing any particular
conflict, the fact is there's plenty of good professional help available and you want
to be able to turn to it.
So where we're going to turn from here in our next lecture is where to get help for
couples, families, organizations, relationships and communities.
That's our next lecture.
