Well, we've talked about where to get help now, but there are sometimes when we're called
upon to step up and actually be the helper.
And while triangulation is definitely a dysfunctional strategy that we need to avoid and we'll
talk about how to do that, there really are times when we as a neutral party can step
up as that third party and help others solve a conflict.
There are times when we're called upon as a friend, a family member, or a work colleague,
or as a supervisor or a manager to step in and help.
So this lecture, we're going to talk about when and how to help others in guiding a resolution
process.
And we're going to offer you some important guidelines for amateurs and point out some
pitfalls to avoid.
So how can third parties help?
Well, begin by noting, as we did in the last lecture, that an objective third party all
by itself, being present for a conflict management process, understood as a neutral third party
and objective, helps because the parties in the conflict tend to calm down, they tend
to get more reasonable, and they tend to get more cooperative just by your being there.
So you're already helping if you're trusted as being neutral and impartial, you're already
helping just by your presence.
But there are more specific ways.
And the first one of those is coaching.
You can help people sort through an issue, help them identify their goals, help them
recognize the other party's perspective, help them decide whether and how to proceed with
the resolution effort.
That's a common way to help people informally in conflict resolution.
Here's an example.
It's a kind of a small conflict that could foul up a friendship or in this case a family,
including the person that would be you who's being asked for help.
Here we're going to look at two sisters, Phyllis and Margaret, and they're talking about working
with their older sister Sue on a plan for their parents' 50th wedding anniversary party.
Let's listen in.
I just get the feeling Sue doesn't trust me to help with mom and dad's anniversary party.
You know, she hasn't given me any of the information I need.
I may be the youngest, but we're all adults now.
I figured she'd be happy to have me do this.
It's not only frustrating, it hurts.
Well, I can see you're upset and I do understand.
Well, do you think you could talk to her for me?
Oh, I think you ought to talk to her yourself.
But I can help you sort things out so that you can figure out exactly what it is that
you need from her.
And she did ask for your help.
OK.
OK.
So what is it that you need from Sue?
Well, first of all, I need a list of people to invite.
OK, good.
And then...
Notice what Margaret's doing here.
She's beginning to help Phyllis pin down what the problem is.
She's coaching.
That's an appropriate role.
She's not stepping in and triangulating the conflict.
She's just helping.
Coaching is not telling the other person how to resolve their conflict.
It's helping them think it through and decide.
So that's coaching.
What's the second way that you can help as an informal mediator, just helping others
resolve a conflict?
Second way would be serving as that mediator, guiding the parties through a constructive
conversation process where you actually sit down with them and you focus on the process
and keep them on track and in motion so that they can focus on the content.
Now it's important if you do that, that you don't focus on the content.
That's theirs.
Let them deal with resolving the thing, but you help them stay focused on the issue themselves.
Keep them taking turns speaking and help get them to listen to one another.
How might that look?
Well, let's look at an example of that.
In this one, we're going to look at the Three Sisters meeting, Margaret serving as an informal
mediator for Phyllis and Sue.
Let's listen in again.
You have these really good.
Yeah, yeah.
She's enjoying it.
She's made a lot of friends.
Ooh.
That looks good.
That looks great.
I'm going to have some right now.
I want that one.
Well, thanks for letting me help.
Oh, sure.
I think we just have a few things that we need to iron out.
So let's try to stay on track.
The party is just around the corner.
Yeah, and we need to get our invitations out soon.
And that's just the tip of the iceberg of all we have to do.
OK.
Well, let's just settle what we can get done here.
Phyllis, you needed some information from Sue.
That's right.
Right.
Sue, you on board?
Oh, sure.
Good.
OK.
Then maybe Phyllis, you could just start us off and tell us what you need.
Well, OK.
To start with, I need a complete list of people to invite.
And we need to agree on our budget.
Very important.
Yes.
Well, that's going pretty smoothly.
I seem to be agreeing that sharing the information is the purpose of this meeting,
and they're moving toward doing that.
And notice that the process guide, and it's often called facilitating,
that overlaps with the meaning of mediating a lot.
Facilitating means just making it easier.
In this case, Margaret's making it easier for Sue and Phyllis
to focus on the content of what they need to decide.
It's handling the process so the participants can focus on the content
and sort out a satisfactory conclusion.
So that's that.
There's a third way that you can help informally help others deal with conflict.
What this one is about is helping the parties involved assess the patterns,
the general patterns that emerge and that they're going through
in their efforts to deal with conflict.
Now, this can be done, by the way, as a coach or as a facilitator,
but I wanted to separate it out,
because you might be looking at the general patterns of interaction
rather than a specific conflict that's up.
If you're going to do that kind of thing,
what you want to do is check conditions before you would intervene.
Intervening should not be undertaken lightly,
so you want to check the conditions that,
for the conditions that would make it right for you to intervene.
You could ask whether you have clear authorization to intervene.
And both parties need to agree.
As one or both parties requested your assistance,
and as the other one consented,
you really want to know that before you step in.
Or maybe you have an assigned role, for instance.
For instance, if you're the supervisor or the manager,
as we were looking at in our last lecture,
where Claire stepped in so excellently.
Sometimes you're the minister.
You might have it a role where that fits.
Then you've got to be concerned with whether the conflicting parties
are really interested in finding a mutually satisfactory solution.
You want to explicitly ask,
and in fact insist on a clear and unequivocal answer,
is that what they're after?
Because if they'll agree with you that that's the agenda
and they both want your help in doing it,
then you've really got to handle it.
You can use to be an effective helper in the process.
And if one or both parties is not willing to do that,
to commit to working toward a real resolution,
I want to suggest that you refrain from engaging.
Don't be afraid to step back and say,
no, I don't want to do that.
You don't want to ever assume greater responsibility
for this conflict being resolved than the parties themselves.
You want them to take responsibility,
and if they're doing that, you're willing to help them.
If they're not willing now, you can say,
look, at the time when you're both really willing
and you want to do that, call me again,
and I'll really help you then.
So you don't have to know right away,
but don't take more responsibility
than they're taking for resolving their conflict.
Some other things to be concerned with
before you step in and help.
Ask yourself, you know, do I think I have
the necessary communication skills?
I don't have to be a professional at it,
but I have to be good at some things.
I have to be pretty good at listening.
I have to be able to empathize with people.
I have to have a reasonable ability
to empathize statements and issues
and ask helpful questions.
I got to be able to be open and honest in my interactions.
I got to be trustworthy.
I got to be willing to honor the trust they place in me
or all parties place in me,
and that means keeping things confidential if they have to.
I got to have the right motives if I'm going to help people.
It's really got to be about helping them.
And Kenneth Cloak, that mediator whom I respect so much,
lays out some important criteria
for what should be the motives that are involved.
He says you got to avoid self-centered reasons
for helping others.
He's got a list of these that's pretty useful.
Ask myself, am I doing this to get help for myself?
If I am, if I'm looking for something back for it later,
I shouldn't be doing it.
If I'm wanting to do it in order to satisfy my own needs
for gratitude and recognition,
it's not a good reason to step in and help.
It's lab or backfire if I do that.
I'm probably not going to be very helpful.
I'm working on my agenda instead of helping them with theirs.
What if I'm trying to mend some poor self-image of mine
and get more self-esteem?
Wrong reason.
If I just want to gain companionship,
get friends this way, wrong reason.
The only motivation should be helping them.
So that's pretty stringent.
Ask myself these questions.
If those pass, then, then I could say yes to helping.
However, before proceeding,
what I want to do is to get determined and agreed upon
what my role is going to be as the helper.
If they want me to help, let's ask and specify
what assistance I'm going to give.
Margaret, remember, was very careful with fellas to say,
this is what I'll do and what not,
and the parties agreed to that.
You got to make it clear that you're not interested in taking sides.
Remember those criteria that mediators and ombudsman have
where they need to be neutral and impartial.
You want to be neutral and impartial in the same way.
Those principles that the professionals follow
is something you want to follow.
You want to be equally on both people's sides.
Then you want to try to determine how best you can help
in that coach, mediator, or facilitator sense.
How do they want the help with this
and try to sort out where it's going to be and get agreement?
If you can clearly state your role
and get the percentable consent of both parties,
then you can proceed.
Be careful here to avoid triangulation.
Parties will come to you presenting themselves as victim,
and they want you to be the rescuer.
That's really tempting.
That victim-rescuer setup is a terrible temptation
into a triangulation role.
And you know, it may feel noble
riding to the rescue and helping someone who feels weak,
but being the victim is damaging to the victim,
and if they didn't have to be the victim,
you don't want to help them do that.
And being the rescuer, you know what happens very often?
You ride in and abuse somebody else
defending what you regard as the victim,
and later they're going to turn on you.
So don't get sucked into doing that.
You've got to be on both people's sides.
So you also want to be very clear that this conflict is theirs.
You're here to help, but it's theirs to do.
So how can we do these kinds of things?
Let's look a little more deeply at these three levels.
Let's start again with coaching the other party.
If only one party has come to you for help,
you can help there by just functioning as a coach,
and you only need their consent.
But remember when you do that,
you're hearing only one side of this thing.
You can validate their feelings,
tell them you understand how they feel that way,
but don't jump in and take sides.
You're only hearing one side of it,
and it would be looking very different
if you were hearing it from the other side.
You want to be a calming and an empowering influence.
You want to encourage that person
to be taking responsibility for themselves,
and you want to help them work toward
and think about working toward a mutually satisfactory resolution.
You can help them to find the issue.
You can help them sort feelings.
You can help them identify goals,
and you've had lots of talk in this course
and ideas about how to do that.
You can help them make a decision
about whether and how to pursue resolution.
You know what that is?
That's what we talked about before
in the seven-step process we talked about back in lecture 11.
Let's look at an example here
of some of that work being done.
In this case, let's have a character named Gary
who's struggling with a relationship
that's perhaps going somewhere
and perhaps not, and he's just not sure how it's going.
And he's talking to his friend Roy,
looking for some advice.
I just get so stressed out
and confused every time I think about it, man.
Sarah invites me over,
then when I get to her place, it's like I'm not even there.
One minute, she's really nice
and then she ignores me for no reason.
It's been like this for three months.
And that's got to be frustrating.
Do you really like this girl?
I mean, is it worth the stress?
Well, to be honest, I do like her.
But I've about had it with this hot and cold business.
Well, listen.
Has it occurred to you that maybe how she acts
has nothing to do with you?
Well, Gary here is attributing Sarah's behavior
to how she feels about him.
That could be that fundamental attribution error
we talked about back in lecture four.
But Roy's being a good friend here and a good coach.
He's really helping Gary sort this thing out.
He's helping Gary calm down and consider possibility.
Nice start into coaching on his part.
Let's next talk about the role of mediator and facilitator here.
And I'm using these terms fairly interchangeably
in this informal sense.
The role of the mediator or the facilitator
needs to be sorted out.
What's it going to be?
You need to identify what's the process that's going to be followed.
And you need to spell out what's going to be your role
and what's going to be theirs.
When you're sorting this out and it's well to set it up in front
to talk about it in front and not just try to let it evolve,
you want to let the disputants own the content
of their negotiations and agreements.
They're not yours. You're guiding the process.
You claim the role of guiding that fair and open process.
Your job is going to be to promote open communication.
One thing about that is to refuse to hold secrets.
You know, mediators have that role.
The professional mediators have that thing
of keeping the process informed.
You might use that as a guide about everybody to know everything.
Don't get stuck holding anybody's secrets
when you're trying to be neutral.
You want to appreciate and let the parties know you appreciate
their willingness to trust you in doing this.
Thank them for that.
It's a trust that they've given you.
You can help arrange a meeting for the parties
once they've agreed to all that
and then you can help them negotiate when they do.
All right.
Let's talk about when that meeting takes place.
You want to begin by thanking the parties for trusting you.
Start again by thanking them
and then encourage them to seek a resolution
that really serves both parties.
That's setting that agenda that we talked about.
Back when we talked about the seven steps
that you're guiding them through in this way.
Then you want to remember that
the example we considered a few minutes ago
where Margaret was helping Phyllis and Sue,
Margaret began by thanking
and setting the objective of the meeting.
So remember that picture in mind.
That's what you're trying to do.
Secondly, what you want to do is create a safe environment.
Sometimes, not always, but sometimes,
that requires asking for ground rules.
I've often done this with clients.
But that's some ground rules.
And one of them is no personal attacks.
Don't attack the person.
That really helps separate the people from the problem
using the Fisher and Urie guideline
to separate people from the problem
and helps keep things safe.
You want to create that.
Third thing you want to do is go ahead and guide that discussion.
What I always draw upon to do that
is exactly what I laid out for you in lecture 11
in steps five, six, and seven,
or excuse me, lecture 12,
five, six, and seven of that seven-step process.
I also follow Fisher and Urie's four principles
when I'm guiding them through.
And you can do that. You have those four principles now.
Fourth, it really helps to ask questions
and check perceptions and get them
to be clear with one another.
You have to be careful asking questions
and checking perceptions
because people then will sometimes,
they'll turn and talk to you
and talk to each other.
So you can lean in, ask a question,
what did you mean by this?
And when they tell you,
point them to the other person and say,
tell him or tell her.
So you keep them talking to each other.
You can also listen very carefully
for the verbal and nonverbal messages.
And when they don't seem to match,
you can ask questions to double-check that.
So you can always do that.
You can really help move the communication
and keep it clear as that third party.
That's what we do in most conflicts.
Now let's look at an example.
Let's turn to the discussion
of our three sisters again.
And see how important it is
to check for consistency
between the verbal and nonverbal messages.
This is one of those things that you can check.
Well, mom and dad are finishing up
the invite list with everybody's addresses.
I can't rush them. You know that.
They said they'd have it by Monday
and I can pick it up then.
I can bring it to your office on Wednesday, Phyllis.
How's that?
OK.
I guess that'll work.
Phyllis,
I know you said OK,
but your face and your voice
sort of suggests that that might not work too well.
Are you sure you don't need to
to drop it by earlier,
a little earlier than Wednesday?
Well, could I get it sooner?
I could pick it up myself at mom and dad's on Monday.
Well, I was going to talk to mom and dad
and I picked it up.
Well,
how about this?
What if we both meet at mom and dad's
at four on Monday and nail down the location
and get a final list?
Sure, that works for me.
OK.
All right, great.
So what else do we need to do?
OK, did you notice Margaret
picking up on the doubt in Phyllis' voice?
Was there in her voice?
It would have been there on her face.
If I were to bring the list to her,
there was doubt there, it didn't look real.
So Margaret stepped in and checked it
and that's when they moved toward
a really solid solution
when what they were agreeing to
before wouldn't have worked.
That was a marvelous contribution
on Margaret's part to that negotiation
that was taking place.
What else can you do?
You can guide the parties to stay focused
on this conflict and on the issue
that they're intended to resolve.
If you don't, so that's a nice help
you can provide as the facilitator.
You also want to avoid
that tendency to have
issues multiply.
You'll find this happen when people start
to talk about what's bothering them.
Issues get added in and you want to intervene
on that and say, let's just stay with this
and we can come to that one.
You can even create a list on the side.
Sometimes I do that, I'll take a separate
pad of paper when I'm helping people
and say let's make a list of what else
and that's that, but that's not this negotiation.
So it goes somewhere, it feels safe.
You don't want issues to multiply
in this conversation.
What you want is for this conversation
to stay on this issue and move toward a resolution.
You really want to guide parties
to describe their perceptions of the conflict
and explain their feelings.
You've got to get those things
on the table. You've got to get them out.
And once they're out and they've been
described, you don't want repetition
going, what you want to do is
move them toward solving the problem.
You've got to ask, are you guys really
willing to try to solve this now?
And if they are, start asking for suggestions.
So it really helps to move them past
the complaints part and the feeling part
and get them to focus on now and the future
asking for suggestions for what they're
going to do to resolve it.
A marvelous contribution that you can make.
Now, if this conflict
appears very complex and very
resistant to solution,
then you can do one of these other things
that we talked about earlier.
You can suggest fractionation.
You can suggest breaking the conversation
into parts and working on one matter
at a time and seeing if there are some
that you can solve at this time.
Solve part of it. Build trust
and they can come back to others later.
As this all goes on, you want to be
honoring and validating the expressions
of emotion, but you don't want them
to get out of hand. You want to keep them level.
And one way that you do this is to keep
them level. Discourage emotional
escalation and the best way
you can do that is to stay level
and reasonable yourself.
You can validate
emotions and check perceptions
by paraphrasing back
a description of the emotion that's being
said to you.
When you do that, you keep
your emotional tone level
but supportive. This can be difficult
but it's easier for you as to help
her to do that than it is for the parties
in the conflict who are feeling the
conflicting emotions themselves.
And by the way, this advice
goes, if you're coaching
just with one person or mediating
in a conflict between the two, it's
the same kind of a setup.
You want to keep level and not rise
in emotion with them. It helps them
stabilize the conversation and keep
it moving toward a solution.
Let's consider an example of that.
Let's look at a coaching situation
that's easier for us to describe here.
Remember Roy
and he's just
proposed that Sarah's behavior might have
nothing to do with Gary. It might be more
about Sarah and he's helping Gary stay level.
Let's go back to Roy and Gary's conversation
and see where they go.
Man, how could it have nothing to do with me?
It has everything to do with me.
I'm sure she doesn't act like this with everybody.
It's like it's some kind of weird game.
Okay, take it easy.
Maybe it has something to do with you and maybe not.
I still wonder if there's something else going on here.
Is there anything that
sets her off?
Money issues?
Family problems? Stress at work?
Well,
come to think of it, it does seem like
her mother calls a lot when I'm over there.
Okay.
So have you asked Sarah about that?
Notice what Roy's doing here.
He's a calming influence
on Gary as we think about this
and Gary keeps wanting to get wound up
and he's really helping Gary
begin to look at a possible route
of Sarah's behavior.
So Roy is keeping that thing level.
He's validating how Gary feels,
but he's keeping the feeling
of this thing nicely level.
Roy's doing a good job.
Now, let's go further.
When an agreement is reached,
when the parties get to the point
where there's an agreement,
what you can do is make sure that
the content of that agreement
is clear and about behavior.
Remember, we talked about that
in the seven-step process.
That's step six.
You can ensure that that agreement
is absolutely clear by checking
meaning back and forth.
You can point out that it needs to be about behavior
because it's got to be what they're going to hold
each other responsible for
and make sure it's clearly agreed to
on the part of both parties.
So you can do that job.
And it's not terribly difficult to do
in most conflicts, especially
if the parties are willing, really willing
to trust you and are looking for a resolution
and will let you know that.
Final thing you might want to do
because I remember in the seven-step process
there was another thing to do.
It's follow-through.
If I've gotten involved in the discussion,
I might need to clarify what's going to be
my role in the follow-through
because the parties might expect something
from me in that.
All right. Having done that,
let's go to the next level where you can help
and we talked about that in some other ways.
You can help the parties
assess the patterns that are going on.
Patterns are tricky
and as we see these happening,
it might not be one conflict.
It's what's going on in general.
If it's that kind of a question
and I'm asked to help,
then my role as a helper
is to help improve an ongoing pattern
of what's happening in conflict management.
Well, the same sorts of conflicts
if they keep recurring
suggest a pattern.
One expert says,
you know what, if the conflict has come up
over the same issue three times,
it's not about that issue.
It's about a pattern that you want to go and look at.
So you can ask people to do that.
If you're being asked about it
and this thing's coming up over and over,
you're being asked to help with a pattern really
even though the person asking for help may not know that.
So how do you work with this?
Once again, you want to begin by clarifying
your role in this assessment process.
And then
in suggesting solutions
for improvement,
you want to be careful because here it could be
suggesting patterns of conflict response
where you may be
suggesting do something differently
rather than just guiding a process
they're going through.
In our roles in organizations
and also in extended families,
we're very, very often
used to be pulled in on the kind of thing
where what's going on is really a pattern
that's emerged
where people are handling conflict poorly
and they're not getting resolved.
We very often belong
to the group, the family,
the work unit, the team, the organization
where this is going on and we may even be in it.
So it can be more tricky
to handle in that case.
So if we're members of the group
that we're being asked to help,
it's especially important
to have our role up front so that we can step out
of being in the middle and define that role
as the helper.
We can help with the analytic process though
of figuring out what that pattern is.
How do we do this?
We can help by engaging with the participants
and the stakeholders involved
around in figuring out
what's going on and then devising solutions.
Treat this as problem solving.
Here's the pattern that's happening.
How are we going to get out of it?
If you treat it as problem solving
or as a pattern, that would work.
It's better to help the participants
though with their assessment
and ask the right questions
than to really offer very many answers
because you want to be helping them,
you don't want to be stepping in
and opposing an answer on them.
There's a definition of assessment
that's usually provided here
if you're talking about assessing patterns
and the definition is kind of useful, I think.
Assessment is described
as observing, describing
and analyzing an interaction pattern,
a set of relationships
or a conflict management process
in order to diagnose its problems
and provide an understanding.
With that understanding, you can then suggest solutions.
You and the participants
are going to need to gather information.
When you're doing this assessment,
remember that it's really important
to get all of the different points of view.
What's going on here will appear
very different from the different perspectives.
So you want to ask all the stakeholders,
you want to get information
from all points of view about a pattern
and you want to get as much
objective information as possible.
When I say objective information,
that's what you're after, but you better remember
that objective truth in this kind of situation
is often very elusive.
Sometimes it's even irrelevant, it's how people see it,
but you want as much objective information you can.
And when you've done that,
what you want to do is focus at least
as much on the interactive processes
by which people are dealing with issues
as on the issues themselves.
You can sometimes help assess patterns
in that way and help people get
to a solution.
So there's lots you can do
to help in that way.
I do want you to think though
that if you participate
in an assessment like that,
you've got to remember that the assessment itself
is an intervention.
When we start asking questions
with a view to solving problems,
we've generated new perceptions
and new expectations.
And if what we do in that assessment
does not lead to action and improvement,
the assessment itself
will have done harm.
It'll reduce credibility.
It'll make people more demoralized.
So things will get worse.
Conflicts occur in systems
and as systems themselves.
They occur as chain reactions.
They make spirals. They become vortexes.
You can think of them as dances.
And in these, all the participants
may acquire roles and labels
and expectations.
The opponents in these things are
cooperating in a process
that keeps the conflict going.
And so these systems develop patterns
and rules of engagement.
And those patterns are sustained by
rewards that are provided
by all the participants.
They're cooperating this.
And once you
provide a diagnosis with that assessment,
it's really important
to figure out what you're going to do
to resolve it.
So that one's tougher, but you can do it.
You can help by facilitating
a problem-solving discussion for where you go from there
once the pattern has been identified.
All right.
Lots of ways you can help.
You have to be careful about triangulating,
but there are lots of ways you can help.
You're sometimes called upon to help
and sometimes you can do it.
You don't have to be a professional mediator
or facilitator to do it.
You can help people
solve conflicts.
Summary, here are the essential things
that I want to suggest you be careful to remember.
One, you want to realize
that you actually can avoid triangulation
and still help as a coach, mediator,
or facilitator.
Two, carefully clarify
your role, be it as coach, mediator,
or facilitator, or combination
of those three.
Three, really honor the trust
that people place in you, both parties,
when you step in to help with a conflict.
Four, look out for the pitfalls
that are here.
Make sure that your only motive is to help
all parties work out a resolution.
Do not be drawn
into aligning yourself with one side
or the other that's a serious pitfall.
Know your own limits.
Don't get in over your head.
It would be another pitfall to avoid.
If you set out to help, you can do more harm than good.
So don't do that.
Helping others deal with conflicts
is a complex, challenging
art.
Even highly trained professionals
make mistakes in their efforts.
But you don't have to do a perfect job
in order to be helpful.
All of us can make some mistakes
and still be helpful.
Okay, that's helping others.
Here's an assignment for this lecture.
Actually, you're going to get an assignment
from someone else probably
that will come up to do with it.
But try this one just as a function of this lecture.
The assignment for me is this.
Look back at the last time you tried
to help somebody else resolve a conflict.
Try to remember it in detail
and ask yourself some important questions.
How well did that actually work out?
Was it a case of triangulation?
Did you try to focus your help
on coaching or mediating?
If you tried to mediate and facilitate,
did you stay focused on the process?
If it didn't work out perfectly,
having heard this lecture,
what do you think you might want to do differently?
That's a tough assignment,
but try it.
Okay, that's helping others.
Where are we going to go from here?
You know, there are some conflicts these days
that appear to be beyond help.
The resolution appears to be unreachable.
The conflict appears to be intractable.
And these conflicts really
frequently reach across cultural divides.
They're conflicts that center
on issues of morality.
Moral conflicts, they're called.
And they really represent the frontier
in our effort to understand
and deal better with conflict.
We need to deal with them before we finish this course,
and we're going to start doing that in lecture 20.
