Israel vs. Palestine, Islamic beliefs vs. Western values, the battle over whether abortion
should be legal in the United States. What all these conflicts have in common is that at their core
each of them is an issue of what's morally right versus what's morally wrong. They also have in
common that they really appear to be intractable, they really appear to defy any effort at real
resolution. It turns out that when conflicts are framed as matters of morals they really pose
particularly difficult challenges to anybody trying to resolve them and they can even seem to justify
violence. They appear to preclude those win-win resolutions that Deutsch introduced us to and
render approaches to negotiation and compromise themselves even the effort to compromise to be
somehow morally suspect. So is it as hopeless of solution as it appears to be or can workable
solutions be found? In this lecture in the next we've got to talk about moral conflicts what are
called moral conflicts? What's the nature of moral conflicts? How are they different from other
conflicts? We'll observe some characteristics of them that make them different and try to better
understand why they're so daunting when we try to manage them. But it's really not hopeless
and we'll get to that. Okay let's begin with a definition. Moral conflicts are issues or conflicts
in which the issues are framed as matters of what is morally right and what is morally wrong
or who is morally good and who is morally bad. I want you to notice that that kind of framing
is black and white thinking. It's absolute framing and way back in lecture nine we when we talked
about dysfunctional strategies we listed absolute framing as a dysfunctional strategy. One way to
think of a moral conflict then is a dysfunctional strategy of absolute framing writ large only for
people with strong moral values of any sort when one of those values that involved is involved
it can really be unavoidable. No matter how dysfunctional that's the way it's framed for
that person. Certain as we may feel about our moral values we do on the other hand have to
recognize that they're inherently subjective. Values are subjective and yet they're not so
so negotiable. They're usually held as absolutes. They tend not to be amenable to any kind of compromise.
In a dispute about a moral question both sides really can't be right so you can't get to a
win-win in any ready or obvious way. For most people morals are just not negotiable and they're
not something that you can compromise. So moral conflicts are tough to deal with.
Barnett Pierce and Stephen Littlejohn who are two very well-known communication scholars both of
whom have focused a good deal of their research on the management of conflict really made an
effort to study and better understand and explain these moral conflicts and they reported it in
a book called Moral Conflict. They tried to explain and here's some of the ideas that they
pointed out. They recognize that we have embedded values that are common in our society. They
have embedded values that are clusters. Our values are embedded in these sort of clusters of other
values and they have complex histories that have developed over time. They're not just separate
things that are held in negotiable separately. They belong to clusters and whole moral orders.
They're essential to our sense of order and function in the world. They're essential to
holding communities and cultures together. So this business of clusters of values which
develop into full moral codes is something we really need as societies and communities.
They tend to constitute an integrated sort of moral order in which all the specific values
are going to support one another. For an example of that you might think about you know the deeply
held values that Israelis and Palestinians have regarding something like what they consider to be
their God-given homeland. Each thinks of Jerusalem as a place that's central in their history
and they're committed to it in their religious beliefs and their cultural beliefs at a moral
level. So they really have a difference that each hill holds deeply that's tied to other things.
A challenge to any one of these values in such a cluster if you let go of that value seems to
threaten to unravel the cluster and people have a sense of this even when they're not very carefully
analyzing what's going on. So you really find that people often when confronted with the idea of
changing on a particular value that may not seem important will appear to unreasonably hold on to
that moral value even in the face of clearly contrary facts they want to hold to their belief
and the problem is that letting go of that seems to threaten to unravel the cluster and that's a
larger value that they can't let go of because that value is embedded in this whole moral order.
So they tend to be resistant. You know that example of the Palestinians and the Israelis
you know would you really think that the Palestinians could negotiate a way possession
of the place from which they believe Mohammed went into heaven the dome of the rock in each
Jerusalem and on the other side of that could you expect the Israelis to negotiate negotiate away
their claim to Jerusalem as the center of their land that's deep with them and it's not just a
history question or a legal rights question it's a moral question with both of them and if they let
go of that how would it threaten the wider sense of their history and who they are in the moral
order that they belong to. So that's an example of the clusters of moral values that
they've got to hold on to so they don't unravel. The next thing that Pearson Little John point to
and it's a very important point is that they say the opposing sides in moral conflicts tend to
describe the issues using what they call incommensurate language that is they talk about the issues in
terms that just don't compute with the other that's connected to that cluster of moral values
that they're working with and this just doesn't compute for the other side so they tend to talk
past each other and they don't understand one another at all. In moral conflicts that we deal
within our own lives we tend to you know we tend to do this we avoid discussion of moral issues
especially in the United States because you know they're uncomfortable when they come up
so we don't talk about them and given that we don't know the different language in the way others
see it. We tend to see opponents on moral issues as people we don't know and can't relate to and
given that we tend to see them as villains or enemies. Beyond this Pearson Little John tell
us one more thing they tell us that people tend to oversimplify moral issues they tend to talk in
absolutes and those absolutes can sometimes justify moving to violence even when we're clearly wrong
and we think we're the good person we can justify violence on a clearly held moral position in a
conflict which can get dangerous. Let's take us some specific moral issues that we confront today
and apply Pearson Little John's description of how a moral conflict works and why it's so difficult
to those. Let's talk about an obvious one that's very present in the United States today and that's
the question of whether abortion should be legal or illegal. Now that is framed by both sides in
this debate as a moral issue with each side viewing the other as wrong. One side says abortion is
killing it's killing an unborn baby. The other side views a government prohibition that would be enforced
as a violation of the woman's right to control her own body and what happens in it. Each side
sees that very much in moral terms but the language doesn't compute with the other. Each
side views the other as advocating a violation of a moral principle that they hold dear so that's
not something you're going to compromise or negotiate away very well. Those values of each
side are embedded in wider moral clusters that those people hold on to in wider moral orders.
One is focused on having a legitimate authority and enforce clear moral standards that they believe
the society needs to hold on to and the other side is focused on ensuring individual freedoms and
rights which are hard one especially more recently one for women to control their own bodies and
surrender on that one issue poses a threat to the wider cluster of values that's involved.
Also the language that the two sides use in this argument is incommensurate in
Pearson and Little John's terms. The arguments they present the claims that they make simply do not
compute with one another because they're talking in those two different moral systems and they talk
past each other so they don't really engage in a discussion that could lead to any agreement or
conclusion. Beyond that what they do on both sides is they tend to oversimplify greatly. Now
oversimplifying is very useful when we're making an adversarial case presenting to the public.
Slogans are very helpful in radio and television and in news but slogans also oversimplify and you
have a classic case of that in this conflict. On the one side you have people identified by the
slogan therefore in favor of the right to life and on the other side they're in favor of the right
to choose. We put these out as simple statements and we reduce this deep moral conflict that's
very complex and has histories on both sides to a couple of slogans that are also incommensurate
language passing beyond one another without really engaging. So we oversimplify and that
makes it worse. Now we can go a little beyond what Pearson and Little John tell us here because we
can go back to lecture four when we talked about perception and if you remember in that lecture
we discussed what psychologists call the fundamental attribution error. I said at the beginning of this
lecture that moral conflicts give us the fundamental attribution error writ large.
That's the case in this conflict. We're very tempted to say that about to say about the other
side he or she advocates that or does that or does those things because that's the way he is.
That's how he feels. That's just the way he is. That's his character and when we do that what we
do is exaggerate and solidify that fundamental attribution error and what happens is that's
the way he is or that's his character readily morphs into that's what he does because he's evil
and now we're connecting the problem with the person which is quite the opposite of what
Fisher and Yuri tell us and we get very stuck with that. It is in fact pretty difficult for us to
comprehend that the persons on the other side of a conflict that's a moral conflict is very
important to us. It's very hard to comprehend that those people over there are basing their actions
ethically on a coherent moral code in which they sincerely believe and therefore behaving
morally within the subjective values that they hold and are committed to. Very hard for us to do
so we tend to commit that fundamental attribution error and then conversely you know what happens
they're over there having the same problem when they look at us so they tend to see us as
evil ourselves. That makes moral conflict awfully, awfully difficult to deal with. Let's go look at
another example. Another one that's here and present in the United States and is currently
being argued and it works its way through courts. This is the moral issue that's in place in the
question of whether same-sex couples should be legally allowed to marry. That's framed by both
sides as a moral issue so it fits our definition. One side asserts that that prohibition of gay
marriage violates the moral principle of equal rights so they're advocating that gays should
be allowed to marry. The other side asserts that sexual relationships of same-sex partners are
sinful and they shouldn't be condoned by society. Wow opposite sides clearly framing as a moral
conflict. Each side is viewing the other's position here as advocating a violation of a moral value
that it regards as really imperative. The values in this dispute are both on both sides are
embedded in values clusters that represent a wider moral order that people adhere to
and surrendering on the one point about whether same-sex couples should be allowed to marry one
way or the other has some threat value for the rest of the moral code that the two sides are
attached to the moral clusters that they hold on to so it's very problematic that way. Once again
the language is incommensurate in Pearson Little John's terms. They talk past each other. One side
talks in terms of marriage as a sacred sacrament ordained by God that's produced for the primary
purpose of creating children and raising them well. The other thinks and talks in terms of marriage
as a union of two persons based on mutual love for the purpose of joy and comfort that everyone
should have a right to. In commensurate language once again we're talking past one another. Both
sides once again oversimplify and some fortunately a relatively small minority view this conflict
as something that allows for justification of violence so they could act on that in a violent
way. They do that both with the issue of abortion and the issue of gay marriage. Fortunately it's a
very small minority. So two examples there are moral conflicts to right here in the United States
and some other countries as well and they appear to be utterly intractable. Beyond that we haven't
finished complicating it yet. Beyond that we need to note that moral conflicts once they're engaged
tend to develop histories and long histories in which positions harden because people can't get
them resolved. So they're struggling with this they're seeing each other through those fundamental
attribution errors and violence is occurring so they tend to develop histories where things get
uglier and longer and more complex. Each side treats the other as the enemy sees them as morally
inferior and sometimes they go to the extent of dehumanizing them and doing that. Well the multiple
and complex issues that are reduced and oversimplified get treated that way as simple moral imperatives
and when people act in that way they do behaviors that multiply and come and make more complex
the conflict that's occurring. As this goes on the opponent's actions are viewed as being some kind
of grave moral offenses that justify revenge and violent responses and when they're treated in that
way and justify violent responses someone acts in that way and then a crime is committed or some
harm is done that becomes a new moral issue and that increases the complexity. So these things
develop histories. How long did they last? Well you know someone wisely said that resentments don't
die when people do. They last for generations and the anger and the resentment can go on and on
and multiply and harden as these things happen. We can think of some examples from history.
One of the examples for me because I grew up in the state of Kentucky so one of the great
examples of moral conflict going on for generations is the classic feud in Kentucky and West Virginia
between the Hatfields and the McCoys. Two families, one in Kentucky the other in Virginia.
Well there's dispute about it all but that appears to have begun with the murder of a McCoy who was a
Union soldier by a pro-Confederate Hatfield. It was exacerbated then apparently when a McCoy
was charged with crossing a state line in order to illegally vote on the other side of the border.
Now both sides framed this whole thing in the context of the Civil War which each side viewed
which each side viewed as a moral crusade and what happened was starting from that first murder
they traded killings back and forth for generations and they lost track of the original issue.
They thought the other was evil and they fought them out. Hatfields and McCoys through generations.
Fortunately some years ago the families got together and actually officially buried the
hatchet and put an end to that one but the conflict went on framed morally for decades.
Let's talk about another example. I live now in the southwest in Arizona where I teach
and there we have a marvelously deep history of the southwest with the missionaries coming over
and the many Native American tribes and I've really enjoyed getting into that history and there's
some deep moral conflict that takes place over a great deal of time there. One that's very central
there is that the Franciscan missionaries when they came over really looked at the Native American
shamans as being in the way of converting people to Christianity and they thought the shamans were
evil and so believing that and believing they needed to destroy their influence they actually
had many of those shamans publicly hanged or beaten to death. So the shamans were killed. Well I
don't know how the Pueblo Indians felt about that but it certainly wasn't very good. They viewed it
as a violation. They viewed it as murder and that went on and it's an interesting thing in the
history of the southwest that there was a point in 1680 when the Pueblo Indians did a great revolt
and they killed many of the Spaniards really focusing on the priests and literally drove
the Spanish settlers out of Texas and New Mexico. It took time for the Spanish to get back.
How long did that one last? Well you know what a couple of centuries later in the 1890s
when the Native Americans were sort of trying to get their sense of identity back and really
beginning to recover in some good ways they began doing more of their dances and the local whites
felt that this might be devil worship and would lead to more violence so they enforced a ban on
Native dances. That was the 1890s a couple of hundred years after that Pueblo rebellion and
now it's three centuries later and you know what Native Americans in the southwest where I live
many of them are still very secret about their religious beliefs and practices.
They really are afraid to share that with whites and it's become a code with them
that you don't tell whites about those things and I don't blame them for being reluctant to share
that information. Moral conflict over time hardens and resentments don't die when people do so it's
there. Today we've got these major moral conflicts that really do confound us and they seem to defy
our efforts at resolution and they have these deep and complex histories that have taken place
over time very much the same as and sometimes much more complex than those two examples I just
gave you from Kentucky and the Southwest. For instance this Israel-Palestine conflict
both of them have centuries old claims to the same territory that are tied to their histories
and their cultures and to their moral values and religious beliefs. Those claims are based on
their understandings of their own religious histories. That's really tricky and it's many
centuries old and it's moral conflict and it's complex. There's also the very deadly moral conflict
between Shiite and Sunni Muslims. That one continues to confound efforts to build a unified Iraq today
and it foments mistrust between Iran and Iran's Arab neighbors.
The roots of that one date back to the 7th century into a dispute over the leadership of Islam
and there's a long history that involves a lot of pain and bloodshed between those two sides.
Difficult one for them to just go ahead and sort out. So we're confronted with very difficult ones
as we attempt to do this today. Well that would raise the question is this thing hopeless? Is there
any hope for resolution of these kinds of things? There really is hope. To begin with
there are some very smart and very good people working very hard at it. There are great many
researchers and practitioners working hard on this challenge. There are academic institutes that
exist precisely to study methods to achieve peaceful resolution and these have multiplied in
recent decades and they're producing a growing body of research. Now I'm not going to tell you
there's a silver bullet anywhere near in sight but there are helpful insights being produced
at a good rate. So good people, smart people are working at this very hard.
In addition to that you know there are diplomats that have engaged successfully in this kind of
thing at least in some issues. There was an interesting one not very long ago when former
President Clinton of the United States flew to North Korea to negotiate the release of two U.S.
women who had illegally crossed into North Korea. This was a moral issue on both sides. The North
Koreans saw this as spies coming into their territory. These were bad people that needed to
be dealt with and Americans saw this as two innocent women who just may have innocently
strayed across the border and the brutal North Koreans were treating them badly.
Mr. Clinton was able to go over and do the conversation and get a breakthrough and get
the thing resolved. So there are diplomats who are able to do this kind of thing and there are also
internationally recognized mediators who are engaged in the effort and they're adding to
the understanding and making progress. It's notable that William Uri of Fisher and Uri who gave us
the principles for negotiation. Uri was involved with helping Chechnya and Russia work out a cease
fire in that terrible conflict that was taking place. He went over there and helped them work that
out. So there are good people working at it and they're gaining some success.
In addition to that, there are some specific processes that we've talked about in this course,
some specific tactics that actually have been found to be possibly helpful in dealing with moral
conflicts. One of those is reframing. Well, we've talked about that. Let's define it again for our
purposes here. What you do when you frame an issue is you decide the terms in which it's
to be understood. It's about this. You can reframe it and think about it differently. So if you change
the way you think about it and describe, which requires changing the language and gets you
beyond that problem of incommensurate language, and if a mediator can help the parties do this,
you can actually make progress in resolving a conflict that's a moral conflict. So that can
help you get around that problem of incommensurate language and the intractableness of the issues
that are there. If you can get people to see an issue in a different way, then they may have a chance
to compromise because it's less about a moral issue and more about something else or even achieve a
win-win. The other kind of process or tactic actually that's been shown to be useful here
is the tacting of fractionating. We mentioned that one in our last lecture. What you do in
fractionating is you, when you've got a complex issue with a whole lot going on in it, you find
one issue that really may be amenable to working with and you take that one and you try to solve it.
You break it into its parts and you start with a part that looks like you can negotiate a resolution.
You talk about that and you try to work out a solution. That can permit a partial resolution
and then you can work later on the other parts. Part of why moral conflicts are so intractable
is because this hostility and mistrust that's built up over time. But with fractionating,
if I can get people to agree on some part of the conflict and how they're going to resolve that,
get that agreement into place and get it to work, the hostility can be reduced and you can begin
to build trust again and you can begin to get breakthroughs in an incremental way that way.
You can also develop empathy between people. That's the third kind of thing you can use.
If you can get people to see and understand each other and begin to talk in ways that they can
understand, that demonizing and that kind of negativity can be broken down and you can see
the other as a human being and you can begin to break through and get mutual trust and understanding.
We'll do some heartwarming examples of this actually in our next lecture when we talk about some successes.
Fourth, I want to note that you can build mutual trust by combining that fractionating
with empathy development and with some patience. You can move things in a direction that really
does help get us to where we can have solutions, at least partial solutions, at least progress
in dealing with moral conflicts. So it's not hopeless. There's progress taking place.
I want to note also before we leave this subject that this business of moral conflicts doesn't
just happen on that large international level or large issues of public discussion and public
policy at the national level. It happens in our own lives. We also see another person's
actions sometimes as unethical or dishonest or unfair. We tend often in our personal lives
to see issues as moral ones. And when we do that, we frame our issue in these terms,
we trap ourselves in black and white thinking, and we render negotiation extremely, extremely
difficult. When we do that, what happens? We present it that way. We say you're not being fair. The
other party reacts defensively and we've set off managing the conflict in a way that's structured
as a moral conflict and we're not going to get it solved. In our personal lives, you know,
what I strongly suggest, don't go to a moral level unless you have to. If you're thinking that way,
try to reframe it. Try to present your position as an I statement as you can. Instead of saying
something like that's not fair to the other person, say, you know, that puts me at a disadvantage
because and explain what the disadvantage is. If you're not talking about fair, but you are
talking about disadvantage, you've reframed in a way that's going to be useful. So all of this
about moral conflict, we can bring down to some of the conflicts that happen in our moral lives.
That's not where we want to go. We don't want to frame as a moral conflict unless it really is that.
Okay. Of course, moral conflicts really are sometimes unavoidable. And when that happens,
if they're real, we do have to draw a line and stand upon our morals. So what can we conclude at this
point? Obviously, moral conflict is just profoundly, profoundly challenging. But we're working on
understanding what makes it so difficult. We're getting better at that. And we are finding ways
to break through and get help resolving at least some moral conflicts. So what's our summary then?
What we've observed so far, moral conflicts are presenting an exceptionally difficult challenge.
They always do. They often appear to be, and they sometimes really are, absolutely intractable.
Moral conflicts generate complex histories, and they're in perceived moral outrageous,
so they harden and develop over time. When we deal with moral conflicts,
there are some ways that will help. And sometimes these ways help. The key ones we know so far are
reframing and fractionation and building empathy and trust. Those tactics actually have been shown
to be helpful. These also can be applied not just to those large conflicts, but remember them when
we feel like we're in a moral conflict in our own personal lives. All right. I can't give you an
exact assignment for something to go do on a moral conflict. What I'd rather do in this case is give
you three questions, important questions to consider for yourself about moral conflicts.
One is consider this. When, if ever, might violence be justified in addressing a moral conflict?
It's helpful to have a considered view on that point. Secondly, when, if ever,
is tolerance of another's view on a serious moral issue going to be morally wrong versus morally
right? And thirdly, might it help us deal with moral conflicts if we got past the taboo against
discussing moral issues with our friends and our colleagues? Maybe we could get better with
dealing with them if we talked about them more often. Three questions to consider. All right.
We've done a general discussion of moral conflict and why it's so difficult, and we've talked about
some history examples of moral conflict, and we've talked about hope for doing better.
We want to do one more lecture on moral conflict. What we want to do is take this to real examples,
and I want to give us more hope by pointing to some fairly recent, very successful stories
about the handling of moral conflict. There is hope. There have been some real successes.
We'll talk about them in lecture 21.
