Well, in our last lecture, we really talked seriously about moral conflicts. Conflicts
that are framed in terms of a moral issue where each side feels the other is on supporting
something that's actually morally wrong. And these pose really special challenges because
they appear utterly intractable. They seem to be what we can't compromise about or even
negotiate let alone win-win. They sometimes even justify violence. So moral conflict
is a particular challenge and I described it in that last lecture as the frontier of
our work on managing conflict better. But that doesn't mean we've really got to accept
defeat. So what I want to do in this lecture is talk about three examples in which what
happened was we got a real success in an effort to deal with a moral conflict. There are three
examples from recent history. In each one of those, I want you to notice that there are
these three things, three strategies that we talked about, building empathy, fractionating
and reframing. Some combination of them will appear in each of the strategies we discuss.
Well, let's get started. Let's go back to 1978. What happened in 1978 was the negotiation
of what are called the Camp David Accords between Egypt and Israel. And that was done
at Camp David here in Washington, D.C. What was that about? Well, there had been a long-standing
conflict between Egypt and Israel. Notice that it was framed really as a moral conflict.
The Arab nations, including Egypt, really seriously challenged Israel's right to exist
as a country on land taken from the Islamic Palestinians. And conversely, Israel strongly
asserted its right as a moral right to exist based on its ancient historical occupation
of its historic homeland and its right to live free from persecution, which required a homeland
after the Holocaust in World War II. So both of these sides treated this as a moral conflict.
This conflict really had a lot of extensive, very ugly history to it. There were documented
atrocities on both sides. There's a history of bloodshed and dispossession of people on
both sides. There were three costly wars fought, 1948, 1967, 1973. Israel had emerged
victorious from all of those with a lot of help from our Western allies. So at this point
in 1978, Israel occupied territory captured from Arab nations. And the territory that's
of concern for this example is the Sinai Peninsula, which was historically a part of Egypt. This
conflict really appeared to be beyond some kind of peaceful resolution at this point.
Here are the major players, three people involved, three key people at least. One is President
Anwar Sadat of Egypt, second one is Premier Menachem Begin of Israel, and the third is
President Jimmy Carter of the United States. This effort, this peaceful solution, was actually
initiated by President Sadat of Egypt. At that point, the Carter administration had
really been focused on attempting to restart the Geneva conference, this time including
a larger number and including a specific Palestinian delegation, which hadn't been included in
the talks up until then. They were looking for a large-scale solution to the whole thing
by bringing everybody to the table. What did Sadat do? Sadat just lacked confidence in
that Geneva conference approach. He just didn't think it would work to bring all the parties
together and frame a grand peace. He thought that was beyond reach. So what he did instead
was he boldly announced an intention to go to Israel himself and begin discussions. And
he did that. Meanwhile, the Carter administration is still focused on seeking an overall solution.
But what Sadat is doing in this case is he's actually going to shift to a strategy of fractionating
the conflict. What he did was zero in on the Egypt-Israel issue that's specifically in
play here to talk about this, and that is the matter of the Sinai Peninsula. He wanted
to divide the overall conflict into its parts and focus on the Sinai Peninsula.
Then let's talk about Begin. What did Manak and Begin do? Given that narrowed focus that
Sadat brought to him, Begin signaled a willingness to really discuss the issue of the Sinai Peninsula.
What he said was, you know what, we might be willing to return the Sinai if we could be
guaranteed a secure peace. So there was a period there where Begin was publicly favoring
reconvening the Geneva conference, but in the same time he and his Likud party were engaged
in secret negotiations with Egypt. Fractionation in this instance, it turns out, served Israel's
strategic interests. Strategically, it really would have helped Israel a whole lot to secure
a solid peace on at least one of its borders so it couldn't get invaded from all sides
at once again, which had happened before. So there was a strategic interest. In this
case, it was big enough to bring Israel to the table beyond the problem of the moral
issue. That's Sadat's role in Begin's role. What about President Carter?
Well, Mr. Carter at this point, to his credit, was able to recognize that there's an opportunity
for progress to be made here. So he shifted to this incremental approach. There's some
evidence that he had read a Brookings Institution report suggesting that an incremental approach
using fractionation might be more successful at about the same time. So he turned on strategies
and shifted. And what he did was invite Sadat and Begin to come to the United States and
they offered to host them at Camp David in order to negotiate a peace settlement. They
accepted the invitation. Mr. Carter served as host and they came to Camp David to negotiate
in September of 1978. It's interesting here that in those negotiations, there was a conscious
effort to draw on the principles for negotiation that Fisher and Urie had been working out
because those overlapped in time. So principle negotiation was being employed at this conference.
Now, when we talk about this, I don't want to cast this as a story in which President
Carter saved Israel and Egypt from each other. Carter played a very important role, but we
do have to give primary credit to Sadat and Begin, who represented their countries boldly
in a very difficult situation and achieved a peace. But Mr. Carter did a wonderful job
of keeping them at the negotiating table, even when it was very difficult. He made some
really interesting efforts to build empathy there that seemed to have worked. There was
one that I heard him speak about once when he was being interviewed, in which he talked
about something that cut right to the core of the morality issue. What he did was he
told them, each that he respected their faith, and he invited them to pray with him. So you
had this phenomenon of Mr. Carter, an evangelical Christian, and Mr. Sadat, a Muslim, and Mr.
Begin, a Jewish person praying together for their success in this negotiation. They did
that, and it probably helped build some empathy. I'm speculating on the building of empathy,
but I don't see how it could have gone otherwise. When the negative emotions ran very high at
one point and it looked like things were going to run apart, Carter engaged in shuttle diplomacy
moving back and forth between the two. He was serving as a mediator, a helper to resolve
things, as we've described in earlier lectures. There was one point when it looked like things
were really not going to work out and it seemed impossible. When he took them over to Gettysburg
and showed them the battlefield and they walked through and he said, if we can solve this
and come together as a country, you too can work this. So Mr. Carter worked very steadily
to keep them at the table, keep hope, get them to know each other, and build empathy.
One of the other wonderful things that Carter did, though, had to do with reframing. And
that story kind of works like this. The date for this one that's best documented is September
17th. And there was a point here where they almost had things together, but there was
an important point that Israel needed to agree to before Sadat could sign the accords. And
Mr. Bagan was just feeling unwilling to do that. Mr. Carter went to see Bagan and he
took with him pictures for Bagan's grandchildren, had their names written on the pictures. And
he laid out the pictures and showed them to him. And Bagan became emotional with this
and Carter said, you know, this is not about Sadat and you, it's not about us, it's about
them, it's about the future. So Mr. Carter succeeded in reframing the discussion to being
one about the future of children and grandchildren in Egypt and Israel. And on that basis, with
that reframing, Bagan was willing to sign and he agreed. And the Camp David accords
were signed. They led then to the Egypt-Israel peace treaty of 1979. Sadat and Bagan shared
the Nobel Peace Prize for 1978 for having accomplished that. And you know, that treaty
between Egypt and Israel continues in place today. And that's a treaty in the volatile
Middle East that's never been violated. Hardliners on both sides, extraneously, objected. Mr.
Sadat one Homan was assassinated in 1981 by one of his countrymen and Bagan was roundly
condemned by many of his countrymen for agreeing to this, but the treaty held. Notice what
happens in that story. There's empathy built. There's the fractionating that Mr. Sadat initiated
and there's the reframing that was so helpful in finishing it and making it happen at the
end. So you can do that with a very difficult moral conflict that's already got a long,
complex and difficult history. That's example number one that I wanted to share with you.
Now let's talk about another one. Let's turn our attention to the START treaty, the Strategic
Arms Reduction Treaty, START 1 in this instance, the first one that was negotiated. It's an
excellent example of fractionation once again that can occur. This one is between the United
States and the Soviet Union. During the Cold War, the United States and the Soviet Union
each framed that conflict, that global conflict, as a moral conflict. Each saw the other as
a mortal enemy and each saw the other as somewhat evil. The United States filled with a global
defense strategy and believing that the Soviet Union thought to conquer and rule the world
imposing communism on it, that strategy was played on a worldwide basis. The Soviet Union
on the other hand viewed the United States as a threat to its very existence and the
two countries fought proxy wars in Korea and Vietnam and in the Middle East and in Africa.
There were proxy wars being fought where we engaged in various degrees all the time holding
each other at bay with nuclear weapons. The most notable one of these that came to near
world destruction was in 1962 with the Cuban Missile Crisis. Each of these countries is
defining the other in morally negative terms and condemning the other on those terms. President
Reagan called the USS or the evil empire. So we're viewing this as a moral conflict.
The result of all of that, given that both of these countries had nuclear warms, arms
was called the balance of terror. That was what we called it in popular jargon. In military
circles that balance of terror, which we called it and I read in the newspapers in those days,
was called mutually assured destruction. Mutually assured destruction, mad for short
MAD. Well, where were we with this? That's a serious
moral conflict. Unable to unwind their arms race in any single step, these countries remained
deeply suspicious of one another. Each saw potential threat from the other and they couldn't
see a way of reducing the level of threat, even though they could see a value that might
be achieved that they could do that. So how did that get to where we could talk about it?
There was a face to face meeting that occurred between Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev.
The two men got along reasonably well in that meeting. It turned out to be cordial and a
certain amount of empathy was established between them. They began to understand each other a bit
as human beings. Not long after getting to know Mr. Gorbachev a bit, President Reagan proposed
negotiating an agreement to reduce and or limit the number of nuclear weapons. Wasn't a proposal
to do the whole thing? It was a proposal once again to fractionate. Could we just bite off this
piece of the great arms race and see if we can bring things down a bit doing that? Mr. Gorbachev
agreed. The negotiations were scheduled and they began. Now these negotiations took a whole lot
longer than the intense couple of weeks it took to get through the Camp David negotiations. They
in fact went on for years. They addressed fixed missile sites, submarine launch missiles. This
was a huge complex issue. Strategic bombers, nuclear warheads. It was very complex and it
required figuring out how they were going to mutually verify what was agreed to. So they
had a lot to talk about. So it took some years to work this out. But the treaty working this out
was finally agreed to. It was signed in 1991. President Reagan was no longer in office. It was
signed by President George H. W. Bush in 1991. It went into effect in 1994. His provisions were
really interesting. They limited the two nations to a maximum of 6,000 nuclear warheads. That's an
awful lot. You can do plenty with that. What else did they do? They had extensive intricate
provisions for verification. Some of these are interesting. There were 365 B-52 bombers in the
United States flown to Davis Mothen Air Force Base which is down there in Arizona where our
university is close to where I live. They split them in five pieces and left them dismantled
there on the ground for three months so that the Russians could fly their satellites over and
confirm the dismantling. I've seen pictures of that. So they did that. And there were similar
verifications that we were able to do there. There's a Titan Missile Museum in Arizona near
Tucson where we were allowed to keep one Titan Missile base with one missile in place unloaded.
It's there as a museum. You can visit it today. And the Russians were able to verify that there's
a concrete door over it that's locked into place, half open and half closed, and it can't be moved.
So they trusted but they verified. They worked this thing out and they achieved a start one treaty
based on fractionation of their big conflict. When that treaty ran out, its time was up,
they were able to negotiate again. And just recently, a further extension was negotiated
by President Obama and President Medvedev of Russia. So we're still going with that one and
we've been able to reduce the nuclear armaments a bit further. So that's a second really strong
example of reducing a moral conflict. Now I want to give you a third example.
For this one, let's bring this home to the United States and talk about what two Western
governors were able to do on the very morally loaded issue of taking care of the environment.
The two governors I want to talk about, one was very much an obvious liberal, a strong liberal,
the other is a strong staunch conservative. One was the governor of Utah, the other was the
governor of Oregon. And what they did was find a way to reach agreement for governors on how
governors ought to manage environmental issues and they did it by carefully reframing the question
that they were addressing. So if you think about this for a moment, issues of environmental
management in the United States are typically framed in moral terms. Environmentalists talk
about in moral terms about saving the planet. On the other side, people talk about destroying jobs.
Those practicing policies and activities that are condemned by the environmentalists feel
really unjustly and personally attacked and they tend to respond very defensively with scorn.
Each side in this struggle feels that it's morally right and that the other is morally wrong. So this
thing is very much felt and structured in most conversation, most debate, as a kind of moral
conflict. Direct real communication between these two is very unlikely. It doesn't work very well.
So into this scene, into this scene, let's bring the western governors to discuss the problem.
Environmental management is very much something that western governors have to deal with. They are,
after all, in these large western states where there are huge issues of environment. In my own
state of Arizona, things like water are just huge. There's nowhere near enough of it from the number
of people there and the more that are coming. There are issues of environment like that that are
enormous that have to be dealt with. So the western governors have this thing in common. They're
concerned about how they're going to do things and they had discussions going about how they
could reach some agreement in terms of what they ought to do. But some of them were very liberal
and some of them were very conservative. So how could they reach agreement? In the late 1990s,
at the western governor's conference, one that was held up in Alaska, they had been having one of
their governor's only discussions where just the governors met and talked. And the rest of the
group that were there asked two governors, John Kitzaber of Oregon, the liberal, and Mike Levitt
of Utah, the conservative, if they could come together and try to draft a common statement
that the association could make about how to manage environmental issues. Now these two
men are so much from opposite ends of the political spectrum, especially on matters
of the environment. So what did they do? Let me note as we begin to move into their reframing,
a thing that I was able to have a conversation, actually several conversations with Governor
Levitt about this. And he told me that these two men knew each other and had already achieved a
level of respect for one another, even though they were on opposite ends of the political
spectrum. So these are a couple of guys with heavy responsibility. They share this business of
being a governor of a western state. And there are two men who, though their politics are different,
have a lot of respect for one another. So they sat down to work this out. What did they do?
Well, as they were struggling to work it out, arguing over things, there was some moment,
and it's not clear, I don't think with either of them the way they described the story, it's not
clear with them. But one of them asked, is there anything about this that we can agree on?
And so they set out to make a list of the points of agreement that they had between them.
They wrote it out on a piece of paper. They sketched it out and they looked at it and it
looked pretty promising. And what they were doing to get that points of agreement thing was they
reframed it. Instead of debating the issues on which they differed, they changed the question.
And they said, let's consider, let's brainstorm what we agree on. So they reframed the discussion.
And what they focused on were principles that should be applied in making the decisions
about those policies rather than what the policies should be. So it was a list of eight principles
that they worked out. Well then in June 1998, the Western Governors Association held a conference.
They took this, Kitzhaber and Levitt had their staffs work this up. They invested some political
capital in it. They brought it back to the Western Governors. And what came of that next
was this conference that was held in June of 1998, where what they did was they held a conference on
shared environmental doctrine. They did some wonderful things for conflict management.
They invited about 400 identified stakeholders from all sides on this issue. They structured
it into various questions arising from these principles that Governors Kitzhaber and Levitt
had identified. They structured it into breakout groups. And they had a facilitator for each
breakout group. I was privileged to be one of those facilitators. It was wonderful to get to be there.
They had a governor host each breakout group. And they had people from all sides discuss an issue.
It was held in Phoenix, Arizona, and it's close for me to get to. What those breakout sessions did,
among other things, is first, produce some human understanding. They produced empathy the way there
had been empathy between Levitt and Kitzhaber to begin with. Environmentalists softened a lot
when they heard people on the other side really talk about how that felt.
One of those instances in the session that I participated in involved, you had a number of
environmentalists talking about the degradation of land caused by ranching, raising cattle on the
land in the West. And there was this rugged old rancher on the other side who listened to a whole
lot of that. And then he spoke up. And he said, you know what? What's wrong with what you're saying
is that we're all going to participate in the benefits that might come from it. But only a few
of us are really going to pay the cost. And you're asking me to pay the cost. And he said,
I'm the fifth generation of my family to own and operate this ranch. And we've always prided
ourselves on taking good care of the land and developing it. And he said, I don't want to be
the member of my family who loses it. And when he said that, and you could see the emotion in him,
there began to be real communication across those sides. Governor Levitt was the host of that
session. He sat there and listened. It was a deeply moving moment. And by the time it was
finished, those people were all talking to each other very, very well. So what was the overall
result of that, of that conference? What happened was that the report outs from the groups were
put together and they were refined by the staffs. What the governors did then was build a set of
principles, which are called the in Libra Principles. It's a term Governor Levitt is very well
wedded to, believes in. And that set of principles, the Libra Principles, were adopted by the Western
governors and used and subsequently adopted by the National Governors Association in the
United States. It's a simple set. I'll give them to you in shorthand rather quickly here.
The first principle said national standards, neighborhood solutions. The second principle
said collaboration, not polarization. The third principle said reward results, not programs.
The fourth principle said use good science for facts and good process for setting priorities.
The next principle said markets before mandates.
Next one said recognition of both the benefits and the costs of environmental efforts.
The next one said solutions that we arrive at need to transcend political boundaries.
And the final one said change a heart, change a nation. Nice set of principles to follow
that were adopted and they've conducted another, a number of conferences since listening to people
and trying to work with those policies. Now I want you to notice something about all three
of these examples. There's something that's paradoxical and that is that the willingness
and the ability of the people on all sides to take and defend a strong stand may be essential.
At least it's important in breaking through to a genuine negotiation. These characters who did
these things and achieved these agreements were not the middle of the road folks who see the gray.
They were people who saw things in clear black and white and they're people who really stood on
their principles. Begin stood on his principles. Sadat stood on his. Ronald Regan stood clearly
on his and didn't compromise. Gorbachev stood on his and Levitt and Ketsober both all stood on
their principles here. So all of these men held strong convictions. They stood by their principles.
There isn't any compromising here. There's gaining empathy, there's fractionating,
and then there's reframing to find something that they can all really strongly agree on.
So that's three good important principles or three good important examples that we can see
where with a serious moral conflict people were able to come together and achieve something like
a resolution. Examples of resolving moral conflict. There's plenty of hope there.
All right let's try to summarize this. We've got these three marvelous examples. There are others
but those are three that I find particularly compelling. They're examples of successful
management of a complex apparently intractable moral conflict. I wanted to remember how much is
involved here with building empathy and trust, doing the fractionating and doing the reframing
because those are approaches that have already been demonstrated to work and that can be
successful in a moral conflict. Note too that these are not examples of leaders abandoning or
compromising on principles. So it's not about having to compromise away but it is about achieving a
win-win on the fractionated issues the way we've reframed them. So we can do that. If empathy and
trust building and fractionating and reframing can help to achieve agreements in these moral
conflicts you know what they can help us in our personal lives as well. We do a lot of thinking
of conflicts as moral in our own personal lives. What do we do with those in our communities,
in our organizations and at home? So what we could do is when we're tempted to describe a conflict
in moral terms with someone else or we're feeling it that way what we can do is remember these
examples look for empathy, fractionate and reframe. We can bring these down to our level with moral
conflicts too. Here's your assignment for this lecture. Remember that all of us hold beliefs
on some issues that we see as moral conflicts. I want to suggest that you identify one or two
moral conflicts on which you have a strong opinion, a real moral commitment and then ask and try to
answer for yourself whether without compromising you might be able to agree with some reframing of
that issue. Really wrestle with that and work with it. Do that in order to seek a resolution on some
part of it so that you can carve out something, fractionate and do a negotiation. Test that out
in your own mind and see if you can see the possibilities for a better solution. Okay that's
moral conflict. Where are we going to go from here? We've spoken a great deal about conflict and
conflict management and conflict resolution getting things to where they're resolved.
There's one more big issue that we really need to talk with here in terms of conflict and getting
our own conflicts resolved and that is its aftermath. You know conflict management doesn't
necessarily end when we get a conflict resolved. We've still got work to do in following through
and cleaning up damage and healing broken trusts and relationships. So that's what we're going to
talk about in our next lecture, Healing Conflicts Aftermath.
