In this lecture, I want to look at what I think of as the most overlooked aspect of conflict
management.
This is the part that takes place over time.
Probably after what's thought of as a resolution has been achieved, or perhaps after the parties
have even parted, or maybe they've just decided to carry on.
It's overlooked in our lives, it's less studied by scholars, and frankly I'm not clear why
it's less studied by scholars, because it's obviously important.
What I'm talking about in this lecture is what I call the aftermath of conflict.
Managing conflict doesn't end when you get an agreement.
There's the after part that goes on, and that aftermath includes what are called emotional
residues, the feelings that linger and stick around and come up again, and the damage trust
that might have taken place, and the relational distance that's happened, the hurt feelings.
That stuff that's going on, how do we bring people back to whole, how do we bring the
relationship back to whole, and how does this happen over time?
That's what we need to talk about in this lecture.
How come there's all this aftermath to deal with?
First of all, nobody's perfect in conflict management, not I, not anyone else that I
know of.
All of us do some dysfunctional things when we're dealing with conflict, and so there
tend to be some hurt feelings, and there are often damages to trust that take place.
Those damages don't just disappear, it's not really all gone.
I may feel better in the moment, but when I remember what happened, those bad feelings
and that lack of trust will come back.
That's why they call it residues, they're there, and we can bring them back just by remembering.
Even a well-intentioned effort at resolving a conflict can sometimes yield a discovery
that the actual differences here can't be bridged, and somebody's going to have to lose,
and losing, even with the best of intentions on everybody's part, still hurts, and the
hurt just doesn't stop.
So it doesn't have to be dysfunctional, it can hurt anyway.
When that damage continues to happen, there's a tendency for relationships to harden, resentments
to linger, and new conflicts to grow out of that.
So here we are in this lecture talking about managing conflicts after-mess.
What we want to do here is explain the concepts that are involved with managing, the concept
of acceptance, apology, amends, forgiveness, reconciliation, and healing, and I'm going
to offer you some suggestions for accomplishing each of these.
I also want to note here that in some conflicts the aftermath is just too great to overcome.
The breaches of trust may be too great, the emotional harm too painful, the relationship
too broken, and so we do also have to discuss termination here, letting go and moving on.
So let's get started.
Let's start with the problem of having to lose.
Sometimes 20% or so is the rule of thumb, sometimes we can't get a win-win resolution.
And if we assume that in that leftover 20%, maybe we can take care of half of those with
a compromise, that would leave us with 10% or something like it where somebody's got
to lose.
What if I'm the loser?
I'm going to have to choose between accepting, escalating the conflict, and exiting, getting
out of there.
Those are my three choices.
We talked about them earlier.
Does that sound familiar to you because we actually talked about them when we talked
about the seven-step process?
How should I make this choice?
Start with acceptance.
That's the first one that I could try.
How do I do acceptance?
Well, it may be the best choice because no other person, no organization, no relationship
can ever really be able to meet all of our needs and wishes.
So there may be some things wrong that I've got to accept.
There'll always be some that aren't perfect.
In an important relationship, it's often reasonable to decide that the risk of escalating or the
cost of separating are just not worth it.
So my choice is to accept.
Now the key to accepting and doing that well is to fully take responsibility for this choice.
I talked about taking responsibility back when we talked about the seven-step process
as well.
Well, if I decided not to deal with this, I said I got to take responsibility for deciding
not to deal with it.
Same decision here.
If I'm choosing to accept this condition, I'm choosing that.
The other party isn't deciding to go ahead and keep offending me.
I'm choosing to live with this condition.
It's acceptance on my part.
We dealt with that in lectures 11 and 12 on the seven-step process.
I may have to work at this in the aftermath over time, though.
It's part of managing the aftermath.
And in virtually all couples and friendships and work relationships, there tend to be behaviors
of those other persons that we don't like, at least some behaviors, and we make this
choice.
We've decided they're not dealbreakers, so we're working at accepting them.
And that decision, though, doesn't have to be permanent.
I'm taking responsibility, but you know what?
I can still choose to negotiate again later or escalate or leave.
So acceptance for now is a choice that I can make.
And I might want to articulate that clearly to the other person that that's what I'm doing.
If I just can't manage to be okay with it, I can always change my mind and go back and
negotiate.
We could look at an example of that.
Remember Rebecca and Jane, our roommates from lecture one?
We've visited them several times.
What if they negotiated an agreement?
They had it worked out, and it wasn't going to work for Jane in one instance, so she's
now going to approach Rebecca and try to negotiate a temporary adjustment in that agreement.
How would that look?
Hey, Rebecca.
Hey.
How was class?
Oh, this public health seminar is really rough, but I'll get through it.
I know you will.
And, hey, only six more weeks to go.
Listen, I know you need to get back to studying, but I have to ask you a favor.
I know that Wednesdays are supposed to be quiet nights, but my book club really needs
the place to meet for the next two weeks.
Is there any chance we can work something out just for this week and next?
Sure, I guess.
I can probably go to the library and study those two nights.
Great.
Thanks.
So tell me about this new project you've started.
Well, that went smoothly.
It didn't seem to be very difficult.
Pretty reasonable thing to do.
And if you already have a pattern of negotiating and working things out with someone, that's
not that difficult to do, so you can always renegotiate and change your mind.
Let's talk about the next opportunity you might have or the next possibility to deal
with this if you're the loser.
What about escalation?
Escalation works this way.
It's going to involve additional costs and risks.
Escalate that's going to happen, but it might be the best available option.
How might I escalate?
This is a case where I might need to seek an ally in order to increase my power.
It might involve turning to official channels and getting a formal judgment.
Remember Ben from back in lecture 17, the custodian who had the back problem and he
didn't want to have to pick up the trash cans, and he didn't get an exemption from picking
up the trash cans, so he said he wanted a file of grievance.
His supervisor was fine with that.
Now, that's an escalation on Ben's part, and it can involve other things like threatening
the other party with consequences in order to secure more cooperation.
Frequently, it involves insisting on seeking mediation or counseling or arbitration, and
if that escalation leads to additional costs or anger or distance, then these consequences
are going to have to be managed no matter how it turns out.
It'll be harder, but still necessary to get to the point where everybody can just move
on if we've escalated a conflict, but that's what you'll want to do if keeping that feeling
and continuing to feel badly wouldn't work.
So escalation is an option.
What's the third option?
Third option is I can just leave.
It's the worst case scenario if I value the relationship, but it really is an option,
and we need to know that, and sometimes we need to just step up and do that.
Sometimes the conflict really can't be resolved.
A condition cannot be changed or will not be changed, and it should not be accepted.
So the best option might be to terminate a relationship.
This could be an important romantic relationship, a work relationship, or a friendship.
If you remember back to Mark Nepp's point about relational stages in that model we talked
about, he pointed out that most relationships necessarily are temporary because there are
too many relationships for us to fully manage on a close level all the time.
But terminating involves loss.
Loss always involves grieving, and I want us to note that I'm going to feel the loss
and have to grieve even if I'm getting out of a bad relationship.
I might be very relieved on one part, away from that job and how I was treated or away
from that mate who treated me so badly, but on the other hand I'm still going to have
to grieve because when I make that choice to exit, to terminate the relationship, I'm
also making a choice to let go of whatever it was I hoped that relationship would be,
what was my dream for it, what it was supposed to be.
I'm accepting the loss of what I was trying to get in that relationship and accepting
that I'm not going to get it.
I'm going to have to go ahead and feel that loss.
The best way through bad feelings is to go through them, go ahead and feel them.
A very wise man once said something to me about that.
He said, Michael, if you're going through hell, just don't stop.
I've cherished that statement.
That's what we need to do.
We need to go ahead and feel it and proceed through it and proceed with life anyway.
Feel it and keep moving and we'll get through it.
Also if you're doing that, you want to value your own and the other person's honesty and
courage in getting to that decision to terminate.
We don't honor that enough.
We think of the termination as a failure when a lot of the time it's getting honest about
a failure of the relationship that already happened and just getting real so we can move
on.
So sometimes termination is the best choice.
They do involve acceptance of the other party when we do them and that acceptance can be
a gift to myself and also a gift to the other party.
You want to be careful if you're going to terminate to not buttress that decision with
a lot of anger so that will cause you to do unnecessary harm.
Don't ruminate about it.
Don't charge things up.
Don't fill yourself with enough anger to try to say goodbye.
What you want to do if you're terminating is do it with what can be called a good goodbye.
Let's look at an example of that.
Remember Jack and Maria, the budding romance that didn't work out?
What would it look like if these people managed to do a good goodbye?
Maria, I wish our story had a happier ending.
I didn't want to say goodbye face to face and see you one last time.
Me too.
And we tried, right?
And I really did enjoy our time together and I appreciate your honesty even when it was
hard to hear.
Thanks Jack.
Now I wish things worked out for us but we have some great memories and he's still only
your mom's cheesecake recipe.
Yeah, you're right, I do.
Well, I should get going.
Me too.
Bye Jack.
Alright, maybe that one was a bit idealistic but you know you could do that.
Good goodbyes really do stay with us and some of the bad ones.
So if I'm parting, breaking off a relationship, it would be nice to work at making a good
ending to it with a good goodbye, useful tip.
Alright, what if there's a good resolution?
There are aftermath problems that can come with that.
Often, yes, with the very best of intentions, we're working on resolving a conflict and
you know what, we don't really do the perfect job of resolving it.
So even though we got through to a good resolution, we didn't have to accept, we didn't have
to believe, we got what we wanted but still in that process, because we didn't handle
it perfectly, we have created some painful emotional residues.
One example here is that in the heat of a conflict, when we're angry, we can say something
that really hurts the other person and we know we've said it, the minute it gets out
of our mouth, we can resent, we can wish we hadn't said it, but you can't take it back,
it's a thing about communication, it only goes one direction, once it's said it can't
be unsaid.
Here's a for instance.
Hey Rebecca, hey, how was class?
This public health seminar is really rough, but I'll get through it.
I know you will, and hey, only six more weeks.
Listen, I know you need to get back to studying, but I have to ask you a favor.
I know that Wednesdays are supposed to be quiet nights, but my book club really needs
a place to meet for the next two weeks.
Is there any way we can figure something out just for this week and next?
Are you kidding me?
We're barely two weeks into this thing and you're already asking for a change for your
silly book club?
We made a deal.
Besides, three bottles of wine and a trashy novel are hardly a book club.
Sir, I even asked.
In the heat of the moment, Rebecca has done some damage here.
Nobody wants to hear that their book club is silly.
That hurts.
That was an insult and that was taken as one.
So what have we got here?
Well, there are going to be some emotional residues.
You know, often too, there's broken trust where somebody was not fully honest.
That would even have greater residues and more difficult things to handle.
Are one party behaved in a way that actually harmed the other?
And the challenge to the trust offending behavior, how do we know that that's not going to recur?
So how do we trust again?
Rebuilding trust is very difficult after it's been broken.
So there's emotional distance and there's defensiveness that's created.
One of the things we call these is we call them relational transgressions.
The definition of a relational transgression is interesting.
It says that an action or inaction is perceived to be a violation of the relationship that's
at least serious enough to require some sort of explanation.
That's a relational transgression in what researchers look at.
Now transgressions are especially subject to the fundamental attribution error that we've
talked about.
When I do something wrong that offends the other person that way, that person with the
attribution error is most apt to think that I did that because of how I feel about them
or some aspect of my character.
They all relate it to me personally and that will make it hurt more.
So transgressions are a problem that's going to have to be dealt with.
And they often result from pursuing our topic goals in a conflict at the expense of relational
goals and identity goals including the other parties' relational goals and identity goals.
When these transgressions have occurred, they're going to require some healing.
Managing aftermath involves moving toward healing in these instances and it requires
both parties and it works on healing both the parties in the relationship.
It involves addressing the past.
You can't get to the future without addressing it but moving toward the future.
It involves trying to get to where we feel better, really feel good, where the relationship
can be positive again and be good for both parties and strong.
So how do we do that?
Well it begins.
It begins with apologies.
Each party has got to take full responsibility for their part.
Real apologies have five essential parts.
I even hate thinking about all these because I don't like to do apologies but I need to
do this.
We all do when we have a transgression to apologize for.
It requires a specific definition of the offending behavior.
You've got to say what you did.
Then you've got to acknowledge that it was harmful, that the behavior caused harm.
Third, you've got to take responsibility for the behavior and for the harm.
Then fourth, you've got to say that you regret that.
And fifth, very important.
You really have to make a commitment to avoid repeating it.
Here's a good example of a good apology.
Remember Barney's kids trampled on Dan's flowers in the example?
And Dan had the payback when we were talking about dysfunctional strategies.
So Dan went and ruined Barney's vegetable garden and Dan's wife was mortified.
What if Dan does a good apology for that action?
Barney.
Yeah.
Listen, I owe you an apology.
I just lost it when your kids ran onto my flowers and I went and stomped on your vegetable
garden and that was way out of line.
I know that you and your family are upset and I'm really sorry that I did it.
It was childish on my part and I promise it won't happen again.
Thanks Dan.
I appreciate that and I'll tell the kids to be more careful from now on.
You know, if I'm Barney, I don't think I'm really ready to forgive Dan yet about that.
But that was a good apology.
Dan has taken responsibility for his own action.
You notice he didn't justify it at all by complaining about what Barney's kids did.
He just apologized for the action.
He went through those five steps I just laid out.
In apologizing, I've got to focus on my own behavior and really avoid explaining it as
a response to the other party's behavior.
You don't want to do what I call a finger-pointing apology.
Like I'm sorry for what I did, but you did blah, blah, blah.
That's not what you want to do.
You want to take responsibility for your own, apologize for it and leave the other person's
apology to him or her if there's one to be had.
Here's an example.
Let's revisit the scene we just looked at, but note the different language and tone on
Dan's part this time.
Listen, Barney.
Yeah.
I know I overreacted to your kids running over my flower beds, and then I went and ruined
your vegetable garden.
I'm sorry about that.
I know I upset everyone, but you know, I was upset too.
I worked hard on those flowers, and then your kids come along and trampled on them.
Okay, Dan.
Let's just say it's over.
I'll tell the kids to be more careful next time.
Now, isn't that what we would feel like doing off and making an apology?
But you notice the trouble that that makes.
Once you've justified it on the part as responding to someone else, you're going to lose the
whole purpose of the apology.
So stick to the first example.
Don't go to the second one.
Take responsibility for your own behavior.
Apologize for that, and you're okay.
All right.
Now let's turn to going beyond the apology, because apology is just step one in moving
toward healing.
The next thing we have to do is what is called making amends, and amend is a fix.
It's mending.
It's making it better.
Apologizing is just saying, we're sorry.
Amends is fixing what we broke.
Sometimes I can't directly fix what I've broken, but I can make an indirect amends and restore
the party or the relationship in some other way.
But I want to move toward doing that.
I want to note here that apology and amends are both done to help the other party.
I want to go ahead and try to fix what I've broken, and I've got to be willing to do that.
It's not done when I apologize.
But if I'm doing that, then we move to the other party's part.
If the other person is making amends and apologizing to me, what moves for me to do then in terms
of the steps toward healing?
That brings us to where we want to talk about forgiveness.
Forgiveness is thought of as benefiting the other party, but unlike apology and amends,
forgiveness is done to benefit myself if I'm the one who's been offended.
Seems backwards, but it's true.
Pay attention to what I'm saying here.
It doesn't mean I'm approving of the other party's behavior.
What it does mean is that forgiving them is letting go of those emotional residues.
Letting go of feeling bad about it.
It does preserve and enhance the relationship.
I want you to note also when we're talking about forgiveness that this is not an entirely
voluntary thing that we do, and it may take time to occur.
I can be trying, but it may take time.
Forgiveness involves letting go of feelings that feel bad, and we've already explained
that we don't have automatic direct control of our feelings.
So I just can't turn off the feeling to let go, but I really do want to be moving in
that direction.
Counselors working with couples and families have a wonderful way to help us do this thing
that many of them use.
They have one person ask for forgiveness for a transgression, and then you've got three
possible responses if you're the person offended by the transgression.
If you're asked if you're willing to forgive or you're ready to forgive, you can answer
yes, no, or a work on it.
So in that case, if you're really ready to let go and it's not forced, you say yes.
You might not be willing to think about it if you're still angry.
You can honestly say no, although you want to move in that direction.
But if you're in that somewhere in between working through this managing of the aftermath,
I'll work on it.
It's a pretty darn good answer.
Three responses then.
Okay, so if we've got forgiveness going, where do we go from there?
The next step would be moving toward reconciliation.
When we talk about reconciliation, we're really talking about an interactive process between
the parties.
It's an interactive thing, and it requires both of them to act to move together.
Reconciliation is a cooperative effort that two people make working together.
It takes place over time, and it typically involves doing things like taking the risk
of trusting someone again when trust has been broken.
You don't want to be too quick and easy with that, but you want to move in that direction.
It does not involve denying that the transgressions occurred or that the harms occurred.
It does not mean that, but it does mean moving forward.
We acknowledge what happened that wasn't okay and how it hurt, and then we move forward
from there.
It does not mean getting back to some previous state.
When things happen, we don't get to go back to the way it was, but we do get to move forward
toward some new kind of normal state that can be good.
This is going to require noticing the new behavior.
It's going to require, as I talked about in step seven of the seven-step process, giving
positive feedback.
It's very, very often going to require renegotiating, and it is what gets called an iterative process.
One iteration is you put something forward and you try that.
If that doesn't work, you renegotiate, you think about that again, and you put another
thing forward.
It moves in that direction, and it's real.
Only if it's voluntary and mutual between the two parties.
That's reconciliation.
Well, that moves us toward healing.
What do I mean healing here?
Healing applies to both the individual and the relationship.
People heal and relationships heal.
Healing involves getting to a point where you can sort of reframe the conflict or the
transgression itself in the new context of this relationship.
People really do do this.
They move beyond, and things get different.
They don't get the same as they were, so we reframe, we think about it.
It includes recognizing the struggle that you went through with the hurt and recognizing
that you're getting through together, making an effort to a successful new place, and you
can celebrate and honor that between yourselves.
Healing moves in that kind of direction.
What happens then is our identities really adjust and grow with it.
We feel different from the way we were, and the relationship does.
What we're doing is building new experience together over that old experience.
The old experience doesn't go away, but we build new experience together over it.
Healing the relationship requires accepting that the other party really is as he or she
is.
I want to remind you here that you don't want the other party to be, especially in any
close relationship, like a project where you're trying to fix them or make them better.
That never actually works.
I've got to accept them and appreciate them as they are, barnacles and all.
So healing involves all of those pieces.
It takes time and effort, so be patient with yourselves, and there can be missteps on the
way, but we have to give time, time to really work to make the healing happen.
Those are important steps in the aftermath, and they can't be skipped.
I also want to talk about just several pitfalls that you want to avoid that are common in
the aftermath period after a conflict.
They can become very serious unless we communicate back and forth about them and try to work
through them.
One of them is that there is this lingering sense of opposition and resentment that can
set in and harden, and when that's going on, you're going to need to talk about it.
Don't hide it.
You've got to bring it out in the open, put it on the table, and begin to talk about it
in order to move on toward reconciliation.
A second one is, and this one's very dangerous, that parties can feel insecure in that relationship.
The one who's done the transgressions as well as the other one, and it's very important
to use open communication and affirming of one another, getting things right and recognize
that when you do, so that a sense of security in the relationship can be redeveloped because
you're going to need that.
A third one is that taboo subjects emerge.
We just don't talk about that thing that that clash was about, and what happens then is
people get silent about it, and silence is not agreement, and silence isn't that it's
settled.
Silence makes us hold on to secrets, and secrets create distance and damage trust themselves.
So I've got to trust one another enough to be open and get those taboo subjects on the
table and try to talk them through.
It's worth it if we make the effort.
I want to think briefly about the kind of attention to aftermath that we have to give,
and that working in forgiveness and healing is really worth the effort.
It seems like it's a soft subject.
It sounds like, isn't this tender and sweet?
Let me give you a true story about me on this one.
Back in the era when I was engaged very much in adversarial processes myself, I once went
through a process of advocating a grievance procedure for a faculty colleague.
I won the case for my colleague, but in the process I had to cross-examine a man who was
the head of the department in which I taught, and this was a very kind man who had always
been kind to me.
In my argumentative intensity as I cross-examined him, I did it in a way that I really made
the people judging this thing laugh at him.
I've made him out to be a fool, and he wasn't a fool.
He had just made a wrong decision.
I did that, and I knew that it hurt him.
This guy continued to be kind to me after that.
He never complained about it.
He never said anything.
But I went on for several years feeling that I shouldn't have done that, feeling bad.
Then one day several years later as I was much more into working with conflict management,
I got to thinking back about that, and I thought, you know, I need to talk to him and apologize.
The day that I decided I was going to go see him and apologize, I got to the university
and he wasn't there that day.
It turns out that while on his morning walk that morning, he had a heart attack, sat down
under a tree, and just quietly passed away, and I never got to apologize.
You know what?
That's a worst case scenario for me.
But there are people who didn't get around to healing relationships, doing the apologies,
building things back together with important loved ones all over, and people die.
That's the worst case scenario.
They don't get it resolved.
But in the meantime, even if people don't die and they don't, they're living with
that misery.
If we're not doing the healing, we're living with discomfort.
And so it reduces communication, limits rapport, reduces joy, and we have pains and things
that we didn't have to have.
There's a saying too that pain is necessary, but misery is optional.
And when we don't deal with the aftermath, we're just continuing to be miserable when
we didn't have to.
So it's not the domain of soft people.
It's not for the pain.
Harder getting out and doing those apologies can be hard work.
But I want to suggest to you that it's very, very much worth doing.
Let's summarize then.
I hope you see now why aftermath is a part of conflict management, that even though we
don't like to focus on it, we really need to do it.
I hope you see why you need to give it careful attention and to do that over time.
If we can't resolve a conflict, our choices are to accept the condition as it is, escalate,
or go ahead and leave.
I want us to recognize that even when we get good resolutions, you can still have aftermath
problems that you're going to have to deal with.
We can manage the conflict aftermath and heal ourselves.
We can heal the relationship in doing it.
The steps we talked about here, and they tend to come in an order or acceptance, apology,
making those amends, moving to forgiveness, working toward reconciliation, all of this
requires some courage and requires lots of communication between the people that are
involved.
They also require time and patience to get done.
Okay, I've got an assignment for you from this lecture.
I want you to remember that apologizing is only the beginning of making amends and moving
toward healing in a relationship, but it sure is the right place to start.
So here's a tough assignment the next time.
The very next time you have an altercation with someone in an ongoing relationship where
you've done any part of it that could have been hurtful, even if the other person did
much worse to you, I want you to do a good apology.
It won't hurt, I promise.
I want you to carefully consider and identify your own part and what went wrong, identify
your part regardless, get together with the other person, do it face to face, and go through
those steps of apologizing that we talk about, all five steps.
That's your assignment.
All right.
Where are we going to go from here?
We've talked about conflicts after math now.
There's just one more thing we really need to talk about before we can move toward wrapping
this course up, and that's the future.
How are we going to teach our children about this stuff so that conflict management can
continue to be better and they can have a better time with it than we do?
That's lecture 23.
Thank you.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
