Do words mean anything?
That's the question we'll answer in this video.
Hello this is Dr. Todd and I've been thinking about something I came across a few years
ago in an article dealing with a concept called concept creep.
I'll include a link to the article in the description below.
But in essence what the article argues is that for some reason in our English language
over the past several years concepts have taken on additional meanings so that what
we understood a word to signify 15 years ago, 20 years ago is way more inclusive now.
And so the author of the article gives several examples, I believe there's about six of them
in the article.
But the idea is that meanings have expanded horizontally, they've increased in what counts
as whatever you're calling this item, and they've also expanded vertically which deals
with the burden of proof has gotten lower and lower to qualify for the concept.
An example that I recall from the article would be bullying for instance.
When I was in school bullying was pretty straightforward.
Some kid would come up to you and threaten you verbally but most importantly usually
physically to get what he wanted from you, that kind of thing.
Well now, and so intent was really important as to who was being a bully or if bullying
had occurred.
Well now that has been expanded so that if I sat down in a cafeteria beside you and
realized that some of my best buddies had just come in and sat at another table.
If I got up or if I get up and I move over to the other table and it hurts your feelings
technically within the new definition, I have bullied you.
There are also things called microaggressions where we unintentionally do things that hurt
people and that qualifies now as bullying.
Well the problem with that is, as it relates to bullying is, is you've cast a narrative
now to where I'm some sort of bullying abuser and you're a victim and usually real life
is a little more complicated than that.
So that would be one example of concept creep.
We see it in other areas such as addiction and so on and so forth.
Now why is this important?
Well here's the problem.
Words are signs that point to meaning.
And if we change these signs, we no longer communicate with each other.
What I've noticed in our current contemporary culture, it seems that words have become
way more fluid but there's usually a purpose behind it.
What ends up happening is we will change the word so that it will have a maximum emotional
impact and therefore help qualify me for a greater victim status.
And so you hear things like, you know, so and so spiritually raped me.
Well rape is a very specific allegation and it's highly emotionally charged as it should
be when understanding what rape really means.
What I wish would happen is that and it's really designed in that situation often to
simply use language to gain control over someone.
So now all of a sudden the person that's been accused of being a spiritual rapist whatever
that means is now on the defensive to claim he or she is not a rapist of any kind.
And so on and on it goes to the point where it becomes nearly impossible either to communicate
or probably even more effectively it suppresses interactions with each other.
So now we're not even going to speak to one another in the first place.
So you've got to understand words have meaning.
As Christians we need to insist upon plain language and agree upon what the terms mean.
So if someone accuses you of something that sounds sort of outlandish to you before you
defend yourself you probably need to clarify meaning with them.
Insist that the terms they're using are accurate but if they're not if you sense that there's
a power play linguistic power play going on simply call that out in a loving way.
And look under the hood a little bit and get them to define terms ask them to clarify
what their purpose or goal in this conversation is those kind of things.
That's the only way you'll put a stop to basically this philosophical nonsense.
So my plea to everyone out there who is doing this stop abusing the language.
The language is a wonderful gift God has given us he's actually chosen to reveal himself
through his word linguistically.
So please stop abusing the language for your own self and grandisement.
And so I hope that this this talk has been helpful forgive me for the rant but if you
like the work I'm doing don't forget to subscribe and hit that bell so that you won't miss any
of these videos.
Also if you'd like any other if you have ideas for future videos I'd love to entertain those
leave those in the comments as well.
God bless.
We'll talk again soon.
