Hello, wonderful person, this is Anton, and today we're going to be discussing what's
known as a gravity battery, and specifically this right here, this unusual looking tower
that's in reality a gravity battery, something that a company known as Energy Vault has now
actually developed and is trying to sell to a lot of different bidders.
But more specifically, we're going to be discussing the idea behind these gravity batteries,
how they operate, and more importantly, how they might transform the future of humanity.
But let's start small, actually this small.
Now you might have seen a grandfather clock before, but this is actually a good example
of how humans have learned to use gravity to operate something and to produce energy.
The pendulum in the clock here generates all of its energy from essentially the gravity
of planet Earth.
And this idea of gravity as energy allows us to produce things like, for example, hydroplants.
A hydro plant, or a dam, operates entirely on the idea of gravity generating energy,
with the motion of water generating energy by driving the turbines.
And not so long ago, I actually went on a kind of a tour trying to explore different ways
energy is generated here in South Korea, because I actually wanted to make a video about all
of this.
Unfortunately, COVID happened, and so all of these plants are currently off limits.
But during that time, when I was exploring various plants, I discovered some really really
awesome ideas and some really interesting constructions that are currently used to either
generate or store energy.
For example, Korea actually has the world's largest tidal wave energy generator.
It generates energy through the tides.
And we'll talk more about this in some of the future videos, because I actually wanted
to dedicate an entire video to this.
But by basically using the tides to control the flow of water, it's possible to generate
a lot of energy in the same way that it's usually done in a hydro plant or a dam.
And so a lot of countries around the world right now are basically trying to find new
ways to generate energy without the use of fossil fuels.
That's obviously the priority for a lot of countries out there.
But generating energy is one thing.
The other thing is how do you actually store it?
And storing energy, especially renewable energy, is a completely different problem that currently
does not have a very good solution.
And that's mostly because a lot of renewable energies like solar energy or wind energy
is not really constant.
It usually deviates with time and sometimes depends on certain conditions.
For example, solar energy obviously does not work at night.
And so the only way to make this work is to collect a lot of energy during the day and
then store a lot of energy for the nighttime so that it can also be used at night.
But this obviously requires a lot of batteries and an extremely efficient way of storing
all of this.
Chemical batteries, unfortunately, are not good enough, especially in certain climates
such as in extremely hot climates or extremely cold climates where chemical batteries usually
discharge very quickly.
And so during my mini tour of different power plants, including nuclear power plants, I've
got to talk to some experts who actually told me how a lot of this works.
And it's really interesting how most of the countries solve this problem.
They usually rely on gravity for providing extra battery storage.
And specifically they normally use sort of like the reverse of what a typical hydro plant
is.
It's known as PSH, pumped storage hydroelectricity.
And the idea is really simple.
During daytime, for example, you use all of this extra energy to drive a lot of water
uphill and then store it in some sort of a reservoir on top.
Normally this is done with some sort of a mountain and some sort of a reservoir on top
of the mountain with different countries using different techniques.
For example, here's a picture of a pumped storage plant in Lithuania that essentially
stores extra water right here in this reservoir and will then release the water when the energy
is required.
And here's another one from Wales.
This has a very funky Welsh name that I don't think I'm going to try to pronounce.
And so once all of this water is collected somewhere on top, at night the flow reverses
and all of this water can now generate extra electricity needed.
And so today this is the most widely used gravity battery often used in conjunction
with a lot of renewable energy, usually massive solar power plants, but sometimes also wind
power plants or a lot of other power plants that require additional energy storage.
And generally speaking, a lot of these batteries are designed to work for at least 12 hours
without stopping.
So basically they have enough energy for approximately half a day.
And today there are quite a lot of them out there.
Only a third of them are in the United States, with a total storage capacity of US alone
being approximately 250 gigawatt hours.
That's a lot of energy.
But there's another country that has even more of them, and that's Switzerland.
And the reason why Switzerland basically explains the problem with this type of energy, or this
type of energy storage.
The type of a gravity generator that we're talking about here requires mountains and
it requires a lot of water.
Without mountains and water, it would be extremely difficult to produce an efficient
gravity battery, or at least a PSH, a pump storage hydroelectricity.
And so most countries with mountains and water usually have no problem producing these, which
is why there are quite a lot of them in South Korea, a lot of them in America, and quite
a lot of them in Switzerland.
But if a country is more or less flat, or if it's a desert, it becomes kind of impossible
to produce this simply because there are just no resources and it would be way more expensive
to produce this than even a chemical type of a battery.
And by the way, fun fact, but the first one of these batteries was originally produced
in Switzerland as well, back in 1907, so this is a super old technology.
And so anyway, how do you solve this?
If a country has no mountains and no water, something else has to be used.
And that's where these two new startups decided to solve this problem by producing something
quite brilliant actually.
And the first startup is EnergyVolt, and this is what their battery looks like.
And even though it might not look like a battery, it actually can store quite a lot of energy,
even more than some of these hydroelectric ones.
And the design itself, despite being kind of ugly, is modifiable and will most likely
change in time.
Okay, so how exactly does this work, and what exactly are they trying to achieve here?
Well, in essence, it's an automated crane that picks up various blocks and stores them
on top.
But these blocks acting as potential energy.
And so as extra energy is generated by the wind turbines or by solar power plants, all
of this is stored and eventually deposited right on top of the crane itself.
Then during nighttime, for example, or when there's no wind, it starts doing the opposite.
It starts to slowly bring all of these blocks down and thus generates energy simply through
the action of gravity pulling on all of these blocks.
And the way that all of this is designed right now, it's entirely automated and runs with
almost no supervision whatsoever.
And so instead of using water, it uses either concrete or even some sort of recycled heavy
material.
And interestingly enough, it's able to store quite a lot of energy, and it's also able
to produce quite a lot of energy when it needs to be produced.
So the capacity here is pretty high, with a total output of approximately 5 megawatt,
meaning that it can supply energy to a small town.
And as you can see from this video, they already have a first function in prototype, currently
located in one of the cities in Switzerland.
This tower is approximately 110 meters in height and is able to move very massive concrete
blocks, approximately 35 ton each.
The total storage here is approximately 80 megawatt hours of energy.
More importantly, this company has officially signed their first commercial deal, meaning
that they're going to be producing these for some of the energy companies in Europe.
And at the moment, they're designed to be powered entirely by solar energy and then
store all of this energy for 910 years.
And from what we know so far, the next tower is going to be somewhere in Louisiana, with
a total storage capacity of nearly 500 megawatt hour.
That's a lot of storage.
It will be enough to power a somewhat small city.
And it's expected to start operating sometime next year in 2022.
And they also are planning to build at least one in Ohio and at least one in Canada somewhere
in British Columbia.
So this is a super exciting project and I'm really looking forward to see where all of
this goes.
And interestingly, this is even a little bit more efficient than the PSH I previously mentioned.
Unlike the hydroelectric energy storage, this has slightly more efficiency in terms of storing
energy and in terms of then retrieving it from the blocks themselves.
The overall efficiency here is approximately 85% versus about 75% for a hydroelectric plant.
But that's not the only company doing this.
There's a company somewhere in the UK known as Gravitricity and they have a somewhat similar
but a slightly different concept of gravity energy.
They're planning to rely on abandoned, very deep mine shafts, usually several kilometers
in depth.
And instead of using a crane and a bunch of blocks, they're going to be lowering one
single block deep into the mine shaft with the block itself being anywhere from about
500 to even 5000 tons in mass.
And by essentially moving this block just a few centimeters deep into the mine, it's
able to generate a tremendous amount of electricity or vice versa, it's able to store a tremendous
amount of electricity as the block is lifted from the bottom.
With the current model being able to store approximately 10 megawatt hour of energy.
But this particular project is still in its infancy and is still looking for more investors.
Specifically though, it's also sort of reliant on these abandoned mines.
So obviously only some countries are going to be able to produce this.
Regardless, it shows us that this is a really exciting time for innovation and for a lot
of new technologies and a lot of new concepts that are going to be appearing just to help
us transition from the idea of fossil fuels and chemical energy to the idea of renewable
energy and renewable storage.
And so I'm actually kind of excited to see where all of this goes in the next five years.
But I guess until we learn more or until some other company invents or designs something
else incredible, that's all I wanted to mention.
You can find all the links for each of the companies and their projects in the description
below and subscribe if you still haven't, share this with someone who was learning about
space and sciences and maybe come back tomorrow to learn something else.
Maybe support us on Patreon by joining a channel membership or by buying the wonderful present
t-shirt you can find in the description.
Stay wonderful, I'll see you tomorrow and as always, bye bye.
To Festiniog Power Station.
