Yeah, no, I will. So Matthew, when, when, when you start this string, just send me a
a notification, send me a little message and I'll, okay, the stream should be started.
Yeah, the streams should be started. Amazing. Amazing. Okay. So could the chat on YouTube
just confirm that they can hear what I'm saying? And then somebody in the chat on YouTube confirmed
they can hear what I'm saying. And then I'll, because we haven't done this before. Yes, amazing.
People can hear me. So hello, everyone. Welcome. Welcome to the annual Maxwell talk and Maxwell
lecture, which is co-hosted by the Cambridge University Physics Society and the Archimedes. The
talk this year will be given by Professor Anthony C, who's going to talk about quantum field theory
in a nutshell. Now, Anthony C holds a joint appointment as a permanent member of the Cavalier
Institute for Theoretical Physics and is also a professor at the University of California,
Santa Barbara. His main areas of research involve cosmology and the fundamental structures of
matter. And he's well known in the physics community for his unusual breadth of interest from
condensed matter physics to biophysics to high energy physics. And C obtained his PhD from
Howard in 1970, supervised by Sydney Coleman. And in the following years, he worked at the Institute
of Advanced Study and was the Alfred P. Sloan Fellow. In his first year as assistant professor at
Princeton, C had Ed Whitten as his teaching assistant. Professor C has authored and co-authored
more than 200 scientific publications and several books. He's written in particle physics, condensed
matter physics, anomalies in physics, random matrix theory, supergun activity, and many more.
We are very honored to have him with us here today to talk about quantum field theory.
Before we start the event, I would like to thank our sponsors, Seamless, Riverlane, TTP, TPP,
Define, JaneStream, and CGT for helping make this possible. And with that, I will let you have
added C after actually just pointing out four questions. If you post them in the YouTube chat,
we will be watching this. And if you have any interesting questions, I will read them out
and see, would you prefer to, oh, Tony, would you prefer to have questions during the talk or
afterwards? I think it would be better to have the questions after the talk. Okay, then we will have
the questions after the talk, but post them in the chat and we will keep tabs. And then I will
hand it over to you. Thank you very much, Oscar. I'm very honored to be giving the Maxwell lecture
for this year. So today, I'm going to talk about quantum field theory. And here is a picture of
the field, the lovely quantum field that we all would like to explore. Okay, so
quantum field theory is arguably the greatest monument to the human intellect.
Now, already you can hear the humanities professor snatching the teeth on the side.
But in any case, whatever, it is the most accurately tested theory in physics. This comes
as a surprise to some people. But as we will see for various reasons, it's tested to an extremely
high degree of accuracy, more than any other areas of physics. So it took us a couple of millennia
before we realized that the universe is actually pervaded with quantum fields. And in fact, as you
listen to this talk, you're surrounded by quantum fields. So today, this talk is addressed to students
and to people who do not know what quantum field theory is. So I'm going to start
with the question, what is quantum field theory and who needs quantum field theory?
And these days, actually, one doesn't even need to know quantum mechanics to be a professor
theoretical physics. Now, in this talk, I should caution the audience that whenever I speak about
physics, I mean theoretical physics, because that's what I know. I'm not speaking
of this. For whom I have only admiration, since they can do things that I cannot even dream of doing.
So who needs quantum field theory? And this is chapter 1.1 of my textbook on quantum field theory
is, in fact, the very first chapter. The book starts with the sentence, quantum field theory
arose out of our need to describe the ephemeral nature of life. This sentence was so widely quoted
that I now see it on the web in collection of quotes to my amusement. But what do I mean by that?
I'll explain. So the ephemeral nature of life, there's a saying about that, that life is just
like clouds and smoke, assing in front of our very eyes. And it's soon over. So, but more seriously,
there was meant to be a joke, but quantum field theory is needed when we confront simultaneously
the two great physics innovations of the last century of the previous millennium, namely special
relativity and quantum mechanics. And here I show you what I call the square of physics. So on this
axis, I've plotted the size of the objects involved. And on this axis, I've plotted whether the
objects involved are moving slowly or fast. So in this corner, we have Newtonian mechanics,
the classical physics of Newton, Maxwell, and Laplace. And as we go to smaller objects, we have
slow moving electrons scattering over proton, for example. There's no need for special relativity,
but you definitely need quantum mechanics. Now, we move up to this axis. Then, for example,
rocket ship moving near light speed, there's no need for quantum mechanics, but you definitely
need special relativity. So what we're interested in is moving into this
upper right corner, in which we have the marriage of quantum mechanics and special
relativity. And it's in this peculiar confluence of special relativity and quantum mechanics
that a new set of phenomena arises. Particles can be born and particles and die.
So this is a new subject in physics is required, a quantum field theory, to describe the birth and
death of some kind of life in between. So in particle, in classical physics, there's no such thing
of objects being born or objects going away. There's no such thing as birth and death. So this
is introduced by a new phenomenon, totally new phenomenon in physics. So let's remind ourselves
of two gold-plated equations of physics. The gold-plated equation of physics of quantum mechanics
is the uncertainty principle. So we're familiar with the fact that the uncertainty
in momentum times the uncertainty in position is equal to h bar, plans constant. So I'll set
plans constant equal to one for the purpose of this talk. So another version of the uncertainty
principle is that the uncertainty in energy is equal to one divided by the uncertainty in time.
So the advertising slogan for this gold-plated equation is that accounting errors could be
tolerated for a short time. So for a very short time, nature has to keep track of the conservation
of energy. But for a very short time, you could have some uncertainty in the energy.
Now, special relativity, on the other hand, tells us that energy is equal to matter,
and even the person, the man and woman in the street, know about the gold-plated equation of
special relativity, e equal to mc squared. And the advertising slogan for this is that counting
errors could be turning to stuff. So in one of my popular books, I spoke of an embezzler
working at a bank. So for a very short time, accounting errors could be tolerated. And of
course, the smaller the accounting error, it could be hidden for a long time. But if you take away
and walk away with $10 million, clearly that would be discovered very quickly. But that is just
fluctuations and accounting errors in quantum mechanics. But it's only with special relativity
that the accounting errors could be turned into stuff than Bezler could then buy himself or herself
and Lamborghini. So when we combine these two equations, particles could pop out of the vacuum
and they can pop into the vacuum. Parts can come into being and disappear. There's birth and death
in physics. So in order for this to happen, we need, as we can see from the previous transparency,
that we need both quantum physics and special relativity. One of them is not enough. We need
both. But these particles could not exist for a long time unless we know of two ways for them to
exist for a long time, which is that if extra energy is available, or if this is happening near
Black Hole Horizon. Now in contrast, I think many people in the audience have studied
non relativistic quantum mechanics, which is the subject before quantum field theory.
In non relativistic quantum mechanics, you have the Schrodinger equation. So no matter how you
shake and bake the Schrodinger equation, it's always the same number of particles. But you
cannot create more or less. If the Schrodinger equation describes three electrons, you're always
going to end up with three electrons. So let us now talk about fields. The concept of fields,
a heuristic pictorial motivation for a field is what I call a mattress. Well, a mattress is just a
bunch of points, mass points, point masses connected by springs in some lattice. So very far away on
distance scales much larger than the lattice spacing, this looks like a continuous field.
So if we're interested in physics on a distance scale much larger than the spacing between the
lattice, then this looks like a continuous field. And we can press down bounce up and down on this
mattress. And we can set up normal modes, vibrational modes, and we can form wave packets of these modes
and localize wave packets. So we can form a vibrational disturbance located in one area of the
of the mattress. And we can set this wave packet moving. So these wave packets can move around.
And if the springs are perfectly harmonic, then nothing much happens. But if the springs
have any amount of n-harmonicity, this would cause us the wave packets to motion with no
longer be harmonic. And these wave packets would scatter and decay and dissipate and so on.
So this was seized upon by the founders of quantum field theory in the early days
to perhaps could be used to represent particles, the particles that they were discovering at that time
right around the century. So right around the turn of the 20th century, for example,
Thompson discovering the electron. So let us consider a space-time diagram. If this is space,
this is time, then I could set up a disturbance here. And we could see in particles a packet of
energy and momentum moving in space-time. And then could be absorbed at some other location,
okay, on this mattress. So this, of course, in 30 seconds is the concept of going from a field
to a particle. Now, of course, I'm hardly describing quantum field theory in detail here,
but I'm just trying to motivate in some cartoon feature how a field, how the concept of field
could lead to a particle. Now going to the next slide, we go from the next step is to go from
particle to force. And I imagine a particle going back and forth. So this caption, I'm sorry, is
rather small. On this cartoon, it says the pie meson, the pion, is a marriage broker of old.
It's a rather obese lady going back and forth between two families. So this was strung from
me by an undergraduate a long time ago. The book was published 30 years ago. So
she must be quite grown by now. So in many cultures, we have marriage brokers going back and forth.
And by traveling back and forth, it produces an attraction between two families. So you could
think of the attraction between the two families as some kind of attractive force. So this is the
first inkling that quantum field theory could explain the forces we see in nature. We're going to
look at this in more detail. Well, you may be curious about where this cartoon comes from.
It is in fact taken from one of my books, Fearful Symmetry. I guess I have to go here.
So this book was written in around 1984. Steve, I was planning to write a book on quantum field
theory. But Steve Weinberg advised me that I should write a popular book before a textbook
on quantum field theory. And his reasoning, I think, is very sound. A lot of physicists
write textbooks about any idea on how to communicate things to people. And Weinberg told me that if
you could explain things to the general public, then you'll qualify to write a textbook. So I
write to this advice and that helps people. Now, so excuse me. My book on Fearful Symmetry,
I show you the French translation here. And as you can see, Fearful, the French told me that
Fearful doesn't make any sense. You cannot have symmetry that are fearful. So you can see that
they change Fearful to some other word. So, but it was another amusing aside is that it
took 34 years since my book was published in 1984. Immediately after it was published,
it was translated into German, Spanish, Chinese, Japanese, Korean, and so on. But French translation,
there was never a French translation. I was very puzzled by that. Until 2018, a couple years ago,
I took a sabbatical and I lived in Paris for a year. And as soon as I have a French address,
I have an address in Paris, the French publishers immediately took it seriously. And in fact,
in one day, I got two offers to translate my book. So that's just very amusing. So having,
I could tell you all that having an address in Paris is very high importance as far as the French
is concerned. Okay, so the Germans invited me to India to the Max Mule Baban. And the trip was
paid for by the United States State Department. I was quite surprised. And after this book came out.
And this is in fact, an article in the newspaper in Calcutta. But the title totally floored me.
It was somehow they treated me as a religious cult leader of some kind. So anyhow, after I came
back, I gave a talk in Mumbai. And this was then published in New Literary History, which is a
humanities journal published in the United States by the University of Virginia. And people
were always surprised. But so I went into this story to explain to you. When people look up this
article, they notice it's illustrated by works of Indian art. And that is why because the talk was
given in India. So I digressed a little bit into where that cartoon comes from. But I remind
you, it was a marriage broker going between two families and generating an attraction between the
two families. Now, this leads to my third theme, to the theme of particles to force my second theme,
sorry. Since the early days of physics, the notion of force has been among the most basic and the
most mysterious. So it was with considerable satisfaction that physicists finally understood
where forces come from. Their forces come from quantum exchange of a particle. I want to emphasize
this point. We are all students of physics. And when you first study physics, you learn about
forces. But if you ask the professor, where did the forces come from, they cannot answer you,
unless they know quantum field. Forces come from the quantum exchange of a particle. And that's one
one of the important results of quantum field theory. And given this understanding of the nature
of force in 1934, the Japanese physicist Yukawa Hideki Yukawa, whom I think many of you have heard
of, he decided that some kind of marriage broker must be provided for the strong interaction.
And so he hypothesized a new particle. And this is the pi meson. So this comes from the talk I
already mentioned to you that I gave him on by, and in fact, interestingly, it was at the National
Center for the Performing Arts. Now, the third theme that I now get to is going from particle to
force. So remember, I went from the mattress to field, from field to particle, and now I go from
particle to force. So another rough analogy, other than the marriage broker analogy that people use,
I think John Wheeler had used this a long time ago, that's to imagine two lumps on the mattress,
and they attract due to the distortion of the field.
So the physical world that we know results from the web of interactions.
And some attractive and some repulsive. I'm going to move my laptop closer to me.
Quantum field theory answers why. So again, when we started studying physics,
the professors tell us some forces are attractive and some forces are repulsive.
Now, to be able to compare what is attractive or repulsive, let's talk about between like objects,
so between the same objects. But if you ask the professor why, there is no why. So physicists
did not understand why some forces are attractive and why some forces are repulsive. In the physics
course, that's usually just stated as a fact. You take it as an experimental fact or else,
but quantum field theory actually tells you why. It turns out the sign depends on whether the spin
of the mediating particle is odd or even. Now, to me, this is a really profound result. I first
heard about this from Julian Schwinger when I took a quantum field theory course from him at Harvard,
and I was really blown away that there's such a simple rule that explains the universe,
whether some forces are attractive and some forces are repulsive.
And if you do the calculation, as I do in my book, you can see that the sign ultimately
could be traced to the difference between time and space. Because in the Minkowski metric,
for those of you who know what a Minkowski metric is,
there is a sign flip between time and space. So according to this rule,
then spin zero produces an attraction, and this is a strong nuclear force, the protons
and neutrons coming together. And that's exactly how Yukawa introduced the whole concept in the
first place. Then you need a spin zero particle to produce the strong force that holds the nucleus
together. And the spin one then produces a repulsion, and we all know that electromagnetism
like charges repel. So spin two, we go to spin two, and that's again an attraction. So just an
even on, so simple, so beautiful, it's amazing that this explains the universe. So that's gravity,
the graviton carries spin two, and that produces an attraction between the apple and Newton's head.
So this allows us to give a lightning history of the universe. The universal gravitation attraction
of Newton, which is due to the spin two particle, produces the instability that drives the formation
of structure in the early universe. Right, dense regions become denser still. That's because in
gravity everything attracts. So if you have some fluctuation in density in some region of the early
universe, where there's more matter than in other regions, these dense regions become denser. They
pull and matter to them, matter forward towards the denser regions. And this is a well-known
phenomenon in the universe, not only in the early universe, but also in our world. We all
know that the rich becomes richer. Now meanwhile, the photons and neutrinos, they're free streaming
because their interaction with the primeval matter was very weak, especially the neutrinos.
And so it's a kind of taxation. They take some of the energy and mass density away from the
dense region. And finally, the attraction between the protons due to the spin zero particle
of Yukawa ignites the stars and eventually form the rich variety of nuclei. And then finally,
these positively charged nuclei and the negatively charged electrons attract each other
due to the spin one particle and they produce atoms. And so the rest is history, as you know,
that eventually leads to us. So it's a beautiful history of the universe. And the entire history is,
according to quantum field theory, just based on this interplay between plus and minus signs.
Okay, the concept of field goes back to Faraday.
And Faraday is a remarkable person because he came up from almost a Kenzian
poverty. And without proper education, the mathematics of the continental philosophers
were beyond Faraday, who was compelled to invent his own pictorial language. So
the mathematics of the continental philosophers that Faraday said you could not possibly understand,
it just partial differential equations, which now every undergraduate in physics knows.
So but Faraday, since he didn't know any mathematics here to introduce the concept
of a field, imagine a field mediating between charged bodies. Now here I cannot resist
making a side remark about basic versus applied research. So if you were in charge of the Royal
Navy at the 19th century at the time of Faraday, would you support the research of a bunch of
strange people in the basement messing around with wires and frogs or with people who are trying
to breed stronger pigeons? Okay, so I say this because all around the world, certainly in the
United States, but in other countries as well that I have spent time in, in the last 10, 20 years,
there's a tremendous shift from theoretical to applied physics. Now Faraday is one of my great
heroes. And for obvious reasons, since he invented the word field. And a few months ago, I was invited
to give a talk at the Royal Institution in London. And I deeply regretted that because of this
epidemic, this pandemic, I was not able to lecture at the same platform that Faraday lectured from.
But I certainly talked of my, spoke of my admiration for Faraday. And I think that
physics students should look at Faraday's life as an inspiration. So now from Faraday, we get to Maxwell.
Maxwell's theory of the electromagnetic field, as we know, it contains two hidden symmetries
that will rock 20th century physics. One is relativistic invariance and the other is gauge
invariance. Now both of these symmetries were already contained in Maxwell's theory. But nobody,
including Maxwell, nobody in the 20th century, in the 19th century, noticed it. And so is it
conceivable that our present day theory also contains all kinds of hidden structure?
To me, that's, that's a possibility. Hidden structure that's waiting for young people
to discover. Just like Einstein discovered relativistic invariance hidden in Maxwell's
equation and Hermann Weyl discovers gauge invariance in Maxwell's theory. So in hindsight,
how is it that Maxwell did not see this? Well, I don't know how many of you have read Maxwell's
treatise. Okay, it's a terrible notation of the 19th century. Since he doesn't have vectors
and index notation, he writes out every component of everything. So nowadays, we think of four
Maxwell's equations or something like this. But for Maxwell, it was actually like 26 equations.
Everything is written down in component form. So when I teach electromagnetism in the United
States, I always ask the student why the magnetic field is called H. And I have almost never encountered
students who can answer this question. So I'll let you think about that. And this comes to another
one of my pet peeve, at least about American students, very few students are interested in
the history of physics. And personally, and I think quite a few of my colleagues around the world,
I just got an email from somebody in Germany, who agreed with me completely, that you really
cannot call yourself a theoretical physicist, if you don't know anything about the history of the
subject. But now Yang-Mills theory also has a terrible notation, because it's a redundancy in
description, those of you who study Yang-Mills theory or gauge theory, know that it has a lot of
redundant variables that have to be gotten rid of at the end of the day. So perhaps the twister
formalism of Roger Penrose is perhaps the first step in fixing this. By the way,
I've given this talk since my quantum field theory book came out something like 20 years ago,
in those 20 years I've given this talk in many, many places around the world in the United States
and more recently in India and in Stockholm. And so this transparency is written long, long before
Roger Penrose got the Nobel Prize, but I've always been an admirer of his twister program.
So incidentally, I mentioned my popular book Fearful Symmetry, and some of you know that I was
honored that Roger actually wrote the preface to my book, the forward to my book. So having that,
I guess a little bit of an ad, but having said this, let me now come back to quantum field theory.
So already in non-relativistic quantum mechanics, the photon, namely the electromagnetic field,
is treated as a field, but not the electron. So the photon is a field, but not the electron. The
electron is treated as a particle. So that is the formalism in non-relativistic quantum mechanics.
Then you write down a Schroding equation for this electron, and then you couple in the photon field.
This is what people in the United States, I don't know what people would call it in England,
but people in the United States, or at least I call it a half-assed treatment. It's absolutely bizarre
to treat one particle as a field and not the other. So this motivated Jordan, Heisenberg,
Dirac, and others to introduce the field. In particular, Dirac treated the electron as a field.
So henceforth, the electron has become a field. Now the next very important step was taken by
Fermi, and most people do not realize this, which is that Fermi said photons can be created,
so the electron can also be created. So that's what I emphasize in my introduction, birth and death,
because this in the weak interaction, the electrons come zooming out.
And the famous, the eminent authorities, the older people at that time, they all said the
electron was already inside a nucleus. It's obvious. And Heisenberg wrote that as a younger
physicist, he got angry letters from older people saying that Heisenberg, you're a crazy guy,
you know, we know that the electron is inside a nucleus. And how can you agree with Fermi
that the electron was created in the weakened action? Okay, so I'm writing about this in a book
I'm working on about how the younger generation got bashed by the older physicists. So here's the
lesson for the students at Cambridge University. Don't listen to those old guys. Okay, so after
that, all particles are excitations in some field. The electron is an excitation electron field.
The proton is an excitation in the proton field. We don't talk about protons anymore.
But we talk about quarks. So quarks are excitation in some quark field. So from in this point of
view, the graviton is just like a particle, like any other particle, it's just an excitation
in the gravitational field. And this is the philosophy pushed by Weinberg in his textbook on
gravity. And Weinberg is sort of anti the geometrical interpretation. But this is a very
minority view. Somehow, the gravitational field seems to be special, seems to be different from
all other fields. So somehow also responsible, the gravitational field is responsible for the
spacetime arena in which all particles work and play. So in my book, I use an analogy. This is
like an avant-garde theater, somehow there's no stage. But one of the actors is the stage.
The other actors are all climbing over him. So somehow the gravitational field is somehow
different. And I think this is the trouble that we face in trying to formulate quantum gravity.
And then we now have this, the biggest problem in theoretical physics now is to understand the
cosmological constant, why it's so small. So once we introduce gravity, we introduce a new
constant into nature, not just H bar and C, as I mentioned before, but also Newton's constant.
So the square of physics becomes a cube of physics. But I don't have time to go into this,
because this is not a talk about gravity. The talk about gravity I gave at the Royal
Institution a few months ago. Okay, so this is one of the puzzles in theoretical physics today,
which I hope some young people in the audience would be able to resolve.
So anyway, as Oscar mentioned, the first year I was an assistant professor at Princeton,
the very first course I ever taught in my life, that is, in my entire life, there was the first
time I was in charge of a course for students. I taught a course on quantum field theory.
And so people at that time, after the course, many people asked me to write up my notes as a book.
But other people, of course, gave me more practical advice, which is that you better not write a textbook
until you get tenure. So I waited for many years, for 30 years before I wrote my textbook, in 2003.
So here's the cover of the original edition of my quantum field theory book. And what it is,
what it is, is this painting shows the student, here's the student. The student is trying to reach
the field, the green field, quantum field theory. But in order to reach the field,
he or she has to hack through all of these weeds and so on and so forth. He has to learn a lot of
undergraduate level physics before he can reach the field. And once he gets past the field,
then he could start climbing the mountain. And we don't know what is on the other side of the
mountain. It may be string theory, it may be something else. So that's 2003. And seven years later,
came out with a revised edition and added a lot of new material. It turns out in those seven years
from 2003 to 2010, there were quite a few new developments that are important. So one of them
is in fact the flowering of Penrose's Twister program in application to quantum chromodynamics.
And my quantum field theory book has since been translated into other languages.
And the most amusing thing so recently was translating to Japanese.
The Japanese publisher told me that the Japanese have smaller hands and they cannot hold the
quantum field theory book. It's too thick. So my quantum field theory book got chopped into
two volumes. This is volume one, it just came out. So I just received a copy. But the translation
Russian is very amusing. You can see my name up here in quantum field theory in a nutshell.
But it turns out nutshell doesn't mean anything in Russian. I don't know why. Is it because they
don't have nuts in Siberia? I don't know. So the title was translated as quantum field theory in
two words. And so all my Russian friends are laughing that I've now published a book with
a logically inconsistent title. The title already has more than two words.
So now I want to also talk about a little bit more about the quantum field theory. One of the
most interesting things about quantum field theory in the last 30, 40 years is the rise
of field theory in condensed matter physics. So this is, I want to say this is distinct from
earlier use of perturbative field theory. So for example, when I was a student, there were two
textbooks Federer and Wallachka and Abrikosov and Al. They use Feynman diagrams just to keep track of
some perturbation theory calculation when they do perturbative calculations. So but the rise of
field theory in the last 30 years of the 20th century was quite spectacular. And it's not
merely using Feynman diagrams to do perturbative stuff. So I mentioned several examples that
in the quantum Hall fluid, the microscopic degrees of freedoms will cause the electrons.
But the long distance physics is controlled by as to turn Simon's gauge field
with fractionally charged excitations. Another example surface growth can be connected,
can be studied using the language of renomization group. And another is that disorder
can be studied by the replica method and supersymmetry. So here I also want to mention
another characteristic of my book. So this is one characteristic of my book because I think
this is important. So that if you ask me, how is my quantum field theory book different
from other quantum field theory book is because I include one third of the book is on condensed
matter physics, maybe one quarter. And the other thing is I introduce gravity as early as possible.
So when I was a graduate student, nobody mentions gravity unless you take course on
general relativity and gravity and so on. But nobody would mention gravity in a course on
quantum field theory. I never heard a single word about gravity in my courses on quantum field
theory. But now, of course, it's taken central center stage. So the other feature of my book
is I try to be much lighter in tone in the formalism. So I introduce a lot of stories,
jokes, fictitious characters a la Galileo. I introduce a character named Confusio and Confusio
is always wandering around my book. And now I get emails from students saying Confusio is their
famous character. And I even have a that even recently, a professor Berkeley said on the internet
that he is Confusio that he's confused about a lot of things. The other thing about my book
on quantum field theory is divided into eight parts. And this is also a joke. I was referring
to something in Chinese literature. I was referring to the eight parts of the celestial dragon.
And for those Chinese students in the audience who knows who Jin Yong is, you can look up this link.
So now I want to tell you that quantum field theory has had two near death experiences.
Quantum field theory actually almost died twice. Okay. So in the late 1940s, there was its first
death. Because it was unable to produce Lorentz covariant results and divergences.
And it was not able to handle the strong intention. The strong intention that time
was the theory of Yukawa's. And because of the coupling is very strong, the Feynman diagrams
and other perturbative approaches are completely useful and were completely useless.
And so people like Landau go as far as to say that quantum field theory should be buried.
I'm quoting Landau, this quote in my new book on quantum field theory.
And interestingly, it's people like Landau and I think also Newsboro, Heisenberg,
all those people saying quantum field theory was dead. Interestingly, it was the young people
who came out of the in the late 1940s. They were the conserved. The older people were the
revolutionary. So sometimes we call them the revolutionary conservatives. And you know whom
I'm talking about. I'm talking about people like Feynman and Schwinger and Tomonaga.
And the next second time that quantum field theory almost died is in the late 1960s when the S
Matrix School came into being. And this was the ability to deal with the strong intention.
And so I had to make a very difficult choice between going to when I was going to graduate school.
I had to make a difficult choice between going to Harvard or going to Berkeley. And if I'd gone
to Berkeley, that would be the end of me. Because at that time Berkeley was the center of the S
Matrix School. And in which quantum field theory is looked on as some old ancient thing that nobody
cares about anymore. But no, in the 1970s, as you all know, thanks to the work of the young genius
Behoeft from Holland, quantum field theory triumphed. And as my professor,
Sidney Coleman later wrote, the triumph of field theory in the 1970s was a victory parade
that made the spectators gasp with joy. I'm sorry, I can't even read, gasp with awe and laugh with joy.
So I'm here also, I also wanted to tell you something for you to think about.
I'm not going to explain that here, quantum mechanics is like a zero plus one dimensional
field theory. And string theory is like a one plus one dimensional field theory. Okay, now let me go
backwards and talk about quantum mechanics. Now when we teach quantum mechanics or when we learn
quantum mechanics, depending on whether you are a professor or a student, usually we talk about the
Schrodinger or Heisenberg formalism. Schrodinger has wave functions and Heisenberg has operators.
But there's a conceptually more profound formalism due to Dirac and Feynman. It's called the Dirac-Feynman
path integral formalism, or the Schrodinger functional integral formalism. And of course,
Schrodinger and Feynman's formalism are equivalent. And this leads naturally to quantum field theory.
So let's ask about the origin of the path integral. Let me explain the origin
of path integral formalism. So in quantum mechanics, immediately in chapter one,
we learn about the two slit experiment. So electrons are emitted from a source.
And there's a screen where detector is placed, oh, this detector. And between the
screen and the source, there's another screen, which has two slits in it. And so the electron
could either go through this slit and or to go through that slit. And then there's an amplitude
probability amplitude for going through one slit and the probability for going through another slit.
And then you're supposed to add the probability amplitude. And you see the quantum interference
phenomenon and so on and so forth. Now here's an interesting comment. Students almost never ask,
what is three holes? I have also taught quantum mechanics. And I've never met a student who asked,
what if you had three holes in the screen? Okay. So in my quantum field theory book,
I imagine a student named Feynman asking this question. By the way, there's so many Feynman
stories circulating on the web. And I feel, why not if people can make up Feynman stories,
I can make one up too. So I imagine a student named Feynman asking, what if you have three holes?
Okay. So the professor then explained, okay, well, you just add the amplitude. So going through
these three holes. And then Feynman asked, what if you add another screen? And also with a bunch
of holes in it. And the professor is starting to get impatient and losing his patience. And the
professor said, come on, don't waste my time. You just add all the amplitudes. There's an
probability amplitude for going through this hole. And then this hole, and then this hole,
and you just add them all up. Okay. So, but this student persists. And he asked the most
zen question of all, what if you add infinite number of screens and drill infinite number
of holes in each screen? Okay. So then there is no screen. If you have infinite number of screens
with infinite number of holes. And so you have to add amplitudes over all paths. So it's like a
young person. Reach the end of your life. Now all possibilities are open up to you. Okay.
So we now have to add up not all the amplitudes through each hole, as the professor was saying,
but you now have to integrate over all paths. Okay. So this very zen question, having an infinite
number of screens with an infinite number of holes in it, is the origin of the path integral
formalism invented by Dirac and Feynman. Okay. So quantum field theory, there amongst an integral.
So I'm saying, I was just saying here, oops, normal in quantum mechanics, which we talked about
adding the summing over the paths. But if you have infinite number of paths, you integrate over
all possible paths. So when all is said and done, you introduce formalism and so on.
Quantum field theory, just one great big fancy sum or integral. So as you can see, sometimes
if I give this popular talk to a general audience, it depends on what the audience is. I may even
have to explain, the audience may not even know what an integral is, and I have to tell them it's
a big fancy sum. And the integral is, but this audience of course knows what an integral is.
It's an integral over d phi, e to the minus s phi, some function, some function of phi.
And phi is the field, a generic notation for the field. It depends on space and time.
And the space can be d dimensional. Then you can, you have written the quantum field theory
in d plus one dimensional space time. Now, how do we get the quantum mechanics? Quantum mechanics
is when you restrict this field to be just a function of time, but not of space. And then
this field has another name, just to confuse the undergraduates. In undergraduate courses,
it's called position or coordinate of the particle, position of the particle. And so that you recognize
is quantum mechanics. If phi represents the position of particles, that is the path integral
formalism of, this is the path integral formalism of quantum mechanics. So quantum mechanics can be
thought of as zero plus one dimensional field theory. Now, I have also worked on random matrix
theory. And random matrix theory is to say phi is not even a function of time, but it's a matrix.
Then it's just an integral over all possible matrices. So random matrix theory could be imagined,
could be thought of as a zero plus zero dimensional space time. And one of the things I did
in quantum field theory, sorry, in random matrix theory was to develop with the French
physicist Edouard Brezon how to treat this using Feynman integrals. So we introduce Feynman diagrams
into random matrix theory. And finally, students can see if I go down, I can go down to ordinary
integral calculus in which the matrix is just replaced by a number by real number. Then that's
as an ordinary integral in calculus. So you see quantum field theory, if you like, is a generalization
of the integral in calculus. So 80 years of quantum field theory, a big part of it is,
consists of finding methods or tricks to do the functional integral. So one example is that people
then put this integral, discretize it, sort of going backwards from Newton, going backwards
from Newton and lightness, replace the integral by a sum, and then use computer to crank away.
So that's one area of physics you could go into, which is called lattice gauge theory.
Now, so we have an integral to do, which we don't know how to do. So as I said, the
path integral in quantum field theory, you can think of the simplest version of it just an
ordinary integral. So let me give you an ordinary integral you don't know how that you cannot do.
We all know that without this term, without this 5-4 term, we can all do this integral.
So if I cover up the 5-4 term, this is just a Gaussian integral that many of you know how to do.
But how do you do this? This integral is not known. Now there's a fabulous idea, which is
one way of doing this integral is to expand it in G. So we just expand this in a Taylor series.
And then these are all Gauss versions of the Gaussian integral. I told you this integral,
e to the minus m square phi square is doable and also doable with 5-4n.
Now I can do this integral and sum it all back up. But then there are many, many terms,
infinite number of terms. And the fabulous idea is to just draw little diagrams to keep track of
all these terms. So I still remember when I was an undergraduate, I was really eager to learn about
Feynman diagrams, which I had heard so much about. And then later I realized Feynman diagrams is just
based on this idea of expanding the path integral and then integrating term by term
and then draw diagrams to keep track of the terms. But it was a fabulous idea and nobody
else had this idea. It was amazing. So in my quantum field theory book, I talk about some
different versions of quantum field theory or Feynman diagrams. I could do a baby version and
a baby version is exactly this. So talking about Feynman, I want to show you guys,
so show you students because it's also a hope to inspire the students in the audience.
I want to show you Feynman's last blackboard in case you haven't seen it.
And he sets impossible standards for himself on the two upper left boxes. One of them is
what I cannot create. I do not understand. And this is an impossible demand, obviously.
Know how to solve every problem that has ever been solved. But anyway, some of you might take
this as your slogan. But also note he has a box called to learn. I don't know if you can see,
it's not very clear, but you can make out this stage to learn. The second box on the right.
And the interesting thing about all the things he wanted to learn, he crossed out one of them.
Okay, I have learned it. So that's it. Okay. So that's very admirable. Now I also want to mention
that after Feynman died, I visited Caltech. And just for one day, and they let me sit in
Feynman's office. So I just thought, oh, I would look at his blackboard. But unfortunately,
somebody had erased everything already. It's just a blank blackboard. And I sat there in this empty
office. And I thought, well, maybe I could get some secret vibes and get some good ideas. But
unfortunately for me, nothing happened. So now come from Feynman, we get to Schringer. So Schringer,
in 1948, Schringer calculated the first term of the anomalous magnetic moment of the electron,
beating Feynman. So Schringer is so proud of this, that he was managed to beat Feynman. Feynman was
not able to calculate it. By the way, a lot of people don't know this. And they just thought
Feynman did, Feynman did, Feynman did, Feynman did. But Schringer actually beat Feynman. And so the
expression for the magnetic moment of the electron is actually carved on Schringer's tombstone. So
if you ever visit the other Cambridge, that is to say Cambridge, Massachusetts, you should
go check up, you should go look at this tombstone and pay your respect to Julian Schringer.
So Dirac, of course, had given any moment of the electron, but we are talking about
deviation from Dirac's value. So Dirac's calculation was not based, did not use quantum
field theory. Of course, Dirac was inventing quantum field theory. So I show you the current value for
the anomalous magnetic moment. The muon in some suitable unit is given by this, and you can see
it's measured to 10 to the minus 11. And people have now calculated all these digits, but Schringer
got the 116. Now to put this accuracy, that's what I said in the beginning of this lecture,
that quantum field theory is the most accurately tested theory in physics. Newtonian mechanics
is not tested to the 10 to the minus 11 level. So to put this accuracy in rough pictorial perspective,
consider the distance between Cambridge and Oxford via A41, 421. That distance is 83 miles.
Then the present uncertainty of 10 to the minus 11, it corresponds roughly to the minus 3 millimeter.
And for this to make any sense, I looked up the width of a human hair. So it turns out human hair
varies whether you have fine hair or coarse hair, different races of different thickness.
So this is maybe something like one tenth the width of a human hair. So just imagine that
this is from Cambridge and Oxford. By the way, I told you to visit the other Cambridge.
If you have a chance, you should also visit the other Oxford. My son is actually a professor
of biology at the other Oxford in the United States. Okay, so here I show you Schringer's Triumph
in which you beat Feynman. And this is taken from my quantum field theory book.
So here's a Feynman diagram in which the photon comes in and it interacts with the electron.
And so this is what the rack calculated. And what Schringer calculated is this one.
So in the process, the electron emits a photon, which is then absorbed by the outgoing electron.
And Feynman was not able to calculate this, but Schringer did.
So as I said, I took quantum field theory courses from Schringer. He was the king
at Harvard physics department at the time. And Schringer was not very pleased.
And one of his famous saying is that Feynman brought quantum field theory to the masses.
So and I think Schringer is more or less right that nowadays you just learn the Feynman rules.
You draw a few diagrams, you stick in, then you follow the Feynman rules and you just
calculate away. If you can't do the integral, you stick it on a computer. And so in fact,
one of my colleagues in Israel, a professor in Israel, he used to refer some to some of his
colleagues in physics as professors of Feynman diagrams. That was at derogatory terms. People
don't understand physics, but can calculate Feynman diagrams. So that's what Schringer said.
So now naturally, at Harvard, at that time, and this is Paul Martin, so I'll tell you who Paul
Martin is. He's a very famous condensed matter physicist who passed away a few years ago.
He was one of Schringer's prize students. And he was in generation. He's probably 20 years
older than I am. When I was a student, I took Paul Martin's course. Also,
and Paul Martin was a Schringer's student. And so he was describing the situation a generation
ahead of me. And he said, in the dark recesses of the subbasement of Lyman, Lyman is the name
of the building that the Harvard physics department was located in. So where theoretical
students retired to decipher the tablets, and of course, tablets doesn't mean tablet computer
at those days. It just means a notebook and where the ritual taboo on pagan pictures could
be safely ignored. So this is still true when I was a student, maybe 15, 20 years later.
Some of my friends were students of Schringer's. And Schringer would assign them some calculation
to do. Now, as I said, of course, Schringer can do it in his own formalism.
But it is much, much easier to do calculations, Feynman diagrams. That's why Feynman diagrams
are so popular. So some of these students told me they would hide somewhere and do the calculation
using Feynman diagrams. And then after they get the result, they would try to translate it back
into Schringer's formalism. And of course, they show Schringer the result without showing how they
got it. So here's another picture, the rivalry between the two grades. And you see this was
at the Nobel Prize ceremony in Stockholm in 1965. And interestingly, this must be right after the
ceremony, because you can see Schringer still holding, he has taken off one of his white gloves,
but he still have the other white gloves on. And here's Feynman. And this picture, I'm going to
include this picture in the book I'm working on right now, because it really shows the very
different personality. Feynman is, you can see talking away and who knows what BS is spouting.
And Schringer is very, very typical. He doesn't sit, even sit straight. He sort of always sits at
an angle. And in this picture, maybe to sort of get away from Feynman as far as he could.
Anyhow, I'm just speculating, of course, I have the greatest admiration for both of these guys.
Those are these guys are tremendous. I really like Feynman. And one reason I really like Feynman
was because once at some conference, he invited me to go with him to some nightclub. Now I cannot
even imagine Schringer doing such. I can't even imagine Schringer ever going to a nightclub,
but Feynman is like the opposite. And by the way, I recommend you guys to read an essay by
Deser. And also through Google, you can find a Deser or Schringer student. And he wrote an essay
about a tale of two voices, about the contrast between Feynman and Schringer. And it's fascinating
because Deser is now, Deser is 15 years older than I am. And so he belongs to the older generation,
and he knew both of them quite well. So he was really able to compare these two people to amazing
geniuses. So I want to now talk about some of the landmarks in quantum field theory. And
Heisenberg introduced us to internal space by inventing isospin. And Hermann Weill
introduced gauge symmetry. And then Yang-Mills and others generalized the gauge symmetry of
vial to non-ambient gauge symmetry. So these are landmarks. And as I said, Landau and the
earlier generation thought that quantum field theory is dead. But in the 70s, people like
Weinberg and Glasshauer and so on resurrected things through the work of Tohoft, who resurrected
quantum field theory. And now we know that all three interactions are described by Yang-Mills theory.
So undergraduates are justifiably fascinated by Yang-Mills theory, the weakened action and all
these things. And in my most recent book published by Princeton, and which come out in October 2020,
that is right now. It's called Fly by Night Physics. I give a very simple introduction for
undergraduates in part nine of this book. And I know that undergraduates could understand some of
this because I have tried it out on the undergraduates here in Santa Barbara.
So I talk a little bit about quantum field theory. So great triumph. Feynman diagrams
revolutionized quantum field theory. And for many years, the influence of Feynman diagrams was
enormous. So even when I was in graduate school, I was told by one professor that quantum field
theory is equal to the sum of Feynman diagrams. Okay, we now know that this view is wrong.
That Feynman diagram just perturbative. So one of the important things that happened in the
mid 1970s, a new generation of young people came on the scene. I already mentioned Tohoft,
and also Polikoff. I've described it in my book as breaking the shackles of Feynman diagrams.
They discover all kinds of non-perturbative structure, such as magnetic monopoles, that cannot
be seen by Feynman diagrams. So these go like e to the minus one over g square in the answer. So
imagine that integral that I showed you earlier. Suppose the answer has a term that depends on
this. Them expanding in powers of g as a Taylor series wouldn't make any sense if you never see
this. And all kinds of things appeared in quantum field theory, duality, topology, all kinds of
things. And for example, when I talk about the application of quantum Hall effect that has to
do with duality and topology. And all that you cannot see in Feynman diagrams by Feynman diagrams.
So I see it's now my time is already 11 o'clock. So some of you may be getting
a little bit anxious. So I am coming to the end of my talk. I'm going to wrap up. I'm going to wrap
up by asking a question, which is what is the purpose of studying physics? I like to ask the
students in my class this question. And no, to make money is not the correct answer. Well,
it may work. It is the correct answer for some people. And I do have one student who worked with
me and gotten a PhD on a random matrix theory, who is now a big shot on Wall Street. But to me,
the purpose of studying physics is to understand nature and not just to calculate
and to fit to some experiment, but to understand nature at a deep level and at a deeper and deeper
level. Okay, so quantum field theory, tell us to understand, help us to understand nature at a
deeper level than quantum mechanics. So now I want to talk about intellectual completeness of
different areas of physics. And what do I mean by intellectual completeness? Let me give you an
example. So for example, the Pauli exclusion principle and the spin statistics connection
that which says that particles to integer spin, integers spin at bosons, and we have
spins of fermions. And duck and Sudarshan, by the way, I shouldn't pronounce this word as duck,
but since I'm a Chinese American, I could be excused. He would be very upset if he heard
pronounced it like that, because he's German. And of course, there's an umlaut about the you.
And it's actually Duke. Duke and Sudarshan wrote a very interesting book, which I recommend to
students. So again, I've been ranting and raving about how American students don't know anything
about history. It's about the history of the Pauli exclusion principle. And this is especially,
I think, of interest to young British physicists, because the first person to propose the exclusion
principle was actually a young Englishman named Stoner. And what Duncan Sudarshan said was that
there's not one fact in the physical world, which has a greater impact on the way things are. Now,
this is a very strong claim about one fact in the physical world, which has a greater impact.
And in some sense, they're right, from atoms to neutron stars to lasers, and much of condensed
matter physics, for example, band structure, superconductivity, et cetera, et cetera. All of this
depends on the Pauli exclusion principle, right? But this is just a rule in non relativistic quantum
mechanics. What I always tell students when they're taking a course on non relativistic quantum
mechanics is to ask the professor, where does this rule come from? And the professors wouldn't
know the answer if it sticks to non relativistic quantum mechanics, because in non relativistic
quantum mechanics, it's just an empirical rule. It just fell down from heaven. Okay.
But quantum field theory can derive the Pauli exclusion principle, Pauli exclusion principle
and the spin statistics theorem can be derived. So this is what I mean by intellectual completeness.
Quantum field theory is more complete than quantum mechanics. There are things that in
quantum mechanics have to be treated as an arbitrary rule, but which can be derived in quantum field theory.
So how do you know all the electrons in the world are identical?
They could have been made in a factory somewhere, and there's manufacturing defects.
One electron is slightly different from the others. How do you know? And we need quantum
field theory to explain this. And the explanation is so elegantly simple that it has to be right.
But all the electrons are identical because as Dirac and others told us,
this is excitations in the quantum, in the electron field, the excitations in the same field.
So, but again, in non relativistic quantum mechanics, who knows, this was a God given
rule or something. Okay. Why is the electron charge exactly equal in magnitude to the proton
charge? This is one of the most important facts of the universe. If not the electrostatic repulsion
between different parts of the universe would blow the universe apart.
But quantum electrodynamics in this sense is less complete than grand unified field theory.
In grand unified field theory, this comes out. Okay. It's a consequence of a requirement in
quantum field theory that the fields belong to the same representation of the symmetry group.
But in quantum electrodynamics, the string confinement, there was no explanation.
When I was taking the course
from Schringer, I could have raised my hand and asked Schringer, why is the electron charge
equal, exactly equal in magnitude to the proton charge? Schringer would not have been able to
answer. Now, I mentioned this as a joke, because you know what would happen in Schringer's courses
if you raise your hand to ask a question. You were told beforehand by the other older students,
they're not supposed to raise your hand and ask questions. Schringer just would ignore
that. It is sort of a little bit like Dirac when Dirac was lecturing. You may run the risk of being
kicked out of the room if you have to ask a question. Okay. Now, let me ask, why is space
times three plus one dimensional? You know, always wonder about that when you started studying physics.
A quantum field theory is in this sense less intellectually complete than string theory.
String theory actually specializes the space time dimension. Now, quantum field theory,
of course, can be written in any space time dimension. It could be written in any,
nothing in quantum field theory fixes the dimension of space. Now, string theory, of course,
is much more restrictive. And as you all know, probably, that it could only be written in nine
plus one dimensional space time. So this is also a joke. String theory predicts that space
time has to be nine plus one dimension. And they have to scramble to compactify six of these
unseen dimensions. Okay, I'm going to wrap up. This is one of the last things I mentioned,
because I want some, perhaps some young people can solve this. To me, one of the greatest mysteries
in physics is that the dynamical evolution of quantum world is given by an exponential of the
Hamiltonian. And the Boltzmann factor in statistical physics also given by the exponential
of the Hamiltonian. So there's a connection between imaginary time and inverse temperature.
Is this just a coincidence or deeper? Over the years, I've asked a number of very famous
distinguished physicists this, and people seem to think that two different opinions, some people
think it's just a coincidence, and some people think it may have a deeper significance. I don't
know the answer. And I thought about it also. But be that as in May, it has some very useful
consequences. One very useful consequence is that it could be applied to calculating the
Hawking temperature of a black hole, basically almost in two lines. This is shown in my book.
But of course, I didn't invent that. I think that was invented by Gibbons and Hawking.
And you just analytically continue to this imaginary time, and you get the temperature.
I mentioned that this has some very useful consequences. I just mentioned one. I mentioned
another consequence, which is that for a long time, we had these fundraising events
in Santa Barbara. Santa Barbara is full of rich people, and you may have heard.
And so we're trying to get some of those rich people to give money. And the attitude is, of
course, I'm rich, so why should I give money to a bunch of theoretical physicists?
So I tell them, well, I'll tell you some very interesting, fascinating thing, that temperature,
you know, just imaginary time. And this always blows them away. So anyway, another useful consequence
is that partition function in statistical physics and in mind, many body physics could be represented
as Euclidean field theory in contrast to Minkowski field theory, because we have to continue,
right? It's imaginary time, so we continue instead of the Minkowski metric, we continue
to Euclidean metrics. And many other problems in physics can then be represented as quantum field
theory. So this just to show you that quantum field theory is very useful in many areas of physics.
So finally, I conclude by saying something that everybody in physics knows, everybody in theoretical
physics, there have been two great attempts at two great marriages. And the great marriage of
the 20th century was that quantum physics was married to special relativity. And as I emphasized
in the first transparency, this led to this very rich and marvelous subject called quantum field
theory, not Einstein, two daughters. One is called special relativity, the other is called general
relativity. And in the late 20th century, and now continuing into the early 21st century,
people are trying to marry quantum physics to general relativity. And we don't know what it
will reproduce, what it will produce. It would perhaps some people say string theory, but it
could be something else. It would be exciting if it's something that nobody has thought of
and waiting for, just waiting for a young person in the audience to discover.
So with that, I end my talk and thank you very much for inviting me to give the Maxwell lecture
at Cambridge University. Thank you. And thank you so much for coming here. There was a very
interesting talk and we have had so many questions. So let's see. So I guess it's a bit hard to hear
the applause, but I'm sure the chat will give it anyway. So the first question that we have
from the audience regards, you mentioned in the start of your talk regarding gravitons.
And they're asking, how likely do you think it is that gravitons actually exist?
Are there any experimental evidence for them? That's an extremely good question. Thank you.
Well, if we treat the gravitational field like any other field, as some people advocate,
then Einstein's theory is some action governing the behavior of this field, g mu nu,
and we expand g mu nu. Then it has a propagator as an interaction. It acts completely like a particle.
So I think from this point of view, many of us believe in graviton. Now, an opposite point of view
is propagated by Dyson, which I mentioned in my book on gravity, and which I'll mention in this
book I'm working on also. Dyson said, if you're going to ever measure the effect of a graviton,
so for example, in the analog of the photoelectric effect to see a graviton kicking out an electron
from a piece of metal, you can easily sit down and do the estimate. It'll be longer than the age
of the universe. And so it's clearly experimentally impossible to actually see a graviton. And so
Dyson said, I don't care about gravitons, and we should not talk about gravitons,
and we should not even quantize gravity. I mentioned that there was also a possibility
that some people do not want to quantize gravity. I'm not sure. So what I said in my book is that
I took the easy way out. I said on the weekends, I tend to believe Dyson, but the other days of the
week, I don't believe him. So I was very honored and privileged also to have seen Dyson in Princeton
a couple years before he passed away. And he is one of my favorite persons to talk to.
And I like the fact that he's very anti-establishment. So maybe gravitons don't exist, but we don't know.
We really don't know. I hope that answers your question. I think it's actually a mistake. I don't
agree with this fact that if you don't see it experimentally, there's no hope of experimentally
ever seeing it. Then it's not a useful thing to think about. In the 19th century, you know,
you can say the same thing. I mean, I think that was basically what people like Mark
were saying, that you cannot see atoms. So maybe you shouldn't talk about atoms.
You cannot see electrons. I don't like that philosophy.
To follow up a bit on then, what is, so where is it then that the problems come in with
quantum gravity? If we have this field of gravitons and we can describe it with the same
methods as we can, the electric field or the photon field, where do the problems arise?
Yes, yes, yes. Another very good question. Is this asked by the same person?
This is by me. This is just a short follow-up.
Yes, yes, that's also a very good question. So if you formulate,
you know, you quantize the gravitational field just by the usual method, and you have Feynman
diagrams. Okay, so you consider scattering two gravitons one on one with center mass energy
capital E. Then you soon see the next order correction get larger and larger as the energy
goes up. But the energy has to go all the way up to the Planck energy for this to happen.
So the perturbation series sort of doesn't make sense. So, but again, Professor Dyson,
you know, I was tempted to say Freeman, but somehow I'm really inhibited from saying that.
Professor Dyson would not like that at all. So that you shouldn't even, therefore,
Professor Dyson would say, well, you shouldn't even be scattering gravitons and gravitons in the
first place. But that's one way of seeing it. And you can certainly see that if you just quantize
the graviton in the usual way, you get into a lot of troubles. But what Dyson is saying,
that he says the quantum physics, quantum mechanics should not apply to the gravity.
But I find that view is probably inconsistent in my book. I talk about that also. You cannot say
that half of the world is quantum and the other half is not quantum. So I don't know. I really
don't know. Okay, it's one of the open questions, I guess, of physics. Then we have another question
which relates to, is there a possibility that there may exist fields we don't know about yet?
Is there a possibility that there are fields that we don't know anything about yet?
Yeah.
Of course. Dark energy may be represented by a field that we don't know anything about.
Although if you ask me to bet, I would bet the dark energy is just the cosmological constant.
We don't know what the dark matter is, but quite likely that matter is just
a particle described by a field. I published a paper on that a long time ago.
So I think that matter is just a scalar particle, a scalar field. It could be. We don't know. So
suddenly there may be fields we don't know anything about. So the experimentalists have to
sharpen the experiment.
Yeah. Okay. Then we have another question about expanding on quantum field theory,
in particular regarding loop quantum gravity. They're asking if loop quantum gravity is more
complete than QFT?
I'm not sufficiently of an expert on loop quantum gravity, so I don't want to say anything. I think
you should invite somebody from loop quantum gravity, like Ashtakar or somebody like that,
somebody reputable in loop quantum gravity. I think not everyone in loop quantum gravity is
reputable. According to some measure, of course, a subjective measure. But maybe somebody like
Ashtakar can answer that question. Okay. Thank you very much. Then we have one question regarding.
Quickly add to that. And this again, I'm not an expert on loop quantum gravity. This is only by
hearsay from my string theory friends. You know, one of the things quantum field theory is able
to calculate what the Hawking temperature is using field theory methods. But it cannot
understand, it cannot tell us where those hidden degrees of freedom come from. And I understand
that string theory could explain, could identify those degrees of freedom. This is the famous
calculation of Alfa and Strowman. But I heard from my string theory friends that the loop
gravity people cannot even reproduce that result. So I don't know. I just remember that. Okay. Thanks.
Okay. Thank you very much. Then we have a question about the the Yang-Noil mass gap.
We have if we have a question asking, what would solving it mean for physics? The millennium
always question. That is has to do with confinement. And so that's a detail of the strong
attraction. Now Gell-Mann proposed quarks. And quarks are never seen in the experimental
search board in the 1960s and so on so forth. So Gell-Mann proposed that quarks were permanently
confined. But that seems very plausible. But has never been proven. So that's one of the millennium
price problems which I encourage young people to work on is to prove confinement. And a simpler
version of confinement is just to prove that there's a mass gap in QED and QCD in quantum
chromodynamics. Okay. Then then thank you very much for that. Then we have another question
regarding regarding what's it called. If there is so you mentioned in the early section of your talk
regarding how spin can be used to predict whether a force is attractive or repulsive
between identical particles. And they're asking if there is a reason why spin zero attractions
like the strong force are much larger than spin two forces like gravity. Is there an underlying
reason for this or is it? Okay. That's a very good question. I think the free bonus of gravity
is not understood why gravity is the characteristic energy scale, the Planck energy,
is so much higher than anything we have explored. So this we also don't understand.
Here I can offer you a speculation. Okay. And this is just a wild speculation.
Why are humans so large compared to atoms and the fundamental particles?
And the reason is entropy, right? If we are made up of 20 atoms or something or a few hundred atoms,
we would be very unstable. I mean, entropic effects would fall apart and so on and so forth.
It's hard to imagine that we can do anything like reproduce ourselves and create physics and so
if we made us a thousand particles. So whether it's a big number comes from 10 to the 23.
And the reason is gravity is so feeble is also has to be related to the fact that we are so huge
because even if gravity is a lot stronger, gravity would be crushing us as well.
So I don't know. That's just a speculation. I mean, I'm not talking about gravity being
10 times stronger than it is now. Suppose the Planck mass instead of 10 to the 19 GV
is 10 to the 9 GV or something like this, 9 orders of magnitude. So gravity
would be 18 orders of magnitude stronger. I mean, we'll be crushed for sure, I think. So that may be
one speculation. Okay. Okay. Thank you very much. Then I reckon we maybe have time for one more
question or should we say that's the final one? I'm fine answering a few more questions,
if you like. I mean, I will say we had at our peak, we had 400 people watching and now
actually it's gone down. We have slightly fewer now that the talk is nearing its end.
But they will be very, very active.
On YouTube, there will be a lot more views. I checked my talk in radio institutions
through a couple of months ago and a lot more views than that now. Anyway, I'm happy to answer a
few more questions. Yes. Let me see if I can find some good ones. So I guess there's a more
not necessarily related to the subject of physics, but rather related to studying physics.
There is a person asking if it's too late for someone to pursue physics at the age of 25
and whether it will still be possible to get into academic field our research when starting at that age.
I think this question is also a very good question. I'm asked for advice quite often.
This is a quite unusual question, but I think it's worth answering seriously.
I think that it's too complex for this question. One is institutional and societal or whatever
you want to call it institutional. That when you're a certain age, it's very difficult to get
into a good graduate school, et cetera, because places are limited and so on and so forth.
Getting into a graduate school, a good graduate school, is important. I think getting into a
good undergraduate school is not so important because quantum mechanics taught at Stanford
and quantum mechanics taught at Bundak University is the same quantum mechanics.
When you get into graduate school, you hear things from the great masters and so on and so forth.
So that's an institutional question. If you're 25, it may be hard to get into physics,
but on the other hand, the second part of the question is, of course, it depends on your ability.
If you have strong enough mental abilities, never too late, why 25 should be cut off age?
Why not 35 and even 45 and so on? I don't completely subscribe to this thing that
Dirac said that if you are 25 and you haven't done anything in theoretical physics,
you might as well go kill yourself or something. I think that's an awful thing to say.
There are many examples of people who pursue other things and switch into physics quite late,
people that were in engineering and so on. So it's certainly possible, but it of course all
depends on your ability. I mean, Ed Whitten, I was on the admissions committee that admitted him
to graduate school at Princeton and he was a very special case because his undergraduate major
or sociology and he had not taken a single physics course. So he was admitted to Princeton
and some of the other graduate students complained to me, even said that who is this guy? He's
taking the undergraduate quantum mechanics course and he doesn't even understand classical
mechanics. He's like asking us questions about Newton's, about classical mechanics.
But then at the end of the course, all the other students are going to him for help. So it depends
on your mental ability, obviously, rather than age. I mean, you can certainly find examples of people
that shown their brilliance later in life. So don't take what Dirac said seriously.
Okay. Thank you so much. And then I reckon, I guess this is, I'm going to take the opportunity
to ask a question of my own, actually, because I have that power. So when you were talking
a bit earlier on your slides about gauge fields and redundancy in description,
you mentioned something called twisters, that you mentioned that might be a way out of it.
What is a twister? Is that something that can be explained? Well, you are in England. You just
have to go those 83 miles. I remember it was 83 miles, right? You just have to move 83 miles,
go over to Oxford and ask Roger Penrose. He'll be happy to explain to you. Okay. But in a word,
read my quantum field theory book, the last part of my quantum field theory book, which is the stuff
I added after the first edition. There, modern-day people have done these calculations in QCD,
and for example, five gluon scattering. So in QCD, you have these gluons, Young-Mills particle,
two gluon scattering producing three. And I've forgotten how many, the exact number,
how many Feynman diagrams you have to use computers to calculate. And the result,
when printed in a journal page at the usual resolution, it's just a doc smudge. I think
I showed this doc smudge in my quantum field theory book. But this calculation using twisters
could be done in one line, basically. Okay. So there's a better, there's a more common word
for twisters these days. People call it electricity spinners. Some of the people doing electricity
spinners also told me that in the early days of the program, they don't want to call it twisters
because Roger has some other wild ideas and so on and so forth, as you guys all know.
And they don't want it to be confused with some of Roger's other ideas and so on and so forth.
So it's not called twisters now. Okay. Thank you very much. Thank you very much. I'll have to go
to Oxford then. Yes, yes. Catch him before he goes to Stockholm. And when you see him,
you can thank him for, thank him for me. You said, for writing the preface to my book,
for writing the forward to my book, he wrote a very nice forward.
Other questions? Yeah.
Today is much higher level than the questions at the Royal Institution.
I mean, I guess we should thank the audience for that. They've all been brilliant and very,
and that's very, very interesting. Absolutely. I guess, I think we should probably wrap up at
this point, especially because there are many good questions still, but I don't think that most of
them can be answered in a short time. But thank you so much for the talk. And I mean, if we get
the opportunity, we would be happy to host you here some other time in Cambridge once this
pandemic ends. I should say to the people in the audience that, just as a reminder that we host
weekly talks, and we also have a talk next week by Paul Scheikin on using information
content to think about phases, which I hope many of you will attend. And in addition to that, we
also have, for the first year students at Cambridge, we have next week coming up a pub quiz
to help you get to know each other a bit better. And other than that, I think that's the end of
the stream. Thank you very much for the Archimedeans and have a good night.
