Hello. I'm Tom Rollins, President of the Teaching Company. These lectures are part of the Great
College Courses on Tape series. They are produced by the Teaching Company. The lectures on these
tapes are titled Thomas Jefferson, American Visionary. The lecturer is Professor Darren
Staloff. Dr. Staloff received his PhD from Columbia University in 1991. He served as a
postdoctoral fellow at the Institute for Early American History and Culture in Williamsburg,
Virginia from 1991 to 1993. Professor Staloff has received numerous fellowships and awards,
including the Rifkind and Eisner scholarships from the City College of New York in 1997. His
publications include numerous articles and reviews, and his book, The Making of an American
Thinking Class, Intellectuals and Intelligencia in Puritan, Massachusetts, was published in 1998
by the Oxford University Press. You will find an outline of each lecture in this series in the
course guide that accompanies these tapes. The course guide also includes a glossary, timeline,
biographical notes, and bibliography. You may find it useful to review the outlines before and after
listening to the lectures.
Lecture 1 The Allure and Challenge of Thomas Jefferson
Good morning. My name is Darren Staloff. I teach Early American History at the City College of
New York, and I want to welcome you all to what will be, I hope, an extremely exciting,
stimulating, and rewarding set of lectures. Our topic, the career, legacy, and meaning of
Thomas Jefferson, his life, his writings, his activities as a statesman, is certainly one of
the most exciting stories in early American history, and it's one which any early American
historian like myself faces with no small amount of trepidation. The reason is because
Jefferson, unlike any other figure of the early national and revolutionary period, has a remarkable
relevance to us. His stature is absolutely immense. Not only in the obvious sense, he's on our
currency, he's in Mount Rushmore, his words are emblazoned in the glittering memorial to him in
our nation's capital, but also because, in fact, he's probably the most revered of early
American statesmen. Sure, we love George Washington, but no one reads anything Washington's ever
written except for that famous farewell address, which he didn't actually write. The reason is
because Washington's oddly distant from us, irrelevant, he's part of a past epoch. Franklin
II is someone who gains our affection, but by the time we get to the revolutionary and early
national periods, Franklin's greatest moments of his career are, in fact, behind him. Jefferson,
in that way, is unique, not only because his career spans the formative period of our nation,
but also because Jefferson, unlike all of his contemporaries, is uniquely relevant to us. As
we'll see, Jefferson is, in fact, the spokesman for the Democratic American Ideal. He's the
champion of the West, of the farmer, of the libertarian government which he helped establish,
which demands the dignity of the common man and tries to establish means for uplift and mobility.
Well, why do we have so much trepidation in dealing with Jefferson? In part because his career is
incredibly diverse. What I'd like to argue, in fact, is that studying Jefferson is not like your
traditional historiographical or historical biographical study. It's not your usual historical
field trip. It's big game hunting. And this is not just a huge target. It's one that covers an
incredible amount of terrain. We tend to think of him as a great statesman, as a president, as the
author of the summary view of the Rights of British America, one of the most radical revolutionary
documents written prior to Thomas Paine's common sense. But he was more than that. He was a student
of natural science. In fact, he was probably one of the only people in North America that could do
the higher order calculus required to follow Newton's arguments in the Principia Mathematica. He
was a botanist. He was a biologist. He was a social scientist. He studied political economy. He read
deeply in what would count at the time as sociology and political theory. He was a philologist, a
study of languages both ancient and modern, Greek, Latin, Italian, French, and a variety of
Amerindian languages, even German and Anglo-Saxon, as we'll see. He was an inventor. He made a superior
moldboard plow, a series of mechanical devices, including clocks, all of which were remarkable for
their efficiency and elegance.
