He was an anthropologist, both physical and cultural.
He was an archaeologist.
He was a diplomat.
He was a vice president.
He was a leader and champion in the struggle for the Bill of Rights.
He was a member of the House of Burgesses, president of the American Philosophical Society,
two-time governor of Virginia, wrote the Northwest Ordinance, and of course purchased
Louisiana.
Oh, and he wrote the Declaration of Independence.
What I'm trying to suggest is that Thomas Jefferson did in a month more than most of
us will do in a lifetime.
And keeping up with him and the variety of things he engages in his career is no small
challenge.
Well, there's an even greater challenge involved in studying Jefferson, which is the difficulty
of penetrating into his character and finding the common threads that seem to unite his
beliefs.
Perhaps the best way of demonstrating this is by looking at the nature of his legacy.
And it's really unique in American history.
We think of the other great revered figures of our political past, people like Lincoln
and Franklin Delano Roosevelt, and they certainly loom large, but they each have a particular
party affiliation.
Lincoln, the champion of the Grand Old Party, Franklin Roosevelt, the creator of the New
Deal Coalition, which informs the current Democratic Party.
Jefferson is different.
Jefferson is appropriated by both Democrats and Republicans.
Our current president, William Jefferson Clinton, began his march to the inaugural
by visiting Monticello.
At the same time, Newt Gingrich and George Will claimed to be staunch Jeffersonians.
It doesn't just devolve on the major political parties, it's wider than that.
For example, the political theorist Richard K. Matthews has argued that, a very perceptive
reading of Jefferson, that Jefferson is, in fact, a proto-socialist anarcho-syndicalist.
He's a champion of grassroots participatory democracy, and he has real misgivings about
the rights of private property.
At the same time, perhaps the greatest American poet of the 20th century, as repound, has
argued in a book called Jefferson and or Mosulini, that Jefferson is, in fact, the spiritual
forebearer of fascism.
Jefferson is appropriated by left-wing libertarians and by right-wing militias.
Looking at Jefferson's political legacies in some ways like looking at a warshaw, we
find what we want.
Well, that's reflected also in studying the man as well as the legacy.
Jefferson has been studied by some of the greatest American historians, and they all
come out with the same conclusion.
They've cited him.
They've hunted this big game, but they can never capture him.
Perhaps the most successful endeavor has been Joe Ellis' recent award-winning study of him,
and won the National Book Award.
In fact, it's a fantastic book.
The title and American Sphinx, the character of Thomas Jefferson.
And that, I think, is very apt.
Jefferson is, in many ways, a riddle.
He's an enigma.
It's hard to get to know Jefferson, and we're going to explore some of the reasons that's
the case.
Dumas Malone spent a lifetime studying Thomas Jefferson.
He read 60,000 pieces of correspondence, state papers, commonplace books, garden books,
account books.
After a lifetime and six volumes of magnificent biography, he concluded by saying, I never
really got to understand the guy.
He eluded me.
So we have quite a challenge ahead of us.
I want to talk a little bit about why it is such a great challenge.
It largely has to do with Jefferson himself, the fact that he doesn't want us to know
him at a personal and private level.
He's extremely private.
He's extremely secretive.
He kept no diary.
His autobiography contains exactly two paragraphs about his early life before he's a college
student, and even those paragraphs mention nothing about his experiences that merely
tell us about who his father and his mother was.
What we could have, perhaps, tried to call from his childhood and his personal life,
his correspondence with his wife and mother, are gone.
Presumably, the correspondence with his mother was destroyed in a shadow well.
After his wife died, he burnt the correspondence with his wife.
So Jefferson tries to keep us at a distance.
Let me give you some examples.
Outside of family members, no one ever recalls hearing Thomas Jefferson laugh in his lifetime.
No one ever recalls him telling a joke.
His daughter, Martha Jefferson, who was devoted to him and spent almost all of her life by
his side, remembers only twice did he lose his temper, and even then he didn't even raise
his voice.
He just sort of raised his eyebrows and gave a steely look at those he was angry at.
So we're looking at a man who wears a very heavy Stoic mask of manners, and while many
have seen that mask of manners as the genuine Jefferson, Jefferson himself, as he informs
his grandson, is aware that it's not.
It is a mask.
He writes to Thomas Randolph in 1808, In truth, politeness is artificial good humor.
It covers the natural want of it, and ends by rendering habitual a substitute nearly
equivalent to the real virtue.
