I want now to look briefly at Jefferson's experience in Williamsburg as a college student.
Because while Williamsburg was hardly a huge city, it was the capital of Virginia.
And Thomas Jefferson soaked up its life.
He attends parties and dances, races and fox hunts, and of course sits in at the sessions
of the House of Burgesses and the General Court.
While in Williamsburg, small in width introduced him to the colonial governor, Francis Faqir.
And together they form what he calls a party quarry, a foursome.
It's a remarkable assemblage.
These three older and sophisticated men, Governor Faqir himself was a member of the Royal Society.
He was over 60 years old.
They're fraternizing with the 16-year-old.
From them he claims to hear, and I quote, more good sense, more rational and philosophical
conversation than in all my life besides.
Well, this is an important part of Jefferson's experience.
This is where Jefferson shines in small communities of discourse where enlightenment conversations
and refined discussions can show off his incredible intellect and charm.
But they're more than that.
They're also important symbols for Jefferson, symbols of father figures and role models.
I had the good fortune to become acquainted, he writes, very early with some characters,
a very high standing, and to feel the incessant wish that I could even become what they were.
For temptations and difficulties I could ask myself, what would Dr. Small, Mr. Whith,
do in this situation?
I'm certain that this motive deciding my conduct tended more to its correction than any reasoning
powers I possessed.
Jefferson though was a normal college student.
He didn't only live with the bantam of Williamsburg, he also fraternized with his friends.
And Jefferson's closest friends at William and Mary were all old classmates from Maori
school, fellows like John Page, Dabney Carr and Jack Walker.
Together they formed something called the Flat Hat Club, a juvenile association devoted
to the usual hijinks when associated with college students.
They drank, they danced, they gambled, they gossiped about women.
But Jefferson's unique among them because according to Page he was the only one who,
and I quote, could tear himself away from his dearest friends to fly to his studies.
Well finally I want to look at the way, a remarkable contrast in Jefferson, the way
he deals with women.
Because he's utterly with himself and confident among his male compatriots, even with these
older distinguished gentlemen.
But around girls he is shy and bashful.
There's a wonderful story about his romance with Rebecca Burwell.
She's a 16 year old sister of one of his classmates that he meets in 1762 in Williamsburg.
He calls it Devilsburg because it's the Sin City.
He is absolutely mortified.
I mean he's enchanted with her and he can't speak to her.
He's absolutely afraid for a full year.
Nonetheless, while he still hasn't spoken to her, she's mentioned over nine times in
letters.
Finally, he works up the courage to ask her for a silhouette that he can put in his watch
fob.
He can put in his watch, excuse me.
Once he gets it, in short order it becomes drenched in torn and he's afraid to ask for
another.
He keeps begging his friend, Page, please treat for me.
Go and play Cyrano de Bergerac to her for me.
Page refuses.
Finally, he meets up with her in Williamsburg on October 17th, 1763 and he writes the following
remarkable letter to John Page.
In the most melancholy fit that ever any poor soul was, I sit down to write to you.
Last night, as Mary is agreeable company in dancing with Belinda, that's his nickname
for Rebecca Burwell, Belinde, beautiful by day, Belinda.
When the Apollo Room could make me, I never could have thought that the succeeding son
would have seen me so wretched as now I am.
I was prepared to say a great deal.
I had so dressed up in my own mind such thoughts has occurred to me in as moving a language
as I know how and I expected to have performed in a tolerably, tolerably creditable manner.
But good God, when I had an opportunity eventing them a few broken sentences uttered in great
disorder and interrupted with pauses of uncommon length were the two visible marks of my strange
confusion.
Jefferson was reduced to the traditional young man's a-ha-ma-na-ha-ma-na-ha-ma-na-hey.
Jefferson then tries to treat with her, tries to offer his love, beg her to obliquely in
his own shy way, offer an engagement to her if she'll wait for him to return from his
grand tour.
She's absolutely silent on this undoubtedly because it's an incredible suggestion.
He takes that silence quite optimistically as a scent.
His friend John Page urges him, you've got to pursue her.
You can't let her walk away from that.
You've got to nail this down.
But Jefferson is unwilling to speak to her again, in part because he's afraid of what
will obviously be the case.
He's going to learn that she's not willing to agree to this.
And the next spring, he in fact learns that she's engaged to be married.
But what does this tell us about Jefferson?
It tells us that Jefferson is a normal young man.
But what we also see is connected to this normal young man with his normal shyness and
insecurities is a remarkable intellect, a precocious mind, one that's negotiating between
on the one hand a growing and soaring intellect, on the other a very shy and quiet emotional
core.
What we're going to do in our subsequent lectures is trace this contrast between inner core and
external appearance, the appearance of a benign mind through his experiences, not only as
a revolutionary American, but then abroad as his thinking matures and becomes more and
more radical and then finally see how this impacts his presidency, his retirement and
what sense we make of it in his overall career.
What I hope you've come away with from this first lecture is the sense that Jefferson's
early childhood was in many ways, although hard to get at, important in forming the emotional
and psychological core of his subsequent development.
