A short volume which, to quote him again, was of 46 pages of pure and unsophisticated
doctrines.
Well, obviously as a radical free thinker of his day, Jefferson was in advance of most
of the nation.
He was also probably the most advanced spokesman for a complete separation of church and state.
In notes in the State of Virginia, he writes, it's error alone which needs the support
of government.
Truth can stand by itself.
With opinion to coercion, whom will you make your inquisitors, fallible men, men governed
by bad passions, by private as well as public reasons?
And why subject it to coercion?
To produce uniformity?
But is uniformity of opinion desirable?
No more than a face and stature.
And here is the glowing pluralism of Jefferson.
And again, I mention this because at the time he's writing these doctrines, there are still
established churches after the Revolution.
Indeed, in New England, these churches were remain established well into the 19th century.
That's not the Jeffersonian tradition.
Jefferson had been instrumental in eliminating divinity as a subject of the College of William
and Mary.
And when he formed the University of Virginia, he likewise assured that there would be no
professorship of divinity.
In one sense, however, Jefferson is out of touch with the American religious experience.
And that is that Jefferson is extremely optimistic in the belief that rational or natural religion
will shortly replace revealed religion in America.
He sees this as the triumph of reason over superstition, something which obviously was
not correct.
As he writes to Adams in 1813, I very much suspected of thinking men would have the courage
to think for themselves and to speak what they think would be found they do not differ
in religious opinions as much as is supposed.
I remember to have heard Dr. Priestly, a British radical theologian and Unitarian, to say that
if all England would candidly express themselves and confess, they would find that Unitarianism
was really the religious religion of all.
It is too late in the day for men of sincerity to pretend they believe in the Platonic mysticisms
that the three are one and one is three.
This constitutes the craft, the power, and the prophet of the priests.
Sweep away their Gothamer fabrics of factitious religion and they would catch no more flies.
We should all, then, like the Quakers, live without an order of priests, moralize for
ourselves, follow the oracle of conscience or moral sense, and say nothing about what
no man can understand nor therefore believe.
I want now to turn to Jefferson's aesthetic views, which again are a curious combination.
Again, they're naturalistic.
Just like his religious beliefs are naturalistic, natural religion, natural aesthetics.
For him, nature is a sort of beauty and order, but nature is both classicist and proto-romantic.
On the one hand, look at him architecturally.
He's a strict disciple of Andreas Palladio's classicism.
Andreas Palladio was a great 16th-century Italian architect, and he adores Roman ruins
while he's in Europe.
In fact, he uses the famous Maison Carré as his model for the Virginia State House,
and these pieces of architecture exemplify the ideals of symmetry and geometrical order
and harmony.
In fact, what they're doing architecturally is imposing a mathematical rationality on
space, a vision of nature as essentially law-like and orderly.
On the other hand, Jefferson's literary tastes are decidedly sentimental and proto-romantic.
His favorite writer was Lawrence Stern.
In fact, he never traveled without a pocketbook version of Stern in his possession.
He was like a talisman, a Bible to him.
One of his other favorite writings was the great epic of Asean.
It's in fact not a real epic.
It's a forgery created in the 18th century telling the stories of the ancient European
peoples before the Roman incursions.
It's extremely romantic and hyperbolically sentimental.
When Jefferson learns that it's a fraud, he still embraces it, he still loves it.
There's something about the romantic that deeply attracts him, and perhaps the best
expression of this is found in notes on the state of Virginia in his episodic descriptions
of the Virginia topography.
They're riddled with the Berkian romantic aesthetic of the beautiful and the sublime.
Now, what is the sublime?
For Berk, the sublime is an aesthetic experience that creates in us a sense of awe, of terror
and majesty.
It draws us out of ourselves.
It forces us to be overwhelmed by a powerful external experience, by the raw power of nature.
Things like shipwrecks and stormy seas.
