Well, listen to his description of the topography of Virginia, particularly the meeting of the
passage of the Potomac through the Blue Ridge Mountains.
The passage of the Potomac through the Blue Ridge is perhaps one of the most stupendous
scenes in nature.
You stand on a very high point of land.
On your right comes up the Shenandoah, having rained along the foot of the mountain a hundred
miles to seek event.
On your left approaches the Potomac in quest of a passage also.
In the moment of their juncture, they rush together against the mountain, rend it asunder,
and pass off to the sea.
The piles of rock on each hand, but particularly on the Shenandoah, are the evident marks of
their disruption and avulsion from the beds by the most powerful agents of nature.
And here is a scene that draws us out of ourselves, we're overwhelmed by the power of natural
forces.
But he turns from that directly to the beautiful.
And for Burke, the beautiful is, in contrast to the sublime, orderly, it's tranquil, it
evokes from us an experience of spectatorial repose, it's gentle, it's caressing, and
I quote, but the distant finishing which nature has given to the picture is of a very different
character.
It is a true contrast to the foreground, it is as placid and delightful as that is wild
and tremendous.
And here he's playing up that imagery of beautiful and sublime, of powerful and gentle.
For the mountain being cloven asunder, she presents to your eye through the cleft a small
catch of smooth blue horizon at an infinite distance in the plain country.
Here's a wonderful sense of invitation to tranquil repose.
It invites you, as it were, from the riot and tummels roaring around to pass through
the breach and participate in the calm below.
And here we see Jefferson ranging not only from the strict classicism of Palladian order,
symmetry and elegance.
And I should point out, Jefferson had incredible hostility to the Georgian architecture in
Virginia and in the United States.
He believed strictly in first Palladian and then later when he began to see it for himself
in Europe, Roman architectural laws.
At the same time, we see him embracing what will be the 19th century's romanticism, the
notion of beautiful and sublime as well as rational and orderly.
And I think if we look over the mind of Jefferson, we have to be struck by this remarkable sense
of broad-ranging intellect bringing together a variety of different elements.
Naturalism, rationalism, scientism, the beautiful, the sublime, the orderly.
Fundamentally, then, what do we take from Jefferson's mind?
We take a rationalist, a scientist, a naturalist, but more than anything, an eclectic.
One who, some will say, was not a systematic thinker, but I would argue is in fact an artist,
a man with vision rather than philosophy, a man who sees doctrines not as dead dogmas
hanging over his head, but rather as living creeds with which he can fashion his own intellectual
experience and that of his nation.
And that's what we're going to do in our next lectures.
We're going to see how Jefferson takes these elements of rationalism, of order, of naturalism,
of moral sense, and applies them in creating the national identity of the American people.
And he does so in words and language, because language is the medium within which Jefferson
lives.
So we're going to trace how this worldview is instantiated, first in Jefferson's actions
in Virginia, in his famous documents, summary view of the rights of British America, and
the Declaration of Independence, and finally in the Notalist State of Virginia.
And then we'll see how this legacy becomes developed as Jefferson's thought turns to
the left as he begins to trace out the radical implications of these doctrines, formulating
creeds which will inform not only the revolutionary period, but will also set up the lines of
the thought for 19th century Jacksonian democracy and egalitarianism.
