Well, when that assembly meets, they do clear Jefferson and vote him thanks.
But Jefferson is bitter and he's disappointed at the way in which blame has been cast upon
him.
He writes to James Monroe, I consider that I have been 13 years engaged in public service
that during that time I had so totally abandoned all attention to my private affairs as to
permit them to run into great disorder and ruin that by a constant sacrifice of time
labor, loss, parental and family duties, I had been so far from gaining the affection
of my countrymen, which was the only reward I ever asked or could have that I have even
lost a small estimation I before possessed.
I stood arraigned for treason of the heart and not merely weakness of the head and I
felt that those injuries for such they have been since acknowledged and had inflicted
a wound on my spirit which will only be cured by the all healing grave.
Jefferson retires for one of what will be three retirements, but at this moment he expects
never to return to politics, he's bitter and disappointed.
Well bad news followed Jefferson at that time.
Not long after writing that letter, his wife became grievously ill.
He nurses her for over four months before she finally dies on 1145 a.m. September 6th,
1782.
His daughter recalls that as a nurse no female ever had more tenderness or anxiety.
He nursed my poor mother in turn with Aunt Carr and her own sister sitting with her and
administering her medicines and drink to the last.
Well we have a remarkable scene from this nursing period where as his wife is dying
she takes a piece of paper and begins to write a wonderful passage from their favorite author
Lauren Stern.
Time wastes too fast.
Every letter I trace tells me with what rapidity life follows my pen.
The days and hours of it are flying over our heads like clouds on a windy day never to
return more everything presses on and that's where her writing breaks off.
Apparently she's too weak to continue writing.
Jefferson takes the pen and finishes the passage.
And every time I kiss thy hand to bid adieu every absence which follows it are preludes
to that eternal separation which we are shortly to make.
And this reveals that Jefferson was in fact behind that mask of stoic manners a deeply
romantic emotional and passionate lover.
Jefferson took that piece of paper and he put it away for safekeeping, later adding
to it a lock of his dead wife's hair and he would keep that with him every day for
the rest of his life.
His daughter tries to describe what Jefferson was like after his wife had died.
The scene that followed I did not witness but the violence of his motion of his grief
when almost by stealth I entered his room at night to this day I dare not trust myself
to describe.
He kept his room for three weeks and I was never a moment from his side.
He walked almost incessantly night and day only lying down occasionally when nature was
completely exhausted on a pallet that had been brought in during his long fainting fit.
My aunts remained constantly with him for some weeks I do not remember how many when at last
he left his room he wrote out and from that time he was incessantly on horseback rambling
about the mountains in the least frequented roads and just as often through the woods.
From those melancholy rambles I was his constant companion, a solitary witness to many a violent
burst of grief.
Jefferson is at the low point of his life as public career has been discredited.
His private life has been destroyed the one great love of his life taken from him.
His slaves recall or claim at least that on her deathbed he promised never to remarry.
If so it's a promise Jefferson kept despite what we'll see where his other loves his wife
always held a central place in his life and in his experience.
What we're going to do in our next lecture is look at how Jefferson emerges from these
moments of despair particularly his governorship because what had distracted him from fighting
this great struggle against the British was drafting one of the most remarkable elegance
and important documents in early American letters the notes on the state of Virginia
and it's to that remarkable document that we turn in our following lecture.
