In our last lecture, we looked at Jefferson, the Revolutionary Virginian, and we saw Jefferson
at a moment of weakness, at a moment of failure, that moment being his experience as wartime
governor of Virginia. In this lecture, we're going to look at Jefferson in a moment of triumph.
Jefferson, not the military leader, but Jefferson, the visionary writer, the author.
Particularly, we're going to look at a remarkable book he wrote called Notes on the State of Virginia.
Notes on the State of Virginia is a classic of early American letters.
It's a work of both enlightened naturalism, social science, and as we'll see, it expresses,
in many ways, the development of Jefferson's thought. Now, the background to this text is,
as follows, Jefferson was submitted a series of interrogatories from the French ambassador
to the United States. He sent these to each of the governors, asking basically for some fairly
brief and cogent statistical information to allow and aid him in creating commercial treaties.
Jefferson takes that opportunity and transforms it, creating a classic work of American political
thought. So, what Jefferson does in Notes on the State of Virginia, and there's actually a play in
that title, is to look at not only the state of Virginia, the province, and its particular features,
but also the state or character of Virginia, the particular situation it finds itself in,
its level of development. And for Jefferson, Virginia is always symbolic of America, so it's
really a work about the state of America, where is America at? And I would be unfair not to point
that right away, that it is in part a work of patriotic boosterism, maybe even American provinciality.
He writes in stirring language,
In war we have produced a Washington whose memory will be adored while liberty shall
avow trees whose name will triumph over time, this despite the fact that Washington won only
about three or four battles in the entire war. In physics, we have produced a Franklin,
then whom no one of the present age has made more important discoveries, nor has enriched
philosophy with more or more ingenious solutions to the phenomena of nature. We have supposed
Mr. Rittenhouse, second to no astronomer living, that ingenious he must be first, because he is
self-taught. So part of this is clearly to represent America to Europe as a place of dynamic heroism
and enlightened science. But more importantly, for us, the work reveals the maturation of
Jefferson's thought, as his revolutionary experience has induced a growing radicalism,
a radicalism based on a mixture of high enlightenment theory, radical real-wig ideology,
and straightforward commonwealth sensibilities. It also, however, reveals the contradictions
in Jefferson's thought between the real and the ideal. And we're going to look at this in two
important dimensions, what I would argue are the two most important elements of Jefferson's notes,
particularly for his future political and philosophical development. And that is his
agrarianism and his strictures on slavery. So let's start with the agrarianism.
Jefferson is not unique in being an agrarian, but he is unique in that his agrarianism is not
based on pastoralism. Most agrarians draw on the Roman pastoral tradition, which celebrates
the retired life of wealthy aristocrats in private villas. Jefferson's agrarianism,
by contrast, takes on a distinctly radical and even moral tone, as he answers question 19 on
manufacturers. Those who labor in the earth are the chosen people of God, if ever he had a chosen
people, whose breasts he has made his peculiar deposit for substantial virtue, for substantial
and genuine virtue. It is the focus in which he keeps alive that sacred fire which otherwise
might escape from the face of the earth. Well, as we look at Jefferson's agrarian vision,
we're going to find that it's actually a combination of three elements. On the one hand,
the wig cult of independence. On the other, and almost through Soviet primitivism. And finally,
and critically important, traditional renaissance civic humanism. So first let's look at that
wig cult of independence. The wig cult of independence largely makes the argument that to
be a good citizen, one must be independent and independent in the sense that one is not dependent
on someone else for their career or income. So the key to that sort of independence is obviously
property. Because it's property which allows us to work for ourselves.
