Well, the final element to the agrarian vision is, of course, his civic humanism.
And by civic humanism, we mean a worldview in which the most fulfilling and rewarding
parts of life are considered those moments when one participates in the political activities
of the community, that it's in living as a political entity, that man achieves his highest
goal as a Zohan political, as a political animal.
In this regard, perhaps the most interesting claim he makes is that when we think of the
failure of civic humanism, the cause of it is that our principles of association are
simply too large for us to feel the bond of brotherhood necessary for that sort of political
community.
Right?
The sociologist called this the transformation from a gamine shaft to a gazelle shaft, from
a face-to-face community to an impersonal community.
His answer to that is always to break larger units down into smaller ones, make them the
locus of political society, thus allowing for the reemergence of civic humanism.
As he writes, it will be said that the great societies cannot exist without government.
The savages, therefore, break them into small ones.
Well, Jefferson's agrarian ideal is, in fact, exemplified in a plan he drew up for the Northwest
Territories, his name is Northwest Ordinance of 1784, which he submitted to Congress.
The provisions of it are pretty straightforward.
The settlers will establish a temporary government to adopt the constitution laws of any one
of these states, so that such laws, nevertheless, shall be subject to alteration by their ordinary
legislature.
So right away, Jefferson wants self-government on the ground.
Such temporary government shall only continue in force in any state until it shall have
acquired 20,000 freed inhabitants, not 20,000 voters, 20,000 freed inhabitants, which is
a fairly small number.
Then when giving due proof thereof to Congress, they shall receive from them authority with
appointments of time and place to call a convention of representatives to establish a permanent
constitution and government for themselves.
Now he has five interesting provisos in this scheme.
First, they have to remain within the United States.
Secondly, that in their persons property and territory, they shall be subject to the
government of the United States and Congress.
Third, they have to shoulder their part of the federal debt.
When we get to the last two provisos, these are the critical ones, the revealing ones.
Four, that their respective government shall be in Republican forms and shall admit no
person to be a citizen who holds any hereditary title.
So right away, Jefferson wants to preclude the possibility of the development of European
aristocracy.
Fifth, that after the year 1800 of the Christian era, there shall be neither slavery nor involuntary
servitude in any of the said states.
So again, we're back to Jefferson grappling with the problem of abolition, of slavery,
trying to limit it at least to the places where it presently exists.
Once those states reach a population equal to even the smallest of the original states,
they will hold a constitutional convention and be admitted into the government.
This plan is pretty much adopted by Congress in 1785.
The anti-slavery proviso is dropped, but the region is to be self-governed.
It's divided into small local districts, 36 square mile townships, divided into a variety
of lots.
One lot is reserved for public schools, several lots are reserved for the use of the federal
government and war veterans, and it's to be sold at auction in lots of at least 640
acres at about a dollar an acre.
And while this is hardly the sort of acreage and price which would attract the down and
out, it's also not the terms which will attract large speculators.
Jefferson again is envisioning people like his father taking advantage of this.
Lesser gentlemen, larger yeoman, moving their way up in the world.
Well, what I want to argue about Jefferson's agrarianism is that there's a fundamental
tension in it between the incredible idealism of his vision and the actual realities of
America, realities that Jefferson himself is aware of, and it's these tensions which
will in large part propel Jefferson's political development.
Take for example the Northwest Ordinance he passed.
It turns out to be an utter failure.
No one wanted to move west under those circumstances.
In fact, the only people that did were largely people called squatters, frontier folk who
move in, don't pay any taxes, don't claim the land, just move in there, don't try to
farm for commercial reasons, and basically just support themselves.
They're an unruly, violent place.
I think the best image you could have is the wild west.
That's sort of what his plan creates.
And there's a simple reason for this.
This was not that long ago.
Farmers then as well as now, people then as well as now, don't move into unofficial
open spaces.
They move into areas that are improved.
