Real estate is developed by land speculators who move in, lay down roads and infrastructure
and then resell lots at a profit, not that different from current real estate development.
And that's actually the way the Northwest Territories will be settled.
The critical figure in this is a fellow by the name of the Reverend Manasta Cutler, who's
a lobbyist for the Ohio Company, and he works out a deal whereby his company will purchase
outright 1.5 million acres of the Northwest area under the following conditions, which
he gets in the Northwest ordinance of 1787, that there not be local self-government, that
in fact the government be imposed by Washington, or at this point I should say the Colonial
Capital, which is probably Annapolis, that the government be comprised of a governor
and judges appointed by the Congress, and that only when they reach 5,000 adult male
voters will they be allowed to have a legislature, even then they cannot join the union until
they've reached 60,000 persons.
And while slavery is prohibited in line with Jefferson's original vision, contracts are
also insisted that they will be strictly enforced in the new territories.
So what we see here is that in reality the way the West will be settled is the same way
that suburban tracks are settled today by real estate developers who lay down the infrastructure
that allows farmers to produce productively in exchange for market.
There's also a contradiction between Jefferson's ideals of agrarianism and the actual realities
of the state of Virginia, and he even puts this in the notes, I'm going to quote two
important paragraphs.
The majority of men in the state, and here he's referring to Virginia, who pay and fight
for its support, are unrepresented in the legislature.
The role of free holders entitled to vote, not including generally the half of those
on the role of the militia or of the tax gatherers.
And among those who share the representation, the shares are very unequal, thus the county
of Warwick with only 100 fighting men as an equal representation with the county of Loudon,
which has 1,746.
Jefferson's statements on slavery, and I want to devote the rest of this lecture to
those because I think they're quite important.
On the one hand, there can be no doubt, Jefferson is a radical outspoken opponent of slavery.
On the other hand, he's a tortured racist, and it's this conflict between these two
elements, which really paralyzes him, and I would argue tortures his thinking about
slavery.
Well, first, his opposition to slavery.
He acknowledges that slavery is wrong.
It's a moral wrong.
It's an economic wrong.
It's a social wrong.
It violates the natural rights of Africans and impairs the character and sensibilities
of their masters.
I want to read the following passage, which, when John Adams read it, said, this passage
is worth diamonds.
It's in this answer to the question on manners.
The whole commerce between master and slave is a perpetual exercise of the most boisterous
passions, the most unremitting despotism on the one part, and degrading submissions on
the other.
Our children see this and learn to imitate it.
The parent storms, the child looks on, catches the liniments of wrath, puts on the same airs
in the circle of smaller slaves, gives the loose to his worst of passions, and thus nursed,
educated, and daily exercised in tyranny cannot but be stamped by it with odious peculiarities.
One can't help wondering if Jefferson is being self-referential here, as thinking about
the impact on his own character of his experience with slavery.
He writes, the man must be a prodigy who can retain his manners and morals undepraved by
such circumstances.
And with what execration should the statesman be loaded, who, permitting one half the citizens
thus to trample on the rights of the other, transforms those into despots, and these into
enemies, destroys the morals of the one part and the armoire patrie of the other.
For if a slave can have a country in this world, it must be in any other in preference
to that in which he is born to live and labor for another.
Well, Jefferson is that statesman, and I think Jefferson is tortured over this problem.
He points out, of the proprietors of slaves, a very small proportion indeed, or ever seen
to labor.
That speaks to his own condition.
Jefferson has never been behind a plow.
He's speaking of himself.
Indeed, I tremble for my country when I reflect that God is just, that His justice cannot
sleep forever, that considering numbers, nature, and natural means only, a revolution of the
wheel of fortune and exchange of situation is among possible events, that it may become
probable by supernatural interferences.
The Almighty has no attribute which can take side with us in such a contest.
