Lecture 6, Jefferson Abroad
In our last lecture, we looked at Jefferson as the author of the Notes on the State of
Virginia.
We saw Jefferson developing his agrarian radical vision for America and grappling with the
problem of slavery, a problem that would dog him throughout his life.
Now we turn to Jefferson Abroad, Jefferson's experience as a diplomat.
And these were critical years in Jefferson's experience, for it's in these years that
he finally overcomes the grief he feels at the loss of his wife, opens up emotionally
and falls in love not once but twice.
His political thought matures as his agrarian radicalism becomes more and more pointed,
and ultimately he's transformed by the French Revolution, an event which will change his
political career and with which he will identify for the rest of his life.
Now Jefferson's diplomatic activities began in May 1784 when he was appointed Minister
of Plenipotentry with Adams and Franklin.
He leaves from Boston with his daughter Martha, or Patsy as he called her, on July 5th of
that year.
And in the following March, finally succeeds if not replaces Benjamin Franklin as the ambassador
to France.
And he and Adams worked together on a variety of projects.
They worked to contain the depredations of the Algerian pirates.
Prior to the revolution, the American commerce and the Mediterranean had been protected by
the British.
And during the revolution by the French, after the revolution, they are subject to raids
by the Algerian pirates.
He engaged in efforts to promote trade and commerce in the whaling industry, in the fishing
industry, in the spermaceti oil industry.
And of course he works on behalf of the League of Armed Neutrality, attempt to create a union
of as many neutral states as a growing conflict emerges between Britain and France who try
to enforce the right of the free shipping of neutrals.
And perhaps most important of all, he and Adams worked together to secure necessary
financial support for the fledgling nation, particularly in Holland, loans which will
keep America from going bankrupt prior to the Constitutional Convention.
But Jefferson was not all work.
Jefferson imbibed the rich culture of Europe, its high culture.
He attended the theater.
He went to galleries, and more than anything, he seeped in its architecture.
As he writes from Nîmes, here I am, madam, gazing whole hours at the Maison Carré,
like a lover at his mistress.
Jefferson immersed himself in the salon culture of both Paris and London, attending galleries.
He also toured much of Western Europe.
With John Adams, he visits London and toured the English gardens in March of 1786.
In the following spring, he toured southern France and northern Italy, where he visits
the ruins I mentioned at Nîmes.
And in the next year, in the following spring of 1788, he toured Holland and the Rhineland.
Well, I want now to turn to Jefferson's emotional experience, Jefferson and love, because it's
in Paris that Jefferson emerges from his deep mourning from the death of his wife, and enters
in, as I've mentioned, not one, but two love affairs.
The first one we're going to look at is that with Maria Cosway, an affair that begins in
1786.
Now, Maria Cosway is a married woman.
She's married to the noted English miniaturist Richard Cosway.
Richard Cosway is a stark contrast to Jefferson.
He's very small, extremely slight, he's a bit of a phob.
Many Jeffersonians have suggested that he may have been homosexual, but it seems far
more likely that he was actually bisexual.
Certainly he's known, though Jefferson was not aware of this, to have been somewhat famous
for painting extremely expensive pornographic snuff boxes.
The point being that the Cosway marriage was a marriage of convenience, it was not a love
match.
Maria married him because she needed property, she needed money to support her family, her
mother in particular.
And Richard Cosway settled on her about 2,800 pounds and promised to care for her mother
for the rest of his life.
So we have a loveless marriage here, one which Jefferson will enter as a gallant hero, trying
to rescue this woman from her unhappiness.
And she is a remarkable woman in her own right, she's about 27 years old, quite feminine,
beautiful, she's a significant artist in her own right, and a London salonière, which
is to say she runs a salon or meeting place where men of letters will meet and talk about
issues of culture and politics.
