And here I want to turn to a very famous letter,
it will be the last thing I'll read on this subject,
this famous Adam and Eve letter to William Short.
William Short was a close friend of Jefferson's,
one of his intimates from Virginia,
who had come with him to Europe to be his secretary.
On falling in love with a married woman,
when Jefferson returned, Short continued the dalliance or affair
and decided to stay in Europe,
and would then, for the following years,
continue to send diplomatic dispatches
back to the American government.
And those dispatches detail with great clarity and specificity
the bloodshed of the height of the Jacobin terror,
as prisons are broken into and people are executed without trial,
charge, or even any sort of due process.
And Short had been detailing these things.
Well, at one point, Jefferson comes to the conviction
that he's finally starting to get Washington over to his point of view,
that Washington is ready to see the virtues of the French Revolutionary Experiment.
It's at that moment that he finally turns to Short to explain his misgivings.
January 3, 1793, after the height of the bloodshed of the great terror of France.
The tone of your letters had for some time given me pain,
on account of the extreme warmth with which they censured the proceedings
of the Jacobins of France.
I consider that sect as the same with the Republican Patriots,
and the Fuyants as the monarchical Patriots,
well known in the early part of the revolution,
and a little distant in their views, both having an object,
the establishment of a free constitution,
and differing only on the question whether their chief executive
should be hereditary or not.
The Jacobins, as since called, yielded to the Fuyants
and tried their experiment of retaining the hereditary executive.
The experiment failed completely and would have been brought on,
and would have brought on the re-establishment of despotism had it been pursued.
The Jacobins saw this, and that the expunging that officer was of absolute necessity.
Expunging that officer means decapitating Louis Capet, Louis XVI,
the man who single-handedly chose to help us fight our revolution.
And of course it was not just the death of Louis XVI, but of his wife.
But Jefferson doesn't flinch in the face of bloodshed.
In the struggle which was necessary, many guilty persons fell without the forms of trial,
and with them some innocent.
These I deplore as much as anybody, and shall deplore some of them to the day of my death.
But I deplore them as I should have done had they fallen in battle.
It was necessary to use the arm of the people,
a machine not quite so blind as balls and bombs,
but blind to a certain degree.
And this is a remarkable passage.
The Irish diplomat and scholar Conor Cruz O'Brien has looked at this,
and as a diplomat says, you know, this reminds me of Pol Pot.
This ability to look past mass murder and bloodshed,
and see it as, oh, just an occasional inaccuracy, some innocent people were executed.
But for Jefferson it's not the violence, but the stakes that are important.
The liberty of the whole earth was depending on the issue of the contest,
and was ever such a prize won with so little innocent blood.
My own affections have been deeply wounded by some of the martyrs to this cause,
but rather than it should have failed, I would have seen half the earth desolated.
Where there but an atom and an eve left in every country, and left free,
it would be better than as it is now.
I have expressed to you my sentiments, because they are really those of 99 and 100 of our citizens.
Now let's be clear, Jefferson probably sincerely believes that, but that's certainly not the case.
By the time reports of the Jacobin terror had arrived in America,
Americans had profound misgivings about their French ally,
and the Washington administration would come to consider most of its treaties with France,
as if not quite abrogated, at least not quite enforceable.
But for Jefferson, France remains a symbol, a symbol of revolutionary ardor,
of enlightened rationalism, of everything he's come to see as central to his own career.
And it will be that identification with France that will define the first party system,
the party system that separates, on the one hand, Jefferson and his Republicans,
and then the other Alexander Hamilton and his Federalists.
And that will be the subject we will examine in our next lecture.
