In our last lecture, we looked at Jefferson's tenure as Secretary of State, his growing
masterfully leads his party but leads it to a victory which would, in the long run, be
ultimate and almost complete. In 1796, Jefferson enters the list as the Republican candidate
for president and as elected vice president. We're going to look at three things. First is
initial gesture, which is a remarkable one. He considers creating a unity government with
the president, John Adams, who is the federalist leader. Then we'll see that he leads his party
through its low point in 1798-1800, a period of great crisis where it's really his masterful
leadership which allows the Republican party to remain intact. And finally, we'll result in his
election in 1800 as president of the United States despite some rather strange electoral
dealings. Well, let's begin with that election of 1796. After he learns, at least to his
satisfaction, that Adams is, in fact, going to be elected, his first thought is to propose a
unity government which is an incredibly high-minded ideal. And I think what motivated Jefferson
was the dangers of global war between France and Britain and the need to create unity at home
and overcome the vitriolic partisanship that threatened the nation. And I want to look at
Jefferson's proposal here. He actually writes a letter to Adams which he doesn't send to
Adams. He sends to Madison and closed in another letter so that Madison can counsel him on
whether to send or not. And what he writes to Madison is the following, and many people have
found this insincere on Jefferson's part, but I think it's not. I think it's actually the truth.
He writes, I can particularly have no feelings which would revolt at a secondary position to
Mr. Adams. I am his junior in life. What's his junior in Congress? His junior in the diplomatic
line. His junior lately in our civil government. And then he proposes the following consideration
for Madison, which is, and I want to quote it, if Mr. Adams can be induced to administer
the government on its true principles and to relinquish his bias to an English constitution,
it is to be considered whether it would not be on the whole for the public good to come to a good
understanding with him as to his future elections. He is perhaps the only sure barrier against
Hamilton's getting in. And this is, I think, an extremely high-minded and in some extent radical
proposal. What he wants to do is offer Adams the support of the Republican Party, literally
make Adams the president and then the president of the Republican president and then have Adams
reelected after that. He's willing to sacrifice his own turn as the first magistrate of the nation
for what he thinks is the good of the whole in creating unity. And I want to read the
enclosures that he would have sent to Adams. And he basically congratulates him on his coming
victory. I have never one single moment expected a different issue. And though I know I shall not
be believed, yet it is not the less true that I have never wished it. That your administration
may be filled with glory and happiness to yourself and advantage to us is the sincere wish of one
who though in the course of our voyage of life, of our voyage through life, various little
incidents have happened or been contrived to separate us, retains still for you the solid
esteem of the moments when we were working for our independence and sentiments of respect
and affectionate sentiment and affectionate attachment, excuse me. Well, unfortunately,
Madison advised him not to send the letter and thus was lost one of the great opportunities
in American political history to overcome partisan differences. I want to read Madison's reply
to Jefferson, at least a little bit of it. At first he lies out some rather dubious reasons
why the letter shouldn't be sent. Adams may not believe it, Adams already knows you care about
him, he might see it as a scheme, but then he gets down, of course, at the bottom of
the letter to the real reasons. The tenderness due to the zealous and active promoters of
your election makes it doubtful whether their anxieties and exertions ought to be depreciated
by anything implying the unreasonableness of them.
