I know that some individuals who have deeply committed themselves and probably incurred
the political enmity, at least of the president-elect, are already sore on this head.
Considering the probability that Mr. Adams' course of administration may force an opposition
to it from the Republican Quarter and the general uncertainty of the posture which our
affairs may take, there may be real embarrassments from giving written possession to him of the
degree of compliment and confidence which your personal delicacy and friendship have
suggested.
What Madison is stating here is that the Republicans are not planning to run to check
the Federalists, they're planning to run to win.
And Jefferson has placed himself at the head of that party, it's his responsibility to
lead it to victory.
Well, Jefferson and his opposition are placed in a very precarious position by developments
in foreign policy, specifically two events, the XYZ affair and the outbreak of the quasi-war.
The XYZ affair was a diplomatic embarrassment between the United States and France.
As the war between France and Britain intensified, both sides began to attack American shipping.
But the British much less so because we had a treaty with them, the French really began
to attack us in great measure.
Well, one of the things Adams does is dispatches three diplomats to try and resolve all differences
in the winter of 1797, 1798.
And the French minister is utterly unwilling to meet with them.
And in fact, it becomes apparent that if they want to get a treaty or at least meet with
the minister to work towards a treaty, they're going to have to pay a fairly substantial
bribe.
When news of this reaches the United States, the reaction is incredible hostility to France
and a sort of patriotic anger at this slight of American honor.
The slogan was millions for defense, but not one penny in tribute.
Well, conjoined to this is the fact that although we're not formally at war with France, Adams
feel necessary to defend American shipping.
So for two years, we fight what's known as a quasi war and undeclared naval war with
France.
And it's at this low point that Jefferson summons the best of his political acumen
in dealing with a crisis, a crisis which threatens to tar his party with the label of treason.
What does he do?
Well, first he counsels caution.
He suggests the Republicans neither panic nor do anything too extreme.
And then he engages in two brilliant political moves.
The first is damage or what we today call spin control.
He attempts to dissociate the Republican party from the French revolutionary cause.
His second is he's cautious and he knows that the Federalists cannot contain themselves
so he waits for them to overstep the bounds of reason.
And when they do, he seizes on two acts, the Alien and Sedition Act, as a violation of
state's rights.
And very briefly, the Alien Act dramatically increased the amount of time it took for immigrants
to become citizens that also allowed the president in time of war to arrest and deport
them on suspicions of spying or treason.
The Sedition Act made it a federal crime to defame the government and its officers.
And obviously this is meant to attack the Republican press.
And I should point something out first in defense of the Sedition Act, which is rarely
ever mentioned.
It does not, it does make an exception for truth.
If you can prove that the things you've said against the government are in fact the case,
it doesn't apply.
Also, almost every state has something like a Sedition Law.
So what's unique about this is that it's being enacted at the federal level.
Okay.
First, I want to turn to Jefferson's continued calls for optimism and patience.
He writes to Elbridge Gary, the unquestionable Republicanism of the American mind will
break through the mist under which it has been clouded, and will oblige its agents to
reform the principles and practices of their administration, so there's no cause for panic
and for extreme actions.
And as I've mentioned, he attempts to dissociate the Republican and French revolutionary causes,
and in fact goes so far as to insist that any such identification was not in fact Republican,
but was the result of federalist propaganda.
He writes to Thomas Lomax in 1799.
The atrocious proceedings of France toward this country had well-nigh destroyed its liberties.
The Anglo-men and monocrats had so artfully confounded the cause of France with that
of freedom that both went down in the same scale.
I sincerely join you in abjuring all political connections with every foreign power, and
though I cordially wish well to the progress of liberty in all nations and would forever
give it the weight of our countenance, yet they are not to be touched without contamination
from their other bad principles.
Commerce with all nations, alliance with none, should be our motto.
