Neither of them were marked President, Vice President, they just had the names of two candidates.
Whoever got the most votes was President, whoever got the second most was Vice President.
Now the way you got around this to make sure that the head of your ticket got the presidency
was to throw away one or two votes.
Now in 1796, the Virginians had refused to support Burr in the numbers they should have
as Vice President.
So as a matter of honor, they were obliged to cast every ballot both for Jefferson and
Burr.
And Burr had promised that he would make sure one of his fellow New Yorkers would withhold
one vote.
It's a promise that Burr did not keep.
And the result is that the electoral vote is in fact a tie, 73 each, which means that
the vote is going to get thrown to the Congress as it were, what actually happens is senators
and congressmen meet together in the Senate building and they vote state by state.
Well, Jefferson doesn't realize that Burr has backstabbed him and he assumes he's won
and he starts assembling his cabinet.
Meanwhile, Burr is cutting deals with the Federalists.
And in fact they prefer him to Jefferson because Burr has very little conviction and he's willing
to give them almost anything he wants for power.
When Jefferson realizes this, he goes to Adams and he recalls this later to Benjamin Rush.
When the election between Burr and myself was kept in suspense by the Federalists and
they were mediating to place the President of the Senate at the head of the government,
I called on Mr. Adams with a view to have this desperate measure prevented by his negative.
He grew warm in an instant and said with a vehemence he had not used towards me before.
Sir, the event of the election is within your own power.
You have only to say you will do justice to the public creditors, maintain the Navy and
not disturb those holding offices and the government will instantly be put into your
hands.
We know it is the wish of the people.
We should be so.
Mr. Adams said I.
I know not what part of my conduct in either public or private life can have authorized
a doubt of my fidelity to the public engagements.
I say, however, I will not come into the government by capitulation.
I will not enter on it, but in perfect freedom to follow the dictates of my own judgment.
In fact, ultimately it is claimed, at least by one of the people who votes for him that
he had struck a deal, but it's not something we can determine with any finality.
Well the result is that when the House and Senate begin voting by states, the result
is that eight states vote for Jefferson, six for Burr and two are divided.
And this same result sticks for a full 35 ballots over a week.
The critical swing vote is Delaware and the critical swing vote there is one person, Federalist
James Bayard.
He will pick the president and he leans towards Aaron Burr.
Now there's a great irony involved here and that what actually gets Jefferson elected
is not the intercession of Adams or even the negotiation of his allies, but is in fact the
intercession of his arch nemesis Alexander Hamilton.
Hamilton writes to Bayard in December 26th of 1800, I could scarcely name a discreet
man of either party in our state who does not think Mr. Burr the most unfit man in the
United States for the office of president.
States abroad ruin at home are the probable fruits of his elevation.
And in fact this was when Hamilton spoke of Caesar, the man he thought was actually the
American Caesar was Aaron Burr because he was unprincipled.
He thought that Jefferson as a popularist, as a grocci, as it were led the way to Caesarism,
but he knew that Jefferson was in fact principal.
For heaven's sake my dear sir, exert yourself to the utmost to save our country from so
great a calamity.
Let us not be responsible for the evils which in all probability will follow the preference.
All calculations that may lead to it must prove fallacious.
Well Bayard's still not convinced and finally on January 16th he writes him another very
impassioned letter and this one deals with Jefferson.
And while it's not particularly flattering it shows that at some level Hamilton does
respect Jefferson and does understand him perhaps better than some of Jefferson's own
colleagues and partisans do.
I admit that his politics are tinctured with fanaticism and that he's too much an earnest
in his democracy, that he's been a mischievous enemy of the principal measures of our past
administration and that he is crafty and persevering in his objects, that he's not
scrupulous about the means of success, nor very mindful of truth and that he is a contemptible
hypocrite.
All right well this is pretty damning stuff here, I mean this is hardly sort of endorsement
you'd expect.
But listen to what follows.
But it is not true, as is alleged, that he is an enemy to the power of the executive
or that he is for confounding all the powers in the House of Representatives and in fact
Jefferson had argued along those lines that the president's role was really foreign policy
and that the Congress's role was actually to legislate.
