In our last lecture, we looked at Jefferson emerge from retirement and lead his party
to victory, navigating the shoals of political controversy during the XYZ affair and the
quasi-war with France.
Now we're going to examine Jefferson's presidency, and in particular we want to look at the relationship
between principle and practice, because like any political leader, Jefferson was found
himself confronted with the tension between on the one hand his ideals, and on the other
hand political realities.
And we're going to look at particular at three different sets of issues.
First, how he dealt with the problem of patronage and partisanship.
Secondly, how he worked through the constitutional issues involved with the Louisiana Purchase,
perhaps his greatest achievement as president.
And finally, the problems he faced and issues raised by his treatment of civil liberties.
Jefferson referred to his election as the Revolution of 1800, and he did this because
he believed that it was in fact a re-institution of the principles of 1776 that the federalists
had tried to undermine.
And in many ways, Jefferson's presidency does in fact reflect a return to the country ideals
of the revolutionary period, ideals of diminished federal government and strict construction
of the Constitution.
In his first inaugural, he argued for a quote, wise and frugal government which shall restrain
men from injuring one another, shall leave them otherwise free to regulate their own
pursuits of industry and improvement, and shall not take from the mouth of labor the
bread it has earned.
This is the sum of good government, and this is necessary to close the circle of our felicities.
What did he deem the essential principles of government?
Equal and exact justice to all men of whatever state or persuasion, religious or political.
Peace, commerce and honest friendship with all nations, entangling alliances with none,
the support of the state governments and all their rights, as the most competent administrations
for our domestic concerns, and the surest bulwarks against anti-Republican tendencies.
And Jefferson did in fact achieve many of these goals.
He was able to cut $33 million off the federal debt in the first seven and a half years of
his administration, which saved a full $2 million per year in interest payments alone.
While doing this, he was able to eliminate all domestic taxes, relying on nothing but
the tariff, and he did in fact dramatically shrink the size of federal government.
In other regards, however, Jefferson's tenure in office represents a stark contrast between
his purported principles and his actual practice, and he's aware of this.
In fact, Jefferson keeps almost all the Hamiltonian scheme of finances and taxes.
As he explains to Dupont de Mur, when this government was first established, it was possible
to have kept it going on through principles.
But the contracted English half-lettered ideas of Hamilton destroyed that hope in the bud.
We can pay off his debt in 15 years, but we can never get rid of his financial system.
It mortifies me to be strengthening principles which I deem radically vicious.
This vice is entailed on us by the first error.
Now you can read this in one of two ways, either pragmatism or opportunism.
I think in Jefferson's case, it's a hard call.
As he writes himself, what is practicable must often control what is pure theory, and
the habits of the governed determine in a great degree what is practicable.
But I would argue that ultimately what informs Jefferson's actions is not constitutional
or even political economic considerations, but a higher sense of political priorities
based on his vision and his fears, based on ultimately the revolutionary principles that
he had first articulated in 1776.
And in fact, what he argues is the real basis of political legitimacy is not constitutional
order so much as something very similar to Rousseau's notion of the general will, the
common good of the people, whether they recognize it or not.
As Edmund Randolphi writes, the whole body of the nation is the sovereign legislature,
judiciary and executive power for itself.
It is the will of the nation which makes the law obligatory.
It is their will which creates or annihilates the organ which is to declare and announce
it.
So I think we have to keep in mind that Jefferson is always pursuing this higher vision.
