Well, I think the key to understanding Jefferson's partisanship with the use of patronage is
his ability to demonize his opponents, to conceive of them as in fact a disloyal opposition
that opposes the goals of the people.
To Joseph Priestly, he described the Federalists as enemies of science and progress.
All advances in science were prescribed as innovation.
They pretended to praise and encourage education, but it was to be the education of our ancestors.
We were to look backwards, not forwards for improvement.
To Governor John Langdon in 1810, excuse me, he recalls that the Federalists were in fact
the same old foe that the revolutionaries had fought, the Tories.
The Tories, with which we struggled in 77, differed but in name from the Federalism of
99, with which we struggled also.
Now I want to turn to the Louisiana Purchase, which is in some way Jefferson's most impressive
achievement, but it's also in some ways his most constitutionally suspect.
The background to the purchase is pretty straightforward.
In May 1801, Jefferson learned that the Spanish had ceded control of Louisiana to France.
This was important to the United States because Spain was a fairly weak country, and as long
as they controlled New Orleans, we could insist on the right of deposit and navigation through
New Orleans because if we didn't get it, we could always seize it by force.
But France was powerful, and this had the prospect of losing New Orleans, and since
all trade had to follow the river passages down the Mississippi from the West, whoever
controlled New Orleans controlled the interior of the United States.
And indeed, he was not wrong to fear French design.
Napoleon had in fact a Western design, a goal to reconquer San Domingo, put down the
Dave insurrection there, recreate his powerful and extremely profitable sugar plantations,
and then conquer and fortify Louisiana.
And briefly, navigation is closed in the Mississippi officially, though in fact much
trade still gets through.
So Jefferson comes up with a plan.
He offers the French $10 million for New Orleans, the city, and for the Florida's.
The Florida's at the time include what is currently Florida and the southern parts of Alabama
and Mississippi.
Well, in fact, the active agent in Louisiana purchased is not really Jefferson so much
as Napoleon.
By early 1803, disease and military defeat had made clear to Napoleon that he was not
able to reconquer Haiti, and that his Western plans for a Western empire would have to be
shelved.
He realizes that war is in the offing again in Europe, and as he prepares for war, he
realizes he needs cash.
He returns to the Americans and offers all of Louisiana for a mere $15 million.
But the terms of the arrangement are that that has to be delivered immediately, or as
soon as possible.
And this is an incredible deal for Jefferson.
I mean, we're buying land at 13 and a half cents per acre.
This is one of the greatest land transactions probably in the history of the world.
And when the treaty arrives on July 4th, which is the exact same day, interestingly, that
Mary Weather Lewis sets out to map that area, it's ratified in fairly short order.
And while most Americans today think of the purchase as a brilliant acquisition, at the
time it was actually quite controversial.
It was opposed in particular by Easterners who feared a shift in the sectional balance
of power.
As we've mentioned, trade from the interior of the United States would always go down
the Mississippi, at least until those ingenious Yankees would start building railroads.
Since ideas follow trade, whoever controlled if the trade was to go through a southern
city in New Orleans, the notion is that the West will therefore ally itself with the
Republican South.
As Uriah Tracey wrote, I am convinced that the accession of Louisiana will accelerate
a division of these states.
And in his typical Yankee twain, who's whenabouts is unsettled, but someone is inevitable.
Will Jefferson acknowledge this problem in his second inaugural address?
I know that the acquisition of Louisiana has been disapproved by some, from a candid apprehension
that the enlargement of our territory would endanger its union.
But again he responds with his abdulliant optimism.
But who can limit the extent to which the federative principle may operate effectively?
Well, the problem for Jefferson is that his own theory of strict construction denied him
the power to make such a deal.
There is no constitutional provision for the acquisition of territory, much less purchase
of it.
As he writes to Senator John Breckenridge, one of the leaders of his party in the Senate,
I presume the Congress will see their duty to their country in ratifying and paying for
it, so as to secure a good which would otherwise probably be never again in their power.
But I suppose they must then appeal to the nation for an additional article to the Constitution,
approving and confirming an act which the nation had not previously authorized.
