Lecture 10 Literary Legacies
In our last lecture, we looked at Jefferson's presidency and the problem of principle and
practice squaring those two together.
Now we turn to Jefferson in retirement, and in particular, at the literary legacies
he self-consciously created for himself and his nation.
In his third and final retirement, Jefferson was surrounded by his family on his beloved
mountaintop house, Monticello, and he claimed to be focused on purely pastoral concerns,
a simply private man who reportedly avoided reading newspapers and didn't concern himself
over public matters.
But despite his modesty, Jefferson understood that his political career had been epic-making
in the new nation's history, and he self-consciously created literary legacies to that career in
his retirement.
He describes in 1810 his day as a retired gentleman, why mornings are devoted to correspondence.
From breakfast to dinner, I am in my shops, my garden, or on horseback among my farms.
From dinner to dark, I give to society, and recreation with my neighbors and friends,
and from candlelight to early bedtime I read.
I talk of plows and harrows, of seating and harvesting with my neighbors, and of politics
too if they choose, with as little reserve as the rest of my fellow citizens, and feel
at length the blessings of being free to say and do what I please without being responsible
to any mortal.
In these years, Jefferson gives us two accounts of his life, one the Annas in 1818, and another
an autobiography in 1821.
And both texts exemplify Jefferson's modesty, his high-minded principle, and his unswerving
optimism and confidence in the rectitude of his convictions and the future course of
the nation.
Perhaps not too surprisingly, Jefferson's recollections are often not quite accurate.
He has a tendency to inflate his own importance, and sometimes denigrate the roles of others.
In his autobiography, for example, he remembers or recalls the circumstances around the eventual
signing of the Declaration of Independence, and he talks about the elimination of some
of his phraseology from that document.
The clause two, reprobating the enslaving the inhabitants of Africa, was struck out
in complacence to South Carolina and Georgia, who had never attempted to restrain the importation
of slaves, and who on the contrary still wished to continue it.
And that's in fact correct, but what follows is rather more fanciful.
Our northern brethren also, I believe, felt a little tender under these censures, for though
their people had very few slaves themselves, yet they had been pretty considerable carriers
of them to others.
Well, that's in fact just not the case.
Jefferson's carriers had a very minor part in the slave trade, not because they didn't
want to.
They simply didn't have the capital and resources, the large ships, to be able to engage in
the trade.
But I think it's important to note that Jefferson doesn't remember it that way, because again,
slavery is a critical problem for Jefferson, and he needs to, as it were, spread the blame.
And then he goes on to talk about the way the Declaration's terms were laid out and
eventually ratified.
The debates, having taken up the greater parts of the second, third, and fourth days of July,
were on the evening of the last closed.
The Declaration was reported by the committee, agreed to by the House, and signed by every
member present, except Mr. Dickinson.
Now again, that's not exactly what happened.
Indeed, as Adams' was fond of reminding people, Declaration independence had actually
been declared on the second.
It was the fourth that they agreed to finally ratify the document that Jefferson presented.
And in fact, Jefferson had a tendency to do that, to conflate his document with actual
independence.
Moreover, it's claimed that the document was signed by every member present, except
Mr. Dickinson, has also been shown to be false.
Indeed, the document wasn't signed by many members until the end of the summer.
But that's not critical.
What is critical is to see that Jefferson is trying to understand and place his legacy
in early America.
Both of these efforts, however, I would argue are abortive.
The autobiography ends abruptly.
The Annas is barely a collection of anecdotes.
And the reason is that Jefferson is uncomfortable telling his own story.
And that may, in fact, be part of his modesty.
He has difficulty expressing what were, in fact, the important convictions in his own
life, in his own words.
He doesn't want to blow his own horn.
