He writes to Albert Gallatin in December of 1820,
the Federalists completely put down
and despairing of ever rising again
under the old division of Lincoln Tory
devised the new one of slave holding
and non-slave holding states.
So again, he's gonna see that old Tory conspiracy
behind the Missouri compromise,
which, while it had a semblance of being moral,
was at the same time geographical
and calculated to give them ascendancy
by debauching their old opponents
to a coalition with them.
Moral, the question certainly is not.
No more than their removal from one country to another
would never make a slave of one human being
who would not be so without it.
Indeed, if there were any morality in the question,
it is on the other side.
Because by spreading them over a larger surface,
their happiness would be increased
and the burden of their future liberation
lightened by bringing a greater number of shoulders under it.
For if Congress once goes out of the Constitution
to arrogate a right of regulating the conditions
of the inhabitants of the states,
its majority may and probably will next declare
that the condition of all men within the United States
shall be that of freedom.
In which case, all the whites south of the Potomac
and Ohio must evacuate their states
and most fortunate, those who can do it first.
And then he throws out his usual scheme.
My proposition would be that the holders
should give up all born after a certain day,
present or to come, that these should be placed
under the guardianship of the state
and sent at a proper age to San Domingo.
There, they are willing to receive them
and the shortness of the passage brings the deportation
within the possible means of taxation
aided by charitable contributions.
Now, who's gonna pay for this, these charitable contributions?
In this, I think Europe, which has forced this evil on us
and the Eastern states, by which he means New England,
would have been, who have been its chief instruments
of importation would be bound to give largely.
And this is why we know Jefferson's scheme is fanciful.
He's arguing not just for expropriation and exportation,
but of compensation and not a national compensation
but a sectional compensation.
Northerners must buy the slaves from the south
so that they can be freed.
Well, the crisis is ultimately solved in 1820
when Maine is added as a free state
to balance Missouri as a slave state.
Senator Jesse B. Thomas of Illinois adds an amendment
that slavery be prohibited from the Western territories
north of the latitude 3630.
And that's known as the Missouri Compromise.
Jefferson will always oppose the Missouri Compromise.
He will take the position that all Southerners
have the right to bring their slaves
anywhere in the Western territories that they choose.
And this is ironic because this issue was raised
precisely because of the Louisiana Purchase.
Had Jefferson not purchased the West,
this would not have led to this crisis,
the crisis which will ultimately produce the Civil War.
Well, Jefferson's other great unresolved project
was education, without which he feared for the duration
of Republican government in the United States.
He wrote to George Whith in 1786,
I think by far the most important bill in our whole code
is that for the diffusion of knowledge among the people.
No other sure foundation can be devised
for the preservation of freedom and happiness.
And he also saw that not only was it important
to educate the masses,
but also to create that natural aristocracy.
As he explains to Peter Carr in 1814,
the mass of our citizens may be divided into two classes,
the laboring and the learned.
The laboring will need the first grade of education
to qualify them for their pursuits and duties,
though learned will need it as a foundation
for further requirements.
Now, in his retirement, Jefferson continued to push
for his ward scheme of education for Virginia,
breaking the state and the counties
down into small educational districts.
But he transforms it into a blueprint
for a social and political reconstruction of the state
along grassroots participatory democratic lines.
He writes to John Taylor in 1810,
I have indeed two great measures at heart
without which no republic can maintain itself in strength.
One, that of general education.
Two, to divide every county into hundreds
of such size that all the children of each
will be within reach of a central school in it.
But this division looks to many other fundamental provisions.
Every hundred, besides a school,
should have a justice of the peace,
a constable and a captain of militia.
These officers should be a corporation
to manage all its concerns.
And here, his model is the New England town,
which he thinks is the most fully developed
local participatory grassroots democracy.
These little republics would be
the main strength of the great one.
Could I once see this, I should consider it
as the dawn of the salvation of the republic.
