And, in fact, on March 4th, 1825, the Board of Visitors, the University of Virginia, under
Jefferson's direction, passed the following proviso, whereas it is the duty of this Board
to the government under which it lives, and especially to that of which this university
is the immediate creation, to pay a special attention to the principles of government
which shall be inculcated therein, and to provide that none shall be inculcated which
are incompatible with those on which the constitutions of the state and of the United
States were genuinely based.
So those works which are not politically orthodox will be eliminated from both the curriculum
and the university.
And for this purpose, it may be necessary to point out, especially, where these principles
are to be found legitimately developed, resolved that it is the opinion of this Board that
as the general principles of liberty and rights of man in nature and in society, the doctrines
of Locke in his essay concerning the true original extent and end of civil government,
end of Sydney in his discourses on government, may be considered as those generally approved
by our fellow citizens, and that on the distinctive principles of the government of our state
and of that of the United States, the best guides are to be found first in the Declaration
of Independence, not surprisingly, as the fundamental act of union of these states, secondly, the
book known by the title of the Federalist, and here he thinks specifically of Madison's
contributions, and third, the resolutions of the General Assembly of Virginia in 1799
on the subject of the alien and sedition laws.
Those are the Virginia resolutions that Madison drew to match Jefferson's Kentucky resolutions,
which as we've seen championed the doctrine of not only states' rights, but nullification.
And finally, the valedictory address of President Washington as conveying political lessons
of peculiar value, and that in the branch of the School of Law, which is to treat on
the subject of civil polity, these shall be used as the text and document of the school.
And indeed, the professor of law must swear loyalty to Jefferson's principles on the
Missouri question, and if they're not willing to do that, he simply won't allow them to
be hired.
And there are other aspects to Jefferson's curricular meddling that are a little disturbing.
As a young man he'd read Hume, Hume's history of England was one of the most popular works
of the time, and in fact, it made his fame.
For good reason, it was a marvelous read, it still is, and it's certainly a surprise.
He contradicts almost all of the Whig history that had been written prior to him.
He writes to William Dwayne in 1810, Everyone knows that judicious matter and charms of
style have rendered Hume's history the manual of every student.
I remember well the enthusiasm with which I devoured it when young.
The length of time, the research and reflection which were necessary to eradicate the poison
it had instilled in my mind, and that's because Hume's position is quite close to that of
Hamilton's.
Well, he's got a solution.
Baxter, one of Hume's tucks associates in persecution, has said on the only remedy the
evil admits.
He has taken Hume's work, corrected in the text his misrepresentations, supplied the
truths which he suppressed, and yet has given the mass of the work in Hume's own words.
It is wonderful how little interpolation has been necessary to make it a sound history,
and to justify what should have been its title to it, Hume's history of England abridged
and rendered faithful to fact and principle.
Can we not have it reprinted here?
It would be about four volumes, eight octavo.
Well, there's another interesting feature that I mentioned before, that is his desire
to have Anglo-Saxon taught, and the reason is because Jefferson is coming increasingly
to be a forebear to what will be the Teutonic germ theory of liberty, that it was the Germanic
peoples who came from the black forests of Europe, and with the spirit of barbaric liberty
and freedom and brought it wherever they carry them, and therefore that's where the source
of liberty in England is from the Anglo-Saxon.
And he expresses this to Major John Cartwright in 1824.
There are some novelties in it, his plan for the University of Virginia, of that of a professorship
of the principles of government you express your approbation.
They will be founded in the rights of man, that of agriculture I'm sure you will approve,
and that also of Anglo-Saxon.
As the histories and laws left us in that type and dialect must be the textbooks of
the reading of the learners, they will imbibe with the language their free principles of
government.
As he states, it has ever appeared to me that the difference between the Whig and the Tory
of England is that the Whig deduces his rights from the Anglo-Saxon source, and the Tory
from the Norman.
And I want to conclude by suggesting the following.
In dealing with his legacies and trying to put his house in order as it were, Jefferson
is grappling with problems that are not unique to him.
They are the problems of the new nation.
They are the problems that America will grapple with throughout the 19th century.
And they are the legacies with which we still deal to this very day.
