Well, perhaps the most revealing aspect of Jefferson's home life is literally his home.
Monticello is one of the great architectural achievements of early American history.
It's neoclassically correct.
It adheres to the Pleidian forms.
It's completely symmetrical and exterior.
And Jefferson was, in fact, an excellent draftsman.
He probably learned that from his father, and his vision was always schematic.
And he had, in fact, talked about Virginia architecture in notes on the state of Virginia,
a very revealing statement.
The genius of architecture seems to have shed its maledictions over this land.
Buildings are often erected by individuals of considerable expense.
To give these symmetry and taste would not increase their cost.
It would only change the arrangement of the materials, the form and combination of the
members.
This would often cost less than the burden of barbarous ornaments with which these buildings
are sometimes charged.
And here he's referring to the Baroque accents associated with Wren, and so expressive of
the wealth and status associated with Pleidian American architecture.
But the first principles of the art are unknown.
And there exists scarcely a model among us sufficiently chased to give an idea of them.
And that will be the key to Jefferson's architecture.
The elements are, in fact, incredibly simple and chased.
There's a real Roman or almost Spartan simplicity, a Republican purity to them.
And indeed, that Roman element is very important in his entire vision.
Jefferson's Monticello is unique.
It's the only plantation house built on a mountaintop, which is, again, reminiscent of the Roman
villa.
OK.
In fact, it was built in two phases.
First designed in 1769 and constructed from 1771 to 1782, when he prepares to go to the
Continental Congress and then Europe.
This Monticello, this first Monticello, is a simple cruciform plan.
The main axis is east-west, with lateral rooms flanked by octagonal bays.
The original facade was, again, conventionally Palladian.
Similar to the rear view of the Via Coronaro, and it's very similar to his original plan.
It's a two-story facade with a second floor portico with ionic columns over a Doric order
below.
And it's a very massive and vertical and somewhat clumsy design, but, again, has the
same accents of the Palladio original.
In Europe, however, he is transformed in his architectural imagination.
By really two things.
One, Roman architecture, which we looked at at his gazing at the Maison carré in Nîmes,
and also by the new Parisian townhouse architecture, particularly the Hôtel de Somme.
And he writes, while in Paris, I was violently smitten by the Hôtel de Somme, and used to
go to the Tuileries almost daily to look at it.
And these new-style townhouses, what was distinctive about them, was that they stressed
privacy and intimacy over ostentatious display.
And indeed, if you get to Paris, take a look at the river façade of the Hôtel de Somme,
and you'll see it's, in fact, the inspiration for the garden façade of Monticello.
So when Jefferson returns to America, he resumes construction, demolishing much of the original
building in favor of a new final plan.
So let's take a look at this plan.
Jefferson starts by changing the floor plan, and he does this by doubling the lateral rooms
on the side of that projecting sort of bullet that runs from east to west, and this adds
great depth to the building.
In fact, it also adds an additional four rooms on the ground floor, and as we'll see on the
second floor as well.
Similarly, the external façade is transformed.
The clumsy verticality of the original design is dropped for a monumental and thoroughly
horizontal effect.
But if we look at it from the garden façade, what we see is that he accents this horizontal
sense by both the entablature, which is the white border above the columns, and by the
balustrade, which is the railing that runs along the roof line.
Both of these are placed over very simple Spartan Doric orders of columns and pediments,
and the pediment is, in fact, not only simple and Spartan, but extremely powerful.
The small window in the middle of it transforms it into a translucent, almost inviting, although
simple design.
And there's an important symbolism to this house.
It tells us, in fact, a story.
So let's see the story.
It tells us.
We approach from the northeast to the main entrance, which is the east entrance.
