And there are really dependencies in three different senses, architecturally their dependencies
in the sense that they balance the main larger structure and offset it, pointing out its
monumental and important and imposing presence.
They're also dependent in another sense in that these are the outbuildings that serve
the great house, they're where the kitchen facilities may be.
And of course, they're dependent in a third sense, most importantly, and symbolically
as well, that is where the dependence of the master reside.
And this would be true not only in Virginia houses, but in English houses as well.
In fact, that's one of the goals of placing these dependencies there, is to show all visitors,
this is my social hierarchy, these are my dependence.
Well this is an idiom that Jefferson outright rejects, Jefferson is the champion of independence.
He's a foe of slavery, and he doesn't want its presence to mar his beautiful and magnificent
architectural achievements.
So as we approach Monticello from the east, we see no dependencies at all.
And I think there's a very important symbolism there.
Jefferson is overcoming dependency through eliminating it, at least symbolically.
But he can't do that entirely.
Actually the dependencies are in the back of the house.
If we look at the original plan again, you see that they run in a L-shaped sort of U
all the way back into the garden facade, or into the garden.
Yet even there, he uses the sloping terrain of the garden to obscure our vision of these
dependencies and further obscures that vision by rows of trees planted in front of them.
And if we approach the dependencies from the garden, what we see are in fact fairly innocuous
things.
We see a large in cooking facilities.
We see a smokehouse.
We see a kitchen.
It's only if we walk around the structure to the sides that the dependencies become
truly and fully visible.
And even then we must enter them to discover the great illusion of the house.
For there are slave quarters, they're just not visible from the outside.
They're built into the foundations of the structure itself.
Now part of this is a drawing on again Roman precedents for Romans like to have these underground
passages in their villas.
But part of it also I think is Jefferson trying to obscure our vision of the reality
of dependency and slavery.
But in removing the vision of dependency, he has in fact made slavery the foundation
of his very structure.
And I think that's symbolic for the nation.
Jefferson may not have intended that, but I've always believed you trust the poem and
not the poet.
But a great artist, as I think Jefferson truly is, can't help but express insights
that he may not have even intended.
And I think if we look at the tension here between Jefferson's optimistic idealism and
the realities of his life, they are in fact symbolic of the American political experience.
We soar between high and lofty ideals and catch penny realities.
Well, what does this tell us about Jefferson?
One might look at this and say, Jefferson is a deceitful man.
Jefferson is lying to himself and lying to us.
I think that's a misreading of Jefferson.
I think we're holding Jefferson up to a standard that is not accurate and that is not fair.
To read Jefferson as a political philosopher or a sage is to misread the man.
Jefferson was fundamentally an artist.
And his architecture proves that.
His draftsmanship proves that.
And his philosophical tastes prove that.
The eclecticism we've remarked, the fact that he is not particularly systematic.
He creates a collage and a visionary effect, which is stunning and overwhelming, but is
not always coherent and consistent.
And that is why we always return to Jefferson, why he's so inspiring.
Because he is, in fact, the prose poet of American democracy.
He's the prose poet of the American vision and of the American dream.
And like all great poets, his story is conflicted.
Conflicted between, on the one hand, the goal of independence, the goal of freedom and justice
for all, the goal of limited government, and the goal of a fundamental harmony which is
in keeping with natural law, one expressed in the perfect symmetries and orderly disposition
of his own home and its intimate relationship with its natural surroundings.
At the same time, there's another side of this legacy, that built into the foundations,
the realities which underlay this vision, and in some ways, betray it.
And so when we return to Jefferson, we have to keep in mind that tension, and it's that
tension which not only informs his career, but informs the American political, cultural
and social tradition.
It's that tradition with which we deal with today.
If we need to honor Jefferson, we must treat him as an artist, transcending his limitations
and honoring his vision.
I'm Tom Rawlins, president of The Teaching Company.
I hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our Great Courses on Tape series.
To find out about other teaching company courses taught by Professor Salloff or about our selection
of other courses, please call our Customer Relations Representatives at 1-800-TEACH-1-2.
That number again is 1-800-832-2412.
