a fully determined progression of spontaneous behavior that unambiguously
produces a correct result.

The behavior of the process is completely expressed in terms of associated
thengs asserting values behaving in accordance with value transform rules. No
other concepts or expressional elements such as an explicit control mechanism
or timing relationships need to be introduced. In particular, no humans are
needed.

The Thengs of a Pure Value Expression The thengs of a pure value
expression serve as a medium of value assertion and do not contribute to dif-
ferentiation. When thengs do not contribute to differentiation, their specifi c
behavior is expressionaly irrelevant. They may behave as is convenient to
express the values. From some mythical meta view they may disappear, appear,
merge, or split, but there is no meta view. Values are asserted by thengs that
are all mutually associated and that is all that can be said.

Concurrent Behavior At a single place of association there can be a mul-
titude of pure value expressions with mutually disjoint value sets and value
transform rule sets simultaneously and independently behaving in a single
frothing sea of values. This is the expressional form of the cytoplasm of a living
cell, which is a single place of association fi lled with specifi cally interacting
proteins supporting the intermingled expression of hundreds of independent
processes proceeding simultaneously and without ambiguity.

The Temporal Nature of Pure Value Expression A pure value expression
resolves in a progression of name formations and resolutions. Clearly, there
is a temporal aspect of befores and afters to a pure value expression. What is
the nature of this temporal aspect and what are its limits?
Might it not be the case that sometimes the name-forming values cease
some time interval before the result values become or that the name forming
values linger after the result values become and co-exist for a time with the
result values.

A formed name can be appreciated only by the result values becoming. As
long as the name-forming values cease without further behavior, whether they
ceased before the result values became or whether they lingered to co-exist
with the result values cannot be appreciated. Consequently the question of
temporal intervals between the formation of a name, its resolution, and the
assertion of the result values is meaningless.

By the same token there is no transition interval of appreciation, no dura-
tion of name-forming values ceasing and result values becoming. A name

cannot be formed with half a value or almost a value. Stages of becoming of
a value cannot be appreciated and cannot be considered. Similarly there is no
way to appreciate stages of ceasing of a value.

A partially formed name cannot be appreciated. Only completely formed
names can be appreciated. There is no means of appreciating how long a value
lingers before forming a name or how long a name takes to form. There is no
means of appreciating that any particular value has not yet formed a name or
that any particular name has not yet fully formed. There is no interval of name
formation:
At this most primitive level there is only a progression of discrete befores
and afters. Remember that there is no meta view or meta referent or metric
of time. There is only the thengs, the values, and the value transform rules.

The Spatial Nature of Pure Value Expression The thengs of a pure value
expression are all at a single place of association. There is no here or there
within the place. All values and their asserting thengs are equally here. In a
shaking bag thengs clearly occupy space relative to each other within the
expression, and one might be tempted to consider their relative locations and
movements within the expression. This temptation, however, requires a meta
view, a meta reference frame, and a meta metric, none of which are available.

The only appreciation that can occur within the place of association is the
formation and resolution of a name. Relative spatial position within the place
is not appreciable.

If one must talk of spatial place inside a pure value expression, one might
say that each theng is simultaneously everywhere inside the expression or that
each theng is nowhere in particular inside the expression. One might even say
that a theng inside the expression does not even exist until its value interacts
and is appreciated. Such comments have no expressional relevance and are
all equally meaningless.

5.3 ASSOCIATION EXPRESSION
Association expression is the association of thengs in specifi c structures of
association relationships. This is in contrast to the mutual association of thengs
in a pure value expression, which has no structure. Differentness is expressed
by unique place in the structure. Each theng and its asserted value is different
from every other theng and its asserted value by virtue of its place in the
structure of association relationships. Identical values asserted at different
places are different by virtue of the differentness of their asserting thengs. A
pure association expression occurs when a process is expressed purely in terms
of association differentiation with no value differentiation.

But before pure association expression can be presented, there are a few
preliminaries of association expression that must be addressed. The diffi culty
is that while a pure value expression can express discrete and directed
ASSOCIATION EXPRESSION 65

THE INVOCATION MODEL
behavior solely in terms of values and value transform rules with no associa-
tion differentiation, an association expression cannot express discrete and
directed behavior solely in terms of association relationships with no value
differentiation. An infrastructure of value differentiation must be established
before the pure association expression can be presented.

5.3.1 The Behavior of Statically Associated Thengs
A theng has no structure and cannot appreciate any orientation of association
with other thengs. It has no input or output, no top or bottom, no right or left.

There is no way for a theng to differentiate the other thengs with which it is
associated. Each theng sees a name formed of its own value and the unordered
values of the thengs directly associated with it and changes its own value in
response to the formed name. Each theng in a structure of association is a
locus of a pure value expression. Each association between two thengs links
two pure value expression loci. A structure of associated thengs forms a struc-
ture of interlinking pure value expressions.

Theng D in Figure 5.4a sees a four value name formed by its own value
and the values of thengs B, C, and E and partially resolves the formed name
by changing its own value. The locus of theng D is indicated by a shaded ring.

There is no way for theng D to determine which value is from which theng.

Theng E in Figure 5.4b sees a four value name formed by its own value and
the values of thengs D, G, and F and partially resolves the formed name by
changing its own value. When theng D in Figure 5.4c changes its value it
changes the name presented to theng E, which will change its value changing
the name presented to theng D, and so on. Figure 5.4d shows the structure of
overlapping and interlinking pure value expressions.

If all thengs assert the same values and resolve the same names, name for-
mation and resolution will fl ow continually in all directions through an associa-
tion structure. Its behavior will be neither discrete nor directed.

5.3.2 Directionalizing the Resolution Behavior of
Association Expressions
To directionalize the fl ow of resolution, it must be ensured that result values
do not infl uence the formation of the names that generated the result value.

This directional behavior is expressed with value differentiation.

D
C
B
E
G
F
A
D
C
B
E
G
F
A
D
C
B
E
G
F
A
D
C
B
E
G
F
A
a.

b.

c.

d.

Figure 5.4 Association loci.


The case of all associated thengs asserting the same value and resolving the
same names is illustrated in Figure 5.5a. All three A thengs assert the same
values (0, 1) continually forming and resolving the same names with each
other. Value change fl ows in all directions continually or result values cease
changing (all three thengs asserting 1). For directionalized behavior each
theng must assert values that do not infl uence the formation of the name that
it recognizes and resolves.

Directional resolution behavior that does not feedback on itself can be
expressed with three thengs in linear association asserting disjoint result values
as shown in Figure 5.5b. Theng A sees names formed of 0, 1, X, Y, S, and T.

It asserts the result values X and Y. The set of value transform rules for theng
A assert a result value based on the values 0 and 1. The values X, Y, S, and
T are effectively ignored by the value transform rules. Theng B asserts values
(S, T) for names including X and Y and effectively ignores the values 0, 1, S,
and T in the formed name. Theng C then resolves names formed with the
values (S, T) asserted by theng B into the values (0, 1), effectively ignoring
the values X, Y, 0, and 1. Theng C is not associated with theng A, so the values
(0, 1) asserted by theng C cannot participate in forming the name presented
to theng A; the progression of value change does not feedback on itself. By
not showing the name forming values effectively ignored by the set of value
transform rules associated with each theng, the value transform rules of the
three thengs can be re-expressed as shown in Figure 5.5c.

