expression shown in Figure 5.21, with pure value expression at one end and
pure association expression at the other end. There must always be a little bit
of each domain in the expression of any process. There must be at least one
place of association, and there must be at least two values, one data value and
one ‘not data’ value.

In the center of Figure 5.21 a process is defi ned as a symbolic function table.

The input is two three-value variables that can form nine names that map to
nine unique appreciation values. There are 15 differentnesses and 9 possible
names.

IL[0]
JL[1]
KL[2]
IM[3]
JM[4]
KM[5]
IN[6]
JN[7]
KN[9]
K L
I
J
K
L
M
N
mapping table of process
A process can be expressed
anywhere along the spectrum
with appropriate encoding.

It can be directly expressed at
either end of the spectrum.

I
J
K
IL
JL
KL
IM
L
M
N
JM
KM
IN
JN
KN
Pure Value
Expression
Pure Association
Expression
two-value
NCL
neuron
networks
cell
metabolism
proteins
in cytoplasm
decimal
arithmetic
more unique value
less association
less unique value
more association
DNA
Figure 5.21 Spectrum of differentiation expression.


To the right is shown the pure association expression of the process. There
are 15 unique places of association bounding the expression: 6 input associa-
tions and 9 result associations. The rank of 9 operators recognizes the 9 pos-
sible formed names. The values K and L are shown as the presented input to
be resolved.

To the left is shown the pure value expression of the process. There are 15
unique values in the expression: 6 input values and 9 result values. The nine-
value transform rules recognize the nine possible formed names. The values
K and L are shown entering the bag to be resolved.

The two expressions are exact duals, and each is mapped directly from the
function table. In the pure value expression, differentiation is expressed
entirely in terms of values and value transform rules, and in the pure associa-
tion expression, differentiation is expressed entirely in terms of place in a
structure of association relationships.

Association differentiation, on the right end of the spectrum, is the realm
of human expression. There are few unique symbols, few interaction rules,
and large association structures.

Value differentiation, on the left end of the spectrum, is the expression
realm of nature. There are lots of unique values, lots of interaction rules and
very little association structure. There are 10130 possible protein symbols and
uncountable possible protein interaction rules.

Along the spectrum lies varying proportions of value differentiation and
of association differentiation. The cytoplasm is a pure value expression,
but cell metabolism also involves a lot of associated structures within the
cell. Neuron networks are largely structures of association relationships
but also involve hormone values and lots of different neurotransmitter
values. Decimal arithmetic uses 10 data values, DNA uses four data values,
and 2NCL expressions are pure association expressions using a single data
value.

One domain of the spectrum can be held constant while the other domain
is allowed free rein. A mathematical logic such as Boolean logic holds the
values and value transform rules constant and allows arbitrarily complex
association structures. All mammals have essentially a constant association
structure with the same body design, organ structures, and cell structures. The
variability among mammals is a matter of protein values expressed by
DNA.

The spectrum of differentiation encompasses and conceptually unites many
forms of expression that previously appeared to be quite distinct or to be only
superfi cially related.

5.5 THE SEARCH
Process is a search to recognize patterns of differentness and assert behavior
appreciating the patterns of differentness.

THE SEARCH 81

THE INVOCATION MODEL
5.5.1 Association Search
The pure association form of the full-adder expression shown in Figure 5.22
illustrates the search in terms of association differentiation. Input DATA
values Cl = 1, X = 0, and Y = 1 are presented as gray and NULL is black.

Each possible input name is explicitly recognized by a unique operator, and
for each input presentation exactly one operator will be presented with com-
plete input and will assert a data value recognizing the presented input. Each
presented data value is fanned out to each operator that recognizes a name
to which it contributes. This fan-out is the probe part of the search. There is
only one operator to which all three fan-outs associate. This is the success part
of the search.

The recognizing operator asserts a data value, which then produces the
output behavior appreciating the presented input. The association con fi guration
of the recognition operators is the internal expression of the possible names.

The association of the operator assertion to the output behavior is the expres-
sion of the mapping of recognized name to its appreciation behavior.

5.5.2 Association Search Failures
The fan-out paths to the operators that do not achieve completeness are the
failed search probes, called orphans. These failed search paths loose their
logical relationships and a timing issue arises. An orphan path must propagate
strictly faster than the arrival of the next wavefront. A discussion of orphans
and how to isolate them can be found in Logically Determined Design.3
CXY
Y
X
CI
S
CO
search
recognize
assert appreciation
behavior
assert recognition behavior
Figure 5.22 Association search.

3 K. M. Fant, Logically Determined Design: Clockless System Design with NULL Convention
Logic (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley Interscience, 2005).


5.5.3 Value Search
In a pure value expression there are two forms of search. In one, all thengs
are mutually associated and immediately form all possible names. The exhaus-
tive association is the search, and a formed name that invokes a value trans-
form rule is the success of the search. In the other, all thengs are jumbling
around in the shaking bag and eventually form all possible names. The shaking
is the search. The search is a success when values form the name of and invoke
a value transform rule.

In the shaking bag, if associated values do not form the name of a value
transform rule, they just part company and continue their search. A search
failure does not leave any dangling state such as an orphan that needs to be
cleaned up. A pure value expression can be expressed without any consider-
ation of time. In this sense the pure value expression can be purely logically
determined or delay insensitive, whereas a pure association expression has its
orphans to consider.

5.5.4 The Value Transform Search
Nothing can be said of how a primitive theng performs its search, recognizes
a presented name, and invokes the appropriate value transform rule. It just
happens.

5.6 WARP AND WOOF
Value differentiation and association differentiation are two interpenetrating
forms of differentiation, each requiring the context of the other to express
differentness. Associated thengs cannot express differentness without their
values changing. Values cannot express differentness by interacting and chang-
ing without being associated.

In the context of an association expression, an operator can be considered
