IL[Y]
JK[Y]
JL[Y]
IK[S]
IL[S]
JK[S]
JL[T]
Function 4
Figure 7.35 Cycle structure overlaying pure value partitioning structure.

Figure 7.36 Reusing value in partitioned pure value expressions.

each pure value expression and can be reused by each expression. The result
values move between expressions, so a single expression cannot generate result
values that are identical to its input values, which are the result values of its
predecessor expressions. So the use of result values must be buffered by at
least one pure value expression. Function 4 can reuse S and T as result values.

There can be other strategies of value isolation. For instance, the receptor
COORDINATING PURE VALUE EXPRESSIONS 131

COMPOSING BOUNDARIES
theng might not just transmit the external value but might transform the
external value to a different internal value acting as an isolation buffer.

A value cycle is similar to the unit of association in that it is a linear pro-
gression of three different value transformations that isolate the fi rst values
from the last values. Following a specifi c value progression, the name Sa might
form, then the name AC can form, then the name Fn can form, then the name
Sa can form again.

7.5 THE LAST ASSOCIATION BOUNDARIES
Boundaries of association expressions are further associated to form greater
expressions with greater strides of appreciation. As a greater association
expression is composed of lesser association expressions, there will always be
input and output boundaries of the greatest association expression that are
uncomposed and expressionally dangling. What is beyond these last dangling
boundaries? Where does the presented input come from, where does the
asserted output go, and how are they expressed? The input and output is not
integral to the association expression itself, but exists in some unexpressed
magically suffi cient limbo. There are two possibilities for expression beyond
the last boundaries: closing the association expression and pure value
composition.

7.5.1 Closing the Expression
All dangling outputs can be associated with all dangling inputs, forming a
closed association expression that continually cycles appreciating its own dif-
ferentnesses. But a closed expression does not extend beyond itself. It is an
expressional dead end and is of no further interest here.

7.5.2 Pure Value Composition
Consider that the next level of composition encompassing the dangling input
and output boundaries is not more association expression but is a very large
pure value expression. The association expression becomes a component
adrift in the vast context of the pure value expression, receives its input from
the content of the pure value expression, and asserts its output to the content
of the pure value expression. From the point of view of the pure value expres-
sion, the association expression is just a large complex theng in its content.

The input/output boundary with the pure value expression is different from
a boundary with another association expression. There is no mutual coordina-
tion. The pure value expression does not explicitly present a sequence of
formed names to the input. The association expression itself must grab its
input from the content of the pure value expression with its own input coor-
dination protocol. The pure value expression does not explicitly accept output.


The association expression simply presents output to the content of pure value
expression with its own output coordination protocol.

7.5.3 The Composition Hierarchy
With the introduction of pure value composition, the hierarchy of association
composition takes on a new form. Association composition begins at the
bottom with the content of pure value expressions (thengs) and bounded pure
value expressions directly associating. As the association expression grows, it
remains content of the pure value expression. Association composition begins
and ends within a single pure value expression. The top of the hierarchy is the
encompassing pure value expression. The bottom of the hierarchy is the primi-
tive components of the encompassing pure value expression.

The top and the bottom of the hierarchy are inscrutable. The bottom of the
hierarchy is inscrutable because primitives have no explanation. They just are
and they just behave with no further accountability. The top of the hierarchy
is inscrutable because there is no higher level. While an association expression
requires presented input differentnesses to elicit behavior, the greater pure
value expression, with its continually interacting content, does not require
input or output boundaries to elicit behavior. The greatest pure value expres-
sion exists and continually behaves on its own terms with no greater context
to impart meaning or signifi cance to its behaviors. With only lateral behavior
on its own level, it feeds on its own content drifting—one might say aim-
lessly—within itself.

In the middle of the hierarchy of association are isolated component asso-
ciation expressions that cannot transcend their own level or their own local
context within the greater expression, that cannot extend their stride of appre-
ciation beyond their place in the greater structure. It is not necessary that a
component expression transcend its place as it is presented with sequences of
limited pre-expressible behaviors via fi xed boundary protocols and it only
behaves within that limited context.

The input and output boundaries of the greater association expression,
however, are exposed to the content of the encompassing pure value expres-
sion. Presentation context is not limited and boundary protocol is not fi xed.

The greater association expression, as a whole, must make its own way through
much more dynamic circumstances than its component expressions face.

While the behavior of mid-hierarchy component association expressions
might be fully pre-expressible, the behavior of the greater association expres-
sion as it makes its way through the pure value content cannot be fully pre-
expressed. Appreciating differentness takes on new meaning for the greater
association expression. Recognizing the differentness of encountered content
and asserting appreciation behavior is more in the nature of a search than of
an appreciation of pre-expressed differentness. Appreciating differentness is
no longer an end in itself but is a component means of a greater search
behavior.

THE LAST ASSOCIATION BOUNDARIES 133

COMPOSING BOUNDARIES
7.6 SUMMARY
Lesser expressions are composed into greater expressions by associating
behavior boundaries. A greater expression is a network of association rela-
tionships with a hierarchy of nested boundaries. The greater expression can
be partitioned both hierarchically and laterally along these boundaries in
various ways to map to various implementations with various coordination
protocols.

The convention of a spontaneously oscillating feedback cycle was intro-
duced as a method of coordinating fl ow between boundaries, and it was shown
that a structure of interlinked cycles implements a pipeline structure that can
be a direct mapping of the association expression. It was also shown that there
can be cycles in a pure value expression, and that they can be interlinked
forming a spontaneous pipeline fl ow through a pure value expression, and
more pertinently between pure value expressions.

The last dangling boundaries of association composition were encompassed
with the introduction of pure value composition. All issues of boundary com-
position are fi nally addressed. There are no loose ends. Association expression
arises within the content of a pure value expression and remains a component,
just another theng, of the pure value expression. The appreciation of different-
ness takes on new meaning for the greater association expression with its
boundaries exposed to the pure value expression.

No new primitive concepts of expression were introduced. It is still just
associated thengs asserting values that interact according to value transform
rules.


Computer Science Reconsidered: The Invocation Model of Process Expression, by Karl M. Fant
Copyright © 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

TIME AND MEMORY
In its quest through the pure value expression a greater association
expression might fi nd it useful to be able to appreciate differentness
through time. Expressions considered so far have not extended beyond
the appreciation of a single presentation. There might be successive presenta-
tions to the input of an expression, but each presentation is a unique different-
ness to be individually appreciated. There is no appreciation of differentness
through time across successive presentations and no expression of change
of appreciation through time, both of which require the expression of
memory.

It is convenient at this point to consider process expression entirely in terms
of memory and of memory as relative persistence of expressivity. An expres-
sion itself is a memory, a locus of relationships that persists from presentation
to presentation. The paths of resolution behavior through an expression are
less persistent short-term transient memories that maintain the differentnesses
of resolution as they fl ow through an expression.

There can be expressions of memory that are less persistent than the
expression itself and more persistent than the differentnesses fl owing
through it. It is this intermediate-term memory that expresses the appreciation
of differentness through time within the expression. This chapter discusses
the expression of intermediate memories in the context of association
expressions.


TIME AND MEMORY
8.1 ASSOCIATION THROUGH TIME
Successive wavefronts fl owing through an association expression represent
successive instances of appreciation in time. Successive wavefronts through a
place in the association expression are related through time by that place. In
relation to a given wavefront through a given place, wavefronts that precede
it through the place are in its past, and wavefronts that follow it through the
place are in its future. Wavefronts can be delayed in relation to primary fl ow
through the structure and can be associated with places in the structure con-
taining future wavefronts.

8.2 PIPELINE MEMORY
In a pipelined expression there are successive wavefronts at various stages of
propagation. The delay of a wavefront to associate with a future wavefront
can be expressed in the pipeline structure with differential wavefront popula-
tions in pipeline segments or by feedback association relationships that associ-
ate backward in relation to the primary fl ow of resolution behavior, forming
a pipeline ring to associate with following future instances of wavefronts. A
direct spatial association relationship becomes an association through time. A
delayed wavefront is effectively a memory that associates a past with a future.

The persistence of the memory is the number of wavefronts into the future
