position in the number represents a different granularity of differentness of
place on the number line, with the rightmost digit representing the fi nest
granularity and the leftmost digit representing the coarsest granularity.

The range of differentness represented by each position of a place-value
number is determined by the number of available digits. Two digits is a binary
range, 8 digits is octal, 10 digits is decimal, 16 digits is hexadecimal, and so on.

With eight digits there can be a fi rst representation of eight differentnesses.

With the digits used again in a different position, there can be eight different-
nesses of eight differentnesses. With the digits used again at another position,
there can be another gradation of eight differentnesses of eight differentnesses
of eight differentnesses, and so on.

A reference point in the sequence of digits represents a baseline granularity
of the number line. A place-value number is indefi nitely extendable about this
reference point. Digit positions progressing to the right of the reference point
increase the fi neness of the granularity of differentness of place on the line,
extending the precision of a number. Digit positions progressing to the left of
the reference point increase the coarseness of differentness of place on the
line extending the range of a number. The number of positions in a number
bounds the extent of unique places represented on the line. A four-position
decimal number represents places 0000 to 9999, ten thousand uniquely differ-
ent places, on the line.

A place-value number is a successive approximation of the place on the
line. The leftmost decimal digit of a four-position number indicates the neigh-
borhood of thousands. The next right digit indicates the neighborhood of
hundreds within the thousands neighborhood. The next indicates the neigh-
borhood of tens within the hundreds neighborhood, and the rightmost digit
indicates the place itself within the tens neighborhood. It is a hierarchically
nested progression of uniform differentness representing fi ner and fi ner granu-
larity of place on the number line.

A place-value number can guide a progressive search for a place on the
line. One might view a number as similar to a fi le system path name: /9/5/6/4/3
for the decimal number 95643.

10.1.1 Interaction of Numeric Differentness
Places on the number line can interact to represent new places on the number
line. In the abstract, two distances-from-the-origin can be directly catenated
in a single behavior to represent a new distance-from-the-origin place on the
line that is the addition of the two distances. But, in practice, the interaction
of place-value numbers representing the places must be expressed as a method
of manipulating the digits of the numbers representing the two distance-
from-the-origin places resulting in a new place-value number representing
the new distance-from-the-origin place on the line.

The addition of place-value numbers is accomplished by combining the
digits of commensurable granularity on the number line to produce a new digit

for that granularity. Commensurable granularity is expressed as positions
equally relative to the reference point of two numbers with identical baseline
granularity. Digit addition is the catenation of the distance represented by
each digit within their granularity domain. It might occur that a combination
of digits spills out of their granularity domain into a neighboring granularity
domain. This eventuality has to be communicated as a carry digit to the com-
bination of the next coarser digits. Because of this propagation of infl uence
each digit combination must wait on the completion of the combination of the
next fi ner granularity digits. Consequently the addition of place-value numbers
proceeds sequentially from the fi nest granularity digit positions to the coarsest
granularity digit positions. The combination of two numbers does not repre-
sent a new place on the number line until all the digits of both numbers have
been combined in sequence to produce a new number representing a complete
path to the new place on the number line.

Place-value numbers provide a general method of expressing differentness
and its interaction with a common referent (the number line), a common
structure (the place value number), a common set of digits (0–9), and a
common set of interaction behaviors (arithmetic). This commonality enables
a uniform characterization of differentness and the interaction of different-
nesses: a general form of expressing process behavior.

10.1.2 Projecting Numeric Differentness
The number line can be projected in many different ways into many different
circumstances to provide a referent for and representation of differentnesses
of the circumstances. Two number lines intersecting orthogonally can repre-
sent a two-dimensional reference frame, and two numbers (a number for each
line) represent a place on the plane of the reference frame. Three orthogonal
number lines can represent a three-dimensional reference frame that can be
projected in space, creating a referent of spatial differentness with three
numbers representing a place in its space.

The ordinality, cardinality, and indefi nite extensibility of place-value
numbers can be used anywhere in the context of a projected reference frame
to characterize spatial behaviors in terms of numeric differentnesses and inter-
action relationships among the numbers.

10.2 A LANDING EAGLE
Consider an eagle landing on a tree branch.

10.2.1 The Numeric View
To characterize the process of an eagle landing, one might project a 3D refer-
ence frame about the tree extending indefi nitely in all directions, defi ne a
A LANDING EAGLE 165

POINTS OF VIEW
reference frame for the eagle within the reference frame of the tree at some
point prior to landing, and specify orientations for the wings, the talons, and
the head and eyes within the reference frame for the eagle. The landing can
then be characterized as a spatial translation of the eagle onto the limb within
the common 3D reference frame.

The spatial distance and orientation between the eagle and the tree branch
can be determined. Coordinate translations of the head, wings, and talons can
place the eagle on the branch in a single translation step. This translation can
be calculated with the place-value numbers representing the position of the
branch, the position of the eagle and all its parts, and the equations of coor-
dinate translation. The calculations are complex algebraic equations carried
out on vectors and matrices involving an enormous quantity of interacting
numbers. Each number interaction resolves sequentially through all its stages
of digit position approximation.

If one wishes to simulate the landing in stages, this translation computation
can be repeated in small increments of position each closer to the branch until
the eagle is perched on the branch. Each step of the sequence must be calcu-
lated to the full precision of the reference frame to provide a current orienta-
tion for the calculation of the next step until the eagle is perched on the
branch. Presumably the fi ner the increments of position and the fi ner the
granularity of the numbers, the more closely the simulation represents a real
eagle landing on a real branch.

Some people marvel that animals can perform the calculations necessary
to walk and jump and catch frisbees. There is an assumption that nature,
through evolution, has come up with very clever ways to perform the necessary
numeric calculations within the reference frame. Perhaps calculation within
the reference frame has nothing to do with it. Maybe it is just a matter of a
different point of view.

10.2.2 The Eagle’s View
Consider the problem from the point of view of the eagle. The eagle
cannot project a high-precision 3D reference frame onto the world, mea-
sure places in the frame with high-precision numbers, and interact the
numbers with complex equations to land on the branch. The eagle only
has the reference frame of its fi eld of vision. Instead of projecting a 3D ref-
erence frame onto the world, the world projects onto the eagle’s 2D fi eld of
vision.

In the vision fi eld there will be a distance and direction delta between the
talons and the branch. This delta can resolve to a number of behavior variables
that fan out to the wings, the talons, the head, and the eyes as a fi rst coarse
approximation to the landing problem. The resulting body movements cause
a change in the vision fi eld of the eagle, which results in a new delta value that

resolves to more values fanned out to the wings, the talons, and the head and
eyes as a fi ner approximation to the landing. As the eagle nears the branch,
body behaviors continue to reduce the delta between the talons and the
branch until the landing is accomplished.

Assume that the delta covers a limited range of one thousand possible
deltas within the vision fi eld. The eagle keeps its eye on the branch centered
in the fi eld of vision. A thousand neurons distributed over the vision fi eld can
represent a thousand different delta (radius vector) values relative to the
center of vision, only one of which will fi re at a time. Think of the compound
eye of the bee. Bees can land on branches too. The neuron that fi res can then
contribute to generating the body variables that direct the wings, the head,
and the talons.

Assume that the body parts have small relative behavior ranges and that
the generated body variables each have a range of fi ve possibilities that can
be represented with fi ve neurons. The body parts are directed though a pro-
gression of small changes that guide the eagle and its vision fi eld onto the
branch.

The eagle’s reference frame is its fi eld of vision, which has a direct relation-
ship to its body parts. The expression of the eagle is arranged so that it uses
only necessary difference relations in a fairly short progression of direct inter-
actions to effect each iteration or approximation of the landing behavior. Its
body movements and its path through space are never characterized in the
context of any external reference frame, they are characterized only in terms
relative to the vision fi eld and the body of the eagle. The vision reference
frame is not a projected reference frame but is integral to the expression of
the eagle and its behavior.

The expression of the eagle is a structure of rings with part of one-ring path
passing through the branch. There are command paths to the body parts and
return paths indicating current position in relation to the body. The ring
through the branch is through the whole body of the eagle, through the
branch, through the eyes, and to the body part command generation, as shown
in Figure 10.1.

The vision fi eld delta is represented as a thousand unique differentnesses
by a thousand neurons. Each body variable is represented as fi ve unique dif-
ferentnesses by fi ve neurons. These are direct representations of local differ-
entness that perform specifi c local tasks. They are not numbers in the
conventional sense.

The eagle knows nothing about the numeric reference frame, about coor-
dinates, about place-value numbers, or about how numbers behave in relation
to the reference frame. The eagle is not doing anything remotely like numeric
calculation as humans understand it.

But why doesn’t the eagle use place-value numbers? To contrast the rep-
resentation of direct differentness with the conventional notion of number,
the notion of a single-digit number is introduced.

A LANDING EAGLE 167

POINTS OF VIEW
