of time relationships and spatial relationships in the context of a spatial
reference frame projected onto the expression, they appear chaotic and
INVISIBLE BEHAVIORS AND ILLUSORY BEHAVIORS 179

POINTS OF VIEW
uncoordinated. It might be possible to derive some complex formulas of space
and time to tease order out of the observed chaos, but the order can be directly
appreciated by just changing point of view. The behavior of the wavefronts is
quite orderly from their own point of view of logical coordination relation-
ships. If they are externally viewed in terms of the logical relationships that
are determining their behavior, the appearance of order emerges. The appear-
ance of disorder, or the invisibility of order, was just an illusion of a particular
observational point of view. The projected point of view can see a larger
picture than the participants but cannot see the orderly behavior of the parti-
cipants in the larger picture that it sees.

10.8.4 Asymmetric Points of View
Sequentiality and concurrency are two asymmetric points of view. The point
of view of sequentiality does not encompass concurrency and cannot see the
simplicity of concurrent behavior, the point of view of concurrency encom-
passes sequentiality as a special case of concurrency.

10.8.5 Finding a Point of View
There is no fi nal right answer. There is only the best that an arrogant bulk can
accomplish with hints such as inconsistency, incoherence, nonconformance
with experience, overly capable concepts, inconvenient or arbitrary limits, and
so forth.

10.9 SLIPPERY WORDS
A way of saying can subtly convey a point of view. It has been reiterated for
almost this entire book that an expression recognizes a presented input and
asserts an appreciating behavior. One might also say that the behavior of an
expression is controlled by its presented input. Or that an expression adapts
its behavior to its presented input. Or that an expression manipulates the
presented data. Is an expression just a static referent in space through which
dynamic change fl ows? Does an expression grab its input and consume it?
These are markedly different views of who is doing what to whom, of what
is primary activity, of what is secondary activity, and of where authority
resides.

American computers execute instructions, while British computers obey
order codes. The American phrasing conjures up a dynamic and authoritative
computer taking command of its instructions and shepherding them along.

The British phrasing conjures up a completely passive machine being com-
manded by the order codes. Both are characterizing identical circumstances,
but the implicit assignments of activity, passivity, and authority—a point of
view of the circumstances—are quite different.


The persistent is not appreciable apart from the transient. The transient is
not appreciable apart from persistent. Is differentness fl owing through a struc-
ture of association relationships, or is a structure of association relationships
fl owing through a sea of differentness? Change can only occur in a context of
persistence. Persistence can only occur in a context of change. Where is the
grounding? It is in a point of view.

10.10 SUMMARY
A point of view cannot be avoided. Every expression behaves with an intrinsic
point of view. Expressions observe other expressions at some level of mutual
understanding that is suffi cient to support interaction behaviors among them-
selves. Some expressions may become complex enough to go beyond direct
interaction and may begin observing or playing with other expressions to build
internal models of the other expressions.

To go beyond direct interaction, an observing expression must transcend
its intrinsic point of view and adopt an observational point of view and project
it onto the observed expression. The task for the observer is to characterize
the observed expression as completely as possible within its own expression
by interacting with the observed expression within the context of the projected
point of view. The problem is that the observer has no ground truth. It cannot
determine a priori what the characterization of the observed expression should
be or what the appropriate point of view might be.

A chosen point of view determines what can be observed by and character-
ized within the observing expression. Different observers may have different
observational concerns and capabilities. There might be aspects of an observed
expression that are invisible to a point of view. A point of view may project
properties onto an expression that are not inherent in the expression, such as
complexity, chaos, or extensibility. It may actually create behaviors not inher-
ent in the observed expression but that are artifactual illusions of the point
of view.

What an observer sees critically depends on how it looks. Finding an appro-
priate point of view to characterize an observed expression is a fundamental
problem. There are no defi nitive guidelines nor absolutely correct answers. It
is easy to construct a point of view built of arbitrarily suffi cient mortars that
seems to be complete and defi nitive but really says nothing about the inherent
nature of the observed expression. If it is so easy to be misguided, how can
one tell when one might be right? There is no fi nal certifi able correct answer.

Discovering an appropriate point of view is a search guided by indirect clues.

There are only interacting expressions with points of view doing what they
can with the resources at hand.

SUMMARY 181

Computer Science Reconsidered: The Invocation Model of Process Expression, by Karl M. Fant
Copyright © 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

REFERENTIAL AND
AUTONOMOUS PROCESS
EXPRESSION
An autonomous process expression spontaneously behaves entirely on its own
merits. It must be a complete expression in all respects. If any expression is
missing, it will fail to behave. A referential process expression does not spon-
taneously behave on its own merits and so does not have to be a complete
expression in all respects.

11.1 AUTONOMOUS TO REFERENTIAL
Referential expression emerges from autonomous expression.

11.1.1 Primitive Expressivity
The most primitive expression is a single primitive theng, its values, and its
value transform rules. A primitive theng does not express a process all by
itself. A process is at least two primitive thengs associating, forming a name,
and spontaneously resolving. At this level, expressivity is symmetric. Each
primitive theng is a differentness to be appreciated by the other. Each primi-
tive theng is referent for the differentness of the other. Each changes its value
in the resolution behavior.


REFERENTIAL AND AUTONOMOUS PROCESS EXPRESSION
11.1.2 Loss of Symmetry
When a persistent locus of association occurs, the symmetry disappears. Just
as a primitive theng is a persistence relating changing values, a structure of
associated thengs is a greater persistence relating a greater range of changing
values. It has a larger stride of appreciation.

The association structure encounters individual thengs and their values and
responds with a wavefront of value change fl owing through the expression to
an output boundary that asserts output values that are appreciations of the
encountered input values. Note that the association structure appreciates the
differentness of values of the encountered thengs. The encountered thengs do
not have suffi cient stride of appreciation to “appreciate” the association struc-
ture in any signifi cant sense.

11.1.3 Meaning
The association structure itself does not change. The association structure,
being persistent over many encounters of input values, becomes a de facto
referent for the differentness of the encountered values. The expression
imparts its own arbitrary meaning to the encountered differentnesses, a
meaning that does not necessarily correspond to any meaning imparted to the
same differentnesses by another expression.

11.1.4 Process and Data
The asymmetry can be characterized by notions of process and data. The
association structure can be called a process. The encountered values and
the value changes fl owing through the association structure can be called
data. The process expression is an appreciator/referent/observer of the encoun-
tered data.

11.1.5 Intermediate Memory
Intermediate persistence memories can occur in the process expression
that relate to and record specifi c encounter experiences. Upon similar en -
counter experiences the memories can present values to the expression that
contribute to its appreciation of each similar encounter. The memories are
integral to the process expression and may be distributed throughout the
process expression.

11.1.6 Internal Models of Encountered Expressions
An association expression may experience encounters not just with data but
with other expressions also. The intermediate memory accumulates expres-
sions of encounter experiences, and so assists the greater association expres-

sion in appreciating its subsequent encounters. The content of this memory is
an observer’s internal model of external encounters. The content of the inter-
mediate memory is a partial referential expression of an external encounter.

The partial referential expression along with the interpreting behavior of the
greater association expression is an abstract model of an external expression.

It is the best characterization of the external expression that the observing
expression can muster.

A intermediate memory and its content are unique to an expression and
are integral to the appreciation behavior of the expression. No other expres-
sion needs to be able to appreciate the values from the memories. The greater
association expression generates the contents of the memories and then uses
the contents of the memories. Even if the gross structures of the intermediate
memory and greater association expression are similar among different greater
association expressions, there is no need for the specifi c content of intermedi-
ate memories or for the fi ne structure of the greater association expression to
be similar among greater association expressions. Even if external behavior is
identical among greater association expressions, it does not imply identical
internal expression. Think of all the ways of expressing binary addition with
Boolean logic functions.

11.1.7 Common Symbols
Association expressions, however, can agree among themselves on a common
form of external expression. They can collaborate through a mutually agreed-
on common set of differentnesses (symbols) whose association structures
(language) are identically or at least similarly appreciated among individual
expressions. A specifi c structure of associated symbols is a symbolic referential
expression.

A symbolic referential expression does not autonomously behave on its
own merits but must be appreciated by an association expression. One associa-
tion expression can leave a symbolic referential expression lying about, and
