complex expressions. Chapter 7, “Composing Boundaries,” discusses the com-
position of complex expressions and the coordination of the composed behav-
iors for both association expressions and value expressions. Greater association
expressions are composed by associating behavior boundaries of lesser expres-
sions, forming a hierarchy of networks of composition boundaries that are also
completeness boundaries, coordination boundaries and partition boundaries.

13.6.1 The Cycle
The cycle, a feedback relationship with spontaneously oscillating behavior, is
introduced as a fi rst level of explicit coordination in conjunction with the
NULL convention. The cycle provides liveness to an expression as well as
coordination behavior. Cycles can be interlinked, forming spontaneously
behaving and fully coordinated pipeline structures. It was also shown that
cycles can be expressed and linked to expression pipeline structures within a
pure value expression.

COMPOSING DIFFERENTNESS 253

REFLECTIONS
13.6.2 The Last Composition
With any association composition there will be un-composed dangling bound-
aries. The last composition that encompasses the dangling boundaries of the
association expression is a pure value expression. Association expression
begins with primitive components within a pure value expression, and an
association expression remains a component of the pure value expression.

Appreciating differentness takes on new meaning for the association expres-
sion as it drifts through the content of the pure value expression.

While pure value composition was introduced as the top of the hierarchy
of association composition, one can also fi nd examples of pure value composi-
tion at intermediate levels of association expression. Biological bodies mix
both forms of expression at different levels in different ways. Biology starts
with a pure value expression in the cytoplasm bounded by the cell membrane.

There are also isolated pure value expressions, organelles, within the content
of the cytoplasm. Cells are associated into the hierarchical structures of tissues,
organs, and organisms, but this association of cells is also composed in terms
of the pure value expression of the blood that associates universally with
all cells. The alimentary canal is a pure value expression encompassed by an
association expression.

13.6.3 Nature’s Compositions
Association expressions spontaneously arise in nature within the pure value
expressions of soil, sea, and air. A primary organizing principle of spontaneous
composition may be the fact of catastrophic failure. There are no halfway
persistent expressions. There are no 99% persistent expressions. The successes
are absolute successes. There is no progressive approach to persistence. What-
ever succeeds arises suddenly with no precursor and no history of failure. A
persistent locus may evolve after arising, but it did not evolve before arising.

It seems exceptional because the failures that went before are not recorded.

Nature does not learn from her mistakes. She just forges ahead with her suc-
cesses. She may not have very pretty design rules, but she has a ruthlessly
effective debugger and that may be suffi cient. The question is, What are the
possibilities and what is the capacity for experiment? If both are suffi ciently
large, possibilities will occur.

13.7 TIME AND MEMORY
An expression adrift in a greater pure value expression might fi nd it useful to
appreciate differentness through time. Appreciating differentness through
time requires memory to associate a differentness from the past with a differ-
entness in the future. Chapter 8, “Time and Memory,” discusses the expres-
sion of differentness through time and its appreciation.


An association expression is an inherent referent for time. The successive
presentations of input provides a more or less uniform tick of time interval.

The structure of an association expression provides a referent of present, past
and future for each wavefront fl owing through the expression. An association
expression can contain association structures that delay content and associate
it with future wavefronts, allowing the appreciation of differentness through
time.

Process expression can be viewed as a structure of memories of various
persistences. The expression itself is a locus of persistence that is relatively
stable from presentation to presentation. The presentations to the expression
are transient in relation to the expression itself. They are temporarily main-
tained within the expression as they fl ow through the expression. The expres-
sion can include memories that are more transient than itself and less transient
than its fl owing presentations. Structures of association relationships among
these memories of varying persistence form expressions that appreciate dif-
ferentness through time.

13.7.1 The Arrogance of Bulk
An assocation is a referent for the differentnesses fl owing through it. As the
content of memories including the expression itself changes, the appreciation
behavior of the expression changes, but it does not cease to be a referent of
differentness. Any association expression of suffi cient persistence and stride
of appreciation, even if it is continually changing, becomes a de facto referent:
an arrogant bulk projecting its appreciations on all it encounters.

13.7.2 Incidental Time
Not all expressions that extend through time with memory are appreciating
differentness through time. Some expressions extend in time as an incidental
aspect of expression. Chapter 9, “Incidental Time,” discusses incidental exten-
sion in time that can be a strategy of enlivenment such as progressive inter-
pretation of referential expressions or that can occur because of available
resource limitations. The conventional computer extends expression in time
for the purpose of general confi gurability and for convenience of implementa-
tion. A common reason for extending an expression in time is a “time/space
trade-off” where it is cheaper to use a single autonomous expression over and
over in sequence with lots of memory rather than implement the autonomous
expression multiple times in a network of associations.

13.8 POINTS OF VIEW
An expression of a process begins with a point of view as to the differentnesses
and their interaction. Chapter 10, “Points of View,” presents and contrasts
POINTS OF VIEW 255

REFLECTIONS
several points of view of process expression. The lead example is an
eagle landing on a branch. The process is considered from the point of
view of an observer with a projected spatial reference frame and differential
equations. It is also considered from the point of view of the eagle as a pure
association expression. Number as expression of differentness is discussed,
and the notion of a single-digit number is introduced to contrast the view in
terms of place-value numbers and the view in terms of pure association
expression.

An observer is just an association expression interacting with another asso-
ciation expression projecting a point of view onto the observed expression.

There are three points of view involved. The observer’s view of its own intrin-
sic behaviors, the observer’s view of its projection of metric onto the observed
expression, and the observed expression’s own view of its intrinsic behaviors.

The problem of the observer is to fi nd a projected metric that best character-
izes the observed expression. The observer should also try to appreciate the
point of view of the observed expression. The observer’s quandary is that
there is no meta referent of correctness, no teacher giving hints. There is no
way for the observing expression to directly judge the effi cacy of its projected
metric or of its take on the point of view of the observed expression. There
are only subtle clues such as consistency, coherence, correspondence to expe-
rience, and simplicity.

A point of view is formed in terms of its primitive concepts. The choice
of stateless functions or of state-holding functions leads to dramatically
different views of process expression. While every expression must
adopt points of view, a point of view can create illusions, mask realities,
and serve as a self-perpetuating referent in such a way that it can be very
diffi cult to transcend the point of view. There is no one most general or
universal point of view, and there is no defi nitive guide to an effective point
of view.

13.9 REFERENTIAL AND AUTONOMOUS EXPRESSION
Chapter 11, “Referential and Autonomous Process Expression,” discusses
the notions of autonomous expression, which spontaneously behaves on
its own merits, and referential expression, which does not spontaneously
behave on its own merits but requires the assistance of an autonomous
expression. Since it does not have to behave, referential expression can
be partial in many convenient ways realizing economies of expression with
appeals to universal conventions and consolidation of common expression.

Referential expressions can be integral components of autonomous expres-
sion, and they can be individual symbolic templates that can be mapped
to many other forms of referential expression and artifi cial autonomous
expressions.


13.10 THE INVOCATION LANGUAGE
Chapter 12, “The Invocation Language,” presents a language of association
relationships in terms of a string of symbols. It is the language of distributed
concurrent behavior with uniform expressivity through all levels of hierarchi-
cal composition. It is the key to scalable and reliable distributed concurrent
computing.

13.11 COMPARISONS
One might think that there should have been more discussion of comparisons
between the invocation model and the current theory of computer science,
but it is not possible to make meaningful comparisons. How does one compare
a model of process within which state space is meaningless in terms of state
space. How does one compare a model that is fundamentally distributed and
concurrent in terms of strict sequence or in terms of a central memory. How
does one speak of a model of spontaneous behavior in terms of explicit
control. The gulf is too great. Any attempt at direct comparison would be a
futile exercise in confusion and ambiguity.

13.12 MODELS OF CONCURRENCY
The most infl uential contemporary models of concurrency begin with sequen-
tiality such as communicating sequential processes [1] and cooperating sequen-
tial processes [2]. There are models that attempt to directly model concurrency,
but they are hampered by notions inherited from sequentiality.

13.12.1 Petri Nets
A Petri net is a token fl ow model of concurrent behavior [3]. It is a directed
graph of alternating places (circles) and transitions (fat lines). A place can
contain tokens. A transition takes tokens from an input place along an input
arc of the transition and places tokens in an output place along an output arc
of the transition. Each arc is assigned a token weight. The weights on input
arcs indicate how many tokens must be in the associated place for the transi-
tion to fi re. When a transition fi res, it removes a number of tokens equal to
the weights of its input arcs from each input place and sends the number of
tokens equal to the weight of each output arc to each output place. Tokens
fl ow along the directed arcs of the graph as transitions fi re.

The behavior of the tokens is directed and discrete. A Petri net has a form
of completeness behavior in that a transition only fi res when there are enough
