Judith Butler might be the most misunderstood philosopher in the world,
so I decided to read as much of their work as I could in one month.
Actually, I read it in like four months, but YouTube videos need narrative now.
Butler has been writing for over 40 years about a lot of things, including gender.
If you've ever heard the idea that gender is performative, that's them.
Their work has also been the subject of huge backlash,
like in 2017, protesters in Brazil burned an effigy of Judith Butler.
Philosophy doesn't usually get that spicy.
I must have missed the effigy making class during my degree.
Interestingly, the people with the strongest reactions to Butler
often haven't understood or even read their work,
and now they have a new book about the backlash.
Who's Afraid of Gender?
I've deliberately filmed the bulk of this video on a white void background
with minimal costumes.
Kind of an old-fashioned style on YouTube these days,
but I wanted to get across the idea that as controversial as this stuff might be,
there's nothing hidden.
You're not committing yourself to anything by hearing it.
It's just an invitation to listen and consider a different point of view.
And really, that's a skill we could all do with practicing,
because this philosophy has huge real-world implications.
I was inspired to take this research journey
when I read this article in The Washington Post.
Students from E.C. Glass High School in Lynchburg, Virginia,
applied for a grant from It Gets Better,
a non-profit dedicated to kids' mental health.
And they got it.
They were awarded $10,000 to put a chill-out room in their school,
a space with comfy chairs and relaxed lighting to go if they're stressed.
Nice.
But the school board sent the money back.
They said that if they took it,
students would have to watch pro-LGBTQ videos, which wasn't true.
It Gets Better does focus on helping LGBTQ kids,
but the room would have been open to anyone,
and the grant had no requirements about watching anything.
But the board wouldn't listen.
The board discussed this for longer than they discussed
the literal closure of two entire schools in their district.
And that stunned me.
A school board rejected $10,000 of free money
and talked about something that isn't true for so long.
It impaired their ability to work.
So what happened here?
Why couldn't they listen?
This polarization is exactly what Butler's interested in.
I'll take you through their technical philosophy.
Although really, I wish I could just show you,
because I'm somebody whose mind has definitely changed on these issues.
But it's not like I can just go back in time
and talk to my past self.
Oh my god.
These Maddlings are amazing.
So, you're surprised?
Yeah.
Fair.
But how surprised are you, really?
You look like Mum.
Right?
You sound different.
Seattle Voice Lab.
Look them up.
I can turn it on and off whenever I want.
So in about three years, we have to move flats.
And the internet contract is in your name.
So when I call to cancel it,
they won't talk to me.
And I have to say, hang on a minute.
I'll go get him and do your voice.
Turn the phone.
I'll be Mum and Dad.
Take it.
Really well, actually.
There's this nice moment in about three years
when you and Dad are going to be out.
Actually, I think you're gone by this point.
It's just me and him.
And we bump into small family friends
and they're super awkward about it.
And Dad's just like, whatever, their problem.
He's not embarrassed.
Why would he be embarrassed?
Were you dressed like this?
Address however I want.
Dude, that's the whole point.
The whole thing is so liberating.
Seriously, you are going to love it.
Just the freedom to be.
I don't want to be like you.
Why not?
Let's talk about Fem boys.
I began at the beginning.
Butler's 1988 paper,
Performative Acts and Gender Constitution,
one of the first things they ever wrote.
And right up top, we should acknowledge,
Butler's academic writing can sometimes be pretty difficult.
And that's fair enough.
Gender is a difficult subject.
Mine took me two attempts.
What made it click for me is it reminded me of a friend
who will call F.
F is very cool, clever and funny.
And unpretentious, the kind of person who turns up
to a fancy restaurant wearing a trucker hat.
F is also a Fem boy.
Fem boys take on attributes
that are typically considered feminine,
but they are not themselves women, usually.
Fem boy is also a genre of online content.
F dresses up like a girl
and streams themselves playing video games.
When I first met F, I wondered, is Fem boy a gender?
Well, it's less a thing that you are
and more a thing that you do like a job.
And interestingly, because the Fem boy aesthetic
is so shaped by online content,
to do Fem boy in a way that other people will recognize
requires you to adopt certain behaviors
and stylized practices
whose meaning is not determined by you.
You can't choose what the trends are,
what styles of makeup or dress signal Fem boy.
You've got to learn them and do them
if you want to be seen that way.
And F works pretty hard at that.
If you're very clever,
you'll already have guessed where this is going.
According to Butler, all gender works that way.
In this paper, they say that gender is a thing
we do through repeated, stylized acts.
Not a property, but an embodied event.
Those acts get their meaning from a social world.
So in a way, gender is also a thing that is done to us.
Gender is in no way a stable identity
or locus of agency from which various acts proceed.
Rather, it's an identity tenuously constituted in time,
an identity instituted through a stylized repetition of acts.
Further, gender is instituted through a stylization of the body
and hence must be understood as the mundane way
in which bodily gestures, movements and enactments
of various kinds constitute the illusion of an abiding gendered self.
You're ridiculous.
Says discount Tom Hiddleston.
Your face doesn't look like me anymore.
Did you get plastic surgery on my face?
Well, there's no plastic in me, babes.
I'm all natural.
Artificial surgery makes you natural, does it?
At first glance, Butler's ideas seemed a little strange to me
because we often talk as if gender is an inner truth.
For example, when people change gender and come out,
we're often said to be living authentically or being true to ourselves.
Even the term coming out implies that there was an authentic self before who was hidden.
But according to Butler, there might be no such thing.
It's not that I exist and then I choose to perform gender in ways that you will recognize.
I can't even form a concept of I without using gendered language
and stylized practices whose meaning exists prior to me.
Gender is one of the ways that human subjects come into existence.
The technical term here is subjectification, and that process happens publicly.
Gender creates the illusion of a private self which exists before all of that,
but this is just an illusion.
If a tree falls in the forest and nobody's around to hear it,
it has no pronouns.
Herein lies the distinction between performative and performance,
which are often mixed up.
When people say gender is a performance,
they mean that people exist first without gender,
and then they put on costumes or makeup or wigs the way that an actor does.
But that's not what Butler is saying.
Performative is a technical philosophy term
for when you say something and by saying it, you also do it.
For example, if you say I promise, you say the words and you make a promise.
If a judge says I sentence you, they say it and they do it.
When Butler says that gender is performative, they mean it that way.
You do it and you make it so, and indeed by doing it, you are made so.
And people have made fun of Butler for this idea.
I've seen people say, oh, Judith Butler says,
you can just choose to be any gender you want.
Oh, I men can choose to be women and women can choose to be baboons
and I can choose to be an attack helicopter.
Ha ha, how silly.
But when I actually read their work,
I realized that's not what they're saying at all.
Our very concept of ourselves as gendered subjects requires a social world.
We depend on others for the recognition we need to become gendered subjects.
We can still make some choices where whatever clothes or makeup you like,
but the meaning of those things is not within our soul control.
People have been making jokes like that about Butler for decades,
even though they address this misunderstanding in their first paper, in the first paragraph.
Almost like the people mocking them aren't really listening.
There is no volitional subject behind the mime who decides, as it were,
which gender it will be today.
On the contrary, the very possibility of becoming a viable subject
requires that a certain gender mime be already underway.
I didn't come back here to argue with you, I'm trying to help.
I don't believe it, it's a trick.
You were born in your castle.
Your favourite fruit is Chinese.
Your first crush was named Flossy.
No, no, no, you could have tortured me and got in that information.
What?
Well, I don't know, you could have gotten it out on me somehow in the future.
Just listen to me, we're the same height, we have the same eyes.
Your body's completely different.
Yes, that's the point.
Human bodies can't change that much.
We can!
Even if you are, even if you are, even if you are, even if you are.
Let's talk about Kristen Stewart.
Next on my reading list was Butler's famous 1990 book Gender Trouble.
But it's pretty tough and technical, so we could use a bit of a run-up.
We can actually start with this.
In March 2024, actor Kristen Stewart appeared on the cover of Rolling Stone, looking…
In the interview, Stewart said,
I want to do the gayest f***ing thing you've ever seen in your life.
If I could grow a little mustache, if I could grow a f***ing happy trail and unbutton my pants,
I would.
Later at the Berlin Film Festival, she added,
The existence of a female body thrusting any type of sexuality at you that's not designed for
or desired by exclusively cis straight males is something people are not super comfy with.
And so I am really happy with it.
I had a great time.
A lot of people think that there's a difference between sex and gender.
Sex is supposed to be the physical thing, some combination of genes or genitals or gametes,
or maybe it's something in your brain, but it's there in the world.
And gender is just what we do with it, or at least that's how the story goes.
It might be helpful to know something of the history of that idea.
For millennia, male-dominated societies exploited women
and justified it by claiming that we are naturally inferior.
From Greek and Roman philosophers saying that women can't be educated,
to Victorian doctors saying that we are too emotional to vote, to today.
Some people still say women are by nature not equipped to live as equal members of society.
Oh, she could never lead a nation.
What if she got her period and started a war?
Misogyny has consistently justified itself by appealing to
facts about our bodies that are simply made up.
If you'd like to know more about the history of this practice, then I really recommend
The Once and Future Sex by historian Eleanor Yanagher.
Into this context comes French philosopher Simone de Beauvoir,
whose landmark book The Second Sex comes out in 1949 and opens with this sentence.
One is not born, but rather becomes a woman.
De Beauvoir challenges this history, saying that whilst there are facts about female biology,
male-dominated society also makes a lot of stuff up and claims that the stuff it makes up is facts.
The technical term here is naturalization, making something appear natural.
For example, women are denied the vote?
Well, it's not because we live in an unequal society,
it's because the female brain just can't handle it because of biology.
So, she says, one is born female, but woman is a socially constructed ideal of subordination,
that we are encouraged to embrace and punished for defying.
And then, in the 1980s, along come French philosophers Monique Wittig and Michel Foucault,
who say this sex versus gender distinction is just another layer of control.
De Beauvoir thinks that woman is an oppressive social construct, but female somehow isn't?
Human beings are 99.9% identical. Who does it serve to split hairs about the remaining 0.1%?
Defining one half of the human species in terms of our capacity to carry babies and be fertile
and straight and thereby participate in systems of property and inheritance overwhelmingly controlled
by men? Does that sound like a natural distinction? Or does it sound like a political one?
Wittig actually says that women should reject womanhood entirely by becoming lesbians,
rejecting the patriarchal categories of both woman and female.
Categories which she says only make sense inside the heterosexual matrix.
Do not try and change sex. That's impossible. Instead, only try to realize the truth.
There is no sex. We've been compelled in our bodies and in our minds to correspond
feature by feature with the idea of nature that has been established for us,
distorted to such an extent that our deformed body is what they call natural,
what is supposed to exist as such before oppression, distorted to such an extent
that in the end oppression seems to be a consequence of this nature within ourselves.
By admitting that there is a natural division between women and men, we naturalize history.
Not only do we naturalize history, but also consequently we naturalize the social phenomena
which express our oppression, making change impossible. Lesbian is the only concept I know
of which is beyond the categories of sex, woman and man, because the designated subject, lesbian,
is not a woman, either economically or politically or ideologically.
For what makes a woman is a specific social relation to a man, a relation that we have
previously called servitude, a relation which implies personal and physical obligation as well
as economic obligation, forced residence, domestic corvée, conjugal duties, unlimited production
of children, etc. A relation which lesbians escape by refusing to become or stay heterosexual.
I'm not sure that I personally agree with everything Wittig says, but it's a provocative
thought, worth listening to, and in gender trouble, Butler thinks so too. They say we should
question the idea that sex is a natural category. That might sound very out there, but just listen
for a moment. Once upon a time, people believed that race was a natural category. They wrote
scientific papers about it and measured people's skulls and took blood samples and they believed
that it was real. Nowadays we know that race is a political grouping that was naturalized,
made to look natural, in large part to justify slavery. And we also know that sex was a big
part of that. Black women and white women were categorized very differently. So are you certain
that the distinction between male and female is as secure as you've been told?
Who told you that?
Why did they tell you it?
And who benefits from you continuing to believe it?
You think that's pussy you're eating now?
This is the artistic space that Christian Stewart's photo shoot is playing in. The
piece and Stewart's comments engage in what Butler calls re-signification, giving a new
meaning to something. In this case, Stewart's body. The question it poses is, what if this
is also female? What does that tell us about the sense or non-sense of gendered categories?
But if sex isn't real, then why did I go through all the trouble of changing mine?
It's a blunt question, but it's not an unfair one.
So when I finished gender trouble, I also read this, Whipping Girl by Julius Serrano. Serrano
is a biologist. She believes in what she calls subconscious sex, something in the brain that
expects the body to be a certain way. She thinks this would explain the existence of people like
me and also her, whose gender just feels right. It's an interesting idea, and I think it gets
to the heart of an intuition a lot of us have to go, look, like physical differences are there.
We can see them. Some human beings can get pregnant and others can't. Like,
is Butler really saying that all of that isn't real? But then I read the book again,
and it turns out that's also a misunderstanding. Butler's not saying that the physical world
isn't there or even that it's unknowable. They're just saying that whatever facts
there might be about biological sex, we can only learn them and talk about them through gender.
To say the sentence, my brain expects my body to be female, is to draw on a particular understanding
of the word female. And while we're at it, a particular understanding of the meaning of the
words my and body, that get their meaning from a social world. I've seen some more recent philosophers
use the term sex slash gender, and even sex slash gender slash race. And now I understand why we
can't really think about those things separately. It's not that there's sex, the biological reality,
and then there's gender on top of it. It's all gender. It's all gender.
Or why it has been. Physical features appear to be in some sense there on the far side of language,
unmarked by a social system. It is unclear, however, that these features could be named
in a way that would not reproduce the reductive operation of the categories of sex. In other words,
sex imposes an artificial unity on an otherwise discontinuous set of attributes. As both discursive
and perceptual, sex denotes a historically contingent epistemic regime, a language that forms
perception by forcibly shaping the interrelationships through which physical bodies are perceived.
The existence and facticity of the material or natural dimensions of the body are not denied,
but reconceived as distinct from the process by which the body comes to bear cultural meanings.
If gender is the cultural significance that the sexed body assumes, and if that significance
is co-determined through various acts in their cultural perception, then it would appear that
from within the terms of culture, it is not possible for no sex as distinct from gender.
A woman is a human being who belongs to the sex class that produces large gametes.
May I suggest also posting interesting and positive content on other matters?
I live in England, where a lot of people are talking about sex at the moment.
Some say that sex is a fixed point that cannot be changed or signified or questioned,
whereas gender is just a nebulous feeling or a contested belief.
I thought all that feminist philosophy was pretty interesting,
but it seems some people don't want to listen.
What if they walk in now and say you made a mistake?
Then I made the mistake you wanted to make.
Better the devil you know than the devil you don't.
The gates of hell are locked from the inside.
What makes me suspicious, right?
Is you're coming in here going, oh, everything's wonderful, right?
Trying to convince me, but you don't mention any downsides.
Of course there's downsides.
Well go on then.
Street harassment?
Men are going to shout at you in the street.
Men push into you and interrupt you.
And?
And it's scary sometimes being a woman.
There's this girl called Sarah Everard.
She's going to get murdered in 2021 by a police officer.
It's a big thing.
It's on all the news.
And I have a vigil for her in London.
Women come from all over the country.
And the police beat and arrest the women at the vigil.
And you're going to see that and you're going to feel scared because it's like,
wow, this is how they treat us.
Were you there?
No.
I didn't feel entitled to.
Good.
The body we have is threatening.
It wouldn't be appropriate for us to be out and about violence against women.
We're not violent.
I mean, we're like tall, but so are giraffes.
Bodies are just bodies.
I wish I had been there.
We need all the allies we can get.
I tell you this, you're going to have to go through so much bullshit just to get health care.
And all of that comes from this place of being like, oh,
everybody needs to fit a strict definition.
Everyone has to be in a little box.
I'll do what I want and I'll help who I can.
Let's talk about feminism.
If there is no natural category of sex,
then how can we argue for women's rights?
That's a question some people are asking.
And I'll admit I was curious.
I've seen some say that Butler is erasing women
and that in order to protect us from things like discrimination and assault,
the law needs a strict definition of women grounded in facts about biological sex.
Thing is, I happen to know just off my own bat that that's actually incorrect.
For example, suppose an employer denies a job to a candidate named Hillary because they think,
oh, women, women be shopping, women are unreliable employees, application denied.
Only it turns out Hillary is Hillary with one L. The candidate is a man.
In that case, the employer can still be guilty of sexual discrimination,
even though their definition of what a woman is, is false and didn't even apply.
The same principle also goes in crimes like assault.
If a straight person gets attacked coming out of a gay club,
that can still be a homophobic hate crime if the suspect
believes that they're gay and attacks them for that reason.
What matters in law is the suspect's actions and motivations,
not whether the victim meets a particular definition.
Even though this is a matter of settled law,
some people still insist that a strict definition is required,
almost like those people aren't listening.
But anyway, wouldn't it still be useful to have some definition of women,
even if we all know it's kind of vague and loose?
Could it be useful as a political standard to rally around?
I read Butler's 1991 paper, Imitation and Gender Subordination,
which is partly about this definition question.
They say that defining womanhood has been,
and still is, a key strategy of patriarchy.
And that's what de Beauvoir was writing about in the 40s.
Trying to set an exact definition is always going to be an exclusionary project,
whereas a certain amount of grey area would be more inclusive.
Indeed, they say that any category like gay, lesbian, trans,
femboy, imposes limits.
And trying to make everybody fit one specific box
as if they must have some inner self that corresponds to one of them
is just a bad idea.
And I understood where Butler was coming from there.
In Britain, trans people are often expected to tell doctors
a certain story about our lives.
We're supposed to say, oh, ever since I was a child,
I called myself Wendy and wore my mother's dresses,
and if your life doesn't fit that narrative,
it can be very hard to get medical care.
The concept of an authentic inner self that needs to be discovered
and verified and checked and meet somebody else's definition
is used against a fact.
Identity categories tend to be instruments of regulatory regimes,
whether as the normalizing categories of oppressive structures
or as the rallying points for a liberatory contestation of that very oppression.
That is not to say that I will not appear at political occasions
under the sign of lesbian,
but that I would like to have it permanently unclear
what precisely that sign signifies.
Which version of lesbian or gay ought to be rendered visible
and which internal exclusions will that rendering visible institute?
Can the visibility of identity suffice as a political strategy?
Or can it only be the starting point for a strategic intervention
which calls for a transformation of policy?
Is it not a sign of despair over public politics
when identity becomes its own policy,
bringing with it those who would police it from various sides?
You know what else to tell you, man?
Change is difficult, but it is possible.
This is going to f**k up our career.
On the contrary.
It's going to f**k up our love life.
On the contrary.
Well look, as far as anyone knows right now,
I'm a cis-het white guy, right?
Like I'm top of the pile.
Surely it would be easier to not change.
Oh yeah, way easier.
If you want to be depressed every day of your life
and kill yourself at 35.
You know what I mean?
Politically things aren't great in my time.
I assume in the future they do not vastly improve.
Let's talk about 9-11 and dicks.
Oh this is where things get silly and then they get very not silly.
A penis is an organ of the human body.
It has nerves and blood vessels and skin and so on.
Its primary function is to allow women who have one to pee standing up
if the toilet of the train carriage that you're in is really gross.
And it also does some other stuff.
Remember what we said earlier though?
It's not that there's the physical organ
and then a bunch of other social constructee stuff on top.
According to Butler, we can only know the body
through the social world of symbolic meanings.
So that particular organ often means power,
strength, domination, particularly when used for penetration,
and the threat of male violence.
That bundle of cultural and symbolic meanings
is what philosophers call the phallus.
Can a woman have a penis?
This question was a fad in British media a year or two ago.
Journalists kept ambushing politicians with it and watching them struggle.
But really the answer is quite simple.
In Britain, you can change your legal sex without surgery.
Because international human rights law recognizes it's probably morally wrong
to make a certain group of people undergo expensive, difficult,
potentially risky invasive medical procedures
that they may not want in order to do things like get married.
So if you are assigned male at birth,
you can change your legal sex in Britain
and become a woman without surgery.
It's not an easy process, but surgery isn't mandatory.
If you like your dick, you can keep it.
Beyond the legal situation though,
if a person assigned male takes feminizing hormones,
then their body will change and that includes their genitals,
which can change a lot more than you might think.
In some cases, it essentially becomes a large clitoris
incapable of erection or penetration.
And whether you want to call that a female penis or a feminine penis
or whether you think there's not much distinction there,
legally and medically, the facts are in.
Can a woman have a penis?
Yeah.
And yet, people who haven't experienced all that for themselves
often don't listen to those who have.
Maybe you were giggling when I told you all of that stuff.
The idea of a female penis is so unimaginable
that it's like a punchline, right?
Despite the fact that it is just a normal thing
that some people have.
It appears funny and unexpected.
The idea of resignifying that, using it differently,
but not wrongly, not powerful, not for penetration,
not even male, appears to be almost a contradiction
because that bundle of cultural and symbolic meanings
has been naturalized, made to seem natural.
And this is a very common mistake.
We might even call it a fallacy.
All of this is deeply funny until the second it affects government policy.
In February 2023, British Justice Secretary Dominic Robb
announced that from now on, women who have male genitalia
who are arrested will be sent to a men's prison,
regardless of what we look like,
regardless of whether we have legally changed sex
and regardless of what we are charged with.
If, for example, I was arrested at a protest,
if I was wrongfully arrested for something,
I would be sent to a men's prison.
And I'm sure you can imagine, although you may not want to,
how that might go.
There isn't really any good kind of prison,
but this policy makes prison worse for a certain section of the population
because of the way that we are born.
And in that regard, it's ethically unusual.
It's normally a principle of justice
that similar crimes should carry similar sentences,
but in my home country,
the same crime might carry a much harsher prison sentence
if you're a trans woman.
This discrimination is justified by politicians
by appealing to the supposed threat that penises carry.
But remember, it's regardless of our crime
or what our particular bodies are capable of.
And that's quite philosophically interesting.
They say that we are a threat,
but they are not listening to any actual facts about us.
Since that 2023 announcement,
I'd been trying to understand and listen
to the justice secretary's perspective
and work my way through the fear.
So the next item on my reading list was Butler's 2003 volume
Precarious Life.
They write about 9-11 and the war on terror.
In particular, the people who were detained indefinitely
in Guantanamo Bay by the U.S. government.
Terror suspects.
And suspects is a key word there,
because many of those imprisoned were never given a trial.
Some of them were never even charged.
The government said those people had to be imprisoned
because they were dangerous,
but not the kind of danger that they could prove in a trial.
The danger that these prisoners are said to pose
is unlike dangers that might be substantiated
in a court of law and redressed through punishment.
Establishing dangerousness is not the same as establishing guilt.
A certain level of dangerousness takes a human being
outside the bounds of law
and even outside the bounds of the military tribunal itself
makes that human into the state's possession,
infinitely detainable.
What counts as dangerous is what is deemed dangerous by the state,
so that, once again, the state posits what is dangerous
and in so doing establishes the conditions
for its own preemption and usurpation of the law.
If a person is deemed dangerous,
then it is no longer a matter of deciding whether criminal acts occurred.
Indeed, deeming someone dangerous is an unsubstantiated judgment
that in these cases works to preempt determinations
for which evidence is required.
If you're very clever, you'll already have realised
that when governments call people dangerous in this way,
they're using performative speech.
They say it, and they make it so.
But what's happening here isn't subjectification,
it's abjectification, creating non-subjects,
non-people who exist outside the law
and who can therefore be treated any way the government likes.
We don't need trials and evidence for them
because they're the bad guys.
If they have their rights violated or they die,
well, you shouldn't care about that
because they were never really alive in a way that mattered.
In fact, if you do care about what happens to them,
then that's suspicious.
You're not going to sympathise with the bad guys, are you?
If you've been watching the news lately, you might be wondering,
the people of Gaza keep being killed,
but Western governments aren't listening.
Is that maybe an example of abjectification?
And according to Butler, the answer is yes.
They are a longtime supporter of Palestinian rights
and have often used their position as a public Jewish academic
to call on the Israeli government to meet their obligations
under international human rights law.
Butler says abjectification is a tool of government
in the 21st century that we need to watch out for.
When the powers that be say a certain group of people
are inherently dangerous,
whether they're Muslims or Palestinians or trans people,
that's them trying to use performative speech
to make that group of people impossible to listen to.
We become not subjects, but abjects.
A problem to be managed against our will
in the name of a public good that does not recognise us as part of the public.
And I'm not drawing a moral equivalence between those three groups,
I'm just highlighting this technique of government,
making you aware of it,
because you never know when the powers that be
might decide to use it on you.
Yeah, you're right about that.
Politics in the future gets weird.
How do you mean weird?
Let's talk about JK Rowling.
We come at last to Butler's new book,
Who's Afraid of Gender.
In recent years, scholars have been studying the rise
of the global anti-gender movement,
a network of people including far-right political actors,
religious fundamentalists,
and a lot of people who are neither.
Sometimes it's a literal network of politicians and activists
working together behind the scenes,
but sometimes it's more of a loose association.
They oppose women's rights, especially abortion,
LGBTQ rights, and they strongly oppose trans people.
There is a part of the movement that emerged from radical feminism,
and that part tends to get a lot of attention,
especially here on YouTube.
Here's three great videos if you're interested,
but the movement as a whole is mainly men
and supports policies that would harm the vast majority of women.
Women play an important role in selling it
and helping it appear benign
because protecting women is always good PR,
but they aren't the core.
The core is the fight against gender ideology,
but there's not much agreement on what that actually means.
In Eastern Europe, they say that gender ideology
is spread by the UN and the EU,
but in Italy, they say it's spread by African migrants.
In Latin America, gender ideology means feminism,
but in the UK, they say it's against feminism.
In Florida, they say it's gay.
In the UK, they say it's homophobic.
They say that gender ideology is the new conversion therapy,
but some anti-gender organisations are in favour of conversion therapy.
Gender ideology is spread by woke students
with blue hair and safe spaces,
but it's also being pushed on innocent students by wicked professors.
Children must not be indoctrinated into gender ideology,
and so the government must make sure children believe
the things it says about gender,
but all of this is deeply confusing.
The Oxford English Dictionary defines gender ideology as...
Although gender ideology is a vague term,
there are recurring themes in how it is used.
One such theme is the idea that gender
is in some way unnatural or artificial or fake,
a contested belief, unlike biological sex and family values
which definitely are natural.
Another theme is that gender ideologues, whoever they are,
are powerful, commanding your obedience,
but also very sneaky, capturing institutions behind the scenes.
And the sneakiness is important,
because it allows the movement to claim gender ideologues
or doing all sorts of nefarious things
that they have no evidence for,
but the reason they have no evidence
is because they're so gosh darn sneaky.
Self-victimization plays a huge role here.
Another reason there's no evidence
is because ordinary people are being bullied
into silence by the woke genderists.
Sometimes this verges into outright conspiracy theory.
There are people in my country,
people with serious political and media careers,
who've claimed that our civil service and healthcare
are secretly being run by the trans deep state,
which frankly, I wish that were true.
The final theme is the danger
that gender ideology apparently poses.
Whatever it is, it's a threat to women who are erased
and to men who are made weak and helpless,
to families and to children in particular
who are confused or preyed upon.
It's a threat to the nation,
because you see gender makes us weak to communism,
or capitalism, or Vladimir Putin,
or Western influence, or Islamic migrants.
It's a threat to the existence of humanity
and the authority of God himself.
The Vatican has actually claimed that.
No exaggeration.
Pope Francis compared gender ideology to nuclear weapons.
It kind of just means the opposite of how things should be,
and the way they should be is whatever you personally want.
And that's a very effective strategy,
because it allows people who previously
might not have associated to stand together.
The movement features conservative Catholics,
men's rights activists, neo-Nazis, new age types,
centrists, liberals, and even some feminists.
And it's good at radicalizing them too.
Gender ideology seems like such a big threat.
It can't be stopped by traditional means.
We have to get tough.
Much of the blame for starting the anti-gender movement
belongs, I'm afraid, to Catholics.
Since the least the 1980s,
conservative Catholics, both within and without the church,
have said that gender ideology threatens the family and God.
They use this claim as justification for their extreme
authoritarian positions on abortion and queerness,
among other things.
It was Catholics who first started the conspiracy theory
that the UN are secretly pushing an anti-Christian gender agenda.
The Catholic Church has also claimed several times
in writing, without evidence,
that gender ideology leads to the abuse of children.
An IMAX level act of projection that might honestly be funny
if it weren't so insulting to the intelligence
of every human being on planet Earth.
Religion still plays a big role in driving anti-gender sentiment,
especially in the Americas and Eastern Europe.
In Britain, our version is a little more secular,
but that's not the case everywhere.
It's just, we don't go in for Catholicism
as much as we used to.
But it would be unfair to lay the blame on all Catholics.
Evangelicals are getting involved too,
and indeed, some ordinary Catholics might be getting scarred.
I have to be careful what I say here.
I can tell you that religion also plays a role
in how the movement is funded.
The Piotr Skarga Association, a Polish group
who oppose abortion and LGBTQ rights,
have raised millions of euros selling rosaries
and pictures of saints to Catholics around the world
via mail order.
And legally, I can't say that's a scam.
Maybe everyone who gives them money knows what they use it for.
Maybe when a little French grandma
in Toulouse buys a calendar with the Virgin Mary on it,
she knows full well that her money is going
to an extreme right-wing organization in Poland
who are going to send some of it to anti-abortion groups
in Brazil and spend the rest on luxury properties.
Grandma probably did her research.
And she'd have to, because their adverts don't mention it,
and Piotr Skarga's financial documents
were hidden from the public until journalists
broke this story in 2020.
Speaking of Catholic crimes, though,
the narrative is that gender ideology is being pushed
on the good people of the world by shadowy elites
who are pulling the strings.
And at this point in my reading, I was thinking,
well, that sounds a lot like anti-Semitism.
And yes, there are some parts of the movement
that are explicitly anti-Semitic.
For example, neo-Nazis have criticized Judith Butler
for being a Jewish lesbian who invented gender
to weaken the West.
But then I read this.
Anti-gender politics in the populist moment
by Polish scholars Agnieszka Graf and Albert Kolszuk.
They say not all anti-genderists are secretly anti-Semitic.
The reason they can look similar
is because they do similar things.
Objectify, make a certain group of people
impossible to listen to.
Though Jews are almost never mentioned in a text on gender ideology,
genderists and especially sexual minorities
are consistently Judaized in anti-gender discourse.
That is, described in a language strongly reminiscent
of conspiratorial anti-Semitism.
The link becomes most obvious when Soros and Butler are mentioned,
or when the term cultural Marxism,
notorious for its anti-Semitic subtext, is employed.
Like Jews and anti-Semitic attacks,
sexual minorities are presented as engaged in a secretive plot.
They are scheming, devious and powerful.
To this end, the term homosexual lobby is often used
and the link between homosexuality and cosmopolitanism
or rootlessness is persistently made.
Furthermore, LGBT activists are routinely accused of sacrilege.
Their very presence is said to contaminate sacred events and spaces,
while the rainbow flag is seen as offensive
to religious sensibilities and patriotic feelings.
Finally, like Jews and pre-World War II Eastern Europe,
gays are blamed for provoking violent attacks
by making themselves too conspicuous.
We're in the eye of the storm a lot.
I mean queer people generally, but sometimes us specifically.
Sometimes it feels like being under a big microscope.
Do you remember when we were studying theology at university?
Yeah, just about.
We had this one lecturer who taught us about Genesis.
Remember, he said, you are created.
You are a creature.
Yeah, I do remember that.
I didn't like that word creature.
Yeah, we belong to us.
We decide what we do.
Well, if it God does exist, it seems you've got notes.
That's all very interesting,
but it doesn't explain why the anti-gender movement just doesn't listen.
Remember back at the start when we learned about the school board
who turned down $10,000 of free money?
Remember how the same misunderstandings of Butler's work
have circulated for decades?
Remember the insistence that the law was made
that the law must have a strict definition of women,
even though we know that's not true?
Remember all those unevidence conspiracies
about the trans deep state and secret UN plots?
There's something else too that's very interesting.
The language that the anti-gender movement uses is very
actioning, threat, infiltration, danger, bullying, silencing, censorship,
a comparison to nuclear weapons.
It's not just that they're not listening.
When they're invited to listen,
it seems like that makes them feel as if they're under attack.
And Butler has an explanation for this.
They say that these people are caught in a phantasm.
Phantasm is a technical philosophy term
for a particular way of misinterpreting the world
by projecting your feelings onto it.
Philosopher Michael Nass says that it's a prism
that refracts an as-if into an as-so.
For example, the presence of a trans person
with a penis in a public bathroom
makes me feel as if I am under attack becomes...
I am under attack.
People use phantasms to avoid cognitive dissonance
in the face of anxiety.
For example, literature professor Darren Tenev
says we use them to help us confront death.
Normally, we don't want to think about our own deaths.
It makes us anxious.
So when we picture our own funerals
and what we would want to happen to our remains,
we imagine ourselves as being gone,
but also kind of still around.
Like, oh, I'd love to be buried somewhere that has a nice view.
Well, why?
You're not going to be there to enjoy it by definition.
That's a contradictory dream.
But the phantasm contains that contradiction
and soothes our anxiety.
It is as if I will still be there.
I will still be there.
What is characteristic of phantasms
is that they are placed
and place what could be called the subject of phantasm
on both sides of a border,
a boundary, a limit, a frontier.
When there is a border, a limitation,
the phantasm lets one on the other side
and not only provides a contraband access
through the border,
but also keeps one on both sides at the same time.
There is no logic of the phantasm.
The phantasm is phantasm
because it allows one to stand on both sides of a border,
for example,
allowing one to imagine one's own corpse
while still being alive.
Like he says, there's no logic to this.
It's an exercise in trying to not make sense
because you can't handle the conclusions
that you would reach if you did.
That's why people caught in a phantasm
will throw out all kinds of claims
that it doesn't really seem like they've thought through
or have any evidence for
and when questioned on it,
they'll say you're attacking me
because they're trying really hard
to not think something.
But what exactly?
What is the thing
that the anti-gender movement doesn't want to think?
Well, it'll probably be different
for different individuals.
J.K. Rowling has been massively radicalized
into the movement in the last few years.
She's made a lot of very weird
and false claims about trans people
and gotten very aggressive when challenged.
People have speculated about her trauma,
maybe causing that,
but as a woman who's also survived
an abusive relationship,
that kind of public speculation
has always felt a little bit gross to me.
I don't want to do armchair psychology on anyone,
even though I'm sure plenty of people
would love to do some on me.
It's just not the philosophy cheap way.
So maybe we can ask a more general version
of this same question.
Why are phantasms catching on?
And not just about this topic,
but all sorts of things.
On the previous episode,
we talked about 15-minute city conspiracy theories
and there's QAnon and conspiracies
about the royal family.
Sometimes the way that Zionists talk about
Palestinians has a touch of the phantasma about it,
as some Jewish scholars have noted.
This is a really big issue
and it would be great if we could sort
the whole gender thing out
because we've got a lot of real problems to deal with.
We don't have time to be fighting imaginary ones.
Oh, Graf and Korolchuk say
there really are a lot of problems in the world.
And a lot of them are systemic.
A lot of women really are devalued.
A lot of children really are living
in an increasingly dangerous and warming world.
A lot of people really do rely on their families
to protect them from big institutions
and economic forces
that really will trample every tradition
and really do dissolve everything into money.
According to them, the anti-gender phantasm
is an attempt to criticize the effects of capitalism
without naming capitalism as the problem.
People see the bad results of the system that we have,
but they're invested in those same systems
and so the solutions become unthinkable.
Their criticisms have to be expressed
as a kind of moral criticism.
Anti-genderism is the socialism of fools
and the feminism of fools
and the anti-colonialism of fools.
The anti-gender movement is so effective
in attracting mass support
because it is structured and legitimized
as a conservative response to the excesses of neoliberalism.
A crucial source of anxiety
is the rampant individualism of contemporary culture,
the erosion of community
and growing instability of everyday life.
Opponents of gender ideology
attribute these trends to the influence of feminism
and the sexual revolution.
Anti-genderism conflates gender
with those aspects of capitalism
that are most frustrating
to members of the working and lower middle class,
especially to parents and would-be parents,
precarity and the crisis of care
resulting from unequal distribution of wealth.
Instead of naming the problem in economic terms
as injustice and exploitation,
anti-genderism presents the world of capitalism's winners
as degenerate and morally corrupt.
And here's where we tie it all together
and bring it back to Judith Butler.
When the anti-gender movement say that gender is an ideology
and sex is a fixed point,
we now understand they aren't making an observation,
they're making a demand.
When they say that you can't change sex,
they mean you shouldn't be allowed to
because that would be dangerous,
not the kind of danger that is proven with evidence,
but the kind they want the state to posit and punish.
What they want is morally righteous violence
that restores an imaginary order
because they are anxious about real problems
that they cannot or will not think about,
and so they can only glimpse those problems
through the prism of unreality.
The contradictory character of the phantasm
allows it to contain whatever anxiety or fear
that the anti-gender ideology wishes to stoke
for its own purposes,
without having to make any of it cohere.
Depending on the anxieties circulating in a particular region,
gender can be figured as Marxist or capitalist,
tyranny or libertarianism, fascism or totalitarianism,
a totalizing force, or an unwanted migrant.
It is not that people are unmindful of the contradiction
and need to be enlightened.
No, the contradiction itself is what works,
in effect emancipating people from the task
of developing a rational position.
Maybe it's because I'm older,
but part of the reason I came back is to tell you
life is too short to spend it being miserable.
Actually, that's the point.
How come you look younger than me?
Because I'm happier.
Joy is youthful.
Also, we get a really good skincare routine.
I don't want to think about getting older.
You know mom's fish pie recipe?
Yeah.
There's this really amazing moment that's going to happen
when you're 30.
You make that fish pie for a friend who's like 23,
and you bring it out and she says,
you are literally my mother.
And that is going to be one of the first times
you realize that we're getting older.
But it's actually nice because it's like,
we have a knowledge that younger people don't.
And it's not like a superiority thing.
It's that we get to be helpful.
We become an auntie.
We have little nieces and a nephew.
We help them put on their shoes
and they ask us to tell them about Shakespeare.
I wish I could tell you that it's all going to be moments like that.
But you're right.
Your future has ups and downs.
And it's mainly ups.
But the politics is big down.
Does it get better?
Let's talk about Brainworms.
Brainworms is a 2024 novel by Alison Rumford
about a woman who discovers that several high-ranking British politicians
and journalists are being secretly controlled
by a contagious parasite that makes them bigoted.
She has to uncover the conspiracy,
but nobody will believe her.
Because she's working class and trans.
And maybe imagining it.
I like that the worms are never confirmed to be real.
We could read them as hallucinations.
That ambiguity forces us to engage only with the metaphor.
Brainworms might not be real,
but hate is infectious, disgusting, and perverse.
One character is a famous author
who writes books about teenage witches.
There's a scene where she infects someone else,
coming close to her victim, worms dripping from her open mouth.
And she says a line.
And in the movie version, this would be the line
that reveals a glimpse of her evil plan, right?
But instead, she says,
I've seen the future of this country.
And it's going to get so much worse.
The worms don't make her happy.
In fact, they're a kind of contagious misery.
Nobody who is infected ever gets better.
So what can we do about all of the things that we have learned today?
Well, there's actually two questions rolled into one there.
The first is, what can we practically do
about the political situation that we're all living in?
And secondly, can we convince people
who are stuck inside phantasms?
So first things first, practically speaking, what can we do?
Well, if you've been watching this show for any amount of time,
you know that I hate telling people what to do or think.
But here's some suggestions, maybe.
If you're Catholic and you like buying little medals
or rosaries or chuchkies, if you have relatives who do,
maybe older relatives who do,
you might like to double check where that money is going.
If you happen to work in media,
that all of this theory could have some practical applications for you,
we might like to talk about anti-genderists
the same way we talk about anti-vaxxers or climate deniers.
For example, Mrs. X says this, which is false.
Organization Y claims this, which is pseudoscience.
Another thing that you might like to try
is using the word cisgender.
It was coined in the early 90s.
It means not transgender.
And the English language anti-gender movement hate it
because it implies that trans people and cis people
are both worth listening to.
It resists objectification by putting us on an even playing field.
Kind of like using the word straight or heterosexual
instead of saying normal.
Beyond that, Graf and Karl Schuch say we need to appreciate the fact
that right-wing populism is criticizing capitalism,
albeit in phantasmic terms.
They say we should move beyond the old idea
that the left are anti-capitalist
and the right are always pro-market.
Now some of them are, to be sure, but not all.
They say that these days a lot of people on the right
are actually criticizing capitalism
even if they don't use that kind of language.
And so sticking to the same old economic policies
we've had for the last 40 years
is leaving yourself wide open to those far right extremists.
They also say that LGBTQ stuff and gender stuff
can't really be separated from normal politics anymore
because that's how a lot of people are engaging
with normal politics these days.
The anti-gender phantasm isn't the only thing
powering the global right, to be sure,
but it's big enough that it can't be ignored.
Important lessons there for centrists, perhaps.
They recommend a strategy called populist feminism
which involves tapping into people's emotions in the moment.
An example from the UK might be the group
Sisters Uncut who've been very successful
mobilizing a broad coalition against austerity,
domestic violence cuts, police violence,
prisons, health care segregation,
arms sales to the Israeli government,
and many other things
because they recognize that all those forces
disproportionately hurt women
and therefore women can be brought together
to protest against them
if given the chance to express our feelings
of hurt and righteous anger.
There's many ways to be involved in a group like that
from actually taking Barton demonstrations
to donating money
which again empowers a broad coalition.
A broad coalition, a coalition of broads,
dames, dime pieces, chicks, dolls, all standing together.
Will it work?
Well, join me at the end of the 21st century
to see humanity's final scores.
And now our second question.
Can we reach people stuck in phantasms?
Is there a cure for brainworns?
Well, to be honest,
there's somebody who does a lot of public education.
I really hate to admit this,
but I am not optimistic that education will work.
Butler says that this movement
is not only irrational but anti-rational.
Many of the most prominent people in it
proudly do not engage
with any of the academic material on gender.
At the end of my research journey,
I realized the reason they don't listen
is because they feel that listening
is an act of submission.
And I can't help it.
I think that's really sad.
I really don't want to come across
as like patronizing or giving people
with mercy that they wouldn't give me,
but I think it is really sad
when people refuse their own complexity,
when they refuse to become
the person that they might become
if they just listened.
Indeed, there could be no greater enemy
for philosophy tube than the anti-gender phantasm.
This show is about compassion and reason
and sharing knowledge between equals.
It's born out of my belief that
thinking and research and words and writing
that they matter.
And I'm trans.
This is my final boss fight.
Informed public debate becomes impossible
when some parties refuse to read
the material under dispute.
It is nearly impossible to breach
this epistemic divide with good arguments
because of the fear that reading
will introduce confusion into the reader's mind
or bring her into direct contact with the devil.
They're skeptical of the academy
for fear that intellectual debates
may well confuse them about the values they hold.
They're refusal to care much about consistency,
to base their criticisms on a reading of the text,
their way of snatching phrases
and making them into lightning rods.
However, are all finally a refusal to think critically.
Some individual people do get better.
When we first come out,
there's going to be people who do not take it well.
But in time, they see that we are happier
and for most of them, that's enough.
I'm scared of changing.
No offence.
Yeah, well, you will change.
But you keep the good bits.
Are you still making philosophy tube in the future?
What did the audience say?
They brought them with me.
Oh, hi.
Nice to see you all.
There's more of them.
A lot more.
I love you.
I love you too.
I'd like to end by telling you my hopes for the future.
I hope that I will grow old.
I hope that when I am old,
I will still be cooking the way that my mom taught me
and that I will have the wisdom of my dad.
I hope that my nieces and my nephew grow up into good
and happy people.
I hope that I will see younger people
have opportunities that I didn't.
And I hope that I won't be too jealous.
I hope that I will be acting and making art
for the rest of my life.
I hope that this is not the cleverest
or the most compassionate that I will ever be,
but that I will continue to change.
Because the only people who don't change are the dead.
Speaking of changes,
I've been doing philosophy tube for 11 years now.
Some of you have been here that whole time.
And I don't know if you realize it,
but you have changed my life.
Off YouTube, I'm a professional actor.
YouTube kind of blew up first,
but it's always been separate from my acting career.
Until I wrote a play called The Prince,
which a lot of you came to see, so it did really well.
And then I got cast in Baldur's Gate 3.
And then I got cast in Star Wars.
And then I got cast in something that's even bigger than Star Wars
that I'm not allowed to tell you about yet.
And the engine of all of this has been you.
I used to think that I would probably have to leave YouTube behind
someday to focus on acting,
but now I realize that because of you and your lovely enthusiasm
for all of the things that I make and that I'm in,
I now realize we can combine YouTube and acting
into something more powerful than either one can be alone.
So then I was like, okay, I want to write a short film.
And I did.
It's called Dracula's Ex-Girlfriend.
It's about two vampire chicks in LA being horrible to each other.
I pitched it to a streaming service called Nebula.
I said, hey, I've got this big audience and we already had success with my play.
Do you maybe want to do a movie?
And they said, yes.
Once again, you have changed my life.
Do you know how many actors would kill to have a streaming service
pick up their debut film?
I'm going to be in it too.
My co-stars are Morgana Ignis and Brandon Rogers from Hell of a Boss,
one of the biggest shows in the world.
And you will be able to see the film when it comes out
at go.nebula.tv slash dex.
And it gets better because Nebula isn't just another streaming service.
Imagine that you had a role in a show on Disney Plus.
Say, I don't know, Star Wars the Acolyte?
Well, you do the job and you have a great time.
And at the end of the day, you go home.
Star Wars belongs to Disney.
But on Nebula, the people who create the thing own the thing.
I wrote Dracula's ex-girlfriend, so I keep the rights.
They're giving the creators more power and even better.
If you all go and get Disney Plus to watch Star Wars,
then that's really cool.
But the creators of the show don't get like a bonus or anything.
However, if you get Nebula using that link specifically,
then I get a cut and you get a discount.
$2.50 a month with an annual subscription.
So I help you.
You're helping me.
We are helping each other.
And there's even more.
If you want to see the full scene that we shot for this episode,
without all the video essay bits in between, that's on Nebula too.
Every episode of Philosophy Tube goes up there early and uncensored.
Lindsay Ellis is on there.
Legal Eagle's on there.
H-Bomber Guy's on there.
They're making a whole bunch of documentaries now.
They're making a sci-fi movie directed by Jesse Gender
that I'm going to be in.
It's called Identities.
It comes out in June.
If you get Nebula, you can see all of that.
We are combining YouTube and acting.
And we are unlocking the power.
You and I have had a lot of fun over these last 11 years.
The next step is Dracula's ex-girlfriend.
And after that, wait and see.
She's the type who will get what she wants, doesn't hide.
Always hiding the sun and it kills me slowly.
Seeing her pass me by in the city of dreams.
Wish that I had the power in me.
But I'm just too madly insecure.
All the time that I waste and always looking
at strangers thinking there's so much better than me.
All the time that I wait is they don't make it some changes.
It's crazy.
Who's that girl?
She walks around like she could rule the world.
She goes for everything that she deserves.
Say what would it take for me to be like her?
I want it out.
I want it out.
Because I just want to be somebody.
Not just anybody.
Tell me who's that?
Who's that?
Who's that?
In your eyes, there's a sense of belief.
I just cry.
I'm a pretty party and I'm getting nowhere.
When she comes first, how can I get some confidence with my mind?
Never wants to be friends.
It just keeps comparing me to her.
Who's that girl?
She walks around like she could rule the world.
She goes for everything that she deserves.
Say what would it take for me to be like her?
I want to know who's that girl.
She's got a power like we're all here.
I bet she's got to make me wait when it works.
Say what would it take for me to be like her?
I want it out.
I want it out.
Because I just want to be somebody.
Not just anybody.
Tell me who's that?
Who's that?
Who's that girl?
Who's that girl?
Because I just want to be somebody.
Not just anybody.
Tell me who's that?
Who's that?
Who's that girl?
You can moonwalk and live your talent.
Apparently.
That's it, that's the end of the video.
I'm just kidding.
