So all this framing material has been sitting here for three or four days because we had
already ordered all that material when we ordered our floor trusses originally and had
everything scheduled and when we figured out last week the issue with our floor truss
design it pushed our trusses out about a week.
So that's the reason all that other material got here early so we didn't want to have to
reschedule it, lose our delivery spot, all that good stuff so we just went ahead and
took it and trusses are here today.
Today is August 30th so it is hopefully going to start moving pretty quick here.
As we were waiting on our floor trusses today we decided to be productive and down we've
moved our burning operation further down the hill.
As you can see we're burning, getting the last little bit cleaned up down there.
This area down in here is actually where potentially we have zoning approval for a 40x60 shop
down there but we're going to continue the driveway on down all the way down and we're
going to make about a 40x40 parking area down there right now and then we've got the little
outbuilding down there that we built.
We built that a couple years ago and we just moved it over here from our house now so that's
going to be where we park trailers, dump trailers, campers, equipment trailers, park the track
hoe, get everything out of the way, kind of off where you're not looking at it all the
time.
We'll see, show you guys how these trusses get unloaded here.
We'll see you guys next time.
There it is.
We'll see you guys next time.
We'll see you guys next time.
So we got most of the roof trusses set last night, as you can see some of the LVLs in.
We did have an issue right here with our trusses.
They're the correct length here but the issue is this block out is for an 8 inch block which
is fine over here where we have the brick ledger but this wall is where our garage, upstairs
garage joins our basement.
So we've talked to our truss designers and this portion of the floor truss is not structural.
Really it's just a nailer to hang your drywall on.
So what we're allowed to do is we're just going to cut it here, we're going to cut it
here and that thing will sit right down in there and we will be good to go and be able
to finish getting the floor trusses on and probably get the subfloor on today so things
are moving along.
So there's our revision to our floor truss.
We cut out that notch so now it will sit down in the wall here.
It's like a glove.
Set the floor trusses yesterday and this morning, had to finish setting the floor trusses this
morning and almost have all the subfloor down today so by dark they'll have all the subfloor
down and be ready to start putting walls up tomorrow.
Today is August 31st, so tomorrow is the first day of September, Hadley, do you know that?
First day of September tomorrow, say bye bye, say see you later, later Gators.
