Are you nervous about this?
I'm scared she'll ask.
Okay.
You must be crazy.
You mentioned Kung Fu Panda is one of your favorite movies.
It has the usual profound master-student dynamic going on.
So who has been a teacher that significantly influenced the direction of your thinking
and life's work?
So if you're the Kung Fu Panda, who was your Shifu?
Oh, well, it's interesting because I didn't see Shifu as being the teacher.
Who was the teacher?
Uwe, master Uwe, the turtle.
Oh, the turtle, right.
They only meet twice in the entire film, and the first conversation sort of doesn't count.
So the magic of the film, in fact, its point is that the teaching that really matters is
transferred during a single conversation, and it's very brief.
And so who played that role in my life?
I would say either my grandfather, Harry Rubin, and his wife, Sophie Rubin, my grandmother,
or Tom Lairer.
Tom Lairer?
Yeah.
In which way?
If you give a child Tom Lairer records, what you do is you destroy their ability to be
taken over by later malware.
It's so irreverent, so witty, so clever, so obscene that it destroys the ability to lead
a normal life for many people.
So if I meet somebody who's usually really shifted from any kind of neurotypical presentation,
I'll often ask them, are you a Tom Lairer fan?
And the odds that they will respond are quite high.
Now, Tom Lairer is poisoning pigeons in the park, Tom Lairer?
That's very interesting.
There's a small number of Tom Lairer songs that broke into the general population.
Poisoning pigeons in the park, the element song, and perhaps the Vatican rag.
So when you meet somebody who knows those songs but doesn't know...
Oh, you're judging me right now, aren't you?
Harshly.
No, but you're a Russian, so undoubtedly you know Nikolay Ivanovich Lubachevsky, that
song.
Yeah.
So that was a song about plagiarism that was in fact plagiarized, which most people don't
know from Danny Kaye, where Danny Kaye did a song called Stanislavsky of the Musky Arts.
And so Tom Lairer did this brilliant job of plagiarizing a song and making it about plagiarism
and then making it about this mathematician who worked in non-Euclidean geometry.
That was like giving heroin to a child.
It was extremely addictive and eventually led me to a lot of different places, one of
which may have been a PhD in mathematics.
And he was also at least a lecturer in mathematics, I believe, at Harvard, something like that.
Yeah.
I just had dinner with him, in fact.
When my son turned 13, we didn't tell him, but his bar mitzvah present was dinner with
his hero Tom Lairer.
And Tom Lairer was 88 years old, sharp as a tack, irreverent and funny as hell.
And there are very few people in this world that you have to meet while they're still
here and that was definitely one for our family.
So that wit is a reflection of intelligence in some kind of deep way, where that would
be a good test of intelligence, whether you're a Tom Lairer fan.
So what do you think that is about wit, about that kind of humor, ability to see the absurdity
in existence?
Do you think that's connected to intelligence or are we just two Jews on a mic that appreciate
that kind of humor?
No, I think that it's absolutely connected to intelligence.
You can see it.
There's a place where Tom Lairer decides that he's going to lampoon Gilbert of Gilbert
and Sullivan, and he's going to outdo Gilbert with clever, meaningless wordplay.
And he has, forget the, well, let's see, he's doing Clementine as if Gilbert and Sullivan
wrote it, and he says, that I Mr. Depressed, your young sister named Mr. This Mr. Depressed,
she tried pestering sisters, a festering blister, you best to resist or say, I, the sister
persisted, the Mr. Resisted, I kissed her all loyalty slip when he said, when she said
I could have her, her sisters could ever must surely have turned in its crypt.
That's so dense.
It's so insane that that's clearly intelligence because it's hard to construct something like
that.
If I look at my favorite Tom Lairer, Tom Lairer lyric, there's a perfectly absurd one, which
is once all the Germans were warlike and mean, but that couldn't happen again.
We taught them a lesson in 1918, and they've hardly bothered us since then, right?
That is a different kind of intelligence.
You're taking something that is so horrific, and you're sort of making it palatable and
funny and demonstrating also just your humanity.
I mean, I think the thing that came through as Tom Lairer wrote all of these terrible,
horrible lines was just what a sensitive and beautiful soul he was who was channeling
pain through humor and through grace.
