You recently published the video of a lecture,
you gave it Oxford presenting some aspects of a theory,
theory of everything called geometric unity.
So this was a work of 30, 30 plus years.
This is life's work.
Let me ask you the silly old question.
How do you feel as a human?
Excited, scared, the experience of posting it?
You know, it's funny, one of the things
that you learn to feel as an academic
is the great sins you can commit in academics
is to show yourself to be a non-serious person,
to show yourself to have delusions,
to avoid the standard practices
which everyone has signed up for.
And, you know, it's weird
because like you know that those people are gonna be angry.
He did what, you know, why would he do that?
And what we're referring to, for example,
there's traditions of sort of publishing incrementally,
certainly not trying to have a theory of everything,
perhaps working within the academic departments,
all those things.
That's true.
And so you're going outside of all of that.
Well, I mean, I was going inside of all of that.
And we did not come to terms when I was inside.
And what they did was so outside to me,
was so weird, so freakish.
Like the most senior respectable people
at the most senior respectable places
were functionally insane, as far as I could tell.
And again, it's like being functionally stupid
if you're the head of the CDC or something
where you're giving recommendations out
that aren't based on what you actually believe
they're based on what you think you have to be doing.
Well, in some sense, I think that that's a lot
of how I saw the math and physics world as,
the physics world was really crazy
and the math world was considerably less crazy,
just very strict and kind of dogmatic.
We'll psychoanalyze those folks,
but I really wanna maybe linger on it a little bit longer
of how you feel, because this is such a special moment
in your life.
Well, I really appreciate it.
It's a great question.
We can pair off some of those other issues.
It's new, being able to say what the observer's is,
which is my attempt to replace spacetime
with something that is both closely related
to spacetime and not spacetime.
So I used to carry the number 14
as a closely guarded secret in my life.
And we're 14 is really four dimensions
of space and time, plus 10 extra dimensions
of rulers and protractors or for the cool kids
out there, symmetric two tensors.
So you had a geometric, a complicated, beautiful
geometric view of the world that you carried
with you for a long time.
Yeah.
Did you have friends that you, colleagues that you-
Essentially no.
Talked?
No, in fact, part of these,
part of some of these stories are me coming out
to my friends and I use the phrase coming out
because I think that gays have monopolized
the concept of the closet.
Many of us are in closets and having nothing
to do with their sexual orientation.
Yeah, I didn't really feel comfortable
talking to almost anyone.
So this was a closely guarded secret.
And I think that I let on in some ways
that I was up to something and probably,
but it was a very weird life.
I had to have a series of things
that I pretended to care about
so that I could use that as the stalking horse
for what I really cared about and to your point,
I never understood this whole thing
about theories of everything.
Like if you were gonna go into something
like theoretical physics,
isn't that what you would normally pursue?
Like, wouldn't it be crazy to do something
that difficult and that poorly paid
if you were gonna try to do something other
than figure out what this is all about?
Now I have to reveal my cards,
my weaknesses and lack and an understanding
of the music of the physics and math departments,
but there's an analogy here to artificial intelligence.
And often folks come in and say,
okay, so there's a giant department working
on quote unquote artificial intelligence,
but why is nobody actually working on intelligence?
Like you're all just building little toys.
You're not actually trying to understand
and that breaks a lot of people.
It confuses them because like, okay,
so I'm at MIT, I'm at Stanford, I'm at Harvard,
I'm here, I dreamed of being working
on artificial intelligence.
Why is everybody not actually working on intelligence?
And I have the same kind of sense
that that's what working on the theory of everything is
that strangely you somehow become an outcast for even.
But we know why this is, right?
Why?
Well, it's because let's take the artificial,
let's play with AGI for example.
Yeah.
I think that the idea starts off
with nobody really knows how to work on that.
And so if we don't know how to work on it,
we choose instead to work on a program
that is tangentially related to it.
So we do a component of a program
that is related to that big question
because it's felt like at least I can make progress there.
And that wasn't where I was.
Where I was in, it's funny,
there was this book called Frieden Uhlenbeck
and it had this weird mysterious line
in the beginning of it.
And I tried to get clarification
of this weird mysterious line
and everyone said wrong things.
And then I said, okay, well, so I can tell
that nobody's thinking properly
because I just asked the entire department
and nobody has a correct interpretation of this.
And so it's a little bit like you see a crime scene photo
and you have a different idea.
Like there's a smoking gun and you figure,
and that's actually a cigarette lighter.
I don't really believe that.
And then there's like a pack of cards and you think,
oh, that looks like the blunted instrument
that the person was beaten with.
So you have a very different idea about how things go.
And very quickly you realize
that there's no one thinking about that.
There's a few human sides to this
and technical sides, both of which I'd love
to try to get down to.
So the human side, I can tell from my perspective,
I think it was before April 1st, April Fools,
maybe the day before, I forget.
But I was laying in bed in the middle of the night
and somehow it popped up, you know,
on my feed somewhere that your beautiful face
is speaking live and I clicked.
And, you know, it's kind of weird
how the universe just brings things together
in this kind of way.
And all of a sudden I realized
that there's something big happening
at this particular moment.
It's strange, on a day like any day.
And all of a sudden you were thinking of,
you had this somber tone, like you were serious,
like you were going through some difficult decision.
And it seems strange.
I almost thought you were maybe joking,
but there was a serious decision being made
and it was a wonderful experience to go through with you.
I really appreciate it.
I mean, it was April 1st.
Yeah, it was kind of fascinating.
I mean, it's just a whole experience.
And so I want to ask, I mean, thank you for letting me
be part of that kind of journey of decision making
that took 30 years.
But why now?
Why did you think,
why did you struggle so long not to release it?
And decide to release it now?
While the whole world is on lockdown, on April Fool's,
is it just because you like the comedy
of absurd ways that the universe comes together?
I don't think so.
I think that the COVID epidemic is the end of the big nap.
And I think that I actually tried this seven years earlier
in Oxford, so I, and it was too early.
Which part was too, is it the platform?
Because your platform is quite different now, actually,
the internet.
I remember you, I read several of your brilliant answers
that people should read for the edge questions.
One of them was related to the internet.
It was the first one.
Was it the first one?
Yeah.
An essay called Go Virtual Young Man.
Yeah.
Yeah, that seemed, that's like forever ago now.
Well, that was 10 years ago,
and that's exactly what I did,
is I decamped to the internet,
which is where the portal lives.
The portal, the portal, the portal.
Yeah.
Well, we'll insert the theme,
that's right.
The ominous theme music,
which you can just listen to forever.
I actually started recording a tiny guitar licks
for the audio portion, not for the video portion.
You've kind of inspired me
with bringing your guitar into the story.
But keep going.
So you thought,
so the Oxford was like step one,
and you kind of,
you put your foot into the water to sample it,
but it was too cold at the time.
So you didn't want to step in all the way.
I was just really disappointed.
What was disappointing about that experience?
It's a hard thing to talk about.
It has to do with the fact that,
and I can see this mirror is a disappointment within myself.
There are two separate issues.
One is the issue of making sure
that the idea is actually heard and explored.
And the other is the question about,
will I become disconnected from my work?
Because it will be ridiculed,
it will be immediately improved,
it will be found to be derivative of something
that occurred in some paper in 1957.
When the community does not want you to gain a voice,
it's a little bit like a policeman
deciding to weirdly enforce
all of these little known regulations
against you and sometimes nobody else.
And I think that's kind of this weird thing
where I just don't believe
that we can reach the final theory necessarily
within the political economy of academics.
So if you think about
how academics are tortured by each other
and how they're paid and where they have freedom
and where they don't,
I actually weirdly think that that system
of selective pressures is going to eliminate anybody
who's going to make real progress.
So that's interesting.
So if you look at the story of Andrew Wiles, for example,
with from our last theorem,
I mean, he, as far as I understand,
he pretty much isolated himself from the world of academics
in terms of the bulk of the work he did.
And it, from my perspective,
is dramatic and fun to read about,
but it seemed exceptionally stressful.
The first step he took,
the first steps he took
when actually making the work public,
that seemed to me would be hell.
Yeah, but it's like so artificially dramatic.
You know, he leads up to it at a series of lectures.
He doesn't want to say it.
And then he finally says it at the end
because obviously this comes out of a body of work where,
I mean, the funny part about from our last theorem
is it wasn't originally thought to be a deep
and meaningful problem.
It was just an easy to state one that had gone unsolved.
But if you think about it,
it became attached to the body of regular theory.
So he built up this body of regular theory,
gets all the way up to the end, announces.
And then like, there's this whole drama about,
okay, somebody's checking the proof.
I don't understand what's going on in line 37.
You know, like, oh, is this serious?
Seems a little bit more serious than we knew.
I mean, do you see parallels?
Do you share the concern that your experience
might be something similar?
Well, in his case, I think that if I recall correctly,
his original proof was unsalvageable.
He actually came up with a second proof
with a colleague, Richard Taylor.
And it was that second proof which carried the day.
So it was a little bit that he got put
under incredible pressure and then had to succeed
in a new way having failed the first time,
which is like, even a weirder and stranger story.
That's an incredible story in some sense.
But I mean, are you, I'm trying to get a sense
of the kind of stress you're on.
I think that this is, okay, but I'm rejecting.
What I don't think people understand with me
is the scale of the critique.
It's like, I don't, people say,
well, you must implicitly agree with this
and implicitly agree.
It's like, no, try me.
Ask before you decide that I am mostly in agreement
with the community about how these things
should be handled or what these things mean.
Can you elaborate?
And also just why this criticism matter so much here?
So you seem to dislike the burden of criticism
that it will choke away all out of it.
There's different kinds of criticism.
There's constructive criticism
and there's destructive criticism.
And what I don't like is I don't like a community
that can't, first of all,
like if you take the physics community,
just the way we screwed up on masks and PPE,
just the way we screwed up in the financial crisis
and mortgage-backed securities,
we screwed up on string theory.
Can we just forget the string theory happened or?
Sure, but then somebody should say that, right?
Somebody should say, you know, it didn't work out.
Yeah.
Okay, but you're asking this,
like why do you guys get to keep the prestige
after failing for 35 years?
That's an interesting question.
Who's the you guys?
Because to me-
Whoever the profession, look, these things,
if there is a theory of everything to be had, right?
It's going to be a relatively small group of people
where this will be sorted out.
Absolutely.
It's not tens of thousands,
it's probably hundreds at the top.
But within that community, there's the assholes,
there's the, I mean, like you have,
you always in this world have people who are kind,
open-minded.
It's not a question about kind,
it's a question about, okay, let's imagine for example,
that you have a story where you believe
that ulcers are definitely caused by stress.
And you've never questioned it,
or maybe you felt like the Japanese came out of the blue
and attacked us at Pearl Harbor, right?
And now somebody introduces a new idea to you,
which is like, what if it isn't stress at all?
Or what if we actually tried to make resource-starved
Japan attack us somewhere in the Pacific
so we could have Cassus Belli to enter the Asian theater?
Person's original idea is like, what?
What are you even saying?
It's like too crazy.
Well, when Dirac in 1963 talked about the importance
of beauty as a guiding principle in physics,
and he wasn't talking about the scientific method,
that was crazy talk.
But he was actually making a great point,
and he was using Schrodinger,
and I think it was, Schrodinger was standing in for him,
and he said that if your equations don't agree
with experiment, that's kind of a minor detail.
If they have true beauty in them,
you should explore them because very often the agreement
with experiment is an issue of fine-tuning of your model,
of the instantiation.
And so it doesn't really tell you that your model is wrong.
Of course, Heisenberg told Dirac that his model was wrong
because the proton and the electron should be the same mass
if they are each other's antiparticles.
And that was an irrelevant kind of silliness
rather than a real threat to the Dirac theory.
But, okay, so amidst all this silliness,
I'm hoping that we could talk about the journey
that geometric unity has taken and will take
as an idea and an idea that will see the light.
Yeah.
So first of all, I'm thinking of writing a book
called Geometric Unity for Idiots.
Okay.
And I need you as a consultant, so can we...
First of all, I hope I have the trademark on geometric unity.
You do, good.
Can you give a basic introduction
of the goals of geometric unity,
the basic tools of mathematics,
use the viewpoints in general for idiots like me.
Okay, great, fun.
So what's the goal of geometric unity?
The goal of geometric unity is to start with something
so completely bland that you can simply say,
well, that's something that begins the game
is as close to a mathematical nothing as possible.
In other words, I can't answer the question,
why is there something rather than nothing?
But if there has to be a something that we begin from,
let it begin from something that's like a blank canvas.
That's even more basic.
So what is something?
What are we trying to describe here?
Okay, right now we have a model of our world
and it's got two sectors.
One of the sectors is called general relativity.
The other is called the standard model.
So we'll call it GR for general relativity
and SM for standard model.
What's the difference between the two?
What are the two described?
So general relativity gives pride of place to gravity
and everything else is acting as a sort of a backup singer.
Gravity is the star of the show.
Gravity is the star of general relativity.
And in the standard model,
the other three non-gravitational forces.
So if there are four forces that we know
about three of the four are non-gravitational,
that's where they get to shine.
Great, so tiny little particles
and how they interact with each other.
So photons, gluons and so-called intermediate vector bosons.
Those are the things that the standard model showcases
and general relativity showcases gravity.
And then you have matter,
which is accommodated in both theories,
but much more beautifully inside of the standard model.
So what does a theory of everything do?
So first of all, I think that that's the first place
where we haven't talked enough.
We assume that we know what it means,
but we don't actually have any idea what it means.
And what I claim it is, is that it's a theory
where the questions beyond that theory
are no longer of a mathematical nature.
In other words, if I say, let us take X
to be a four-dimensional manifold.
To a mathematician or a physicist, I've said very little.
I've simply said there's some place
for calculus and linear algebra to dance together and to play.
And that's what manifolds are.
They're the most natural place
where our two greatest math theories can really intertwine.
Which are the two?
Oh, you mean the calculus and linear algebra.
Yeah, right.
Okay, now the question is beyond that.
So it's sort of like saying, I'm an artist
and I want to order a canvas.
Now the question is, does the canvas paint itself?
Does the canvas come up with an artist
and paint an ink, which then paint the canvas?
Like that's the hard part about theories of everything,
which I don't think people talk enough about.
Can we just, you bring up Escher
and the hand that draws itself.
The fire that lights itself or drawing hands.
The drawing hands.
And every time I start to think about that,
my mind like shuts down.
Don't do that.
There's a spark.
No, but this is the most beautiful part.
We should do this together.
No, it's beautiful, but this robot's brain sparks fly.
So can we try to say the same thing over and over
in different ways about what you mean
by that having to be a thing we have to contend with?
Sure.
Like why do you think that creating a theory of everything
as you call the source code,
our understanding our source code,
require a view like the hand that draws itself.
Okay, well, here's what goes on
in the regular physics picture.
We've got these two main theories,
general relativity and the standard model, right?
Think of general relativity as more or less
the theory of the canvas, okay?
Maybe you have the canvas
in a particularly rigid shape.
Maybe you've measured it.
So it's got length and it's got angle,
but more or less it's just canvas and length and angle.
And that's all that is really general relativity is,
but it allows the canvas to warp a bit.
Then we have the second thing,
which is this import of foreign libraries
which aren't tied to space and time.
So we've got this crazy set of symmetries called SU3
cross SU2 cross U1.
We've got this collection of 16 particles in a generation,
which are these sort of twisted spinners.
And we've got three copies of them.
Then we've got this weird Higgs field that comes in
and like Deus Ex Machina solves all the problems
that have been created in the play
that can't be resolved otherwise.
So that's the standard model,
quantum field theory just plopped on top of this canvas.
Problem of the double origin story.
One origin story is about space and time.
The other origin story is about what we would call
internal quantum numbers and internal symmetries.
And then there was an attempt to get one to follow
from the other called Kalooza Klein theory,
which didn't work out.
And this is sort of in that vein.
So you said origin story.
So in the hand that draws itself, what is it?
So it's as if you had the canvas
and then you ordered up also give me paint brushes,
paints, pigments, pencils and artists.
But you're saying that's like,
if you want to create a universe from scratch,
the canvas should be generating the paint brushes
and the canvas.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Right, like you should.
But who's the artist in this analogy?
Well, this is, sorry.
Then we're gonna get into a religious thing
and I don't want to do that.
Okay.
Well, you know my shtick, which is that we are the AI.
We have two great stories about the simulation
and artificial general intelligence.
In one story, man fears that some program
we've given birth to will become self-aware,
smarter than us and we'll take over.
In another story, there are genius simulators
and we live in their simulation.
And we haven't realized that those two stories
are the same story.
In one case, we are the simulator.
In another case, we are the simulated.
And if you buy those and you put them together,
we are the AGI and whether or not we have simulators,
we may be trying to wake up by learning our own source code.
So this could be our Skynet moment,
which is one of the reasons I have some issues around it.
I think we'll talk about that because I...
Well, that's the issue of the emergent artist
within the story, just to get back to the point.
Okay, so now the key point is,
the standard way we tell the story
is that Einstein sets the canvas
and then we order all the stuff that we want
and then that paints the picture that is our universe.
So you order the paint, you order the artist,
you order the brushes, and that then,
when you collide the two,
gives you two separate origin stories.
The canvas came from one place
and everything else came from somewhere else.
So what are the mathematical tools
required to construct consistent geometric theory,
you know, make this concrete?
Well, somehow you need to get three copies,
for example, of generations with 16 particles each, right?
And so the question would be like,
well, there's a lot of special personality
in those symmetries, where would they come from?
So for example, you've got what would be called
grand unified theories that sound like SU5,
the Georgia Eglashow theory.
There's something that should be called spin 10,
but physicists insist on calling it SO10.
There's something called the Patissalon theory
that tends to be called SU4 cross SU2 cross SU2,
which should be called spin six cross spin four.
I can get into all of these.
Now, what are they all accomplishing?
They're all taking the known forces that we see
and packaging them up to say,
we can't get rid of the second origin story,
but we can at least make that origin story more unified.
So they're trying grand unification as the attempt
to do- And that's a mistake in your-
It's not a mistake.
The problem is, is it was born lifeless.
When Georgian Glashow first came out with the SU5 theory,
it was very exciting because it could be tested
in a South Dakota mine filled up with like,
I don't know, cleaning fluid or something like that.
And they looked for proton decay and didn't see it.
And then they gave up because in that day,
when your experiment didn't work, you gave up on the theory.
It didn't come to us born of a fusion
between Einstein and Bohr, you know?
And that was kind of the problem,
is that it had this weird parenting
where it was just on the Bohr side.
There was no Einsteinian contribution.
Lex, how can I help you most?
I'm trying to figure out what questions you wanna ask
so that you get the most satisfying answers.
There's a bunch of questions I wanna ask.
I mean, and I'm trying to sneak up on you somehow
to reveal in a accessible way the nature of our universe.
Well, I can just give you a guess, right?
We have to be very careful that we're not claiming
that this has been accepted, this is a speculation.
But I will make the speculation
that what I think what you would wanna ask me
is how can the canvas generate all the stuff
that usually has to be ordered separately?
All right, should we do that?
Let's go there.
Okay, so the first thing is,
is that you have a concept in computers
called technical debt.
You're coding and you cut corners
and you know you're gonna have to do it right
before the thing is safe for the world.
But you're piling up some series of IOUs
to yourself and your project as you're going along.
So the first thing is we can't figure out
if you have only four degrees of freedom
and that's what your canvas is.
How do you get at least Einstein's world?
Einstein says, look, it's not just four degrees of freedom
but there need to be rulers and protractors
to measure length and angle in the world.
You can't just have a flabby four degrees of freedom.
So the first thing you do is you create 10 extra variables
which is like if we can't choose any particular set
of rulers and protractors to measure length and angle,
let's take the set of all possible rulers and protractors
and that would be called symmetric,
non-degenerate two tensors on the tangent space
of the four manifold X4.
Now, because there are four degrees of freedom,
you start off with four dimensions,
then you need four rulers for each of those
different directions, so that's four.
That gets us up to eight variables
and then between four original variables,
there are six possible angles.
So four plus four plus six is equal to 14.
So now you've replaced X4 with another space
which in the lecture I think I called U14
but I'm now calling Y14.
This is one of the big problems of working on something
in private is every time you pull it out,
you sort of can't remember it,
you name something new.
Okay, so you've got a 14 dimensional world
which is the original four dimensional world
plus a lot of extra gadgetry for measurement.
And because you're not in the four dimensional world,
you don't have the technical debt.
No, now you've got a lot of technical debt
because now you have to explain the way
a 14 dimensional world which is a big,
you're taking a huge advance on your payday check, right?
But aren't more dimensions allow you more freedom?
Maybe, but you have to get rid of them somehow
because we don't perceive them.
So eventually you have to collapse it down
to the thing that we perceive.
Or you have to sample a four dimensional filament
within that 14 dimensional world
known as a section of a bundle.
Okay, so how do we get from the 14 dimensional world
where I imagine a lot of four dimensional world?
Wait, wait, wait, you're cheating.
The first question was,
how do we get something from almost nothing?
Like how do we get the,
if I've said that the who and the what
in the newspaper story that is a theory of everything
are bosons and fermions.
So let's make the who the fermions
and the what the bosons.
Think of it as the players and the equipment for a game.
Are we supposed to be thinking
of actual physical things with mass or energy?
Yep, okay.
So think about everything you see in this room.
So from chemistry, you know,
it's all protons, neutrons and electrons,
but from a little bit of late 1960s physics,
we know that the protons and neutrons
are all made of upcorks and downcorks.
So everything in this room is basically upcorks,
downcorks and electrons stuck together
with the what, the equipment.
Okay, now the way we see it currently
is we see that there are space time indices,
which we would call spinners
that correspond to the who, that is the fermions,
the matter, the stuff, the upcorks,
the downcorks, the electrons.
And there are also 16 degrees of freedom
that come from this space of internal quantum numbers.
So in my theory, in 14 dimensions,
there's no internal quantum number space that figures in.
It's all just spinorial.
So spinners in 14 dimensions without any festooning
with extra linear algebraic information.
There's a concept of spinners,
which is natural if you have a manifold
with length and angle.
And Y14 is almost a manifold with length and angle.
It's so close.
It's, in other words,
because you're looking at the space
of all rulers and protractors,
maybe it's not that surprising
that a space of rulers and protractors
might come very close to having rulers
and protractors on it itself.
Like, can you measure the space of measurements?
And you almost can.
And a space that has length and angle,
if it doesn't have a topological obstruction,
comes with these objects called spinners.
Now, spinners are the stuff of our world.
We are made of spinners.
They are the most important, really deep object
that I can tell you about.
They were very surprising.
What is a spinner?
So famously, there are these weird things
that require 720 degrees of rotation
in order to come back to normal.
And that doesn't make sense.
The reason for this is that there's a knottedness
in our three-dimensional world that people don't observe.
And, you know, you can famously see it
by this Dirac string trick.
So if you take a glass of water,
imagine that this was a tumbler
and I didn't wanna spill any of it.
And the question is, if I rotate the cup
without losing my grip on the base, 360 degrees,
and I can't go backwards,
is there any way I can take a sip?
And the answer is this weird motion,
which is go over first and under second
and that that's 720 degrees of rotation
to come back to normal so that I can take a sip.
Well, that weird principle,
which sometimes is known as the Philippine wine glass dance
because waitresses in the Philippines
apparently learned how to do this,
that move defines, if you will,
this hidden space that nobody knew was there of spinners,
which Dirac figured out when he took the square root
of something called the Klein Gorton equation,
which I think had earlier work incorporated
from Cartan and Killing and Company in mathematics.
So spinners are one of the most profound aspects
of human existence.
And you forgive me for the perhaps dumb questions,
but would a spinner be the mathematical objects
that's the basic unit of our universe?
When you start with a manifold,
which is just like something like a donut
or a sphere or a circle or a mobius band,
a spinner is usually the first wildly surprising thing
that you found was hidden in your original purchase.
So you order a manifold and you didn't even realize,
it's like buying a house and finding a panic room inside
that you hadn't counted on.
It's very surprising when you understand
that spinners are running around in your spaces.
Again, perhaps a dumb question,
but we're talking about 14 dimensions and four dimensions.
What is the manifold we're operating under?
So in my case, it's proto-spacetime.
It's before Einstein can slap rulers and protractors
on spacetime.
What do you mean by that?
Sorry to interrupt.
Spacetime is the 4D manifold.
Spacetime is a four-dimensional manifold
with extra structure.
What's the extra structure?
It's called a semi-Romanian or pseudo-Romanian metric.
In essence, there is something akin
to a four by four symmetric matrix,
which is equivalent to length and angle.
So when I talk about rulers and protractors,
or I talk about length and angle,
or I talk about Romanian or pseudo-Romanian
or semi-Romanian manifolds,
I'm usually talking about the same thing.
Can you measure how long something is
and what the angle is between two different rays or vectors?
So that's what Einstein gave us as his arena,
his place to play, his canvas.
There's a bunch of questions I can ask here,
but like I said, I'm working on this book,
Geometric Unity for Idiots.
And I think what would be really nice as your editor
to have beautiful, maybe even visualizations
that people could try to play with,
try to reveal small little beauties
about the way you're thinking about this world.
Well, I usually use the Joe Rogan program for that.
Sometimes I have him doing the Philippine wine glass dance.
I had the hop vibration.
The part of the problem is,
is that most people don't know this language
about spinners, bundles, metrics, gauge fields.
And they're very curious about the theory of everything,
but they have no understanding
of even what we know about our own world.
Is it a hopeless pursuit?
So like even gauge theory, just this,
I mean, it seems to be very inaccessible.
Is there some aspect of it that could be made accessible?
I mean, I could go to the board right there
and give you a five minute lecture on gauge theory
that would be better than the official lecture
on gauge theory.
You would know what gauge theory was.
So it is possible to make it accessible.
Yeah, but nobody does, like in other words,
you're gonna watch over the next year,
lots of different discussions about quantum entanglement
or the multiverse, where are we now?
Or many worlds, are they all equally real?
Yeah, right?
I mean, yeah.
But you're not gonna hear anything
about the hop vibration except if it's from me
and I hate that.
Why can't you be the one?
Well, because I'm going a different path.
I think that we've made a huge mistake,
which is we have things we can show people
about the actual models.
We can push out visualizations
where they're not listening by analogy,
they're watching the same thing that we're seeing.
And as I've said to you before,
this is like choosing to perform sheet music
that hasn't been performed in a long time
or the experts can't afford orchestras.
So they just trade Beethoven symphonies
as sheet music and they go, oh, wow, that was beautiful.
But it's like nobody heard anything.
They just looked at the score.
Well, that's how mathematicians and physicists
trade papers and ideas is that they write down
the things that represent stuff.
I wanna at least close out the thought line
that you started.
Yes.
Which is how does the canvas order
all of this other stuff into being?
