You got into some, you went on this person, nice mangoes podcast.
Yeah, that was that.
Talk about a no good deed going to punish.
You know, there's just something wrong.
I did my best to launch your podcast.
There's, well, there's something wrong with that account
because there's many ways in which it seems quite reasonable.
Yeah, it's degraded into mental illness.
Well, there's a personal, there's a personal nastiness about it
that just, that doesn't let up and a lack of charity.
And what I find is that there are certain things I can do
to slow down that kind of negative experience.
And then there are certain diehard actors,
some of whom are quite polite and charming and funny, who just will not,
like their thing is they will ride this to the most negative place
if they get there.
And that sub community, I've been talking about in terms of,
we have diversity and inclusion, which I'm willing to say is a good thing.
And then it needs a different function, which is interoperability and exclusion
because there are certain people who can't be at the table
for a conversation if it's going to progress.
And because their interest is in derailing.
And now I got into some weird thing just now.
Do you know the singer Billy Bragg?
No.
He's like a progressive, he's kind of like a punk Arlo Guthrie
or Woody Guthrie rather.
And like, he turns out he wrote a book and he's talking about
Eric Weinstein, an investment banker who is a free speech champion, won't meet with,
I don't know, he's got a whole story in his mind.
And.
Oh, so he took a shot at you in his book?
He went on Sam Cedars' program.
Oh, well, there's a venue that is not going to select for.
Well, honest opinions.
I spoke to Sam.
Look, there's a problem with the Saul Alinsky thing where,
you know, Saul rules for radicals, the focus on ridicule.
I think it's hard to remember like country Joe and the fish was ridiculing a bad war
in terms that are ridiculous.
You've now got a group of people who, if a mathematician says, you know that in,
in, uh, in different, um, arithmetic, you could have an equation like two plus three equals one.
And so then you get somebody saying, I don't know what they're smoking over there at Princeton,
but well, that's ridicule, but you're ridiculing something that you straw man didn't understand.
Right.
Because the person actually was making sense.
And so what I see is that the left and in particular the Sam Cedar crowd, uh, has a.
Doing that with abandon.
It's willing to do two separate things.
Sam is quite willing.
Like there's this whole thing, but when you talk to Sam Cedar, when you would debate Sam Cedar,
and my feeling is I would debate part of Sam Cedar, the part that just is focused on the ideas,
but the part that is kind of like nasty and ridiculing and doing the Alinsky thing.
I don't know what to do with it.
I'm not interested.
I've spoken to Sam Cedar on the phone.
It's perfectly reasonable, made sense to me.
We disagreed on, on positions, but.
Well, the line that gets crossed for me always with these guys, and again, it's,
it's disproportionately on the left, is the, the line of conscious dishonesty.
I mean, it's, it's your, it's your brother's aphorism.
Bad faith changes everything.
Bad faith changes everything.
And I mean, these guys are in bad faith.
They know their line about, in my case, my views, my, my actual beliefs and.
Not all of them.
There's just too much information.
Well, David Pakman.
No, David Pakman's fine.
I just did his podcast.
Yeah, I know.
But David Pakman said some pretty non-charitable things in some parts that seem kind of ridiculing.
And I think you, me, other people.
Well, I haven't, whatever I haven't, I have never seen him misrepresenting my views.
And I think that, I mean, again, I don't know him.
I just did his podcast once, but he seems like the, he seems like somebody who, if I said,
listen, you got me wrong here, that would matter.
And he would, he would make an effort to.
And that's the thing, which is the problem that we have increasingly is that the tactics
that are being used in what are called progressive circles have been confused with the content.
So that is the objection to the vehicle, which might be Saul Linsky's rules for radicals,
which is a totally unethical program for smearing people dishonestly.
Well, no, it's immoral technology.
Well, no, it's, no, it's, you're just, it's an ends justify the means.
That's the big problem on the left.
Yeah.
So, but that, that ethic is flawed, right?
So like, so for instance, I mean, like with me and Trump, like, there's nobody who.
You don't like the guy.
Denigrates Trump as avidly as I do, but I am super careful to be honest, right?
So like, I, it's not that anything you can smear him with is fair.
Because you can be, Sam.
I mean, the problem was.
All these guys can be.
Sam Cedar can be honest on his show and still have a show, right?
Nobody's going to cancel him because he was too honest.
No, I think that there's like this very weird other, I mean, Sam, I don't want to get into
the same Cedar thing in particular.
First of all, because he can do an entire show, we know.
That's right.
He'll take these quotations and.
No, but he, he has the, see, he has Pacman's ability to reason.
I mean, I got.
This is the banality of evil, right?
Like there's not that many evil people, right?
There's just a lot of people who are functioning in some normal mode with, with, with normal
incentives and they become assholes because they're not heroes, right?
But so like it takes some work not to be an asshole when you are incentivized to be one.
And, and we're all vulnerable to this, but there's some people who have just cashed in to go for.
That nonsense on the left makes me crazy because in part it just feels like all of my ideals
turned into some piece of crap that's.
We're of the left.
Not only the left, man.
I came from a farther left part than I don't even, I don't even know where you started, but.
Yeah, no, I mean, I've never been tempted to be anything other than a Democrat.
I've never even said I'm going to be an independent because, you know, the Democratic party.
If I could, if I, if I could move to another party that made sense, I'd do it at this point.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But anyway, I think that what they, I think that what we don't really understand is,
is that there's a homelessness problem that is really significant.
If you are the sort of a person who needs to attach to some kind of institutional structure
in a time when there is no institution that actually holds your perspective,
you're going to start to do very bizarre things.
Now, the thing about you and, and, and, and me is, is that to some extent,
and I don't think we can do this long term, we're okay with being homeless, right?
You can use sort of first principles, try to think your way out of stuff.
But it's very tough for, for most people.
And I think that there is, there are these sort of collection points in the adaptive
landscape of politics.
Would you, would you would disagree with that?
Yeah, well, one thing that seems important is the connection to science.
I mean, we're not spending a lot of time talking about science in this mode, but
the, the, the, the, the, the dispassion and self-criticism that is the, like,
is the only rubric under which real science can be done,
bleeds into our thinking about all these other issues.
I mean, I think that's, that's got to be a relevant variable.
It's like, it's like, you either have a scientific cast of mind or you don't.
And when you don't- I have both.
Right. But when you, when you don't, you're seeing, you're not seeing the,
I mean, just not even, you're not even seeing intellectual dishonesty for what it is, right?
It just, it's just like, like motivated reasoning isn't a bad thing, right?
Wishful thinking isn't a bad thing. Confirmation bias isn't a bad thing. These are virtues.
This is in religion, this is faith, right? This is, this is, you know-
Well, this is like always the issue with, with our friend Jordan Peterson, which is that
when he gets really far out there in the, I don't know, people now call mythopoetic,
I don't, I don't know the lingo. You always wonder, are you still maintaining a fact-checking
ability to, to bring you back to earth? And so as long as those two facilities are present
and in dialogue, and as long as the fact-checking, you know, what we, what we call the scientific
method is in some sense inadequate to me to explain how science has progressed.
All the mad thinking and then the spirituality of coming up with breaking new ground doesn't-
You just gave us Ramanujan about an hour ago. Yeah. So he's, he's
having dreams about the goddess Lakshmi handing him theorems.
Well, there's, there's that, you know, the Kerala School of Astronomy that came up with
Infinite Series before Newton and Leibniz was doing it in religious poetry. You know,
it rhymed, I think, over there in Kerala. So there is a, there is a kind of madness that you have
to invite to break new ground. And there's a kind of sanity that you have to invite
to wrestle with the madness. And our friend Dan Barkay came up with this idea that science is
a two front war, but that most people are only been deployed to one front. And I think that
that's a really nice image. I do worry that in part the activist mindset, particularly on the
left, has a very clear idea, which is that, yeah, it's really a shame the number of people have
to get hurt for justice to be done. And that is a highly conserved idea that I had not understood
was broadly distributed. Yeah. But I mean, that, that is a, an ethic or a pseudo ethic
that we have to just relentlessly criticize because it's, it's so much harm
gets done. I mean, that, that is the thinking that allows good people or otherwise good people
to create immense harm. It's like, let's, yeah, throw, throw them off the rooftops because
they, you know, the purge is on and it's, sorry, we have to break these many eggs,
make this omelet. But partially the question is, how do we spend enough time together to get past
this problem? Like I really think it's quite serious that part of it is, is that we're not
actually doing much of this face to face, right? Like I've never met Naseem. I've never met Sam
Cedar. I've never met it. They shouldn't have been in the same sentence. They have very different
problems. But if, if I had, if before any of this is happening, Sam Cedar, I think has done
probably a dozen shows or, I mean, I'm always getting, someone's always sending me a video that
he's made that, you know, I don't watch, but I log the fact that there's a yet another export
from his world where he's, he's attacked me. The, if I had, had lunch with him before any of this
ever, he ever took an interest in me, there might have been a very different fact. It's the fact
we've never, you know, we were, this is, this is why I anchor to civility. And you, you know,
you now seem as a friend of yours. So you have a, there's a kind of a loyalty effect or just a
fact, you know, you have a different relationship to his flaws, knowing him as a person. And I,
the same things happened to me, like the fact that I've hung out with Jordan or Ben Shapiro.
Well, you saw it happen with Claire. Let's talk, let's talk about the Claire situation.
Okay. That would have been different had you never hung out with Claire,
or it might have been different. No, I think there was a more serious issue. And it just didn't.
Well, it was, no, the flip it around, it was more of a betrayal, you know, or a seeming betrayal,
given the fact that you had hung out together. It wasn't just coming over the transom.
Betrayal in part was, was my betrayal of Claire. I just didn't know it.
Well, whatever, I'm just saying the dynamic change if you know each other at any level.
I'm trying to make a different point. Right.
When somebody you know behaves in a way that is very, most unexpected,
right. What I try to do is I try to slow it down. I say,
I bet we're watching two different movies. Yeah.
And your story and my story are not, the gears are not lining up. And so if we just push on the
gears, the teeth are going to pop off and it'll be the end of everything. And so with Claire,
what I tried to figure out is why are you repeatedly sort of coming at me? You know,
do you need to burnish your credentials that you're objective, that you don't have
tribalist loyalty? That was one set of issues. There's another issue,
which is that Naseem had gone after Claire and I was silent. I didn't want to get involved in it.
I, I didn't like the way Naseem was going about doing what he was doing. Absolutely couldn't,
couldn't take it. Didn't like it, detested it. On the other hand, I have a particular bug in
my bonnet about IQ and race, which is that I, I think it's an absolutely dangerous topic that's
being explored in a really bad way, even by good people. And that in part IQ has this curse that
I've said it's a pretty good measure of intelligence. It would be much better if it was obviously
terrible or really terrific, but it's in exactly the wrong place that it does tell us something
about intelligence and not nearly enough. So you can be a genius with low IQ. That problem,
um, you know, was being teased out and neither of them, the reason I stayed out of it is just
I didn't believe in Claire's position as I understood it and I didn't believe in Naseem's
tactics as I understood them. And Claire interpreted that I think, and I don't know this to be true,
as, wow, you know, you're seeing me getting mauled. Right. And I thought you would be there,
you know, or something like that. And so in part, just backing up everything, slowing it down,
trying to listen, you know, Ben and I have gotten sideways a few, few times to his credit.
Every time I take something to Ben Shapiro, he'll think better of himself and he'll come.
Yeah, yeah. I mean, that's my experience as well.
Even though he's part of his business. Yeah, yeah. No, that counts for a lot. So,
so the place where we've reached some kind of bad faith singularity is where I think,
okay, there's like, we just have to cut our losses. There's no conversation. Like,
that's why I would never talk to Sam Cedar in a public forum. He's proven himself so committed
to the singularity. I mean, he's like, there's a bunch of, I can, there's maybe 20 people who are
just on this part of the landscape where there's no coming back from it. I mean, there's coming,
obviously, there's an appropriate, any conversation that would have to happen
would have to begin with an actual apology. I'm like, it's just so bad. There's no alternate
movie version that's exculpatory, right? These people know their line. They're avidly lying.
It's all malicious. It's all, it's all, it's all Saul Linsky. It's all just smear, smear, smear.
Well, it is Saul Linsky, but look, the best that can be said for it, again, I don't get along with
it, is I believe that they think that they're in desperate times and they believe that desperate
times call for desperate measures. And that's sort of the mindset, which is the ridicule is
necessary to stop a greater evil. And that entitlement, as soon as you start experimenting.
But ridicule, ridicule is not the problem. It's the line. That's the problem. It's right. You can,
you can, if it, if it's an honest joke, I can be honest, I've probably watched 45 minutes of Sam
Cedar total. That's more than I've watched, but I've watched enough to know that these are people
who, when they're trafficking in audio of my podcast that's been edited, edited to show the
opposite of what I was saying, and they get a thousand blistering comments telling them about
this, they keep the audio up or they, they don't, they never, they never correct an error.
I agree, but that's what's coming out of it. That's psychopathic behavior. You know, it's like,
whether or not they're psychopaths, they're acting like psychopaths.
All right, but then we've got a giant chunk of our world and then part a lot, a lot of the
sense-making apparatus that is explicitly amongst itself psychopathic. It believes that it is under
threat and desperate times and desperate times call for desperate measures. This is its opportunity
and it's going to do things. And it's going to be, the thing that I didn't understand about it,
because I came from the left, is that it just explicitly thinks in, that's too bad.
Right. I'll, I'll, I'll get you a Kleenex. Next. It's just this dead, cold-heartedness
that progress requires that good people get hurt, boo-hoo. And, and that thing is so hardcore.
That's going to make that, that makes the Trumpian backlash understandable.
And that's, and that's really in part what I'm trying to get at, which is, is that
when I went to Washington in like 1996 on the immigration issues, I went into some staffers
like some warrant of cubicles. And I saw the sign on one of the cubicles that said,
if it's worth fighting for, it's worth fighting dirty for.
And I came to understand that if you wanted to survive and thrive and get stuff done in
Washington, that that had been absorbed almost universally. And then once I realized that,
I had to make a decision. Did I really want to get good things done or did I want to stay a
person I could live with? And that's very painful to actually have to think about.
Yeah, but I think that is an easy choice or should be, we want to make a, we want to create
a world where that's an easy choice. We want to create a world in which that's an easy choice.
What we've created is a system of selective pressures, which may actually end up selecting
for that over and over again. And you don't realize, and this is the, this is the issue,
the reason that so many of these things make me angry, like the, the great moderation or the abuse
of the immigration system to decrease wages. And then you cry xenophobia when somebody points it out
or NAFTA and a lot, large areas of the country get really hurt. And you're saying everybody's
going to be made better off is, is that all of these things I can see in real time, like right
now what I can see, like those things of the past is I can see this weird, and this is getting
back to the Jeff Epstein thing. There is a deliberate attempt not to talk about the intelligence
community and its links to Jeffrey Epstein. And it is clear and it's a very short proof because
assume that he had no links to the intelligence community, like none whatsoever. Somehow a
member of the trilateral commission affiliated with Rockefeller University, Harvard, no links to
any intelligence community anywhere in the world. You could sell papers debunking the claims that
people want to know, which is how is this guy tied in with the intelligence community? Right?
So you're saying it's fishy that no one's doing that? Well, I mean, it's beyond fishy. In other
words, you have something that everybody's demanding and wants. If it weren't true,
you could get paid by showing that it's not true or making the best argument possible or
making fun of how thin the claims are. Well, that may yet happen. I mean, again, I don't know
that somebody isn't writing the 5,000 word Atlantic article on Epstein that's going to answer
it. Dude, how long has it been? This guy supposedly commits suicide. We don't know whether, you know,
what branch of the decision tree that's on. And you can search, go to the New York Times and
search on intelligence. The thing and Epstein, like it's not being explored. It's not being
shut down. It's like an echoic tile in your echo locating. It's not what you're hearing.
Go to the search bar and search for things that people are discussing that don't come up.
And that's what's telling you that there's something very... I mean, this guy was apparently a
serious sexual predator. We're in an era of Me Too. Right. But there are anomalies like that. I
mean, the clear anomaly for me was... And it's one for which I don't have any sinister explanation.
I just think it's an anomaly of the news cycle we're in. That's the sort of what Trump has done
to our information diet. When the Las Vegas shooting perpetrated by a man whose name I don't
even know, right? And I'm kind of a student of these things. But I never even took the time to
learn the guy's name. I think many press reports decided to not use his name. No, but this was
the biggest shooting in American history. Right. Right. And 48 hours later, nobody was talking
about it. That's not true. That's like it had fallen out of the news cycle and never came back
in. It vanished very quickly. But there you... I don't think there's any reason why it vanished
apart from the fact that we just don't have the bandwidth for it anymore. There was no link that
made it clearly ideological. I mean, nothing surfaced. He wasn't a clear white supremacist
history. He wasn't a jihadist. I mean, there was no... You remember the word bump stock?
Yeah. Yeah. So the bump stock... Okay. So why weren't we talking about bump stock?
Yeah. So we banned bump stocks as a result of that thing. And that's the legacy of that
atrocity. But if you had told me at any point beforehand that on whatever day of the week it
was, you're going to have the biggest mass shooting in American history by far. And it was going to
be a fairly cinematic one, right? I mean, it's like you're talking about shooting out from the
windows of a... Did you see Dan Bilzerian was at this thing? Oh, no, no. I think I... Dan Bilzerian
is running out of this thing saying like, we're under fire. I'm going to go get my gun. He's
like, he's doing it in real time. If you told me we're not going to be talking about this a week
later, right? That just wouldn't compute. But that is the situation we're in. I mean, somehow it
just didn't survive the Darwinian contest with whatever else was on social media. I don't really
think that that's what happens. So Austin, why aren't we talking about it? Well, that's... See,
like when you're starting to smile. No, this is the thing that conspiracy theorists get dead wrong,
which is you are allowed to notice some very weird anomaly and not have to say what it is you're
noticing. Right? Right. So my claim, like... But you don't buy my explanation, which is
because there was not an immediate purchase on a larger story of motive. And this guy,
it was just... Not a lot of information came out about this guy that was salient. It just,
we're so deluged by other stuff, most of it Trumpian. Correct. You're not correct in my
opinion. Okay, that's interesting. So the way I would say it...
But whoever's right or wrong, I'm just saying that this belief that I now have,
that we have a different relationship to information now.
We can agree that we're cycling through things very quickly, but that was a spectacular... There's
a reason we're talking about it. It was amazing. Because it's anomalously weird how fast that
story disappeared. Oh, yeah. Now, one of the things that we have to talk about in that realm
is Dana Boyd and her discussion of strategic silence. So that's your search string people
playing along at home. Strategic silence is a doctrine of some kind that says that news media
should not report the news because of its potential impact. And where was this articulated?
You should check out data and society, which is a particularly interesting organization,
which fingered our friends as the alternative influencer network. Oh, right, right.
And Dana Boyd, who I believe is sort of in our circles, in the tech circles,
starts talking about the need for strategic silence. Is it a girl Dana or a boy Dana?
A female. Okay. Somebody I perceive to be female. Yeah, I don't...
I now don't want to touch a human named Dana Boyd.
Right. And strategic silence, she also talks about data gaps, if I'm not mistaken,
if I have my terminology right. And so then you have to look at things like style guides,
like the AP style guide or the New York Times style guide, which is the way in which people
are directed to report news stories. Is there a danger of copycat killings? So there may be a
body of thought around what does one do around mass shootings so that we don't have future mass
shootings. Or if this is particularly exciting to certain people, should we publish the manifesto?
So as you start to understand what the meta rules around these things are,
some of those could be innocent. Well, I think some are better than innocent.
I think some are benign and we've been slow to adopt them. I think the fact that I don't know
this guy's name is probably a good thing for the world. And that was part of the new style guide.
Did you read the New Zealand Shooters Manifesto?
No, but part of it. But yeah, I haven't read the whole thing. No.
What I don't want is I don't want somebody saying we should criminalize reading the New
Zealand Shooters Manifesto. But by the way, let me tell you, he told us all that Candace Owens
was his inspiration. Because that's not what the shooter did.
No one wants to criminalize. I'm saying something much more disturbing.
It's appropriate for journalists to worry that merely shining a light,
pointing a camera at this new atrocity, should be the default setting. Like name the guy,
get into his story, let's find out why he did it and do all of this in public.
We're in such a much more dangerous place in my opinion.
But no, Bob, maybe we're talking past each other here. It's just that we've been very
slow to realize that the part of the mimetic contagion here is the copycat effect. The fact
that in their own perverse way, these people are being martyred and lionized just by the mere
sharing of this information about it. Let's agree that in a better world,
we would have a situation by which we would not want to communicate relatively...
We're going to make these people famous. We don't...
There's fame as part of the motive, right? Posthumous fame even is part of the motive.
So, even if it's not part of the motive, it's part of what is attractive to the living,
aspiring gunman. First of all, let me steal me in your position to make sure I'm getting it,
and then I can take issue with you and you'll see whether I'm adding or subtracting.
I think what you're saying is that because of the information quality and the fame quality and
the inspirational quality to copycat killers, that communicating the information that somebody
wished to communicate provided they're willing to make a down payment in terms of dead bodies
lives taken out of this world. I'm not even focused on the manifesto,
I'm focused on just naming the person. You're sympathetic at some level with
the concept of strategic silence. I would be sympathetic with the concept of strategic silence
if I trusted the people who are supposed to manage it, but that's... I'm trying to get to the
next layer, which is that I am very concerned that the people who are enthusiastic about strategic
silence are interested in telling us partial information about all of these things so that
we cannot actually tell what the hell just happened. So, you just changed the topic to jihadism
and we're perfectly in agreement because yes, they will elide the religious identity
of perpetrators in various contexts and actually hide information from us. So, you'll see something
happen. The media will pretend it's inexplicable, like the end of the Orlando shooting. It's like
maybe this guy was just... It was his repressed homosexuality that was the problem. And yet,
those who have a little bit of information recognize that this is a clear-cut case of jihadism and
indoctrination and the consequences of certain ideas and the analogous situation on the other side
would be, what if we were going to systematically conceal evidence of white supremacy being the
motive for a certain attack? Right. But what I'm trying to say is that in all of these killings,
like you just pointed out that the Unabomber, you re-read the Unabomber's manifesto.
Now, the Unabomber wrote a story called Ship of Fools, which I thought was relatively interesting,
about people losing their heads in social justice and society...
There's some of that in the manifesto too. He's very critical of...
He's not a dumb man, that Kaczynski guy. However, the point was that you were able to
mine that for information and then you were able to reach some pretty interesting conclusions
about where Kaczynski was relative to society in general, you trusted yourself. Right. Okay.
My guess is that when it comes to jihadis, you are more interested in communicating the information
about what the motivational structure is because it is prescriptive that something might be done.
However, it is also... Actually, there's another reason. It's not just that it's
prescriptive. It may not be. It's just that there's more contact between...
There are more levers to play with to try to control the situation.
And it's a much larger problem.
No kidding. Right. But on the other hand, if I look at the New Zealand shooters and the Squirrel
Hill shooters manifestos, it's disgusting and it has content. And the way on which I can
explain to people how all of the open border type stuff is going to cause future problems is just to
say, you may not think of a country the way I do or somebody else, but imagine that somebody
comes to your home as a guest and you give them the key and they say, I hope you don't mind,
but I noticed that there were a lot of people on Skid Row today who didn't have anything to eat,
no place to sleep. So I ran off 2,000 copies of your key. And I hope we can adopt all those people
when they come over later tonight because I gave them the address and the security code.
Now, if that starts to rattle around in your brain, you don't feel good about it. You may not
conceive of your country as a house with a front door and a security code and rules as to who gets
in and out. But they do. And some of those people are going to go crazy and they're going to kill
people. And I know that to be the case. And it's not that I'm sympathetic with a synagogue shooter
or a mosque killer. Fuck those guys. The point is, is that we are not trying to get the information
because we have this class of people, this intermediating class that I don't trust as far
as I can throw them and that you still have more residual trust in. In other words, my feeling
about data in society is that I understand all sorts of things that they're trying to do,
but they're super dangerous. Like they are incredibly dangerous in part because they're
going to be backed by people like Bill and Melinda Gates or the Ford Foundation or whatever it is.
This is the Southern Poverty Law Center problem and other guys. So I think you and I have been
talking past each other a little bit here. I totally agree that in this case, we can't
really trust the gatekeepers. The only thing that I was expressing open-mindedness about or
agreement about with respect to strategic silence is there is this...
I would trust you to do strategic silence.
In some ways, it's impossible. It's like take it out of the atrocity.
Because you know that.
Yeah, but there's the atrocity side of it, which is its own thing, but just take the
case of famous suicides. We know that suicide is contagious. And this has a name,
the Werther Effect, based on Goethe's novel, The Sorrows of Young Werther. So there's the
fact that a sufficiently prominent person who's got any kind of...
Especially, and this is true, I think, for any suicide, but especially if there's some sort of
bironic, romantic gloss that can be put on it, suicides go up. And suicides go up in ways that
plane crashes go up. And we believe... I don't know if the data has changed on this,
but as of 20 years ago or whenever this was done, I think this was in...
It might have been in Kaldini's book, Influence. The plane crashes go up and the interpretation
of that is that some number of airline pilots commit suicide with everyone on board.
We know that's happened before. There's one famous case of that. But just to add
to the statistics that seems to be suggested. So what do you do when Anthony Bourdain commits
suicide? How do you cover that story? There has to be some style guide around how you cover it.
At one point, it could look like an unwillingness to actually get at the truth, but what's actually
motivating you is not an unwillingness to get at the truth. It's just you're aware of the
potential contagion effect here, depending on what the actual story is.
