Music
Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy. I'm Imyash Brotsky. I'm Stephen Zuber. I'm Jay Sticky.
And we are going to have, well, I am going to make a real quick feedback thing before
we jump into the post, the sequence post today, if that's okay. Make a feedback thing. Okay.
Apparently, I did not know this. So this is good information found out for on our discord.
Last episode, we were talking about various supplements. And one of the big ones that
we like is God, how do you present all things nicotinamide ribosin? Yep, ribosin.
Ribosin. Thank you. And R for short, which is just what I always think of it as and call it.
It turns out that's not a shelf stable at room temperature.
It degrades like slowly over a month's time. It apparently will lose like 20, 25% potency.
Oh, so you've learned that you've been tossing a lot of this basically in the toilet.
It sounds like possibly yes. So as a note, keep it probably in the refrigerator if you keep it
because that'll that'll be fine. And you know, it's not terrible if you only buy a one month
supply. But if you bought like a three month supply, then by the time you get to the near the
end of your third month, it's it's mostly degraded. Yeah, apparently. That's annoying. I know that
like dry pills that like, you know, you get a bottle of Tylenol or, I don't know, acetone or
hydrocodone or like all the ones that are dry packed pills, like not the liquid gels,
not the ones with capsules on them or whatever. They always say they expire in two years. They're
good, like 98% for like 15 years. As long as you keep it dry. Yeah. Yeah. And they usually,
I don't know, they package in those little silica gel or there's a crap. One of the brands of pills
that I got recently had like a actual little like dehydrator mechanism in there. And that was cool
because it was like krill oil and those like get they kind of turn into jelly every time.
I like stopped taking, even though like, you know, doctors still recommend fish oil, but like,
yeah, that's another thing about like the shelf stability thing where fish oil can go rancid.
And apparently a lot of the fish oil capsules you buy are rancid. I buy 180 at a time. And that
means I buy it once or twice. You can buy it rancid because it might have been sitting on the shelf
in the store in stock somewhere. Yeah, that could be a two, whatever it is when it arrives,
because it's been a hundred degrees out in the shipping truck that arrived in, you open it and
just hits you in the face like, you know, fish smell. And so like, then some of them are like
melted to the bottom. So I ended up usually putting the freezer and then shaking them apart when I
get them. I mean, if they cost more than eight bucks for 150, then, you know, I wouldn't bother
wasting money on it. So I've just been eating fish or but like, that's the smart way to consume
fish parts. Yeah, but I don't know. Apparently, the new new trope, newotropics depot.
I just say no tropics. But like, apparently, the correct pronunciation is nootropics. Like,
they got to like, pronounce both O's and that just nobody does that gifts and get out of here. Yeah.
Oh, wait, GIFs. Fuck. Fuck GIFs. Yeah. But the the place that would link newotropics depot
does keep them refrigerated in their warehouse from what I heard anyway, I didn't look into it
personally. So yeah, and they test all their stuff too. Like, that's just so just keep it refrigerated
once you get it at home. Really shouldn't degrade much if at all on the shipping trip over. You
know, there's like, you guys, you did do episode before on the tropics, right? We did. Was I on
that? I don't think I was on the podcast yet. It was enough years ago that it's completely faded
Maybe do another one at some point after Katrina left, but before you joined. Okay,
could be. Yeah, we had like a nine, 10 month period like that. I remember the period I couldn't
tell you one episode we did during that time. I believe newotropics was one of them. Fair enough.
Yeah, I, oh, we had to do another one at some point or somebody we had a guest on for that one. I
think you had a guest on. Well, I know we had a guest. And I think it was biohacking, not not
no tropics, but like as the topic, but you talked a lot about no tropics. Okay. I think it was like
under the umbrella of biohacking. Oh, if it was biohacking, then it was that guy from Russia that
we had. Oh yeah, he was on the live episode too, right? Or was it a different guy? I don't know.
I remember that we had a guy from Russia do an episode with us. There's only two, right? And he
was talking about, there's only two dudes in all of Russia. And it was lucky dudes. He was talking
about how he had been taking like 100 or 200 milligrams of edafinil every day for the last
several years that was doing great and that sort of stuff. Okay, that rings a bell. Okay. So first
of all, I feel like I want to re-listen to that now. But he turns out Russian.
We talked to a Russian guy about edafinil at some point. Okay. If you know who are this
Russian guy, let us know in the comments. I don't know what my issue is. It's, you know,
for posterity, if anyone's listening to this, you know, years down the road and COVID's not,
or COVID has been over at that, by that point, everyone's brain is mush at this point in 2020.
Brain is so mush. We're recording near the end of. I need some no tropics. End of November. And
I was just thinking about that this morning. Like, I thought it was October still,
even though things didn't just happen. And it's almost, yeah, it's gonna be December and like
every day, like what, two days, three days? It's been such a fucking waste of a year. Like,
I mean, I've done stuff, but it just like the whole year has just been like this weird haze.
I know. Yeah, I'm bright enough. But like, at least it's been like, I don't know if this is
comforting, but like, I kind of keep thinking, well, at least it's been a shit year for everyone.
So like, we're all kind of, we're all kind of right here,
in depression land. Oh, what were we talking about? We're talking about these like sequences.
Yes, we should get into them so that we can get down to the main topic. So our sequences for today
are the first one is the lens that sees its flaws, which is an old favorite of mine. And
I confess that I missed reading these this week. So who would like to start?
I'll start us off. You have read them before, though. I have, yes. Yeah. And this one is that,
I mean, it's two minutes, it says it's two minute read at the top. I would like just to read the
whole thing because this is one of the ones where you know, I actually think you're phrasing at some
point was Eleazar has like a great word count to information ratio. And this is one of those that
just comes through super heavy. There's so much to think about in a two minute read. And this is
one of my most memorable and favorite ones. The overall, if I had to summarize in a couple of
sentences, then we'll get into the more in depth bit is that like, the human brain is capable
of analyzing itself in a way that other brains on earth aren't like mice. And that's the example
he uses are aware, like their world consists of like cheese and cats and holes and mouse traps.
But it doesn't consist of having mouse eyes and mouse brains, right? That's not part of what you
need to be a mouse. That line is my seat, but they don't know they have visual cortexes so
they can't correct for optical illusions. I kind of wanted to like, call out the fact that like,
man, like, take it easy on mice mice have contributed so much to science. I mean, this is
putting them down. It's just, it would be kind of a ethical nightmare. It's just a thing that
jumped into my head where I was like, man, like, give mice a break. You know, many like mice have
their brains dissected. So we have cool drugs and whatever. Yeah, squirrels, because squirrels are
a lot of the same thing. Or like, if we're going to go a different route with it, like small bugs,
their world is very different in ours. And that like to them, the surface tension of water counts
as a surface to move across, right? But for us, it's not because we're too big.
Yeah, bugs probably don't really have very much in the way of even thinking about like,
this is a pond and I need to go over that. It's probably like a lot of just acting on instinct.
Yeah, I don't think if then bugs even know that they exist, possibly like mantids and spiders,
because they're they're pretty intelligent. But anyway, I assume pretty much all mammals
are aware of their own existence at some level, even if they aren't aware of, you know,
the fact that they have brains. That kind of picture is just like an impulse to keep doing
things if you're a fly. Yeah, like, it's not even so much that like, I want to have kids.
Of course not that complicated, but it's more just like, it's not even like a thought of like,
reproduce. It's probably just a thought of like, do this thing. Yeah. And I see this. Now here's the
response that it triggers. That's sort of what I imagine being a small bug is like. But that's
not the point. The point is, is that humans aren't like that. Yes, we have, we have eyes, we have
brains, but we also know that we have eyes and brains and visual cortices. Exactly. And this
gives us the ability to not just be aware of things, but to be aware of the mechanics involved
of being aware of those things. And that gives you the power to, like in the easiest form,
like adjust for optical illusions. But also if you're, if you're thinking about whatever brain
issues or something, or cognitive issues, you can see the optical illusions there too. You
can see cognitive biases, I think is more like the metaphor that he's using is the sort of the
camera that is just sort of recording what's in front of it versus the camera that knows it's a
camera. And it knows like, okay, I have this lens. I could see this far. Yeah. But like camera cannot
take pictures of its own lens. Yeah, we are aware of our lens. We can see the thing that we're
seeing the world. We can take an MRI. Well, not just that, but we're like, we're aware of our own
thought processes. Yeah, but it's sort of like, I guess like sees its flaws. I like that as a
metaphor, because it's like, well, imagine, I don't know, you have a lens that's cracked and you
don't know or cracked. Wow. You can sort of, first of all, know if like, huh, like I need glasses,
you know, because like, you can compare your own experience with someone else's and be like,
oh, everybody else can see the chalkboard, but I can't. But like, you could also see the flaws
in your reasoning, as well as like, you know, the physical flaws, but also the fact that like,
you can, it's like the study with the gorilla. There's a lot of those you got to be more specific.
The one where it was, you're supposed to, there's some basketball players and like,
the study tells you to like count how many times they pass the ball back and forth and you're
counting that and then like, there's a dude in a gorilla suit walks by and like beats his chest
like a gorilla then walks away. But the people that are that are doing this for the first time,
just don't even see the gorilla, like, you know, they get to the end, they show it to a class,
I think it's a standard thing. They're like, okay, how many you saw the gorilla? And they're like,
what? I got to be in one of these, like as it was done live, having not known about the experiment
first, not live, it was a video, I got to see the video of it. And at the end of the teacher asks,
all right, how many, how many balls or how many times did they throw the ball, you know, raising
anything that goes 17 or whatever. And how many of you saw the gorilla? It's like, I don't know if
any hands went up, but it's like, what do you mean? And then they play the video and everybody's
like, what the fuck? No, you just put that in there. That's just like, don't count the balls
this time. Then you watch the gorilla come out and it's like, how the hell did I miss? He walked
between them. Yeah. Yeah, it's not subtle. It's great because I love every time like new time I
see this, because it's really fun to be in the group of people, like sitting next to the person
who's watching the same thing as you, but it doesn't see the gorilla. There's another great
version of this. If you Google over YouTube, Richard Weissman color changing card trick,
and I won't spoil the surprise in that one, but it's another sort of attention thing there.
I saw that one as well. Yeah. I think it was the same time I saw the gorilla video. I was going
through a kick of these sort of things. And you're just like, I'm fucking blind. Yeah. Dude,
the craziest one is when they swap out the person that someone is talking to. Yeah. Like they have
people carrying a big piece of plywood or something, interrupt the two people and so it blocks the
line of sight for a second. And they have the person that they were talking with swapped out
with something else. Like a totally different person, different height, different clothes,
and the person like doesn't really notice. They just keep going. I was helping this person with
directions. This person is still asking for directions. That's all I need to know. Yeah,
exactly. Yeah. I heard that the brain caches a lot of information in the environment because
you don't need to keep track of the person you're talking to because that's information that's there
in the environment. It's not going to change. Yeah, you put a lot of your processing power into
whatever like, you know, okay, what am I going to say next and respond? Oh, that's a good question.
Let me think about that. How do you get to the supermarket? Yeah, like, you know, when you have
like artwork in your house or something and like you just get to the point where like you don't see
it anymore. Or like, you know, when you've sort of memorized the floor plan of your house so you
can get up in the middle of the night, it's pitch dark and like you're like, I know where the bathroom
is and I'm going to go get a fridge, get a snack. But if you were in a hotel, you'd be totally like
lost. Yeah. So, yeah, we do like store a lot of things, have a lot of heuristics built in,
and that's cool that we can know that and correct for it sometimes.
That means since we are aware of the flaws in our lens, we can correct for those using
second order thinking. And here, everybody is the secret of deliberate rationality. This whole
process is not magic. And you can understand it. You can understand how you're how you see your
shoelaces, you can think about the sort of thought thinking processes, which create beliefs that are
which ruined it. You're going you're going really well. Which sort of think processes will create
beliefs which mirror reality and which thinking processes will not mice can see but they cannot
understand seeing you can understand seeing because of that you can do things that mice cannot do.
Take a moment to marvel at this for it is indeed marvelous. Yeah, it's awesome. And like this post
to me, it sums up what the whole point of this Bayesian rationality thing is. It's to be able to
not only see your own flaws, but correct them as well. And that is, I mean, the name of the site
is less wrong, right? That's that's kind of the whole point. This is like the post I would point
people to to explain what we're trying to do if I could. This is the point. This is the post that
I have pointed people to to explain what we're doing. Yeah, cool. And like the main thing that's,
you know, because every, everyone in their friend has a, you know, self help thing that they've
heard about, right? Or like this will make your life better and five easy steps. And all of them
are like, you know, just trust this process or, you know, some of them have whatever empirical
stuff behind it. But like, very little of it is, and you can understand everything along the way
if you put in the homework. And it's not like we don't charge you for the homework, right? This
isn't a, you know, you get to level six by giving us $16,000. This is a an understandable process
that people can actually do. That's great. Yeah. And then there was this bit about where he says,
one time I went to EFnit's hashtag philosophy chat room to ask, do you believe a nuclear war will
occur in the next 20 years? If no, why not? One person answered and said he didn't expect a nuclear
war for 100 years because all the players involved in decisions regarding nuclear war are not interested
right now. But why extend that for 100 years? Pure hope. Reflecting on the whole thought process,
we can see why the thought of nuclear war makes the person unhappy. And we can see how his brain
therefore rejects the belief. But if you imagine a billion worlds, Everett branches or Tegmark
duplicates, this thought process will not systematically correlate optimists to branches
in which no nuclear war occurs. To ask which beliefs make you happy is to turn inward, not outward.
It tells you something about yourself, but it's not evidence entangled with the environment.
And the last couple of sequences we did talk about this idea of entanglement with reality.
I like them a lot. I have nothing against happiness, but it should follow from your
picture of the world rather than tampering with the mental paint brushes. And so that's another
example of not just sort of seeing the flaws in terms of these physical things, but also you
can see where your thought processes can be altered by things like emotions about the thing.
I mean, if everybody had the mental process of, oh man, nuclear war sure is scary to think about.
So let's not do that.
So we're probably not going to have another nuclear war for a long time that like, you know,
you want to be able to, that's another like point in favor of truth seeking and rationality.
In my opinion, I've always been, I don't know, I remember like there was I was in like a philosophy
class or it was a literature class in college. And I remember there's this thing that came up about,
I think it was it was like vaguely related to the book we were reading, but the teacher started
talking about like my religious grandmother, you know, I'm not going to like go to her deathbed
and like tell her that I'm an atheist because like that would, you know, what would the point
of that be? And I'm just like, that's why you got to tell her now. I was kind of like, but like,
I, I feel like I value the truth. And I had to like, like, like explain to the class then what
because we started having this debate about that, like, well, why would you, you know,
disillusion people from their beliefs if it makes them happy? And I was like, but like,
but like, what if, what if you need to know the truth so you can like fix something, you know,
like the delusion about like, it's a better example, I think, Steven, the thing you've talked
about before about suspecting you have cancer and then being like, that sucks to think about,
I'm just going to be like, nah, I don't, I don't think that there's a good example of this.
My wife and I got, or we went and donated blood last week. And she was sick, like a month ago,
more, I have no idea time is fuzzy now sometime, I think in October, for like a couple of days.
And because she works around people in the medical industry that have COVID all the time,
there was a very reasonable guess that that's what it was, even though presented, like,
non typically. So she thought, Hey, maybe I had it. And I was like, well, that, you know,
that'd be awesome if you had it, then you've got the antibodies and you don't have to worry about
anymore. How fucking awesome would that be? And so like, we could have just operated under that
nice, happy thought, right? Instead, what you can do when you donate blood in today's day and age
is you can ask them, or you can go to the whatever web portal when they upload your results,
give you your blood type, which she also didn't know we have the same blood type, which is cool.
But she also doesn't have COVID antibodies. And so like, that sucks. And yet, that we're already
living in a world where she didn't have them. Now we just know that and we're actually better off,
right? So it's, it is, it's a bummer to be disenfranchised. If there's something you can do
about it, you know, if you're going to go for the hyper constrained deathbed thing, where they've
got 30 minutes left, are you going to try and talk about it every religion? I probably wouldn't
know. I would have also agreed with that. But at the time that was when I was like,
in the new atheism, I went through the exact same phase. Yeah, I moved away from that when
realizing that, yeah, okay, we're going to paint it that constrained. Sure. They've got five years
left. And getting them, you know, persuading them to sign it for chronic is a real option.
I would actually think of worthwhile. If they're like, no, I'm going to go to heaven, it'll be
fine. It's like, yeah, but what if you're not like, if there's time to have that conversation and
have it go anywhere, I think that'd be valuable. But if there's literally not, then forget it,
right? Well, can you just come out to her without trying to, you know, can
de-convert her? Like the thought experiment or what I don't know if it was a thought experiment,
but like, it was just about the teacher, like telling her grandmother, actually, I'm, I've
like, de-converted I'm an atheist. I don't think I'd bum my dying relative out in the last 30
minutes. I would just steer the conversation. But like, the thing that I said, the last half
hour of your life, yeah, I still don't know. I feel about this where like, because that gets
into the subject we had about lying, which is sort of getting off topic of the thing. But like,
it's like, I sort of feel like I would prefer if this person is close to you, that they like,
know like, true facts about who you are and what's going on with you.
Right. I was going to say, if this is a grandma that you see, you know, for 30 minutes once a year
at a holiday, then whatever. But like, if this is something you track with a lot, you've got to be
in the closet constantly around them. And that's a huge stress. And it's basically lying to them.
I just, I don't like being in the closet in general about things, especially if it's something
that might, you know, come up and be important in some way.
Yeah. Another thing I sort of realized is that like, I guess, I was like, I'm carrying around
distress about not being out as trans to my parents. And I didn't really think about it that way,
though. But like, when I did, I realized I felt this like, massive amount of relief. And then
they felt distressed. And it's kind of like, so you transfer the distress from you to them.
And now it's their thing to deal with. And that's kind of how it should be, I think.
And that's the only way you can kind of get rid of that stress or tension. Because like,
each person has to work their way through it. And that's one of those like, Hey,
it is how it is deal with it. I guess, I don't know. I mean, like, this is going on,
kind of out into left field. I just wanted to find out that there was two footnotes
in this. And I'm trying to scroll back up. Okay, the one that was after he's talking about,
yeah, imagine a billion worlds, Everett branches, tag mark duplicates, this thought process won't
systematically correlate optimists to branches in which no nuclear war occurs. There's a footnote
if you scroll down to the bottom, some clever fellows bound to say, Ah, but since I have hope,
I'll work a little harder at my job, pump up the global economy and thus help to prevent
countries from sliding into the angry and hopeless state where nuclear war is a possibility.
So the two events are related after all. At this point, we have to drag in Bayes theorem and measure
the relationship quantitatively. Your optimistic nature cannot have that large of an effect on
the world. It cannot of itself decrease the probability of nuclear war by 20%. Or however
much your optimistic nature shifted your beliefs, shifting your beliefs by a large amount due to
an event that only slightly increases your chances of being right will still mess up your mapping.
Which I think takes us nicely into the next post. Yeah. Yeah. What's fun about it, and this
kind of leads us into the next post is I remember a few months ago, I was talking with somebody who
kind of denied that it was possible to have like a Bayesian prior that wasn't given to you as like
a six-sided die. You're odds of getting one or one in six, like it was anything more complicated
than that. They're like, you're just making it up. And it doesn't mean anything. And yet, like,
yes, you're making it up. And yet it would just take the example of nuclear war. I don't know what
the odds of nuclear war on the next 20 years. I don't even have a guess. And yet there are things
that could make my estimate of it go up. Right. And we've got a month left of Trump. If he starts
talking about how big his red button is again, like he did when he first got into office, and
I don't know, metaphorically waving his dick around. I don't know what my odds are, but my
odds would go up, right? Do you think your odds are gone up or down now that the Israelis, allegedly
the Israelis, assassinated that Iranian nuclear scientist guy? Because like on the one hand,
it's going to be harder for Iran to get nukes. But on the other hand, this could lead to war,
which could possibly spiral into more things, you know, more powers getting drawn into conflict,
which could lead to nukes being exchanged. I would ask the wisdom of crowds. Has anybody
betting on this on one of the big prediction market? Who's betting on there being a nuclear war
in the next 20 years? Like, what do you expect to make money on that? I think that's one of those,
like, you win. You get to say, I was right. And then you get incinerated. Yeah. I don't even know
if I would trust the wisdom of crowds on that. I would be more interested in people who know a
lot about the political situation. Yeah, no, there's there's a whole thing where people
can outperform experts after certain critical masses reached.
Did we talk about that in this show? Because I feel like we did. Probably. That's
or maybe we talked about it in discord or something. Yeah, I believe we may have done it
during our episode on metaculous. Is that the name of the website? Yeah, I thought this was
recently because there was just a few months ago an episode of Skeptoid about wisdom of crowds.
Okay, sorry for anyone who's curious to that, which is a lot of fun. And it's 12 minutes.
I mean, I like I like the betting markets because the people who think they have more information
will bet more money. So they will be given more weight. And also the people who are really wrong
with their estimates eventually go broke and leave the markets. But if it was just like everybody
betting, I kind of feel the noise. I know the the idea is that the noise is random in all direction
so cancels itself out. But I'm not sure how how likely that actually is in practice. I think
there is systematic bias to some things. Totally. As far as this goes, I have no idea. I don't know
anything about the politics over there to the to the granular level to know whether or not this
will likely increase the increase the chance of war. My naive guess is that the less people who
know how to make nukes, the less likely nuclear war is. But that's probably too simplistic, because
you know, they could be pissed off enough to steal or buy a nuke. Right. That said, I don't know,
I'm not losing sleep over it. So also I didn't hear about it. Maybe that's why I'm losing sleep
over it. Oh, okay. Yeah, just happened yesterday. Oh, I think it was yesterday. Could have been the
day before. Something else happened yesterday that I heard about again today. Oh, Governor
Polis has COVID. Sorry. It's a bummer. And it's it's one of those things like
the mayor of Denver, flying out to celebrate Thanksgiving. That really, really irritates me.
You're supposed to as as a leader, like set an example and show that you're willing to make
sacrifices as a leader as well. He was the one telling everybody stay over Thanksgiving. Yeah.
Yeah. And then he flies out later. Fuck you, dude. It doesn't apply to me. Really hope he gets COVID.
So there's like, I was talking to this with the people last week about like not getting your
haircut as like kind of a signal of I'm very pro science and liberal and care about COVID and stuff.
And it definitely is a signal of that, assuming you were getting haircuts before, right? Right.
Right. Like, but it's not to say it's merely a signal. Like everything that's the thing is,
you know, if you say, oh, that's signaling, people assume that you just mean like that's just a
signal. But like, I was thinking and I didn't put it this way to the people I was talking with
because I was time constrained and I didn't think of it this way. But like, there's no way that like,
what's his name, Seth Meyer or Stephen Colbert can't safely get a haircut right now. Right.
Yeah. I mean, it's where we're most of a year into this. And I'm pretty sure if they wanted to,
they could carefully get a haircut. Oh, have they been growing their hair? Yeah. Oh, okay.
And so because it's a nice, it's a nice signal of like, I'm very careful. And like that said,
that's good. We need those people. It's just like, this, I don't know why that came to my mind
because we're, oh, we were talking about Governor Polis and stuff. Anyway, updating on priors is
kind of the next information or the next post here. And so how much evidence does it take? And it
runs through a, the chief example it uses is a lottery example, where the odds of winning are,
watch me fuck this up. One in 131 million, 115,985. I did it. So I'm not going to say that every
time because I think that number is used maybe 15 times in this post. Why? Because you said in
the podcast, they read it out the entire, in this entirety every time. Yeah. Just to say the big
number when it comes out. I mean, I would probably read it out the first time. But after that,
you could just shorten it to one in 131 million. But that's not the math gets much more granular
than that. In any case, the gist is like, so if I buy a ticket, what are the odds of me winning?
It's one in one hundred something million, right? But so how much information would I need to know
that I've got a winning ticket here? And so it gives, I don't know, this is one of the ones where
I wouldn't praise it for like word count to information delivery. It makes an important
point though, it just does it in a way that I think because you've got to use a mathematician
that he really appreciates that I showing his work in this one, which I think there's a like
nice ratio, I guess, in the sequences of, well, yeah, most of them, I think do tend towards the
like layperson friendly, brief, intuitive format. There's a few where he does start
throwing math at you. I think those are good to have in there too, because it's, you know,
the whole I'd like out here, like here's the thing I'm trying to say. And then here's the proof,
I guess. Right. And that's valuable to have. So it's not just all, you know, air, right?
But I like it kind of sums up at the end here. It says, in general, the rules for weighing how
much evidence it takes, follow a similar pattern, the larger the space of possibilities in which
the hypothesis lies, or the more unlikely the hypothesis seems a priori compared to its neighbors,
the more confident you wish to be, or the more confident you wish to be, the more evidence you
need. And like, simplistically, big claims require lots of evidence.
Or to win the lottery, you'd need evidence selective enough to visibly favor one combination
over the big number alternatives. Right. And so, like, of course, you can still
believe in it on inadequate evidence, if that's your whim, but you'll not be able to believe
accurately. As I try to drive your car without fuel, because you don't believe in the funny,
dirty concept that it ought to take fuel to go places. Wouldn't it be so much more fun and so
much less expensive if we just decided to repeal the law that cars need to fuel? Well,
you can try. You can even shut your eyes and pretend the car is moving,
but to really arrive at accurate beliefs requires evidence to fuel. And the further you want to
go, the more fuel you need. Yeah. That's my kind of analogy. Yeah. I was always more a fan of the
one where it's like, I don't know, people that talk about sort of having, what is that word,
like post postmodern people that are just like, well, you know, we can't really know anything.
Oh, my God. I like, okay. Um, I mean, like,
are you thinking, um, postmodernism in general or solipsism specifically?
Um, I'm not exactly sure what the distinction. But solipsism is the, uh, belief that actually
you cannot prove anything except for the fact that you are conscious. Like literally everything
else could be a dream or you could be a matrix. There might not be other people. Everyone else
may be zombies that say that they, you know, have thoughts, but they don't really, it's
like solipsism is just the complete denial of reality. And I just refuse to have conversations
with people like that because there's, there's literally nothing you can say to someone like
that. Yeah. Well, I was going to say you could go jump off a cliff and I guarantee that gravity
will do its thing every time. I mean, they will certainly think that they have fallen and broken
their legs and or died, but the point being the people who like, you know, you're still,
you're still walking around like making choices based on evidence. Yeah. Because like,
that's, yeah, that's the thing that really annoys me about them. That's how life works. It's like,
you don't, you don't go to the store just by closing your eyes and wishing you take the route
that you took, you know, similar to the one you took last time or whatever you have to make a
detour. But the point is, you know where the store is, you know where your house is, you take
turns in such a way that will reliably get you there. You don't just like, you know, roll a
diet or, you know, flip coin at every every intersection because it doesn't matter which
way you go. Like their entire lives operate on logic and consistency of reality. And then for
certain things, usually religious exceptions, they pretend like, oh, no, I don't actually run that
way. It's like, you definitely, definitely do. Yeah. But like, you only get to be like, woo,
woo about the things that you can't prove with evidence. Right. Like that I kind of like that,
uh, uh, they're getting off topic again. But I was just going to like talk about how the world
that like religion gets to encompasses shrinking, like more and more, the more that we learn via
science. Yeah. Um, anyway, so what's there more about more in here? I think that was basically
it. You definitely need very long fuel to arrive at accurate beliefs. Yeah. Uh, I guess it's not
this one too, but I was scrolling to the bottom to see I remember there was when I was like first,
I had, um, gotten into methods of rationality and then I started reading the sequences, just
like the ones that sort of linked to it or correlated. But I remember one, it apparently wasn't
this post, but like they were talking about, uh, Bayesian probability and making predictions based
on it and somebody in the comments or like someone that was like, well, where are you getting your
priors? And he's like, well, they sold them at Kmart or something like that. Just remember that,
like for some reason that cracked me up and stuck in my head, like for a while. And I don't know
where I read that. All right. Are we done with the, the sequences then? Yes. I was just trying to
find, uh, you mentioned something about the shrinking skill of what like people get from their
religion slash Bible. There was a thread yesterday on Ask Reddit. What is your favorite sex scene in
the Bible? And, uh, someone, I just liked how like they get into describing what this was and
someone just put like in that kind of, uh, I think they call it, um, sponge casing where it goes up
and down. Okay. And it's like Judeo Christian values. And it's, uh, and it sounds like it's
being mean, but it was talking about, uh, well, it's, it's a, it was the top response on that thread
and you're welcome to Google it. But, uh, well, all right. What was your favorite sex scene in the
Bible? That one where the two sisters get their dad drunk, their mother is still salty about it.
Oh, I just got the, because it's Lot's wife. Yeah. God damn it.
I like, I like those things that they, that like the bad movie summaries are the same kind of thing
where, yeah, it subverts the way you remember the story, but, uh, it's accurate. Yeah. There was
that one, what was Lord of the Rings, like two short people go through a piece of jewelry into,
like, into a volcano or something. I liked, uh, my favorite one was the, the, I think this may have
been the first one that kicked it off, the Wizard of Oz one. Um, uh, girl arrives in a strange land,
kills the first person she sees that teams up with three strangers to kill again.
There was this like, it's the only thing where it was the explain your job badly challenge.
Yeah. Uh, I'm trying to look for some examples. It's good to find good ones because like people
will link that on Facebook and then everyone tries to explain. Yeah, like I'm looking at it now.
These are funny. Yeah. Got to find an actual like comedian, good, good, smart thinking brain person.
We try to make the brains work and we put them on air.
I like this one, badly explain your job. I put different mixtures of liquids and, and give them
to people. They give me money when my drinks make them feel funny. That's, that one's pretty good.
See, and then you know, they mean bartender and that's awesome. Yeah. All right. Our posts for
next episode are going to be Einstein's arrogance and Occam's racer. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Occam's racer.
Yes. I mean, two, two posts in a row that have a person's name and then a noun after it.
Yep. Okay. Shall we go on to our main topic for today? Yes. And our main topic for today was
Jace's idea career hacking. Like kind of didn't want to call it career hacking, but now I kind of,
I don't know. I feel like it's, it's one of those like catchy things that explains.
So it is, it is career hacking or does not career hacking?
Yeah, let's, let's call it career hacking. I just, I don't know. I get a little bit like cringe,
cringe reaction. Whenever the word is hacking. But like, it's memorable. So yeah, I don't know.
We haven't really talked about careers, jobs. And I kind of like, wasn't sure going into it
this time where I was, I was like a lot more excited about it when I was like actively
doing cool job stuff. And like, like right now I'm just unemployed and I'm doing a
coding bootcamp though. So was that started already? Yeah. Hell yes. But like, kind of want to talk
about it, see if I could get excited, re excited about it, or maybe get some other people excited.
All right, we'll just talk about sort of alternative, like alternatives to the like
classic sort of patterns people have about getting jobs. And just sort of the idea of
like rationalists and careers in general. I'm also curious what the average career,
like the average path that people take is to get job that people take to get jobs is,
because that was part of what kept me from finding a real job for four years after graduating
college was like, or how many years it was. I had no idea what people did to get real jobs.
So tell us about your experience. You graduated college and then
my then girlfriend who was already driving to and from Denver, I went to CSU. And so she was
driving to and from for her job. Actually, this is a great story on her part too. Undergrad and
social work at CSU, master's of social work at Columbia University, and an advanced standing
program that took 10 months. She comes back with a master's degree from an Ivy League school,
took her 10 months to find a job. And mainly that's because everywhere within 30 miles of
Fort Collins is saturated, like every entry level job is saturated by interns and people who are
going to school for the undergrad stuff. And someone wants to hire anybody who seems like
overeducated, but you know, for an entry level position. Yeah. So she ended up finally getting
a job in Denver, was driving round trip for six weeks. I graduated on a Saturday, we moved
that Monday, which was awesome. So she had like a 90 minute drive to work on her five minute drive
home that day. And what did I do? I floated for a few weeks, got a job as a teller for six months
that I hated. I remember how much you despised that. And this was after you graduated? Yeah.
What was your major? Psychology. I wouldn't recommend it if you're not doing anything more with your
degree. I got into it initially with this like, I don't know, long term, long term ish plan,
and realized two months in that was never going to do anything. So I was like, well, I might as
well finish because what are you doing with your life, Steven? Oh, I'm in school is a much better
answer than nothing. And that was actually the majority of the reason I went to school.
I got an associate's degree for cheap because I went to a community college. And then after that,
I wasn't doing anything. So yeah, it was seriously bumping into somebody I knew from high school.
And they're like, Oh, I thought you'd be doing something like more exciting. And I'm like,
that's a good point. I need to pretend like I'm doing something. And so I'm back to school.
I get the feeling that's a lot of people kind of, I mean, that's how why I ended up in college too.
It's just like, this is what everyone's supposed to do, right? Yeah. And I like, that is the opposite
of hacking when you are just doing the exact same thing everyone else is doing, because you're
supposed to and you don't actually have any sort of plan. Yeah, I totally agree. Yeah, there isn't
really, I mean, I think that I'm glad to see that I think it is becoming a lot more like
people are becoming more aware of the fact that the standard idea of, you know, you go to school,
you go to college, then you get a job and then you'll get promotions and eventually you retire
at the same company with your, you know. Oh God, that hasn't been a thing since the 50s. Yeah,
that's how our, I mean, that's, I mean, that's kind of how maybe our parents generation did it.
Like my dad has been at his job for 40 years. And like, I think that that's what people think of
now. And that's just not how jobs work anymore. I think across most industries, my industry is
particularly weird there where like, if you've been there two years, you're like, Oh my God,
you've been here for ages. But a lot of jobs are getting to be like that where, I mean,
one of the things you brought up is that it is more profitable for companies to hire,
or not even hire, maybe they're not even paying them, but to have a bunch of interns,
rather than, you know, having to hire some employees. Yeah, based on,
based on Rachel's experience, like, it seems like it is better to have the experience working
for a company than to have a degree, right? Probably. It depends. It depends. I think that
the degree, the degree got through the door and probably kept bigger doors open for further job
jumps. But she's been at four or five places since 2014. Right. So like, she's, she's doing,
she's moving at a rate like I'm moving at. The people that were interning had a much easier job
getting in, even though they didn't have Ivy League master's degrees. Yeah, I bet. I mean,
she had no trouble getting a work study experience, although I think the school helped set that up.
Okay. But they might even just say, go find an internship. And she had two of those across
her education. So like, if you're willing to work for free or next to free, people will
are happy to open the door for you. But that sucks. But yeah, if you want to try to pay your rent off
what you're making to do very important work, then yeah, people are much less inclined to open
the door for you. But just to finish off my career thing, I can skip a couple of years because it
was just random jobs. And then a friend asked me, like, why aren't you a programmer? And I said,
well, I don't think I can do that. Isn't that the kind of weird magic knowledge you need to be
like coding your own game since you're in diapers to do? And he's like, hell no. And he sent me a
book that I've talked about before called automate the boring stuff, which isn't like the best Python
introduction that I've come across. But it is a great like introduction to programming. If you
have no idea what anything is. And you're like, Oh, like, I mean, I can show anybody a simple Python
function. And it reads like English. And like, Oh, you're not writing in machine code, like I've
seen in the movies, this doesn't look like matrix code. You're you're writing basically words. And
like this is so it's really, it was this this light switch moment for me that like, Oh, this is
learnable by any adult who wants to put in some effort. Like this, this isn't some arcane magic
knowledge. And the only thing that's remotely career hacking there is that at the time of
considering, All right, well, now I want to do this. Do I want to go to a university and go back
to school probably spend at least two years because I've already got all my, you know, what do you
call them core credits or something out of the way? Or do I want to do this faster and more
cost effectively? And I mean, when you put it that way, the answer was obvious. So I did a bootcamp
instead. It was also the majority opinion across the programmers that I knew that I asked. The
there's always trade offs, right? So like, on the plus side, I was able to concentrate, I think
about three years worth of hours that you would get out of school into 19 weeks. Because it was
10 hours or yeah, about nine hours a day, five days a week, rather than I mean, how many hours
do you do if you're doing 18 credits? It's like 12. It's hard to say because you have, you know,
the what two classes a week at two to three hours per class for the lecture, but then they give you
so much fucking homework, right? But this also had homework stuff in it too. Like this was a full
time commitment that was 50 something hours a week. Yeah. And so I mean, yeah, there's a trade
off. But like, if I'm going to be just doing homework for 30, you know, two thirds of the time,
why am I paying a university $15,000 a semester to do it? You're paying for the name. Right. So
fuck that. I paid a bootcamp $15,000 to do it 19 weeks. And the other main perk there was that
like your let's see, I talked about the contact hours, I guess the cost was way less to the main
downside is that it was an intensely full time. And so like holding down another job at the same
time would have been impossible, not merely hard. If you had another job, there was no way to make
you could make this particular program work. There are tons of bootcamps that are part time,
but you need enough money to live for 19 weeks on your savings or have like parents or someone be
able to house and feed you for that time. Yeah, I borrowed money. And the other thing with that is,
I mean, a lot of them will do lending and stuff too. So I mean, it, I mean, taking out a loan
would be a dragon. It's scary. But the cool thing is that at the end of it, you know, for me, I was
cheaper than like college degree though. You're taking out a loan for a college degree too.
That's true. And look, but I think the like the loan, the track to getting a loan there is more
intuitive for people because that that road is laid out with giant signs over it to for
everyone can find it. Please take it, take it alone with us. It's so weird that the student loan
feels different from just a regular loan that you would get for a bootcamp.
Like it's this, this isn't a real debt, you know, it's a student loan. Everyone gets this one.
Isn't it insane to think about, it's like, oh yeah, sure, I'm taking out $60,000 in debt,
but you know, everyone's doing that. And yeah, and you know, sure, this is the only kind of debt
that won't be absolved if I say, I don't know, lose my house and go bankrupt. But in any case,
all that nonsense aside, like, I don't know, I'm trying to remember exact numbers. But without
exact numbers, the point is it doesn't making about exactly twice as much when I got my first
job out of bootcamp than I was at my job before bootcamp. And so like paying off that money was
super easy, barely an inconvenience, because I was subsisting previously on half that amount of money.
And so now that I had twice that amount, paying that back was quick and easy.
Yeah, you still had, I mean, you had all the money you had before to live off of plus all this
extra money now. It's like you had two Stevens working, but only the expenses of one Steven.
Exactly. So that was my, I mean, it was hardly like an original track to make my own kind of,
you know, to carve up my own path, because this was an existing program and all that sort of stuff.
But it was off the beaten path of like, I don't know, I think our parents would have done, right?
And I think that this is going to be more and more the way the future, especially when I learned
that Jace did one for... Oh, clinical research. Clinical research. I knew it was, I was going to
say clinic or like, I don't know, medical data or something. I knew I had it wrong. The fact that
there's boot camps for clinical research tell me that there's probably these things for all kinds
of careers. I mean, there aren't actually like, well, there will be in 10 years. I would be really
happy if there were. I bet in 10 years will be these things for everything just because
it feels like the university system is kind of breaking down. Yeah, because why would I pay $60,000
to learn how to work on cars? If I have to also spend $30,000 reading a bunch of books, I don't
want to read. And I don't know, trying to think of the other pointless classes I took. I don't know,
all this random bullshit, right? Why do I need to take three English classes if I'm going to be
working on cars? Why can't I just go somewhere and learn how to work on cars? Like, that's what I
want to do. And if you go like, get a job as a mechanic, a lot of places have entry-level jobs
with paid training. So, I mean, I think that that's sort of optional for lots of career paths.
I mean, I think that they do things like this. I mean, I think trades are already kind of maybe in
that domain. Or more like that. But they're also kind of opaque in the sense that like, I remember
when I was a kid, I kind of occasionally would think about, maybe like, what do you do to get
into trades? Do you go to like, technical school? Do you have to know somebody? Like, dude,
how do you become an apprentice? I had no idea. I was like, it would have been, you know, I've
always sort of been attracted to some of the craft skills. But yeah, like, I, you know,
because I was assigned female, my dad didn't want to take me on as a carpentry apprentice.
Really? What a douchebag. It was kind of douchey. I don't know. I have issues about that. I keep
thinking about going into carpentry just to like, piss him off, or not piss him off to get back at him
or something. I don't know. It's like a sort of a petty thing, because there's this big billboard
by my, right by my apartment that I pass all the time that's like, home builders school, like,
oh, it was, and I think it was one of those like, paid training, like, come learn to become a,
to build homes with our company. And I just like, keep looking at it. And I'm like,
oh, not yet. Maybe someday. You could do that. Or you could just go to like,
one of those woodworking shops where you pay for like, a monthly membership and get really good
at making like, intricate ornate tables. And like, so like, sometimes you'll come over for whatever
Christmas or Thanksgiving or something. And it'd be like the most decadent looking,
like piece of furniture he's ever seen and be like, Oh yeah, I made that. And just like,
just flex the awesome table and that way you don't have to make a whole job out of it.
I could do woodworking because I did it with him when I was a kid. I like,
but as you know, you can do woodworking better than him. That's the real wind.
Well, that's also, that's also more of creating art than it is, you know,
regular carpentry labor. Yeah, but eat off of it. You've also made something. Yeah.
Yeah. So I don't know if we all want to just go down the line and tell our career histories.
Sure. Well, you started this, so you go now. Okay. I feel like you know, this would be shorter.
If I, if I might just make a motion to guide this a little bit, I think you should go in
the ocean and then Jay, as you can go, because then you're going to jump off into all the cool
ways to do stuff. Oh, yeah, that's true. And that way we won't have to ping pong. Plus,
I think yours will be very short. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Like, so I'm not even sure how applicable
mine is anymore since I entered the job market in the year 2000. Oh my gosh. Yeah, I know.
Oh wait, I did too, because I started working at 14. Wait, you started working at 20? Well,
you entered your career at 20. You were working probably before that.
Oh yeah. Well, I've been working for many years, but that was when I dropped out of
college and actually needed to get a job to pay for my own rent. I don't count anything.
Like anything before you have to pay for your own shelter and food doesn't really count yet,
in my opinion. I lived for pizza part-time through college and paid for my shelter and food through
that on like three days a week. It was great because I lived in the second cheapest apartment
complex in the city. So nice. And it showed. Couldn't have been like that bad though,
if you were willing to live there in terms of like crime and shit. I mean, yeah, it was livable.
Yeah, that's why it shows the second cheapest one. Yeah. Like if I think about the cheapest
place in Denver, I'm like, I would probably get stabbed there and I don't know if I want to live
there. I think I'm in one of the cheapest places in Denver. You're not going to get stabbed there,
though. It's like all Vietnamese. Oh, okay. What's your rent, if you don't mind? It's like,
you know, I'll tell you after, because it's terrible. I would have to look it up.
But yeah, I think there's just a drastic change in how you understand the world
once you're responsible for your own continued survival. But no, I joined the workforce just
a little bit before I turned 20. And I, like I said, I dropped out of college. What were you
studying? Computer science. Because back then there wasn't real boot camps or anything. If you
got a, if you want to go into programming, you either started your own computer science course,
right? Like it wasn't even like you could take a JavaScript class. Like you had to like, okay,
well, the first computer was this. And you know, here's just like computing theory, test
questions are like, when was Alan Turing born? No, no, they didn't bother with like the history
of that stuff. But it was like computing theory and how, you know, the theory behind various
algorithms and stuff that I didn't get too much into because like I said, I dropped out.
Okay. It was definitely interesting though, like it got into deep level shit.
I was going to say like, it's cool stuff to know, but I think it's not things that like
should be a prerequisite for entering the career. If you're going to be like doing CSS, it's like
you don't need to know, you know, about the little life of Alan Turing, it's not applicable.
Or even just like the, you know, how our card computers,
yeah, like, I mean, knowing how to like to design a register machine and see sounds super
valuable. Well, like literally one of my classes was about the various search algorithms and the
theory behind which ones were more effective for what kind of searches and why. Yeah. Okay. Yeah.
So that's like more applicable to your actual life as if you were going to be a programmer.
Almost today, you would just Google like, Hey, this is the kind of did I'm looking to try and
grab. Right. And you would find the optimal solution on your second click on stack overflow.
And so like, and this was like, if you want to sort your database, here's your various options.
And here's the theory behind why you want to use these options for larger databases. And yeah.
To be clear, that sort of knowledge is what separates like seniors from entry level people.
Okay. And so when you come out of a bootcamp, unless your bootcamp has like a specific section
for that, you tend to that I should have mentioned this, if you're curious for computer science.
Some breakdown I saw years ago showed that bootcamp grads came out, they tend to be tended
to be stronger in like their ability to build applications right away. Like just sit down at
their desk and start coding on day on week one. But they're weaker in algorithm design and data
structures. So like sense the the sort of stuff that, you know, like, I don't particularly know,
even though I should this point, know exactly what's going on under the hood with like, our
giant Postgres monolith database that we have, because I don't really need to. But if I wanted
to optimize it, like we had one of our seniors do this year, I definitely need to know what's
going on there. And so he was able to come in and clean up a bunch of shit and save us actually
many thousands of dollars a month, because now we require that much less computing power for it.
With the bootcamp model, you could come out of your bootcamp and start coding immediately in
your entry level position. And if you want to become a senior programmer, you could learn that
stuff later. That kind of degree is overkill for most of the jobs that people actually want.
Yeah, I think a lot of jobs like you could skip college, you don't need to have as much background
knowledge in that, like, if you're gonna, I guess, like, probably people that read less wrong
that are listening to this podcast, at least, are the kind of people that are gonna like,
learn that stuff anyway. Like, if you find a thing interesting, and if you're motivated, like,
this is a group of people that at least like, you know, can read long things and absorb like,
complex ideas. So yeah, I would feel, you know, I guess, I guess I could see from an employer's
perspective that are like, yeah, I want my employees to have a degree, like so they can have this,
like, depth of knowledge. You're a lot more valuable to the employer, but also that takes a
lot of time and money. And so you're probably going to want more money as well, which, you know,
that's the point of the bootcamps, the employer can hire you for $60,000 instead of $90,000.
Yeah, it can be beneficial. But yeah, I dropped out and I went to work as a basically just a
kind of a secretary, really, I would crunch some not even crunch numbers, I would add up lists of
numbers for someone else and put them into a database, I would call like a clerk.
Yes, I was a desk clerk. I wanted to think a secretary usually handles communications,
or something scheduling and stuff. I would sometimes man the phones when the actual,
you know, front person was out. I mean, it was it was a small company and all the really low
level shit I would get to do. Was this like the accounting job that you got to later? Or was this
like this car dealership? Yeah, no, okay, this was a company that mailed things out to people.
Basically, if someone would say like, Hey, we have these 10,000 people that we want to mail
this thing. Can you do it for us? And we were like, sir, yes, sir, we will put these umbrellas
into this weird package and send them to your people for you. Cool. Yeah, it was it was the
the actual it was pretty much menial labor on the floor. Anyways, I started out there. And
basically, I just was bright enough that when other things needed doing my boss was like,
Hey, can you do this? And I said, Sure. And eventually, a guy above me retired and my boss
was like, You learned things on the job. You're gonna go to college for them. No, I got I mean,
I got paid basically shit like 925 an hour. But like, what's doing saying? I mean, if you,
you know, got your masters and probably wouldn't get your masters in shipping weird objects, but
like, you wouldn't be able to even get that entry level job. Yeah, no, and that was the thing.
Like, I knew I meant, I got to know the people on my job. They knew me saw that I was, you know,
enthusiastic and energetic and bright and I could do stuff really my my main piece of career hacking
advice would be whenever anyone asks you if you can do something you say yes. And then you go and
you learn how to do it. Yeah, or like, I've done the thing of just asking like, Hey, you know,
pretty on top of all my job duties now is there are there more things that would be helpful,
like for me to learn? Yeah, like, can I pick up more skills? Yeah, that works too. I was not
that ambitious. I actually when they offered me the job of the guy, I was like,
let me think about it for a day, because that's a bunch more work and responsibility and I don't
know if I want that. But eventually I was like, Yeah, fuck it. Why not? And it, you know, from
there I took on some of his duties, which included bookkeeping and accounting stuff. And so my next
job was exactly one from there. But yeah, the it really feels to me like being at a place and
knowing people that work there is a huge big move. So getting into someplace just getting in the door
is is a great idea, even if it's a really low level thing. Pretty much every job that I found
this this would be my other big piece of advice. Pretty much every job I found was from a temp
agency or a placement agency. I was going to mention that, which I was replacing someone who
either had been fired or, you know, was paternity leave or something. Yeah, exactly. And every
single time that I was placed somewhere, within the first week I was there, the my boss was like,
Oh my God, you are so much better than the last person. Because oftentimes when you're getting
hired from a temp or placement agency, it's because the person behind you sucked really hard,
had to be canned, and they need someone on super short notice. They don't have time to go out and
interview people. And so, so my piece of advice is take over for someone who sucked at their job,
and you will look awesome. I was going to mention temp agencies as a way to go to because it's
it's one of those that's like, I think off the beaten path, it was under it was off my radar
until I until it wasn't. And it paid, I don't know, three bucks more an hour than my previous job.
And it's like, it was shit work. But like, if all I needed was money, it got the job done.
Job was that Stephen? I worked for four, six weeks or something at Otterbox, the phone case
company, they would order all then the components, the phone case from China, and then you would
assemble them in the order that they came in, then you put them in the box, a little instruction
insert, and it was an assembly line. It was terrible. It was like 12 hour shifts that started
at, I think it was, I think it started at noon, and it usually ran until midnight or two in the
morning. And it was it was like that. I remember it was, I think 15 days with no days off. And like,
you're supposed to be allowed to take days off if you want it or whatever. And the overtime
was supposed to be optional, but it was it was discouraged the point where you just were let
go because it would find somebody who would be willing to stick around for those hours. But
one of those cases where it's like, oh, you can take days off, but you have to like ask all your
coworkers, could someone cover for me on this day? No, it was all 50, like they brought in like
50 people at once. And it was everybody's first thing. And there was none of that stuff when
you started a regular job or like the first week is like onboarding. And here's the HR stuff,
because you didn't get any of that. You just came on, you immediately started working. But it was
the only perk of working that many hours was, and for those like that shift was that I had no
time to spend any of the money. And like, my check was about twice as big as it should have been,
because there was like 30 hours of overtime on it. So yeah, that that sucked. I hated that job.
That's right. When my back started going, I'll fuck you too, probably from standing for 14 hours
a day. You should go see them. Well, yeah, actually, it was when I started when I asked,
actually, I got a couple days off, because I went to the physical therapist and they said, you need
you need to rest. And the week I came back, I was let go. So shit, but they don't need a
reason to let you go. They just said, Oh, performance. I'm like, okay, great, fuck you guys. Bye.
So I guess, yeah, it's really hard. Yeah, it's really hard to shine in those sort of mass
production easily replaceable jobs. Oh, yeah, this one wasn't one where they were where they
were staffing for a real job. Well, maybe, sorry, you're still talking. Oh, no, this one, there
was no way to shine to grow. This wasn't that kind of job. This was a, we just got in a gigantic
order. You know, we got a product order of some 10s or hundreds of thousands of these we need to
get done by the end of the summer. Like so it wasn't like this was never going to be a job with
people. Yeah, but I was like, thinking about I have a friend who actually moved with me from New
Jersey. And he got like, I let's see, my partner at the time went to the Tampa agency, I went to
the bootcamp. And this kid was like, Hey, you know, someone at the Walmart told me that basically,
they'll hire you on the spot if you go work at FedEx. And I was like, you sure you could go to the
Tampa agent, like I could help you look and he's just like, nah, he paints. So he like was selling
his oil paintings for a few hundred bucks, but like just needed a job on the side. And so they
start you out as like just like a packet chandelier and you like just unloading hundreds and hundreds
of boxes from trucks and putting them on assembly line. And it was just like brainless work. But
just because the people doing that job were people that were just hired on the spot, like
there are a bunch of people just coming to work drunk, drinking throughout the day,
smoking weed in their cars, doing harder drugs, getting in like bar fights and like so like,
just by being a reliable, normal human who would just show up to work and move the boxes,
my friend like was able to get promoted to being a scanner. And then they got promoted to
driving a forklift and like, so they did manage to like work their way up the chain at that job
just by like, you know, not being the normal grade of person who would work at a throwaway job
like that. I mean, most jobs kind of suck. And so most people have crappy attitudes for them. And
just I mean, as someone who has now had to hire people to, you know, like help renovate houses
and things like that, just having someone show up when they said they're going to show up and do
the job is automatically a win in my books. I'm like, nice. I love that I can actually know,
I know someone who I can rely on to actually show up and do the thing. Because like, you know,
you set aside the day, you're like, okay, this day, the person's going to come in and put the
carpet in for me or whatever. And then they don't show up. And you're like, well, fuck,
now what do I do? So that yeah, just being, being reliable is good. And, you know, people like to
work with people that they like to be around, which, you know, it's going to be much harder in
the era of COVID to be around people, obviously, but that's not going to last that much longer.
And just like, in general, being personable, not always being a grump, I don't know, I hate to,
I hate to give this sort of advice, like, hey, be nice. And, you know,
big, nice to be around you, lecture night, younger, but you really struggle to get along with people
that is a skill you need to work on. Yeah, that I mean, people aren't going to want to work with
you unless they absolutely need you because of your skills, which that's great if you have that.
But I mean, just being personable is such a life hack for everything in life, generally.
And being minimally personal, personable, for most people, isn't that hard.
And win friends and influence people. Yeah, exactly. One book you need to know about that.
And if it is hard, like, that is, that is something that's worth putting some XP,
you know, time into, right? Like, it's worth spending some points to figure out, all right,
how do I actually get along with people? So much of human power is about groups of people
working together. And so being able to do social hacking is huge. That's a different subject.
Yeah, we could do a social hacking one to that would probably be really interesting.
I don't know if I have much to offer there other than like, just be nice to people.
It's almost always free. And it gets you, it can get you all the way. Plus, it just feels good.
I'm not sure, like, you absolutely are just really nice and awesome. And I love being around you.
And I've been told by others that I'm fun to be around as well. So I don't think we would
have much to offer because we naturally just like to be around people and like to be nice.
We're already awesome at being nice to people. We need to find an asshole. We need to find a
reformed asshole and ask them what their path to success was. Exactly. That's what I was saying.
I mean, like, I don't think I was an asshole, but I was the autistic kid that couldn't make eye
contact or speak above a whisper and didn't know how to do any social interactions. And I had to
learn it all from like reading books and practice. That's actually valuable though.
Yeah. Like, so would you, would you, and this is supposed to be a leading question even though it
is, was that, was the effort and no doubt it was like a struggle to get through the beginning
of that effort at the very least. Was that worth the time and energy to get there?
Yeah, it's very much what Anish was saying about it being sort of a life propeller. Like,
we are the social species and we need to do social things really to get ahead. It's actually
quite hard to be a hermit and to succeed, I think. In my industry, once you get to the top,
like once you're really good, you can then afford to be a complete asshole because then
you're irreplaceable. It's in your doctor house of computer science. Exactly. It's like, sure,
you guys can fire me because I'm a dick and I don't come to work, but once you do and something
breaks, you guys are fucked. So, you know, when, when I'm 60, if I feel like caring that little,
I will. But for the next 30 years, or God, yeah, 30, that sounds about right. I'll enjoy
being nice and collaborating with my team. But yeah, just use that as your motivation, you know,
put a smile on your face, walk through the door, be nice, and then like just think about when you're
old, you're going to get to do all kinds of shit, apparently. Keep a list of people to get revenge
on. No, actually, when I was in that period before school, before starting a real career,
and just like, you know, working at various kid jobs, I changed jobs every year just because I
was like, I mean, whatever, these are throwaway jobs anyway. So there's not really much point to
me staying at the boardwalk Disney store. I was like, I'm going to become a model employee.
Like when someone pissed me off, in particular, most of these jobs have some like, you know,
asshole boss or it's a toxic environment. But I was like, I'm going to become the best fucking
person here at selling Disney toys. And then I'm going to leave. I'm going to give my two weeks
notice and be gone. And I'm going to time it for right when the season's about to pick up. And
then they're going to, they're going to beg me to stay and I'm going to leave. And then they're
going to get a temp. They'll look up and beg for help. And I'll get to whisper no. Yeah. That was
part of like my motivation that kept me going through the high school jobs. But anyway, I wasn't,
I'm not sure if you were done your story. Yeah, I guess the last thing I would say. So I got lucky
I managed to get on the job training and I got paid shit for years. But you know, I also didn't
have any debt. So that was fine. The the thing we were talking, you know, pooping on degrees earlier.
It has put a hard ceiling on how far I can advance at this point. If I wanted to get
any higher, I would literally need to have a degree because they're like,
we just cannot promote you above this position. It would look too bad to, you know, the people
above us. It's a hard requirement. And that, you know, I personally don't give a fuck. I knew that
would be an issue when about 10 years ago, they were offering me college, like, you know, we'll
pay for 50, 60% of your college go take night classes. I was like, no, I'm done with schooling.
I am so over it. And I decided not to. And that is fine with my life goals for other people,
they may want to jump on that if it's offered. And other people in general may just want to
keep in mind that you might have a hard ceiling like that as well. But I know that's not the case
for all industries like programming, for example, programming is just sort of a lot of jobs are
just prove you can code a thing. Yeah, all right, you're hired. They don't care where you went to
school or whether you have a degree or if you're living in your mom's basement is like, can you do
the job? Yeah, all right. Cool. It does depend a bit on politics, but it's like harder to test some
careers. Like, can you social work, social work at this person? Okay, you're like, you can't really
most jobs when you're not producing a product, you're more like in the business side of things.
The how it looks to others is important. The signaling is a big part of the game. Well, and
that's where they want the degree to signal. Yeah, and I'm glad you mentioned social work. I don't
think that's the kind of thing you could bootcamp. I think that so much of it is soft skills and
like, it's also a very variable career path, even if you're doing kind of like,
a similar thing the whole time, she's worked with this, basically the same population, the elderly,
her whole career. But her job requirements have been so diverse, that it's, I don't know if you
could crunch that into a 15 week program. So some things maybe like, but also that's not so much of
like the, you know, the kind of trade we were talking about, right? I think you, I think it's
possible to pick up electricity, electrician work, plumbing, mechanics, or mechanical engineering,
like, you know, cars or computer programming. I think you can pick all that up in 12, 15 weeks,
enough to get started. Right. You know, to get in the door and not kill yourself or your co-workers,
if you're paying attention. I think I have a friend, I have a friend who's an electrical engineer.
I don't think he went to school for it. He did some sort of outside of school program for it.
Yeah, I think a lot of, well, I don't know about electrical engineer, but like an electrician
or a plumber, they usually just apprentice. Maybe it was electrician. I'm not trying to
talk about you know, knowing somebody like your, your dad was a plumber or your, you know, next
door neighbor needs, needs and needs some help. There used to be trade schools. Are they not
still trade schools? They are. I think the friend I'm thinking of went to a trade school. Yeah.
But in any case, yeah. I mean, trade schools are kind of like boot camps for the trades.
Exactly. Yeah, no, that's why I raised them. I think that that's the point. Like,
you know, if, if you want to work on a particular thing, you should be able to just
study that one thing. I get the idea if you're getting a liberal arts degree to have a very
diverse and not necessarily focused core of curriculum that you need to get out of the
way just to expose you to everything. Right. But it's a good idea to know like basic philosophy.
Totally. But liberal arts degree doesn't teach you how to do anything. That's the
point is like those core credits don't get you anywhere. They're there to make sure that
school lasts four years. Now I got a liberal arts degree and I like graduated basically like
not really knowing how to do anything practical. I knew lots of theories. It's like,
I mean, I'd you know, anyway, I'm getting ahead of myself. But yeah, that is me. I have other
stuff I'll add later. But for now, let's go on to Jayce. Oh, okay. I thought you were going to
talk about your writing. Oh, your podcasting. I mean, so okay, I suppose I could. Neither of those
pay enough to live off of. But like what you like doing, right? Yeah, exactly. For those things,
it's just a matter of, you know, this is the thing I like to do and I want to do. So I'm going to do
it. And then after I do it, I look up resources on how to on the online. God, I don't even know. I
guess back in the before times, people had books, yeah, and libraries and stuff. Libraries were
like the internet before electricity. No wonder people loved librarians and libraries so much.
But yeah, if I just did the thing and then I was like, Oh, that thing was kind of crappy. Let's
see if I can learn how to do it better. And I would search on how to do it better for the
writing specifically. What really helped me is I found an in person writing group here in Denver
that met once a month. And we critique each other stuff. My first year there, I learned so fucking
much. There were critique groups for more things. It would have been cool to have a like, I have no
idea how that would have worked, like a clinical research critique group. Like it won't make you
a genius or anything. But the things you learn the basic core stuff you learn in the first year is
just honest feedback from people. I had a hard time with that with art, like, where people will
be like, Oh, man, that looks great. And like, I don't know, like, I feel like there's maybe
something I could improve about. No, man, I can't even draw a stick figure. It's awesome. Like,
because people are so used to, I guess, like art being, well, it's like creative expression. So
it could look like whatever you want. It doesn't matter. There's no rules. And I'm just like, no,
there's good art and bad art. Like, yeah, there's, I mean, there's the problem that people, you know,
don't want to hurt your feelings. So they won't say bad things. And also just people who aren't
doing art don't necessarily know what's good or what's bad. I couldn't join a critique group of
regular people because, well, sorry, of non writers. Yeah, like, if you're in like a dance
critique group or something. Yeah, like, I don't know what to say to anyone. I don't know. They're
dancing looks good to me. Not casting spells very well. Do more finger flailing. Yeah. So
trying to think. So you've had like, I did a lot of jobs. Yeah. Um, I am constantly when I hear
what you've been doing with your life. I'm like, Holy crap, which is like three or four different
people. I feel like I'm like, yeah, because you did game design, you did house renovation, you did
art, you did soap making soap making bio research. Yeah. So I've always had the problem of being
person with lots of interests. And probably, I think a lot of people in this community can relate
to that. And for anyone who doesn't know, Jace is the person that created our basic conspiracy
logo, which we have an announcement about at the end of episode. Oh, yeah. Gotta remember to say that.
That's your spoiler. Yes. So that. So yeah, I guess I started working when I was 14, which like,
the legal age was 16. But it was just, you know, my parents being like, we started working when we
were young, like kicking out a gut, go get a job. And I don't think there's any lower limit to when
your parents can put you to work. Well, they I wasn't working for them. So they like actually
since I lived near the Ocean City Boardwalk in New Jersey, turns out that you can get lots
of jobs under the table. In fact, I think a lot of the economy is based on questionably legal
immigrants and like underage kids. That's a great combination. You were helping to steal the jobs
of hardworking Americans, Jace. I probably was. I were the endeavor for anybody. Yes.
So I sort of might like introduction to jobs was that sort of getting a different job every year
and not feeling super attached to it. So I think that actually helped me learn. Well, the lesson
my dad wanted to teach. And I think this is funny, because I almost feel like I hated it at the time.
But now I'm kind of like, would I do that to my kid? Like maybe it was kind of valuable was
my dad's like, okay, you're going to go work at like, you know, as a cashier, or like as a
busboy, as like a, you know, whatever, like, and and then you're what that's going to teach you is
that like, you should stay at school because you don't want to do that for the rest of your life.
And like, I think that that's kind of an elitist point of view, like, for from the perspective
of the person who does work forever at the deli. But like, and like, I don't know, maybe they love
it there. But like, at the same time, I think it was helpful to kind of see behind the scenes of
just like, here's what this job looks like, you know, being a busboy, you see what it looks like,
you'd learn what goes on in a restaurant. I think that's valuable. Someone like needs perspective,
which I think most people do. Like if you ever work to service industry job, you have to be a
special kind of asshole to ever be mean to people in the service industry again. Like, if you've
ever, I don't know, ordered fast food. And you're like, Oh, I worked actually, I worked at McDonald's
for some weeks when I was a teenager, too. You know, you ever wonder why your thing that yes,
without pickles comes the pickles on it? It's because the person making it made a thousand of
them with pickles already today. That's how they usually come. And they're not, they're not engaged
cognitively enough to to raise to come to leave your pickles off as like a conscious attack on
you specifically, right? They're just that's just they they're just on autopilot because it's exactly
what these kinds of minutia jobs require out of the better place. I think you know how they have
like mandatory years of military service in some countries, like I feel like mandatory, like just
working in like basic retail like service jobs for kids would probably like just help people be a
lot kind of, you know, more appreciative. But um, but it was like also, like working at the Disney
store with that was my, my next door neighbor's mom's store, which was how I, you know,
screwed up for your next door neighbor's mom. No, she wasn't, she was younger than me.
And she didn't start working. Anyway, I don't know what's going on there.
But did you actually quit the Disney store at the height of their season? Yep. Okay.
Oh, nice. It wasn't actually, okay, this is like, it wasn't actually even a Disney store. It was
um, called boardwalk characters. And there was no licensing for any of the stuff. So it was like,
like, I think actual Disney stores only sell Disney like branded character products and no other
stores can sell them unless they get the Disney licensed merch. But like, this was so this was
basically a store that sold like bootleg Disney stuff. And the boardwalk does that. There's like
all these, you know, people selling buildings shaped like Spongebob or ice creams that are like
very super here at none of them got the license. And it's kind of this unspoken agreement, I guess
that none of the businesses rat each other out about that. The result is that you get to see some
really janky like costumed character that like looks like a really cheap Chinese knockoff Spongebob
that's just like a little off. It's so terrifying. There's a great subwriter called Crappy Off Brands
where I see these things all the time. That's one of the, if you ever end up in New Jersey and you
go to the Ocean City Boardwalk, that's like kind of one of the fun things to do is to just keep an
eye out for all the like weird janky bootleg things. I also, I had no idea what I wanted to do.
My experience was I had a I have a sister who's one year younger than me and she was always like
super conscientious, super moralistic, and always seemed to be on top of like she knew like when
she was a little kid like she was like I'm gonna be a pediatric nurse because I love babies and
taking care of them. And what are you gonna be? And I was like astronaut, ballerina, race car
driver? You know like I don't know. The first ballerina on the moon. Yeah. I think that that like
but so they don't really expose you to many careers in high school or at least I wasn't like
really exposed to careers at all like that we did have like a shop class and we had home ec but it
was really I don't know they tried to do stuff with it too much and I think they got rid of it
like the year after I graduated but like I think the the idea behind the liberal arts degree and
it's an idea that like I can kind of get behind and understand like it is that exposure to different
things but you can get the same exposure to like different jobs by working at different jobs. I think
I'm just like as we're having this like discussion on the podcast I'm realizing that I think of my
proponent of like sort of propelling like I do think you probably could boot camp everything
if you're clever about it. I was thinking about like social work it's like. Were you a librarian for
a while? Yeah. How did you get into that? That's actually like one of the main examples of career
hacking that I like the first time I kind of did it I guess. Because I hear that you need like all
sorts of degrees to be a librarian. It's very competitive it's like a really it's a highly
desired job um it starts to pay pretty well like a librarian pays pretty well about like head
librarian or director like they start getting pretty good salaries um I could just jump to that I guess
I don't have to I don't have to tell my story no matter I could tarotino it um yeah uh no it
doesn't it doesn't make as much sense to go out of the way right now that I'm thinking about it
yeah like a bunch of you know kid jobs uh went to college because that's what you do
and it was kind of it's kind of funny um there were like the reasons that I had for going to
college were okay I don't know what I want to do with my life so that it was just sort of extending
the period that I was in school for one there was the feeling of um it's it felt like morally superior
oh I don't know like um more not morally superior but like more uh high status
well not even high status like I guess ambitious like you know um meh it felt like the right thing
to do that like people would be proud of me and like if I went to college and disappointed if I
didn't my neither my parents had college degrees and I was the oldest kid so it was like sort of
I do think that going to college because you don't know what else to do is probably the worst reason
like if you have a plan like you want to be a psychiatrist so you're going into med school
that's good then do that but like I mean I did the same thing like I don't know I guess I'll
program computers and go into college is what you do and that was just yeah I mean like I I mean
I'm really glad I dropped out to be honest I had some interests I had a lot of interest but like I
didn't have any like you know my sister always had her I know exactly like you know where I'm
gonna go what my plan is she like super organized about taking the SATs and looking for like these
colleges that are good I did not do any of that I just uh found school really easy and I was like
I don't know I was a shitty student in the sense like not in the sense that I got bad grades but
that I like didn't really try hard I had uh I was putting all of my like energy into like playing
MMOs or doing doing whatever interest I had on the side and kind of just like doing enough school to
uh pass and not make my parents angry but then like I remember I had a guidance everybody had to
like schedule time with the guidance counselor at some point to talk about where you like what
you were gonna do and receive some counseling and I remember like the guidance counselor like
looked at you know my I guess like scholastic history whatever they have and was like yeah it
seems like you should probably go to uh community college like and I just I took personal offense
to that because I was and I think she was like actually saying like I don't like I don't know
you don't seem like focused or disciplined enough or like get like getting good enough grades to get
into like a university like you should go to this and I wish I hadn't had that reaction because
if I could go back and do it over it would have made a lot more sense to go to a community college
um and just sort of continue doing the thing of exploring and seeing what I wanted to do
I remember some kids did that and they're like yeah you know you just transfer your credits over
to the school that you end up going to and some other kids were like I'm gonna take a year off
travel the world and or like I'm gonna take a year off and just work and try to like think about it
and for some reason none of those like options felt like I was allowed to take them like I I
guess like um sort of grew up or like the culture around me was very much about like yeah like you
know being decisive doing the right things following the path then I was like I don't have a
path like I'm good at my thing was like I'm good at drawing and I like biology um and like nature
and stuff and I was like so I'm probably gonna do something like that and that was the thing I
would tell people after like you know I was done saying like paleontologists whatever so how did
you get a job once you were out um well I continued I went to college for five years um and took
classes more slowly so I could work on the side and my dad uh my dad and I had an agreement where he
would I'd pay half he'd pay half so between the two of us I did not have debt um and I was also just
still working through college and working like that was when I did the soap company um and that
that was pretty cool because that has like the the crafty thing that I like so hold on you can't
just say that was when I did the soap company you you like started your own soap I did not start it
now I was uh it was a local business um kind of like lush if you're familiar with it where it's all
handmade bath and body products made of coconut oil and stuff instead of scary chemicals with
names like propylene glycol I am familiar with lush but I'm still gonna picture you making soap
like they didn't fight club yes it was um there was a large tank of lard or not of lie involved
human fat not lard that's although you can use look but um so did you like show up at the front
door and say hey are you hiring or oh okay I just applied there and I were like yeah I mean um
that was how I got all my other jobs they're like I didn't have that they didn't yeah like
indeed and stuff like didn't really exist then because this would have been in 2010 so I really
want to know how you got the librarian job because that is I've heard very hard yeah that that go in
and like in the front door and apply makes you think of all that boomer advice like just go in
ask the ask the manager and just give him a firm handshake and hand them your paper resume and
I'm like they would they would yell you out of the store if you did that to understand how the
ship works yeah and it's all well-meaning advice but it was really funny when I was looking for uh
um my second maybe my first job too in the computer programming industry but my dad was just saying
you know tell him you're you know looking to get married and start a family and I'm like they would
be pissed if they heard that because all they hear is this guy wants to take time off like you don't
understand how things you haven't been looking for a job since 1970 dad or 1980 something I guess
at this point you don't know how the ship works my parents did that like they'd drive me to a place
and then they just just dropped me off like I remember uh one time uh my dad's like oh I think
like Dino's diner is hiring it was just this like local diner you like drove me over there
he's like I'll come like pick you up in a bit and use your wages today so I had to like walk in this
place like talk to like the you know the hostess I'm like hey like I'm here to apply for a job as
like as the manager and like oh yeah he's the kid so I have to like walk back in the kitchen as a
civilian not in uniform or anything be like hey where's the manager like uh that probably still
works in some industries and that's probably what you have to do but like a lot of people I think get
jobs through networking where yeah you do have like your dad's or whatever or your your next
door neighbor who has this store um your cousin works at this place can probably get you a job
but um other than that there is kind of there there used to be how you got a job like and I
guess they would post like you know help wanted sections in the newspaper and stuff but before
the internet it was very much sort of and when you're you know a teenager without job skills
you're just going from door to door being like here's my resume and if you're gonna or can I fill
out an application yeah and if you're doing that sort of thing you can't be picky you gotta be like
does anyone need a body to do any sort of work and then you can find a job that way it didn't
like make any sense to be picky because it was all kind of the same jobs although the soap shop was
a lot cooler than working in a restaurant you know bus and tables or making breakfast sandwiches
um because I did get to like run the front of the shop and also make all the products
and making the products was so fun but also working the front the desk was really great
because um I'd just been used to you know I'd worked a bunch of cashier jobs but people grumpy
when when it comes to the part where they have to part with their money
uh except for like if they're going in to buy a gift for like for someone which usually they were
like buying themselves some like you know getting some self-care like or like buying gifts for people
and then and they're like oh these are so nice oh can you can you make a gift basket you know we
make gift baskets here we can make them whatever color you're like oh my god you know let me tell
you about my daughter all right we just took a few minute break because we needed to stretch
we've been here for a while and we were talking in the sequences about uh word count and information
ratio and I've had a lot of fun but people aren't here to hear about our career paths
although I think there's that's the thing is there's information to glean there on how we
did what we did um you know none of us are I think uh with the possible exception of jace who's been
doing I don't know 10 12 things over the last decade something like that like you're probably
the exception of the person who's like actually done cool shit with like chasing interests but
the rest of us have kind of just done not so off the beaten path things um what was I going to say
oh but if if people are looking for like okay that's fine that's all cool hearing about your guys
that stuff but how do I do stuff yeah we're gonna jump ahead to some of that um look how good Steven's
got in that segue so proud of you last practice I guess yeah I noticed like you know I've been
listening to I've been catching up on all my podcasts and I've like just been able to watch
you like getting better at it in that podcast and then like see you doing it and like I'm like
yeah the trick there is that usually I've got like a minute where we've been derailed long enough
and then Brian's talking I'm like all right let's think boy lead this back to where I was trying to
go so I just look for an opening and then I shove it in speaking of yeah like awkwardly um
and that podcast is we want more yeah um listen to that one too if you like this one you might
like that one um how I yeah so I said about how I got this soup job and like all the other jobs
before that was literally just walk in the door go harass the manager some of the advice I got from
like my parents and other people in my parents generation which they like would tell everybody
like this was this was the thing you're supposed to do oh yeah like so make your application and
then call them the next day and then keep calling them and keep like come in if they don't answer
you like I was like you want like so you're like harassing them giving you a job basically but this
was the advice that everybody gave wait so you're seeing that actually worked to get you the jobs
though yeah I mean all right it's it I haven't done it yet about that when I worked at the ice cream
shop I remember the manager going through and he had just a stack of applications and I was watching
him he's like this person called back this person called back this person called this person called
and these ones didn't just threw them the trash without looking at him wow but he was also an
idiot so take that with a grain of salt no that was like what they would um tell you like the
explanation for that is like oh you'll show that you're committed to the job if you call and like
you know and that you're like able to be business-like and professional on the phone and stuff like
that it was just like kind of the thing where it was a signal on both sides of I guess conscientiousness
and like career suitability where yeah but like it's just I don't know it's it would be so weird
to do now um I think at least I think it would be I don't know seems like maybe still work um so
yeah as I was like going through college I was still working so okay and it was a continuation
of random weird jobs um eventually yeah like internet uh like I don't know monster I think
was the first one I used monster.com and indeed and all those started existing and at that point
then I guess that was like sort of me growing and watching the career like standards changed
so that was interesting um but I was working as a sous chef um at the end of college when
this was actually really cool the the boss's wife who worked uh at a like finance industry was like
hey you're like majoring in art uh there's this guy who just took out a loan to do uh something
with video games and I mentioned that like you're in school for art and he might want to hire you
so that was how I like got into the video games industry and it's one of those um sort of networking
to you know it's who you know again and but um and it's also like jumping on opportunities so this was
that is a big one yeah like putting yourself in positions where you might run into opportunities
is and saying yes to everything yeah absolutely yeah I really like uh Derek Stivers actually has
good career advice he's the guy that made cd baby back in the day and now he like writes books and
music and stuff um what were some of his uh oh yeah like one of his like catchy things that I
enjoy is say yes to everything and then like once once you've like hit your sort of goal or your
success goal say uh fuck yeah or no yeah that's that's I mean just having luck is really important
but a lot of people don't seem to realize that luck a lot of it is being in positions where you
can run into opportunities and that requires things like you know going out being social saying yes to
any sort of requests and then yeah jumping on them when they do appear so let me yeah let me just
tell you how sketchy this was um can I with one sentence interject yeah speaking of being sketchy
that's how I fell into being a pi for a year okay was I mean that's it that that's the one sentence
version you were just a really sketchy dude and no no no I was fine on people I was not I did
insurance stuff it was less follow my ex-girlfriend or something it was uh insurance fraud but it was um
I was in a situation where the idea was presented to me and I was like you know what I hate what I'm
doing being a teller let's just see what it takes to get licensed and do this and uh then it happened
to be right after I got licensed I bumped into somebody uh at like a vape shop and like I was
just he was like what are you doing it's like well I just got licensed to be a pi no way a friend of
mine's a pi and I was like give him my number and I worked for that guy for a month he sucked but
like that's how I got in so it is just placement and seizing every opportunity too right so that
was all I brought it up for and it looks I mean um I don't know uh it sounded like you did a little
bit of research there too yeah to get started for sure like or at least you know know what it is
and get the interest but um yeah yeah I'll get to that with the library job I just want to like
real quick just because this is hilarious so uh yeah she's like here's this guy's phone number
and I call and it's his personal cell and it was just like hey yeah yeah I'm looking for
I just come by my house it's like this address just let yourself in oh bring your portfolio I'll
show you some of the stuff we're working on I was just like okay this is fine I brought like a knife
in my back pocket my portfolio and literally like I got to his house I call him he's like I'm down in
the basement yeah the front door's open here's the the code for my garage just um walk in door on
your left goes down to the basement just let yourself in I was like okay go to the basement now
my friends let them know where I'm at oh yeah but um it was legit it was that was yeah it's kind of
crazy trusted you with the code to his garage too this was the kind of person this guy was um he was
like creative genius very add and very like he was so good at doing um pitches for projects we got
so many projects because he would just like get so fucking excited about whatever it was we were
pitching that like he was practically like bouncing up and down and it was infectious cool um not so
good at like the organizational side of things that was what I was doing a lot of uh library so after
being in the games industry for like six years getting really disillusioned with it changing
like getting laid off it's building a new company getting bought by another company like uh um I
wanted to I realized that like I my goals changed to wanting to do something values oriented where
if I had gone back like to me in school I um kind of you know was like I guess I'll you know get this
art degree and probably become some graphics designer and be making ads or some shit and then
like I never really could have imagined that I would have been like working in the video games
like I worked for Disney at one point and it was just like if I went and told my past self that I'd
be like away and um then like doing it I was like actually I don't like this it was I don't know um
there was a point where like the love of video games and art like stopped being motivating um I think
we could touch on a little bit of hacking like you said I worked at Disney for at one point
which most people be like holy shit how did that happen yeah by like you know the the same
thing of like you know take a chance on creepy guy in the basement and eventually uh you know we
got hired um we were working for Microsoft originally and making like web-based MMOs and then
we just like we pitched a project to Disney and a bunch of it was one of those like um bunch of
people are pitching to be the ones hired for the specific project and we were the ones hired
and so like I never had like a goal of working for Disney and uh but then I like ended up there
and I was like hey cool um so the library though I was hanging out like a real lot in this library
um and after yeah like the the period where like the the rest of my employee like uh fellow
employees and my boss were trying to like form a new startup and getting and I was just like I'm
sick of this um I was hanging out this library a lot and I was like attending a bunch of their
events and at one like point you know um I like helped them fix their projector and like so like
people who were working there knew me and I was reading uh like I was I was into Paris at the
time and so I think that in particular I'll have to see if I can find it in link it but there was
this one article that was um a guest that was posting on his blog and probably someone he
didn't interview with was talking about backdoors into careers and he said that he wanted to like
work at this one radio company like be a radio host I think it was and he just um like I called
there called the place was like hey like could I talk to the manager and then like I think just
asked him like hey what would it take to get a job you know in radio and I forget if he didn't um he
might not have even like led up with that but like he just sort of became friends with this dude
and I think maybe helped him with like something else that he was like consulting or advertising
or something and then like by building that rapport with the person then they were willing
to be like you know rather than I don't know if any of these employees are qualified but like this
one has a degree and this one doesn't it's like oh this one has a degree oh but that one's Dave
we love Dave or whatever his name was um and there were some other suggestions about like
backdoor ways of finding your way into a career and I started actually like trying to put that
into practice I was like this is this library is a good opportunity I remember as a kid I
was like talked out of being a librarian real early because I did hear the stuff that any
ash was saying like oh yeah like well you need a master's degree and it's really competitive
and there's not like you know there wasn't a robust library system in New Jersey because
Governor Christie slashed library funding boo um but so you hung out at the library a lot yeah
hung out there made friends with the director and you helped when they needed things done
yep and yeah I like did I did some volunteers I did volunteer I made them a logo and helped them
like do some graphics for their website awesome and then like eventually I was like you know hey
what would it take to get hired here and I didn't have any background in library science but they
were like oh yeah like Jason's been here you know like it was again like uh you were bringing
bringing up the thing of like being someone that people want to work with yeah and especially like
with the logo and the website you did something for them that they couldn't do on their own you
weren't just like a grunt landing a hand you were like for them to do this would take special training
or hiring someone and you were like hey I have these skills and then they remember you for that
yep and and then I just um did the the other thing that I was talking about before where I kind of
okay I learned how to like run the sequel database and like run run the circulation desk
and then do like interlibrary loans like all that you know that on the job yeah um so you were just
like you know just following people around being an extra pair of hands until I like learned how
to do a thing and then I would be like okay what else can I help with eventually I was doing like
all the things yeah and it started with I'm here a lot of help a lot is there any way I can get a
job yep it's like yeah you know you're hiring somebody part-time you need some extra help for
the summer and then like eventually it was uh I then you were already there to
eventually I was like saying hey like um what if I got my library masters and like could I be hired
on as a librarian because I was like a library assistant uh although I they'd like promoted
me to a job that didn't really exist but it was like a media specialist library media specialist
which is a name that we made up and sort of crafted by looking at job postings
so they could justify giving me a promotion um and the director was like oh well like
you could go get your masters but you already know everything that they're gonna teach you
and I was just like um uh something else that I think was in that same Tim Ferriss article
uh since after he said that were you able to just go straight to librarian then no um
there's another one of those you have to have it yeah there um there is the you know the degree
barrier so they can I guess justify the high salary and but like yeah it was kind of I thought
that was kind of bullshit where it's like what if you do you know like start as an entry-level
employee and work your way to the point where it's like at least your company um offered to like help
pay for the college this was me just saying hey what if I take my own money and like go do this
but um yeah the I think it was I forget if it was a different Tim Ferriss article I have to see
if I can find these two I tried searching for them and they didn't come up as readily as before
but maybe I just need to tinker with my search terms uh there yeah and I'm sure I can find
it I think with this quote there's a guy said like oh this standard paces for chumps and he was
talking about uh how he went I forget if it was when he went to college originally or when he went
back to college but he realized that you can test out of classes so he was just like oh this is like
a superpower like so he just made himself a boot camp crammed for the stuff and then tested out of
each subject nice like you um he like had to I think talk it over with the professors or the
school faculty but it's like basically yeah if you can submit these three projects and then like
pass the final exam that'll prove that you know the the subject matter well enough that we can just
like be like yeah you get those credits so he like I forget how much um faster he got through
college that way but that's like whether that's more of a education hacking I guess but uh
I really strongly agree with the uh standard paces for chumps thing I think we've touched on this
several times but like way back in the day used to be you got the one job you would get promoted
slowly over time and eventually you retired from that same job you started at 40 years ago
and now you just don't do that that's stupid yeah you can't do that most places like just don't even
have the higher level jobs to offer or yeah or they don't care about giving you like I mean they're
not like helping you accelerate your career or or or incentivize you to stick around you know like
this was an off year for my company anyway but I was given a 1.5 percent raise which and I'm close
to a manager so I was able to say this when he delivered that number I was like oh that's almost
inflation and so like I mean if they were to give me 1.5 percent every year for the next 10 years
I'd be fucked right uh now I have a friend who's been in the industry for over 20 years
and this is the first job he's been at long enough to get a raise what industry programming yeah
programming and so like he's he's jumped so frequently over the last 20 years that he's like
yeah I just got my first raise yeah I think programming is definitely much more supercharged
than jobs in general but even so you should but not that much more yeah I think yeah you should
be looking to transfer to a different department if your company is large enough or just get you
know moved to a different job that's high of better placed every three years or so at the
very least I think for other industries you want a title change yeah like you don't want to be the
same you don't want to be library assistant you want to be media specialist right if you have a
business card or not but whatever your job title is listed as you want that to change every few
years because then then the company can justify their higher ups why they're giving you a 15
percent raise right and it looks much better on your resume when you go to you know when you are
shopping around for the other job you're like look I started out as an accountant I went to
accountant two uh two two years later three years after that they put me to account supervisor you
know that kind of thing yeah we're senior account or whatever just like always get even if it doesn't
come with like a pay raise especially because jobs change over time they're like the stuff you
originally hired on to you often do less and less and they give you more of other work so
eventually once you're like look I do a lot of stuff now I didn't do before can I get a different
title for it even if it doesn't come with a pay raise you get a different title on your uh CV
or um what's the other word for CV resume yeah and that looks better to the next people you're
showing it to you like well I get the title beats the hell out of accountant 2004 to present
yeah um I mean if you're ready to wrap up we can no well yeah I had more uh subjects to hit
like maybe we can go more quickly over some of the things the I mean we definitely should
yeah we talked about boot camps we talked about um accelerated learning and so there's also the
option to take like the especially now you know that everyone's working from home going to school
from home online courses um are blowing up there's online courses for like just about everything
and some of them offer certifications and I think MIT and or maybe I could have it's MIT
or Stanford um and maybe some other bigger universities but they offer their courses
for free not with the you don't get the degree if you didn't pay for the course but if you just
want to learn the material um so like depending on how much rapport you have with whoever's maybe
going to hire you you could also just like you know tell them well I took the you know I took
this course I don't have the like ability to prove it but I can like talk to you improve
that I know the material maybe you can at least put it on a resume um and you can yeah like skill up
by doing things that like yeah you could stick on a resume you could go volunteer um say that you
wanted to like work at a non-profit I mean um or like an NGO uh you can definitely go like take a
volunteer um stint and you can put that on a resume as experience uh there's I want to talk about
80,000 hours oh okay um which is it's rationalistic Jason it might I don't know if it um I think the
professed goal is to like not just get you into a job but get you into a hiring industry that you're
equipped to do yeah and uh with the understanding that you'll probably give a lot of that money to
charity yeah so yeah like 80,000 hours is roughly the amount of working hours you get in a currently
healthy adult human uh working span um I it's interesting I maybe and I'm curious about your
take on this I'm only jumping in just because I had a question about this like my immediate thought
shortly after learning about 80,000 hours was that like if you get into a high paying industry
just to give away a bunch of money whether or not that's actually you can put that on one side
like if you're if you're optimizing for income there's a good chance you'll find a job that you
don't love yeah or that you don't even really like that much and that my understanding was that the
burnout rate was kind of high have that I'm sure they've actually calibrated that in though this
was 10 years ago when I first heard about this yeah I think the yeah the goal is you know just to
make big books and then do what you want I guess but you could donate a bunch of it to charity
and you don't have to like live that life forever you know like if you don't like being a stock trader
you could work as a stock trader for a bit if you have the ability to do it and maybe it kind of
sucks but then like then you got a bunch of money that you can not only give to charity but also
like invest or use to like float you to your next thing while you take a coding boot camp yeah
exactly 80,000 hour hours also very much about like um not just making money although that was
like one option for people but specifically about making an impact with your career yeah so I'm
changing the future I was talking about like values oriented um and it's kind of yeah like
people are gonna have different goals for what they want to do in their career like do you just
want to make money do you want to travel do you want to just learn stuff are you like motivated
by helping others 80,000 hours um yeah has the goal of optimizing the job search for like highly
skilled or like highly motivated candidates so there's like job advice and job training opportunities
there um if you're a young person in the rationalist community uh probably or not even a young person
they started out um if they said explicitly like we're mostly gearing our advice and stuff towards
like college grads because we have to you know pick a place to focus on now and that's like the
people that have the most years to give to the cause but they've started from what I've heard
expanding a lot more of their advice to be applicable to so if you're already you know
are in a career and you want to change or whatever uh I think that they have stuff for you and I
also intended to check that out and I haven't done it yet so it's a reminder to myself I think
that's good I like I said I imagined that they had optimized a bit over the last decade because I
remember when I first looked into it it was it might have been in the earlier days of it well
it definitely was because it was 10 years ago but it might have been in the early days of it
not just the earlier days and the fact that they're iterating and improving the process is reassuring
um you know I'm trying to think of like any general advice that I could think of and it's
kind of just like my same advice for everything which is like don't be afraid to take a leap for
something but the downside of that is that like calculated risks right calculated risks and uh
you know not just like take a leap and like I'm gonna quit and you know start painting and sell
that like that's that's a great ambition but I would start something like that that isn't like
a and a waged job I would start that as a side project yeah like I wouldn't bank your mortgage
on uh like you're suddenly taking off as an artist it's like writing or podcasting right uh you
know there's there's no uh you know when there's not a guaranteed minimum that you're making then
that tends to be a lot scarier but the other thing about even like the uh the the general leap of faith
that I'm talking about that's safe or more calibrated like even that comes with some like I
don't throw this word around a lot but some level of privilege like I'm lucky enough that
I have parents that continue to care about me and that if I was ever like I'll never be homeless
right like if I needed it I could move back into their house at any time and so you know if my
adventure into programming had taken a complete shit and I'd never got anywhere well they would I
wouldn't you know end up homeless right so like I I have that safety net um if you don't have that
obviously you have to be more careful about the the risks you take but I'm you know can I speak
briefly about the first uh career hacking from less wrong that I'm familiar with yeah uh this was
I guess back in the day 2009 2010 maybe um someone posted on less wrong about this uh opportunity
in Australia yeah I was gonna bring that up optimized income there does out the name of the
post optimal income okay yeah we can find it it was a thing in Australia where you could go uh
as with a temporary visa and get a job basically a low skill job um out in the far lesser populated
places and you would get paid a decent amount due to the fact that they had nationwide minimum wage
laws and uh yeah they recommended like working at a hotel and they're like you will get like three
meals a day and a free room so you can go there you can just save all the money you make cost of
living was very low out in these remote remote areas you still got paid a good amount because
the minimum wage is calibrated for cities rather than these areas and the government uh it will take
a fair chunk of money and taxes for the government retirement program or whatever but when you left
the uh country after a year or however many months you got uh they would give all that back to you
and basically it was just a large chunk of cash for going out having a really cool unique experience
in a foreign country for a year and uh that money could then be used to fund all sorts of things
like for example going into a coding bootcamp for a long period of time or putting down a
down payment on a house or whatever uh i know thomas uh who we've had on this podcast before
thomas elliott uh did that thing in australia yeah and he said it was fucking awesome it was
how he got started uh with a lot of things including uh funding his own board game making uh business
six pence games yes yeah so i'd recommend looking at that and i also helped uh kick start his
book the translation of the enchiridion um it's a human translatable human trend the modern human
translated version of uh was it um it's one of the greats at the curis yeah yeah yep yeah i like
wait hold on i got to hear the rest of the this cliffhangers there's still an option you said
i'm sure it's not right now because of covet uh i don't know if it will be again afterwards
uh so that would be great to look into but uh one of the things that this brings up is
is finding areas uh where people really need people to come work because there aren't a lot
of people there are things like this in the us they will pay you extra to go out to remote areas
being a teacher in uh remote areas can often pay very well because no one wants to go teach there
yeah especially um english is the second language yep that's what i was going to mention is that i
know that there are programs that'll pay you to come out and live in vietnam or japan or whatever
to come teach english mm-hmm uh really any place where there's government resources being uh put
into propping up in industry is also a good place to go to look for jobs uh i it's kind of scummy
because you know the i don't like the government funneling money away from one place to another
place that they do you have examples of this well the the one that comes to mind immediately because
i do it is the government in the us props up home buying a lot which is why it's such a good idea to
buy uh places here and renovate them yeah because the amount of support government gives to the
homeowners here in the us is crazy i have been like i even though i'm doing the coding boot camp
now i'm kind of i was laughing a little earlier because you said it but like i'm kind of just
doing it so i have a thing to do right now like it's like i'm in school so not just i'm being
unimpulled but like one of the things i was thinking about was like uh kind of be cool to flip
houses yeah that's like one of those sort of like taking a risk thing where either like either it
works out or it doesn't and then you just like kind of are screwed and like take advantage of these
kind of programs i know someone who uh got into a boot uh coding boot camp and said specifically
you know they are in lots of high-tech companies they're looking for female programmers because
they want to get that ratio yeah well i could be the trans program exactly i think you feel
some sort of demographic yeah but the the they're trying to uh get that ratio closer to 50 50 and
so female programmers are just in greater demand in a lot of these companies and she was like i
think i can get a decent job uh pretty easily because of that so she went right for it i worked
with a couple recruiters uh at my last job and well they trained they i like to make the drug
that they made the ultimate recruiting decision and recruited themselves into programming um
so they wound up on my team over the my years there and uh they both said something similar where
like and it's just a you know sexism whatever all the the implications or whatever aside the
fact is that when they would sort resumes female resumes were on top right if you happen to belong
to some minority like non-english speaking yeah version of color disabled or queer and i think
it was easiest for them to do female because that was obvious in the name and so like they
didn't necessarily get like the you know when you apply for a job and it says check your race check
your whatever a lot of those don't get translated or don't get transferred to the recruiter themselves
but your actual resume does with your name and if your name is yeah but there's that that's um totally
a thing though where there's various like government programs you can look for um i remember when i was
actually looking into possibly getting a library masters i was like i wonder if there's like
financial programs that i could apply for like and there was the like single women grant or something
since i wasn't married and it was just like transition uh it was like those are like single
mothers but it was just single women in general uh i am trying to remember what it was but uh
but you don't have kids i think it was um like single women that were making under a certain
amount of money or something like that nice uh i did not end up applying for it but i recommend
i don't know if you if you can think of yeah some way to fund a thing or like some uh exemption like
that exemption is not really the word i want but and it really does depend on the industry there's
some that are trying to uh close perceived gaps and or actual gaps and uh you know there's others
that just don't give a fuck yeah this isn't i wasn't making any like actual advice on mine i was just
relating one anecdote that backed up what you said like if you're trying to get a construction job
that'll probably be and you're less likely to get one if you're uh of the female persuasion
yeah i mean uh that's probably true i guess um the female persuasion i don't know how these
gender words work anymore yeah if your name makes it sound like you were born with a vagina then
they won't pick you to fix roofs or something right yeah um oh my uh i had a friend who got
hired at GameStop and it was because they thought he was a girl oh really because um i think he
well he was it was trans but he had to apply under his legal name because he hadn't changed it legally
and like because he had a like stereotypically female name even though he had come in and like
intro like he had you know had a deep voice facial hair like like looked like a cis guy because he
transitioned early like fuck it um but like it handed his resume to the guy the guy i just forgot
or something and was just like oh like uh female name yeah like put a chick at the counter give
more like the gamer guys in here and then like they were like disappointed when he actually came in
and they're like it's like oh we thought like i don't know we thought i wanted to hire a girl
but like they already hired it so it was like just this really awkward he didn't like stay at that
job for very long because it's very awkward well plus like for someone to say i meant to hire someone
else is definitely a weird thing to hear on your starting day also i have a friend who worked at
GameStop she was or she is a girl um and she hated it apparently and she's everyone hates it she's
big into video games and i also thought that like oh it'd be fun to work at a video game store because
i like video games and i met her actually at the coding bootcamp who went to and she was like oh no
it's a fucking nightmare like it sucks all the fun out of it i'm like oh well that's good to know
because i wouldn't expect that well it's not like you get to play the video games for your job it's
just another shitty retail job but it's your job to you know maybe spend categorize them and then
like talk them up to people yeah you know be like hi i played that one it was whatever and yeah you
get to read the the reviews of whatever demon souls remake and talk to the oh do you get an
employee discount probably yeah but also i lost all my my enjoyment of GameStop when they stayed
open way late into the pandemic so that they could sell doom and animal crossing in stores yeah
yeah it's i don't know i i've i've often heard do what you love for a living but i've also heard
never ever try to make what you love into a job because then you won't love it anymore yeah i mean
do it for the love when i and if you get paid for it cool right that's how i that's how i treat
you know the podcast and the writing exactly you don't get paid very much but you get paid
something and i do it not for the money but because i love doing it right it um is worth noting i think
that like you might find out that you don't actually love the thing you loved like uh working in the
games industry i like you know started out like designing levels and coming up with game design
documents and then like eventually by the end i was social media manager and doing analytics um like
search engine optimization and like it was just all marketing bs and i was not into it anymore
they just needed somebody to do those things and you know that's the downside to being the person
of like give me more tasks i want to learn anything like oh you want to learn how to do like
social media management and i was like nah really like well we really need someone to do okay
and they're like oh well jace is really good at that so like you know that oh you can make
it and i was like no you say yes to things yeah don't don't say yes to things that you know you'll
hate or like that you suspect you'll hate but like also um yeah kind of your sort of your goals
might change every time you might start out just looking to do get a job that'll make money and
realize like oh actually you know i'm more motivated for helping people or learning stuff i also
totally want to walk back what i just said i would not do this podcast if i was not getting paid for
it so yeah i mean i'm saying that with a smirk nope it's totally true working in the games industry
like i was i was not playing video games when i came home like and i loved video games and it was
like actually kind of this wake-up call of like oh sometimes doing what you love can wreck your love
of the thing my brother worked for a few months ish at a donut place and it was like you make you
make all the donuts at night and then they sell them all first thing in the morning and now he
doesn't like donuts yep yeah and it's like yeah it ruins donuts for him and donuts are a treasure
so that's i think maybe it's been enough time where you can enjoy them again but for years he was
like oh no fuck that i'm i'm good um yeah i think seeing how the sausage is made uh can take some of
the the energy out of something that you might otherwise enjoy especially to i mean i'm trying
to think like you know you mentioned um carpentry and stuff and i was like oh you know make a beautiful
table that's different than pumping out a dozen tables a day for a job right and so like if you
did that then like you don't want to go home and work on your your uh your product your table project
that you've been working on for the last few months like no i just spent my whole day you know covered
in sawdust and and like you know doing all this shit like now i hate doing it so but that people's
mileage varies there probably yeah my dad comes home and just continues building stuff like my
childhood home he built it and then like it's it was kind of hilarious by the time like my parents
you know all their kids moved out they finally sold it but it was just like excessively large and
my dad just like built like a tiki hut in the back and then he put it in ground pool and then he
put like a a waterfall like he just like couldn't stop adding stuff and it was kind of that it was
like all this stuff to manage uh yeah anyway that's let's see what else um we talked about yeah we
talked about optimal income back doors 80 000 hours uh and yeah i just want to like i didn't
actually say this directly but i want to like reiterate um google has its own like job search
feature where they'll just scrape from indeed a monster and all that so i always just google now
like clinical research jobs near me and it'll just brighten the you know search results like
populate you know some links to the the different postings that are on those sites so that's a handy
to trick if you're looking for a job and um if you don't know what you want to do and want to explore
more jobs uh try like googling things you're interested in or just look for like jobs near
me entry level and maybe like paid training um or for uh training included you know um think
you're like think around with the search results and like maybe just uh just throw an application
out a bunch of things and try it out for a bit you can quit and it's like much less stigmatized
now that was one of the things that i uh kind of was frustrated at my i like i went to clinical
research fast track which is the bootcamp i recommend them a lot like the education was
really high quality but um i remember that the director at the time uh one of her like advice
to students thing what was uh like even if okay you're gonna land your first job maybe it won't
be a great job maybe the people kind of suck like you know maybe they like maybe it doesn't pay great
but like stick with it for a few years just like grate your teeth and stick with so you can like
you know put it on a resume and then you won't be one of those like people that are just like
wishy washy jumping job jumping and i was just like oh no as soon as i heard that okay boomer but
yeah that i was like oh she's like my parents age so that's like i think just like most industries
know that that's not how the world works anymore and they've like you know they're taking advantage
of it you might as well yeah get a job if you hate it leave go get another one yeah i think that's
that's a mindset mentality that's switched with our generation that like the idea of gritting your
teeth for a few years is a complete fuck you it's like no why would i hate my life for seven years
when i could go do something else exactly and like unless you know that's what you're doing on purpose
like oh yeah this is going to take me 10 years to get to where i'm you know planning to end up then
you know that's different then you're gritting your teeth for a known end not just because
you feel like you need to for five or six years like that's that's terrible um i uh i can't imagine
um well actually now i can't imagine what point i was trying to make there other than i think that's
a generational shift that i'm in favor of like don't be deliberately unhappy of if you can avoid it
well then you're not being deliberately unhappy right yeah so unless a fan of the like the companies
aren't going to try to support your career anymore because people know that like like the the businesses
know that that's not like how the market works anymore so they can just you know shuffle you
know they can hire they can over hire and then lay off if they need to uh they can not promote people
well that's why you gotta move around a lot yeah but that's why you gotta you know it's it's not like
they're not going to take it personally and if they do don't work for them uh i do find it weird
how sometimes people like get attached to their jobs i don't know if i'm like an unfeeling monster
or something but at my last job i'd been there for six years and then i got laid off and uh like i
knew was coming my my company had been laying off people every uh december for i think four years
that like period i went through that so many times with the games industry because that's
just part of part and parcel but that like period where you know the layoffs are coming but you're
still like you know clocking in every day it was always when's it gonna be me when's it gonna be me
yeah but uh when i got laid off i was like okay cool i can you know go right full time now for a
while while i'm on unemployment and uh my boss when she called me in to tell me like was crying
out of like just frustration and anger and she was she was upset that i was getting laid off and i
was like oh my god it's it's a job like i i don't care about you that much i certainly didn't
yeah have emotional i didn't have emotional attachment to this job every single one of you
i'm gonna miss this potted plant it must be different in the situation where you're saying i'm
sorry i'm taking away your livelihood you know that for for her being upset that's just her not
being an unfeeling monster she was just telling me that upper management was you know but she's
delivering the news i guess yeah it sucks to be the one delivering people to get laid off and they
like cry and they get upset and i'm like what what did you expect it's a company it's a profit
maximizing endeavor when you are no longer maximizing profit they will fix that those people probably
are thinking that it's the previous um paradigm where like the companies did companies did used
to look out for their people but like i don't know if i like that it's a big thing in japan uh yeah
different cultures too but i'm kind of like going back and forth between like yeah the the um
the way it is now is like more efficient i guess it like improves capitalism it like makes individual
people's lives a bit crappier though and then like but it's like is it is it really good to keep
somebody around because of loyalty i mean i guess like it's not a reliability and like knowing this
person and their capabilities i guess could be good but like but then it could also you know
incentivize people that just keep they just stay in the company everybody knows this person you
know who's like in some upper management position and they suck at their job and the only reason
they're still there is because they've been there for so long that you can't fire them oh and you
know it also means that companies lose a lot of human capital because their employees are changing
every two to three years yeah and then that means they got to retrain people and they lose that
institutional knowledge that that person had on the other hand that can be a good thing too you
drew out drawing new blood you shake things up but it also comes with costs like when i leave my
position i i know that my uh my company's gonna be kind of fucked because they they have a hard
time hiring people especially right now in denver accountants are just hard to find really yeah
weird you feel like a lot of people my age we're going into accounting because they had all read
the same books that said that that was going to be a big growth error okay i think they were wrong
because nobody really accounted for like internet uh what accounted for was that a pun or i guess
no one did the accounting yeah okay i'm i'm trying to remember i mean i still get twice a month
emails from recruiters being like hey you want to go to this other accounting job i'm like no
no not for a long time now they just wait they just find you yeah well because you know they're
like oh here is someone who is working at an accounting position let's see if we can poach him
to these kinds of hours yeah that's i guess um career hack is you can like find recruiters and
be like hey do you want to recruit me for things uh they they i found that some recruiters do like
kind of want to work as your advocate um so in some words it's desperate to land you in a position
but that means that you got a job their job is to like get jobs for other people so yeah or like
you know if you're in school there's career counselors that can help you too um but the
career counselors don't get a paycheck every time they find someone a career whereas the recruiters
do yeah uh resources um i'm right on that steam uh i think we should maybe we could revisit it
sometime but i think i oh yeah one final thing um so uh i have a friend who wanted to work at miri
and she was just you know she did the thing of uh contacting like you know went to the bay um
just socialized a lot found people that knew people that knew people and uh was eventually
able to like find somebody who worked there in order to ask like hey what do i what do i need
in order to work at miri and uh this is someone who i think she did not go to college or like
do well at school um due to like depression issues or like life things but they're like okay you need
like this level math you should be able to do x y and z she was like cool all right and then just
did it just or it's still in the process of like okay uh now i'm gonna go back through you know
college math back to this like higher level math now okay and then like you know i'm at this level
in programming now so like you can check that one out just you know like got a spreadsheet and just
like systematically is like okay learn that thing learn that thing learn that thing so like you could
also shoot for the moon for like whatever your dream job is or whatever really prestigious thing
you want to do help with and and just do the research figure out what it takes like steven
was saying earlier about like yeah what does it take to be a private investigator i mean like
that seems like a cool movie job it's a cool like even if like the actual reality of it turned
out that it wasn't that great that like being able to tell people that you're a private investigator
is pretty sweet man but your point's taken um or it looks cool on a resume or whatever you know
i don't put it on my resume but but i hear what you're saying like in general yeah i think the
only piece about your your friend's story that i think is cautionary is i wouldn't move out to the
part of the country that your job is in unless you have something lined up for it like i feel like
she may have just been able to spam everyone who worked there with an email saying how do i get a
job there from the safety and comfort of where she's already lived without having to live in the
bay area i don't know it's not the same as meeting yeah face-to-face interactions but just if you're
asking just what it takes to get the job yeah well um but she had to like figure out how to get in
touch with one of the people that worked there in order to ask the question that's why everyone who
wants to act has to move out to the hollywood you really got to be where the where the action
is happening where the people are yeah um what what what's next what's what's on our uh do we have
anything else any feedback or do you want a thing just in time for the holidays oh yes uh
silly us gifts to get somebody yes so i mentioned before that jace made our beautiful uh basing
conspiracy logo we now have one of those internet store things where you can buy stuff that has our
logo on it uh things like um what is it coffee mug mouse pads for people who still use mouse pads i
don't know i use a mouse pad do you yeah i've got an optical mouse it kind of needs a pad to see what
it's doing i also have a glass desk i was gonna say i've got a glass desk all right yeah i found
optical mice work perfectly on everything except i guess reflective surfaces uh phone cases yes
that's right phone cases technically t-shirts i personally do not advocate anyone buy clothes
that they can't try on first because cuts are you know important and you got to see what they look
like but if you would like to buy a t-shirt anyway or a hoodie or something with our logo on it you
can do that and stickers and stickers yes lots of stickers um the it's maybe the first time i put a
sticker on my car yeah maybe i don't know there's there's a whole load of options for things that
you can buy that have our logo on them and uh we get a cut of you know anything that you purchase
because otherwise why would we do this i know we got cut i thought i when you you showed us this
like a month ago and i was like oh that's cool i thought it was just a service that somebody did
for us i didn't know we got no no with a small part of that goes into our bank account and then we
get that you know at the end of the year oh well that's interesting i'm buying a phone case and i
didn't know that i was somehow putting a quarter of a dollar back in my own pocket but whatever um
yeah the um i have no idea what the ratio is on that but we'll have a link to that on the
episode description and i'm assuming on the website prominently displayed somewhere at this point
oh uh yes i will do that all right perfect we'll well yeah we'll find somewhere to put it
on the website as well link to the store yeah hey now i feel like i need to make more graphics
or maybe this will finally motivate me to make more graphics if you want to that'd be cool
i love the one we have but and at this point it's iconic that's true yeah okay cool all right we
should uh who's our patron for this episode our patron do we remember whose turn it is i'm gonna
give it to you because i we're not keeping track we'll start doing that okay our patron this week
is beth smith thank you yes thank you beth smith because of you uh we are having slightly better
careers in the podcasting world is that it you know it's not it's not about that it's about uh the
the support again it's about us getting to do this thing we like yeah and it's nice to know that
people you know uh another people enjoy it enough to to be willing to pay for it yeah i have a hard
time just saying that every time but it does it always makes me happy to i don't know see that
now you know the other thing that this has always done for me too is i now donate more to patreon
stuff of things that i enjoy um the second i open that we opened up our own and like oh yeah why aren't
i giving financial support to uh derrick bannis that you know makes a coding tutorials on youtube
why don't i give bingy with babish money every month like i love watching his shows and they come
out so um my life is measurably improved by these things and i'm willing to you know give a little
bit of money for for that because that's time that people aren't pursuing their careers and hacking
them exactly i basically give like to um give well or like individual creators like i i don't
know it's just i like to either be i like to either be giving to the most effective charity or like
specifically to a person who made a thing that i like yeah that's kind of cool because like you
know if you're a writer you get and and you're going the traditional publishing route uh that's
not accessible to everybody um and also like by the time you get your royalties like everybody
along in the process has taken a chunk out of it whereas if you are a writer supported by patreon
you get all that money except for the amount patreon takes yes uh but that's not as much as
how much the publishing industry take yeah but hey that's another career hack uh do something cool
make a patreon although i don't know because a lot of a lot of patrons i think don't really pay
enough to be like your full-time thing but at least you can support somebody's like side thing that
might eventually turn into an outside thing yeah i think almost none of them pays enough yeah the
super majority probably doesn't pay enough to pay your pay your bills on but it pays enough to
keep you in some device to keep going yeah and you know if it off all it does is pay your cable
bill that's you know more than nothing and i will say there have been some weeks where i've been like
oh god i just i don't want to do it let's call it off but you know having that financial incentive
really helps as well oh good well if you're if you know your friendship and camaraderie to us
isn't enough i'm glad i'll screw you guys all right well that's it for this one we have a
couple of fun episodes lined up but i'm not sure which one's coming up next so just stay tuned
knowing that i'm excited about at least if it's not the next two it'll be the next three or four
if we've been contacted by some people that i'm excited to do episodes with so yeah hold on to
your seats they should be fun excellent all right thanks everyone and have a great uh no
thanksgiving's ready over happy holidays there we go there it is bye
you
