In the previous lecture, we learned about mutual funds, and I talked about how these
products are the perfect starter investment.
You might think then that our basic set of essential investments is complete, stocks,
bonds, and mutual funds.
But wait, there's one more investment that you really need to be familiar with.
It's a relative newcomer to the world of investing, and you may not even know it exists.
Or you may have mistaken this investment for an ordinary mutual fund.
But even though this investment does share some of the features of mutual funds, it's
a different character altogether.
The general name of this investment is an exchange traded fund, but people mostly call
them by its initials, ETF.
To give you some idea of how different ETFs are from mutual funds, consider one of the
largest ETFs.
Its ticker symbol is GLD, which as you might guess, stands for gold.
For the price of a share in this fund, which is only a fraction of the price of an ounce
of gold, the average investor can invest in gold bullion without any of the hassles of
storage or the big transaction costs and commissions associated with buying gold coins
or bars.
If you remember my previous lecture, where I discussed the regulations on mutual fund
portfolios, you'll realize that there is no way a standard open-end mutual fund can invest
in gold bullion.
So ETFs really are quite different from open-end mutual funds.
And people like these differences, judging by the incredible rise in their popularity
over the years.
The first ETF was introduced in 1993, and this type of investment has grown at an astonishing
rate since then.
Here's a chart that I made that shows the total assets held by ETFs from 1995 through
2010.
Notice that ETFs come from out of nowhere, just a billion dollars in 1995, and by 2010
they're just a hair short of one trillion dollars in total assets.
That makes them the second largest type of pooled investment after open-end mutual funds.
There are about a thousand different ETFs in the market these days, investing in stocks,
bonds, commodities, currencies, and even futures contracts.
And there are lots more to come.
Some people think that eventually ETFs will overtake standard open-end mutual funds as
the most popular pooled investment.
Now, I'm not sure about when that would happen, if ever, but one thing I do know is that there
are some very good reasons for investing in ETFs in addition to, or even in place of,
other instruments like mutual funds.
In this lecture, we'll learn about exactly how ETFs differ from mutual funds, and we'll
see how that gives them certain advantages over other investments.
We'll see that ETFs are especially attractive to investors who are making taxable investments
and to investors who are looking for a broader set of investment opportunities than they
can find in standard mutual funds.
Of course, ETFs also come with a different set of potential risks, and we'll learn about
what those are as well.
But by the end of the lecture, you may find yourself agreeing that ETFs are part of your
investing future.
Now as the name suggests, exchange-traded funds combine some of the features of mutual funds
with some of the features of individual stocks.
The main feature they take from stocks is being listed and traded on an exchange.
To understand how ETFs work, I should start by telling you about a related instrument
called a depository receipt.
Depository receipts have been around for a long time, and until ETFs were created, the
most common use for depository receipts was in trading shares of foreign stocks.
The structure of a depository receipt is simple, and it basically works like its name suggests.
Somebody deposits an asset, like a share of stock in the Japanese company Canon Incorporated,
into a specialized bank that offers depository services.
The asset stays in the depository, but the bank issues receipts, documents proving the
ownership of these assets, to the original depositor of the assets.
The depositor can hold the receipts, of course, but the real reason to make this transaction
is for the depositor to sell these receipts to other investors.
Whoever holds the receipts, of course, are the legal owners of the assets.
So the depository receipts look and feel just like shares of stock, and they're traded
just like stocks.
Depository receipts are listed on stock exchanges, and you can buy, hold, and trade them in the
same ways that I described in my previous lecture on stocks.
Why do investors go through all this?
Well depository receipts are convenient for a couple of reasons.
One is that they're priced in local currency.
In our example, the Canon shares are actually priced in yen, the currency used in Japan
where the shares are issued.
But the depository receipts are going to be traded in the US, so they'll be priced in
US dollars.
That's much easier to deal with.
So depository receipts make it easy to trade foreign assets outside their home country.
The other convenient feature of depository receipts is that they can divide up the value
of the deposited asset any way that the original depositor wishes.
This enables the depositor to choose a size for the depository receipt that will make
it very attractive to small investors.
For example, let's go back to our gold ETF example.
Did you know that the standard size of a bar of gold bullion is a petite 400 ounces?
And with gold priced in the multiple hundreds of dollars per ounce, a single bar is pretty
expensive.
But suppose I take a 400 ounce gold bar and put it in a depository and have the depository
issue receipts that are each good for one tenth of an ounce of gold.
Now I have 4,000 depository receipts that individual investors can afford and they'll
want to buy these depository receipts from me instead of having to go through the hassle
and expense of seeing a coin dealer and storing the gold themselves.
So depository receipts are a great way to convert a foreign asset or a very expensive
asset into a form that is convenient and attractive for trading by all investors, even individuals.
Back in the early 1990s, executives at the American Stock Exchange made that connection
and basically created an investment company that issued depository receipts against the
S&P 500 index.
The investment company literally bought multiple sets of all 500 shares that make up the index,
placed them in a depository, and then issued depository receipts against these shares.
This was simply called Standard and Poor's depository receipts.
The ticker symbol used was SPY, but the acronym based on the initials was SPDR, so the investment
came to be known as SPYTERS.
Well, the SPYTERS took off immediately, and in finance, whenever somebody has a successful
idea, it's almost immediately copied.
So the race to create ETFs was on.
My favorite imitation was the creation of ETFs that held foreign stock indexes.
These were called World Equity Benchmark Shares, or WEBS for short.
So first came the SPYTERS, and then came the WEBS.
Now the first generation of ETFs, and the vast majority of ETFs that exist today, are
still investment companies registered with the SEC under the same law that governs the
operation of open-end mutual funds.
ETFs get a special exemption from the SEC that allows them as investment companies to
issue depository receipts.
The SEC granted this exemption, but imposed an additional condition on ETFs, that they
could only offer passively managed index products.
This restriction remained in place until 2008.
Actively managed exchange traded funds have been in the market ever since that time.
They potentially offer the best of both the mutual funds and the stock worlds.
On the one hand, you get the possibility of buying shares in a diversified fund run by
an expert asset manager who may generate above market returns.
But you can also trade your shares in this fund at any time, just like a stock.
The details of actively managed ETFs are a bit trickier, because the fund's assets
may be changing at the exact time you're selling shares or buying shares in the fund.
This requires some extra caution and effort on the part of investors to make sure that
they know what's actually in the fund, especially when they're about to buy shares.
Over the years, as people have become more creative with ETFs and the SEC has also become
more comfortable with them as well, new types of ETFs have been created that are not actually
investment companies.
For example, all the ETFs that hold physical commodities are not technically investment
companies and are not regulated under the Investment Company Act of 1940.
But they are still regulated by the SEC under its other main law, the Securities Exchange
Act of 1933.
In addition, some ETFs also invest in futures contracts of various kinds.
These ETFs are actually regulated by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, or CFTC.
All ETFs that are available to individual investors are regulated and in ways that try to protect
the interests of individual investors.
That's the good news.
The only bad news is that the regulations that ETFs must follow do differ depending on what
they hold.
I'll come back to a few of the most important differences later on.
So what's the main source of attraction to ETFs relative to mutual funds?
Well, I've mentioned it already, trading.
You probably remember from the previous lecture that you can only buy or sell mutual funds
one time per day, generally at 4pm Eastern Time.
But ETFs can be traded anytime the markets are open, which you may have realized is all
the time.
In addition to the standard opening hours of major exchanges, there's a thriving after-hours
trading market on the internet that never closes.
This ability to trade ETFs at any time comes as a big relief to some investors who worry
about being locked into once-a-day trading of mutual funds.
For example, suppose you get news early in the morning that may disturb the markets like
the outbreak of a war or a market crash in the Shanghai Exchange overnight.
If you're holding mutual funds, you can place your order to sell shares in your funds, but
you'll get the 4pm price, which will probably fully reflect the bad news.
On the other hand, if you're holding ETFs, you may be able to sell your shares before
the bad news drives their price down by nearly as much.
Of course, this example presumes that you can time the market, and a lot of people think
they can.
An even bigger reason to like the flexible trading of ETFs, though, is taxes.
Don't get your hopes up, I'm not saying that ETFs are tax-free.
But I am saying that ETFs give you much more flexibility when it comes to incurring taxable
income or capital gains.
The context of this discussion is someone who is investing outside of a tax-deferred
saving plan like a 401k, IRA, 529 college savings plan, or other similar plan.
Those plans aren't affected by the tax issues I'll discuss next.
I'm talking about someone who holds additional savings in taxable accounts.
For example, if you max out your tax-deferred savings options and still want to save even
more, and believe me, you do, then you'll have to pay taxes on income and capital gains
from these savings, even if they're held in bank accounts.
You may be familiar with the U.S. tax code, which taxes the capital gains that investors
make on their investments.
A short-term capital gain is a trading profit that you make on an investment that you've
held for one year or less.
Short-term capital gains are taxed as ordinary income, so your rate depends on your marginal
tax bracket.
On the other hand, long-term capital gains are trading profits you make on investments
you've held for longer than one year.
Long-term capital gains are taxed at a rate that is generally much lower than the income
tax rate.
Since you choose when you're going to sell an ETF, you get to determine whether you
make a short-term capital gain or a long-term capital gain.
For example, if your ETF shares have gone up 10% after 10 months, then you can sell
the ETF shares now and have a 10% short-term capital gain.
But you could hold the ETF for two more months and try to realize a long-term capital gain.
Even if the share price falls a little, because of the lower tax rate on long-term capital
gains, you may still come out ahead by waiting.
The other aspect is that you can choose which year you want to realize any capital gains
on your ETF shares.
Again, for example, suppose you're holding an ETF that you've held for, say, 10 years
and the share prices have doubled during that time.
You know that you'll pay a long-term capital gain when you sell the shares, but you may
want to realize that capital gain in a year when it's convenient for you.
What many investors do, actually, is try to liquidate some of their winning positions
when they also have some losing positions that they want to get rid of.
The tax code allows investors to use the losses on some investments to offset the capital
gains on others so that they can reduce their overall tax bill using the strategy.
But you have to have the flexibility to choose when to sell shares and realize those gains
and losses.
The reason why I'm going into these details is because I'm going to contrast the tax flexibility
of ETFs with the tax inflexibility of open-end mutual funds.
A lot of investors don't realize this, but if you hold open-end mutual funds as a taxable
investment, you will almost certainly owe capital gains taxes, courtesy of your mutual
fund manager.
Those open-end mutual fund companies don't pay taxes, which is good because it keeps
expenses low.
But the reason why they don't pay taxes is that they pass all the dividend income and
capital gains onto the investors.
So every year, the mutual fund managers have to look over all their trades and calculate
the capital gains and losses on them.
They have to calculate the dividends, too, by the way.
The mutual fund manager divides up the total capital gain over all the shares and reports
the capital gain on your shares to the IRS.
So if you hold mutual funds in a taxable account, you'll get a notice about the capital gains
on your mutual fund shares and you'll owe the capital gains taxes on them.
And to make matters worse, it can actually be the case that your mutual fund loses value
during the year and you still have to pay capital gains taxes.
This happens when the market value of the assets held in the mutual fund falls from
one year to the next, but the mutual fund manager has sold some of the assets in the
fund for more than he or she originally paid for them.
In the eyes of the tax authority, your losses exist only on paper, but your gains are real.
Of course, that's not how we see it when we get our statements from the mutual fund.
This of course is one of the nasty surprises that mutual fund investors hate the most.
Imagine that you have to sell your mutual fund shares at a loss and then you get a capital
gains tax bill on top of that the next April.
Talk about adding insult to injury.
As a note, if you're going to hold open-end mutual funds in a taxable account, you need
to pay attention to the turnover rate of the mutual funds you're considering.
The turnover rate is the fraction of the total value of the mutual fund that the portfolio
manager trades or turns over during the year.
The higher the turnover rate, the more capital gains the shares are likely to report at the
end of the year.
So if you do hold open-end mutual funds, try to look for funds with lower turnover rates,
all else equal.
You can find this information, by the way, right after the fee tables in the summary
prospectus.
Ah, yet another reason to read that prospectus.
Well now you can see the reason why I've gone into all this tax information.
There's a big difference between mutual funds and ETFs in terms of when you have to pay
capital gains taxes.
Because of the flexibility that ETFs offer, people say that ETFs are tax efficient relative
to open-end mutual funds.
Now again, keep in mind that this tax efficiency doesn't matter at all if we're talking about
tax deferred investments like IRAs and 401Ks.
In these cases, you don't pay any taxes until you withdraw money so there's really no tax
difference between having an open-end mutual fund or an ETF in your IRA.
This difference only matters if you're investing outside of one of these plans.
Another advantage of ETFs over mutual funds is that they generally have lower expenses
and higher returns than identical mutual funds would.
First, the lower expenses.
ETFs pay far fewer brokerage fees than mutual funds because technically the ETF isn't buying
the assets that get put in the depository, some wealthy investor is.
Also, ETFs don't have to deal with individual investors like mutual funds do.
Mutual fund companies have to maintain individual accounts for their shareholders, but people
hold ETF shares in their brokerage accounts.
So there's no need for record keeping or account maintenance for ETFs.
That also cuts down on expenses.
Now turning to returns, the returns on ETFs are influenced by the fact that they don't
have to redeem shares.
Mutual funds always have to have some amount of cash on hand so they can cash out investors
who want to redeem their shares on any given day.
They try to minimize the amount that they need, but holding cash necessarily delivers
a lower expected return than the rest of the assets the mutual fund holds.
By contrast, ETFs don't redeem shares.
You cash out your ETF shares by selling them to another investor at their current market
price just as you would a share of stock.
A final advantage of ETFs, which I've already hinted at a couple of times, is that ETFs
invest where open-end mutual funds either can't go or don't go in as much depth.
For example, commodity ETFs are some of the larger ETFs out there.
In fact, the ETF that goes by the ticker symbol GLD, which refers to the SPDR gold trust,
has on occasion been the largest ETF by asset value, even larger than the largest S&P 500
ETFs.
Also, because ETFs were limited to indexes for the first 15 years of their existence,
they specialized in global, regional, and even country-by-country indexes.
ETFs generally offer more opportunities to invest in foreign stock indexes than mutual
funds do.
So there are several big reasons behind the surge in popularity of ETFs among many investors,
and it's hard to deny that ETFs bring something to the table that's different from stocks,
bonds, and open-end mutual funds.
Of course, ETFs aren't perfect.
They have their own set of tricky issues and potential problems that you need to be aware
of.
As you've probably figured out by now, there is no such thing as a one-size-fits-all investment
or investment plan.
You may well believe that ETFs suit your needs better than any other investments, despite
these costs and problems, and you're willing to put up with the shortcomings of ETFs in
order to take advantage of their benefits.
Other people will disagree and choose a mutual fund substitute or something else altogether
for their investment portfolios.
The first potential drawback of the ETF is trading costs.
Although you're free to trade ETFs at any time you like, trading itself isn't free.
You'll have to pay commissions, similar to those you pay for trading stocks.
And the more you trade, the more these commissions will pile up and lower your all-in return
from investing in ETFs.
Everyone has to find some happy medium between not trading at all and trading too much.
But if behavioral economics is any indication, it's hard to strike that balance than you
might think.
You may either put too much weight on the trading commission and trade too seldom or ignore
the trading commission and trade too much.
This is one of those places where you really need to have an investment plan in place and
stick with it.
The next potential drawback of ETFs is their pricing.
Remember that ETFs represent a particular pool of assets that's held by some depository.
We know that the price of each ETF share should reflect the market value of that underlying
pool of assets.
For example, if we're trading a gold ETF where one share represents one tenth of one
ounce of gold, then the price of each ETF share should be very close to one tenth of
the market price of an ounce of gold.
But how is this correspondence between the price of the ETF and the market price of the
underlying assets enforced?
Well the answer is every financial economist's favorite concept, arbitrage.
Although the price of a depository receipt could differ from the market value of the
underlying assets, arbitrage should drive the prices together.
For example, consider an ETF that invests in an inequity index made up of the so-called
BRIC country stocks, that is the stocks of Brazil, Russia, India, and China.
If there's a sudden surge of demand for ETF shares in this BRIC equity index, then the
demand could temporarily outstrip supply sending the price of the ETF shares up, and the price
of the ETF shares could actually rise above the index value.
But if this happens, then the process of arbitrage should come to the rescue in a hurry.
Other traders would notice that the ETF shares are more expensive than the index shares,
and they'd step into the market.
What they'd do would be to buy up the shares of the stocks that make up the BRIC index,
deposit these shares with the ETF depository, and then take the depository receipts from
the depository and sell them to the ETF investors.
This would do two things.
First, this increase in demand for the shares would drive up the prices of the shares in
the BRIC index, sending the BRIC index up in value.
And second, this increase in supply of the depository receipts, or ETF shares, would
make the price of the ETF shares decline.
Ideally, the prices of both the underlying stock shares and the ETF shares would change
quickly and enable them to meet in the middle where the prices would agree again.
This process is actually a very common one in financial markets, and it's one that traders
rely on daily.
For example, there's a very strong arbitrage between the shares of the S&P 500 index and
the S&P 500 index futures contract, which is traded in Chicago's so-called PITs or
commodity exchanges.
Traders called index arbitrageurs, or index ARBs for short, simply watch the markets for
significant gaps to open up between the S&P 500 index and the futures contract based on
the S&P 500.
Whenever a significant gap opens up, they do what ARBs always do.
They buy whichever asset is cheaper and sell whichever asset is more expensive until the
gap goes away.
The trading keeps the two markets, which otherwise have absolutely nothing to do with each other,
in sync.
In fact, part of what caused the great stock market crash of 1987, which I mentioned in
my first lecture, is that these two markets became disconnected because of computer problems.
The reason I bring up the crash of 1987 is to point out that even though the process
of arbitrage generally works very well in financial markets, occasionally it will fail
and allow the price of the ETF shares to differ significantly from the value of the underlying
assets held in the depository.
That means you run the risk of selling for less than full value when it comes time to
sell or buying for more than full value when you buy.
You'll have to expend a little more effort to make sure that the ETF shares are close
to their true market value when you buy or sell.
For an open-end mutual fund, of course, this is not an issue, since they only buy and sell
shares at the net asset value, which is based on the fair market value of their holdings.
The next potential disadvantage of ETFs is leverage.
This is a case where too much choice might not be such a good thing.
We learned in the previous lecture that the SEC doesn't allow open-end mutual funds to
take on much leverage at all, but it does allow ETFs to use derivatives to effectively
leverage up their portfolios through a process of financial engineering.
ETFs that pursue this investment strategy usually promise to deliver twice or even three
times the gain on some underlying index like the Dow.
Of course, they can also deliver two or three times the losses.
Fortunately, these ETFs always identify themselves as leveraged ETFs.
In addition, ETFs are required to reveal the entire list of assets that they hold on a
daily basis so you can see whether they are in fact using financial engineering.
One of the best indications to me that beginning investors should stay away from leveraged
ETFs is that experienced investors can't agree over the best way to use them.
Some believe that they're really only a tool for sophisticated day traders, while others
maintain that they can also be good at investments if held for longer periods like months.
So far, though, nothing I've seen has leveraged ETFs as being a good long-term buy-and-hold
investment.
One final potential disadvantage of ETFs is actually taxes, depending on the type of
ETF that you buy.
Although it's true that most ETFs will be more tax-efficient than mutual funds, ETFs
that hold alternative investments, such as commodities, still have tax issues.
Specifically, capital gains on commodities are taxed at a higher rate than other securities,
and this applies to commodity ETFs as well.
In addition, if you invest in an ETF that uses derivatives, 40% of capital gains will
be taxed at the short-term capital gains rate.
This can also be an issue for commodity ETFs because many commodity ETFs invest in futures
contracts rather than the actual commodity.
So if you want to invest in an alternative asset ETF, that is, one that doesn't invest
in stocks or bonds, then you should definitely seek some advice about the tax consequences
first.
Well, that's a fairly complete rundown of all that ETFs have to offer, and the main
things to watch out for.
If you didn't know about ETFs before this lecture, then hopefully you've learned a
relatively new investment that could have a role to play in your portfolio.
If you already knew about ETFs, then hopefully you learned more about how they work and what
are their strengths and weaknesses.
In my opinion, ETFs definitely have a place in your portfolio, if you're going to be
making taxable investments.
As I mentioned earlier, if you haven't maxed out your allowances for tax-deferred investing,
especially if your employer matches your contributions, then you should do that first.
But if you do that and still wish to invest, then ETFs may make a lot of sense for your
portfolio.
The low cost and tax efficiency of ETFs, especially the broad index ETFs, make them great candidates
for long-term buy-and-hold investments.
If you do plan to include ETFs as part of your overall portfolio, then you may have some
tough decisions to make about what assets to hold in your tax-advantaged savings plans
and what assets to hold in taxable accounts.
The answer is going to depend, in part, on the specific menu of investments available
to you in your tax-deferred or tax-advantaged savings plans.
This is one of those places where a financial planner who can sit down with you and look
over the details of the investment options you have in your 401k can really help you
make better decisions.
Well, overall, ETFs are another case that shows how financial innovation that adds real
value for investors becomes a permanent part of the financial landscape.
I expect that in the not too distant future, ETFs will be mentioned in the same breath
as stocks, bonds, and mutual funds when we give a list of all the standard investments
we expect everyone to own, or at least know about.
Of course, having one more type of investment to choose from isn't necessarily great news
if you're already overwhelmed by the choices out there.
Fortunately, in the next lecture, I'm going to start discussing issues that ought to help
you narrow down your search.
