In this lecture, we're going to move on to some advanced topics in investing.
We've just finished learning about the basics about the four instruments that every investor
should consider, stocks, bonds, mutual funds, and ETFs.
Now we're going to move on to the next step.
We're going to learn some ideas and skills that can help you choose the best investments
for you from among the thousands of options out there.
I'm going to follow the same general order that I did when I introduced the four main
investments.
So again, I'll start with stocks.
If you want to pick your own stocks, then you'll need a stock pickers toolkit.
The next three lectures are going to build up a standard set of tools that make up the
core of every stock analyst toolbox.
Even though I'm calling this a stock picking toolkit, the ideas and techniques I'm going
to discuss will be useful for analyzing just about every possible investment.
This is certainly true of the stock picking tool we'll learn about in this lecture, financial
statement analysis.
Although we tend to associate financial statement analysis with picking stocks, it's actually
just as important for bond investors.
And it doesn't really matter who's issuing the securities either.
Some debt investors do financial statement analysis on governments, and retail lenders
do financial statement analysis on households.
What do you think goes into your credit score?
Well, financial statement analysis, among other things.
Financial statement analysis is the practice of forming ratios and other statistics using
the numbers presented in a set of financial statements, that is, the firm's official accounts.
The idea is that although the numbers in a borrower's financial statements already
tell us a lot of good information, we can learn even more about a borrower's financial
condition and performance if we combine or compare these numbers in creative ways.
This information will hopefully give us a clearer picture of which firms are more attractive
investment opportunities.
So in this lecture, we're going to learn some basic financial statement analysis.
In order to do this, we'll have to first learn a little bit of accounting, mostly just
some definitions, but ones that are used all the time.
We'll also need to take a brief look at the overall structure of every company's financial
statements and learn what information is presented where.
Once we've done that, we'll learn some of the most important ratios and other statistics,
and I'll explain what these numbers are trying to tell us about the condition or performance
of the company.
As we learn about the ratios themselves, we'll also learn how to use these numbers when you
select stocks or bonds.
Beyond selecting investments, however, this information is also useful for gaining a better
understanding of your employer's financial condition and performance, which these days
is not a bad thing to know.
In addition, if you ever want to start your own business, you'll need to put together
a set of financial statements for your venture, as well as project the values of certain financial
ratios into the future.
Hopefully this lecture will help you understand financial statements so that this task doesn't
seem quite as daunting as it otherwise might.
The obvious place to start learning about financial statement analysis is a company's
financial statements.
The financial statements try to show a concise, yet complete picture of a company's finances.
They consist of four main parts, three different tables that correspond to the main financial
activities of the firm, plus a set of notes that explains a lot of the details that are
omitted from the three tables for the sake of brevity.
The three tables or statements are the income statement, the statement of cash flows, and
the balance sheet.
What I'm going to do next is to go through these tables or statements and discuss what
they tell investors.
I'll start with a financial statement containing the information that stock investors seem
to pay the most attention to, the income statement.
If you stop and think about what you'd most like to know about the financial condition
of a company, it's probably whether the company's making any money.
The income statement, also called the statement of earnings, or the statement of operations,
presents a detailed answer to that question.
It gives an overview of how much revenue the company brings in, how much it pays out as
various expenses, and then how much profit is left over, if any.
Now, because it's much easier to understand financial statements and financial statement
analysis with an example in front of you, I'm going to introduce my example now.
I'm going to work with the financial statements of the Campbell Soup company, which goes by
the stock ticker CPB.
I picked this company mainly because I've noticed that they always present a very simple
and clean set of financial statements, so they're great for people just starting to learn financial
statement analysis.
And besides, soup is good for you.
Well, actually, Campbell's has diversified his line of products well beyond canned soup,
so if you don't care for soup, then there are plenty of other snacks and prepared foods
to think about as well.
I suppose the first question is, where did I get this statement?
Well, I like to go right to the source, the company website, and look for links to company
information or investor relations.
Eventually, I find my way to the latest annual report, and the annual financial statements
are always in the annual report.
Now publicly traded companies are required to report their financial results quarterly,
so you can get more up-to-date information by viewing the quarterly financial statements,
and most companies these days do link to these on their websites as well.
But the SEC also has this data as part of their so-called Edgar database, and many financial
websites, including free ones, also post financial statements from publicly traded companies.
My only complaint about the financial websites is that they take the company's actual financial
statements and then move the information into a one-size-fits-all financial statement template.
After you get some experience looking at different company statements, you'll realize that there's
actually a lot of variation in how the information gets reported.
Unfortunately, when these financial websites translate the financial statements into their
templates, sometimes good information is lost in translation.
So let's have a look at Campbell's income statement, which they call a consolidated
statement of earnings.
Earnings is the finance word for profit, and as we'll see, the income statement shows
fairly clearly how Campbell's calculates its profits.
The top of the income statement is net sales, which is sales minus returns.
Other companies will just have a number for sales or even revenues.
Campbell's sold nearly $7.7 billion worth of products in 2010.
Then below the sales come all the expenses of running the company, including production
costs, marketing costs, R&D, and administrative expenses.
After we subtract those expenses, we have a rough statement of earnings, which goes by
two names.
One name is operating income, and the other is EBIT, which is an acronym that stands
for Earnings Before Interest and Taxes.
For Campbell's, this turned out to be about $1.3 billion.
You may have also heard of EBIT's cousin, EBITDA, which stands for Earnings Before
Interest, Taxes, Depreciation, and Amortization.
You'll notice that you don't see depreciation and amortization listed on the income statement,
and you'll have to find that somewhere else.
I'll tell you where in a little bit.
If we take EBIT and subtract off interest and then income taxes, well we call them
corporate income taxes, but they're actually taxes on corporate profits, then we get to
net income or net earnings.
This is our so-called bottom line on the income statement.
For Campbell's, this number was $844 million in 2010.
Net income tells a stock investor all the profits that could be paid out to the shareholders.
You may recall, though, that most firms don't pay out all these earnings as dividends.
I'll have more to say about that in a future lecture.
The last thing that an income statement typically does is that it calculates the earnings per
share or EPS of the firm.
This is done as a convenience, since so many investors want to see the profits on a per
share basis, and otherwise investors would have to dig up the information on the number
of shares that the firm has outstanding.
So Campbell's earned $2.42 per share in 2010.
It's tempting to think that as a Campbell shareholder, you have a claim to $2.42 in
cash for each share you hold, but you actually don't.
The income statement tells you what the accounting measures of profit are, but the truth is that
accounting measures of profit are not equal to cash.
This is because most accounting is done under the principle of accrual.
Accrual refers to one particular set of procedures for recognizing revenue and expenses.
Business transactions get pretty complicated, and we need a set of simple rules for making
sense of these transactions.
Accrual is the most popular way to do this, but one of the costs of its flexibility and
simplicity is that accrual-based measures of income and expenses are not equal to the
actual cash payments going into and coming out of the firm.
For example, suppose Campbell's makes a deal to sell a million dollars of snack food over
the next three years to a company that operates vending machines on college campuses, talk
about a solid business.
Under the principle of accrual, Campbell's can record the entire one million dollars
in sales now, as soon as it has the signed sales agreement.
The accountants at Campbell's don't have to recognize the revenues immediately, but
they can if they want to, so the sales numbers don't necessarily tell you about the money
flowing into and out of the company.
Needless to say, investors are really interested in knowing how much cash is being generated
by the company.
Common business owners and anyone who's ever started a business know that companies generally
go out of business because they run out of cash, not because they don't necessarily make
accounting profits.
Fortunately, there's another financial statement that addresses the need to know about cash,
and not surprisingly, it's called the statement of cash flows.
The purpose of this statement is to simply give investors a clearer picture of how much
cash the company is taking in and how it's using cash.
Investors use the statement of cash flows primarily to see whether the company is bringing
in more cash than it's spending.
Happiness is positive cash flow.
First, note that on the statement of cash flows, the company's use of cash is broken
down among operations, investing, and financing.
One thing that's always worth checking is to see whether the company's operations,
the things it's actually in business to do, are bringing in more cash than they use.
For Campbell's, this cash flow from operations or net cash provided by operating activities
is just over a billion dollars.
Also, at the bottom of the statement, we can see whether the company as a whole increased
or decreased its holdings of cash.
Some investors use the statement of cash flows quite intensively, but nearly all investors
find two pieces of information particularly useful.
The first piece of information is the depreciation and amortization expense, which is counted
as a production expense on the income statement.
Depreciation and amortization attempt to keep every company honest about the fact that its
factories and equipment are wearing out and will have to be replaced sometime.
Using up these real assets is a real economic cost, but not one that causes any money to
change hands.
So if a company reports a depreciation expense, its earnings fall, but its cash isn't actually
affected.
The second item on these statement of cash flows that most investors like to know is
called free cash flow.
Now, there's an exciting name.
This doesn't directly appear on the statement of cash flows, but it can be calculated directly
and easily from it.
Free cash flow measures how much cash the firm could be returning to shareholders, so it's
the cash flow analog to net earnings on the income statement.
Different analysts like to calculate free cash flow in different ways, but nearly everyone
starts with cash flow from operations and then subtracts off capital expenditures, which
is usually the first item in this section on cash flows from investing activities.
Capital expenditures are purchases of real assets like equipment and factories.
Given how most financial statements are laid out, cash flow from operations and capital
expenditures are almost always next to or at least very close to each other.
For Campbell's, we know that cash flow from operations is $1.057 billion, and just below
it is an item for purchases of plant assets, which is $315 million.
The numbers in parentheses, too, indicate that it's an expense.
So our basic measure of free cash flow for Campbell's is $1057 minus $315 or $742 million.
Notice that for Campbell's, there's a fairly close correspondence between the accounting
measure of profit, net earnings, and the cash flow measure of profit, free cash flow.
But again, given the differences between accounting earnings and cash flow, this isn't necessarily
the case for any given company.
Many investors will do all the same things to free cash flow that they do with earnings,
especially they'll divide it by the number of shares in the firm to get the free cash
flow per share.
The income and cash flows of the firm are important, but if we stop there, we leave
out an essential part of the firm's financial story.
You may recall that in the very first lecture of this course, we learned that firms issue
financial assets in order to borrow money from investors so they can buy real assets.
The financial statement that's last, the balance sheet, tells part of this story.
The balance sheet is a snapshot of the company's assets, liabilities, and equity at a point
in time.
We use the term assets for anything the firm owns, and liabilities for what the firm owes
to other parties.
Equity or net worth is the difference between assets and liabilities.
It tells you in accounting terms what the entire company is worth.
On Campbell's balance sheet, it had about $6.3 billion in assets and just over $5.3
billion in liabilities as of August 1, 2010.
That implied that Campbell's equity was $929 million.
Many investors, including me, also refer to balance sheet equity as book equity, where
the book in question is the company's accounting books.
I like the term book value of the company because it makes it clear that I'm talking
about the accounting value of the firm's equity from the balance sheet rather than the market
value of the company.
Now we've seen the financial statements and learned about the basic information they
contain.
The financial statements already contain a lot of information about the firm's performance.
Numbers such as EBIT, free cash flow, net earnings, and net worth all tell essential
information that helps us understand a company.
But there's a lot more we can do with these numbers.
In fact, there are entire university courses and entire books on financial statement analysis.
My goal is to give you what I consider to be the most important financial ratios that
nearly all investors know and use to help them pick stocks.
Each ratio we'll learn about represents an entire category of ratios that are designed
to measure some crucial aspect of a company's financial performance.
The first category of financial ratios we'll look at are called liquidity ratios.
Liquidity ratios measure whether a company has enough money to pay all the bills coming
due.
A standard liquidity ratio is the current ratio, which is defined as current assets
over current liabilities.
The word current here is an accounting term that means that it comes due within the next
12 months.
So the current ratio says how many dollars of current assets a company has for each dollar
of current liabilities.
Or in other words, how many dollars a company thinks it will receive in payment over the
next year divided by the number of dollars of bills it thinks it will have to pay during
the next year.
Campbell's had current assets of $1,687 million and current liabilities of $2,065 million.
These numbers give a current ratio of about 81.7 cents.
This means that Campbell's currently has about 82 cents in short-term assets for each dollar
of liabilities that it expects to have to pay during the current year.
These short-term assets should be converted to cash within the next 12 months.
For manufacturing firms like Campbell's, the current ratio can be a bit misleading because
inventories make up a lot of the firm's current assets.
For example, Campbell's has $724 million in inventories, which is almost half of its
current assets.
But it may be hard to liquidate inventories in a hurry, and if the company is forced to
do that, it may have to sell the inventories of soup and snacks at very low prices.
So for many manufacturing companies, analysts also calculate a related liquidity ratio called
the quick ratio.
The quick ratio still puts current liabilities in the denominator, but the numerator only
contains cash, securities, and accounts receivable.
Accounts receivable, by the way, is the amount of money that Campbell's customers owe it
for the soup and snacks that they've purchased.
So for Campbell's, we calculate the quick ratio this way.
Cash and investments are $254 million, and accounts receivable are $512 million for a
total of $766 million.
Then we divide $766 million by the total current liabilities of $2,065 million, and this gives
us a quick ratio of .371 or $0.37.1 in cash, securities, and accounts receivable for every
dollar in current liabilities.
Well, now we've calculated a couple of financial ratios.
What do they mean?
Well, taken by themselves, we don't really know whether these ratios are good, bad, or
indifferent.
That's because these ratios have very little meaning by themselves.
They're really meant to be used in comparison with other firms' ratios.
We'll get to the comparisons in a little bit.
For now, though, I want to show you what ratios are important and how you can calculate them.
So at this point, we've learned how to find two liquidity ratios, the current ratio and
the quick ratio.
The next set of ratios are leverage ratios.
Leverage measures how much the firm is borrowing.
I'll discuss leverage in much more detail in a future lecture, but for now I'll just
say that leverage is the two-edged sword.
A bit of leverage can do you good, but too much leverage is just plain dangerous.
That goes for companies as well as individual investors.
There are lots of ways to measure leverage.
Although some investors like to use debt-to-equity ratios, I tend to prefer leverage ratios expressed
as total assets over total equity.
Campbell's total assets are $6,276 million, and their equity is $929 million.
This means that total assets over total equity is equal to $6,276 divided by $929 or $6.76.
This means that every dollar of equity supports $6.76 of assets.
I think this view gives you a very clear idea of the extent of the leverage and what it's
being used for.
And you can still take this number and deduce that for every dollar of equity that the shareholders
have contributed along the lines, the managers have borrowed another $5.76.
The next category of ratios is the profitability ratios.
One of the profitability ratios that most investors look at is the operating margin,
which is defined as EBIT divided by sales.
You may remember that we also call EBIT operating income, which is the connection to operating
margin.
This ratio simply tells us what fraction of each dollar of sales goes to operating income,
so it's clear that this is a profit margin.
Campbell's EBIT, which we've seen before, is $1,348 million.
Efficiency sales are $7,676 million, so the operating margin is $1,348 divided by $7,676,
which gives 0.176.
That means that 17.6 cents of every dollar of sales is operating profit.
Now we'll move on to efficiency ratios.
Efficiency describes how well a company utilizes its assets.
One of the main efficiency ratios is called the asset turnover ratio, which is defined
as sales divided by total assets.
Note that many financial analysts use average total assets in the denominator of that ratio,
but I'm just going to use total assets for simplicity.
Campbell's sales, which we just used in the margin calculation, were $7,676 million.
And the total assets, which we saw in the leverage calculation, were $6,276.
This makes the asset turnover ratio equal to $7,676 divided by $6,276 or 1.24.
This is literally saying that every dollar of Campbell's assets produces $1.24 cents
of sales per year.
And finally, I've saved the best financial ratios for last.
The ratios that every investor wants to know right off the bat are ROA and ROE, which are
return on assets and return on equity.
These are so-called performance ratios, and they try to measure, in an accounting sense,
the return that different investors would get by lending a dollar to the company.
First, let's start with ROA.
This is defined as EBIT minus taxes, that quantity divided by total assets.
The numerator measures the profits that are available to be distributed to both the bondholders
and to the stockholders of the company.
In fact, ROA calculates the return you would earn, again measured in accounting terms and
not market terms, if you finance a dollar's worth of the company's assets by buying both
the company's bonds and its stock.
ROA assumes moreover that you finance the company by buying its stock and bonds in the
same proportions as the one the company has listed on its balance sheet.
So for Campbell's, you're buying about $5.76 cents worth of bonds for every dollar you
buy of stock.
EBIT once again was $1,348 million.
Taxes paid were $398 million.
This makes the numerator equal to $950 million.
Then total assets once again, $6,276 million.
So the ROA ratio is $950 divided by $6,276, which gives 0.154 or 15.4 percent.
Finally, let's do ROE.
ROE is defined as net income over equity.
Campbell's net income was $844 million, and its equity was $929 million.
This makes the ROE ratio $844 divided by $929, which gives 0.909 or 90.9 percent.
Wow, that seems really high.
Is it realistic?
Well, to answer that, we really need to compare Campbell's ROE to the ROEs from a set of
similar companies, such as an industry group or subgroup.
As I said a moment ago, Campbell's financial ratios have very little meaning by themselves.
They're really meant to be compared with other firms ratios.
In order to use financial statement analysis to help you pick stocks, you have to select
a set of similar firms and then compare ratios.
If one firm's ratios are impressive relative to its peers, then it's probably worth doing
further analysis on it to see whether it's worth adding to your portfolio.
Let's do this comparison on ROE for Campbell's Soup Company.
If you go to about any financial website and look up Campbell's, which has stock ticker
symbol CPV, the site will probably list that Campbell's is in the consumer goods sector
and the processed and packaged goods industry.
What we can do is look up several firms from this industry that seem like they would be
similar to Campbell's Soup and compare their ratios to Campbell's.
One way that I like to choose similar firms is to find a list of companies in the industry
sorted by market capitalization.
Market capitalization is a measure of market value equal to the current stock price times
the number of shares outstanding.
Most financial websites will list companies in order of market capitalization, which will
also help you choose firms that are similar in size.
I think this is useful because I don't want to compare Campbell's either with a company
that is many times larger or smaller.
It doesn't seem like the firms would have that much in common.
Well, when I went to the list of firms in the processed and packaged goods industry
on one financial website, I constructed this list.
I've included more companies than I really think are comparable just to give you an idea
of what you might find when you look on these websites.
Note that Campbell's is a pretty big firm, but by no means the biggest.
There are several firms on the list that are about the same size as Campbell's and also
seem to be in about the same line of business.
For example, Heinz, Sarah Lee, Jay M. Smucker, Con Agra, and McCormick all make packaged
foods like Campbell's Soup does, so I'll compare Campbell's to these five companies.
Once I get my list of companies, I gather the information on the financial ratios and
do a simple comparison.
For ROE, here's a comparison among the five firms.
We see that among the firms that are Campbell's Soup's peers, there are certainly some healthy
ROEs, but Campbell's by far has a much higher ROE than these firms.
Well, should I buy 100 shares and see what happens?
Well, maybe, but first I should do a whole lot more research.
I'd start by comparing all the other ratios we learned about in this lecture to Campbell's
Soup's peers.
For example, based on my experience looking at companies, Campbell's leverage ratio seems
pretty high.
I'd have to find out why Campbell's uses so much debt and how the firm has been able
to support that debt so far.
The next step would be going on to doing more research to measure how Campbell's is actually
currently valued in the market.
It could be that Campbell's Soup already has a price that reflects its relatively high
ROE.
I'd also have to learn a lot more about the products that Campbell's and its subsidiaries
intend to roll out in the coming months and years.
So in other words, I've made a good start on finding an interest in company, but I'm
nowhere near the point where I'm confident enough in its future success to put my money
on the line.
I hope this lecture helps you feel more comfortable around a company's financial statements.
We've learned the basic financial ratios that help us judge the performance of different
companies, and seen that the way to use ratios is to compare one firm to a group of its peers.
Although there's no one single ratio that identifies good companies, ROE is a good starting
point for noticing strong performers.
Once you find a company that interests you, look over all the major ratios to really get
a feel for its financial performance.
And don't forget to look into the stories behind the numbers, like why Campbell's uses
so much leverage and what kinds of new products it will bring to market in the coming years.
These stories are really where you'll discover the information that will convince you to
invest or not to invest.
