In the previous lecture, we started a unit on stock picking tools.
We learned some basic financial statement analysis and saw how to use it to identify
companies that are worth looking at in more depth.
In this lecture, we'll start learning how to actually drill down into a company and
at stock using valuation models.
Valuation models are extremely important to stock picking.
In fact, anytime you're investing, you should be using some kind of valuation model, even
if it's very simple.
Valuation models simply help us figure out what something's worth.
Whatever we buy any product, whether it's a cup of coffee at Starbucks or a new car,
we compare the price of the product to what it's actually worth to us.
If we think something's worth the price, we buy it.
Investing really works the same way.
By figuring out what we think a stock is worth, we can pick the stocks that we think are worth
at least as much and hopefully a lot more than their current prices.
And we can avoid buying stocks that are overpriced.
Notice that I keep emphasizing that we're going to use valuation models to think about
what we think an investment is worth.
As I keep telling my students, there's no absolute truth about value waiting to be discovered
out there.
Generally speaking, there's constant disagreement in the markets about what any given investment
is worth.
These disagreements arise for several good reasons.
First, the value of any investment depends on what will happen in the future and everybody
has different ideas about that.
Second, you have to make tons of judgment calls when you apply any valuation model to
the real world.
Different people will apply the same model in different ways and get different answers.
And finally, there are many different valuation models and they often disagree.
When I first tell people that there's no such thing as the true value of an investment,
they get a little panicked.
Isn't it a bad thing that we don't know for sure what an investment's worth?
Well no, it's actually good that there's a lot of disagreement about value.
That's exactly what gives each of us the opportunity to pick stocks and beat the market.
So as you take these valuation models and start applying them to interesting stocks,
keep in mind that your mission is to use these models to help you find companies that you
think most people have overlooked or underestimated.
You want to find companies that you think are worth more than the market says they are.
So with these ideas about valuation in mind, let's look at our first stock picking model.
The general name for this valuation method is the method of comparables and it's based
on using ratios like the price to earnings or PE ratio to value stocks.
This model is widely used in all kinds of financial markets, not just the stock market.
In addition, I'd say it's the model that professionals prefer to use by far.
The reason why professionals prefer this method is that it's simple, fast and reliable.
In fact, most professionals will tell you that this method lets the market speak directly
about what an asset should be worth.
What's not to like, right?
Well, in this lecture, we'll learn how to use the method of comparables to price stocks
and we'll see whether it's really all it's cracked up to be.
The method of comparables starts with a very simple idea.
Every asset has some features or characteristics that indicate or influence its value.
For example, one of the characteristics of a company that most influences its value is its earnings.
We call these characteristics value drivers because they literally drive the value of an asset.
Every asset has a different set of value drivers.
Some are easy to measure, like a company's earnings, while others are hard to measure.
For example, we know that in real estate, the big value driver is location,
but it's hard to capture that in a simple number.
So we have to use other value drivers for real estate
and try to hold the location constant when we apply this method.
The second big idea behind the method of comparables
is that if two assets are truly comparable,
then they'll have a similar relationship between their prices and any given value driver.
Now, we know that the relationship between the price of some asset and its value drivers can be complex,
maybe even nonlinear,
but we don't assume that we know anything about the spread of value.
But we don't assume that we know anything about the specific form that this relationship takes.
Instead, we simply form the ratio between the price of the asset and its value driver
and let this ratio represent the relationship.
To make this concrete, let's let P stand for the price of some asset
and V stand for the value of some value driver that we think affects P.
In addition, let's consider two comparable assets.
Just call them asset A and asset B.
Now, the method of comparables says that if asset A and asset B really are comparable,
then the ratio of each asset's price to its value driver should be the same for both assets.
Here it is in an equation.
The equation says that the price of A divided by the value driver for A
should be equal to the ratio of the price of B over the value driver for B.
And that's it.
The method of comparables is simply a use of ratios and proportions.
We use the ratio of one asset's price to its value driver,
which we call evaluation multiple, to estimate the prices of other assets.
For example, if we were using the price to earnings ratio,
then V of A would be the earnings per share for company A
and P of A over V of A would be called the earnings multiple.
We multiply company A's earnings multiple times company B's earnings
to get an estimate of company B's price.
Then, if the market price of company B's stock was less than the predicted price,
we'd want to look deeper into company B to see whether there's more information about company B
that indicates that it would be a good investment.
This method seems pretty simple.
So let's think more carefully about actually using it to estimate some stock prices
and see if it really is as easy to use as it appears to be.
The first issue is, what value driver should we pick?
Well, you can literally choose any characteristic you want.
The three most popular value drivers for stocks are earnings per share, or EPS,
book value per share, which is balance sheet equity divided by the number of shares outstanding,
and sales or revenues per share.
So the three big ratios that analysts look at are called the price-to-earnings,
or PE ratio, the price-to-book ratio, and the price-to-sales ratio.
I'll be giving examples with all three of these.
But all kinds of other value drivers are possible,
and the choice of value driver depends on the industry
as well as on the state of development of the firms in the industry.
One of my favorite valuation multiples comes from the days of the dot-com boom.
You may remember that there were hundreds of firms trying to go public at the time
that didn't even have positive earnings,
but that didn't stop the analysts from finding a value driver.
Since these firms were mostly internet startups,
you may remember, for example, Pets.com, Webvan, and other famous or maybe notorious examples.
The analysts figured that the number of clicks on the websites of these companies
should be related to the price of the companies.
After all, the more clicks there are on a site like Pets.com,
the more sales there should be.
So the valuation multiple, priced-to-clicks, or even priced-to eyeballs,
where eyeballs denoted a distinct new visitor to a website,
briefly became valuation multiples that investors used to price these companies.
This example helps to show one of the strengths of the method of comparables.
You can always find some value driver to base a multiple on.
If a company's earnings are negative, no problem, try the price-to-book ratio.
If the company doesn't have a lot of equity, no problem, try the price-to-sales ratio,
and so on, until you find some ratio that works.
The next issue is finding comparable companies.
The accuracy and reliability of the method of comparables
relies heavily on finding truly comparable assets to compare to each other.
For example, if you're trying to find the price for your home when you want to sell it,
you'd like to find the selling price of the same size house in your own neighborhood.
The price of a smaller house in a neighborhood across town
wouldn't generally be very comparable,
and it would give an unreliable estimate of the value of your house.
When it comes to applying the method of comparables to stocks,
we generally use companies in the same industry or sub-industry as our comparable companies.
For example, suppose you were interested in the stock of the Cheesecake Factory,
which is a chain of casual dining restaurants.
When you look up information on this stock on most financial websites,
they'll tell you what industry this company is in,
and probably link you to information about the industry.
Now, the industry that the Cheesecake Factory belongs to is restaurants.
Of course, just because a company is listed as being in the industry,
this doesn't necessarily make it comparable to the company that you're interested in.
For example, the restaurant's industry includes fast food places like McDonald's Corporation,
in addition to sit-down casual dining restaurants like the Cheesecake Factory.
On the other end, the restaurant's industry also includes higher-end chains
like Morton's and Ruth's Cris Steak Houses.
You probably wouldn't want to include either end of the spectrum of restaurants
in with your set of casual dining companies.
They're just not the same.
Other considerations are whether to include foreign stocks as comparable companies
or companies of very different sizes in your list of comparable companies.
Again, your choice is going to depend on the specifics of the company you're investigating
and whether you can find many companies that are good matches for it.
In the case of the Cheesecake Factory,
I'm going to include other American casual dining chains
that also have fairly large total market values, about a billion dollars or more.
So as a first cut of companies, I would include these on my list.
Most of these companies' names are self-explanatory,
but you may not recognize Darden restaurants
until I tell you that it operates Red Lobster and the Olive Garden, among other restaurants.
Likewise, Brinker International is the company behind Chili's Bar & Grill
and several other restaurant chains as well.
Now, generating a list like this leads to a related question.
How should we use the information from all of the different firms?
Well, in practice, valuation multiples are averages of the multiples for many different firms.
So if I wanted to value the Cheesecake Factory using a price-to-earnings ratio,
I would form the earnings ratios for all the comparable companies on my list
and then take a simple average of these multiples.
Doing this is actually fairly easy,
since most free financial websites have several pages of summary statistics on each company,
where you can find all the prices and various company statistics that I'm using in this lecture.
Okay, so I went out and found the prices of all the companies on my list,
and I put them in a column that I've labeled P for price.
Then I went and found the earnings per share or EPS for each company
and put them in a column labeled EPS on the spreadsheet.
Then, to find the PE multiples for each company,
I divide each company's price by its EPS,
and then I put the result in another column called P over EPS.
Notice that I'm not including the multiple for the Cheesecake Factory
because I want to use the information from the rest of the market to price that company.
I collected the Cheesecake Factory's earnings per share,
and I put that information in my table,
but notice that I skipped a line to keep it separate.
Now, underneath the P over EPS column,
I calculated the average PE ratio for my eight companies,
and I've labeled this the average valuation multiple.
The value of this average multiple was 14.55.
Now, I'll use this valuation multiple
and the actual value of the Cheesecake Factory's earnings per share
to estimate the price of the stock.
To find a price for the Cheesecake Factory,
I take its earnings, which are $1.67 per share,
and then multiply by the average earnings multiple for the comparable firms that I selected.
That's 14.55.
So when I multiply the two numbers together,
the answer is $24.29.
I put this in the table and labeled it the Estimated Price of Cake,
using the stock ticker symbol for the Cheesecake Factory, C-A-K-E.
Now I compare this estimated price to the actual market price of the Cheesecake Factory.
I put the actual price in a line just below the estimated price.
The actual price when I did this exercise was $26.14.
So my comparable's estimate based on an earnings multiple
is less than $2 below the current market price of the shares.
Not too bad.
One question you may have is whether there's a minimum number of comparable firms you should use.
Generally, the answer is there isn't a minimum number.
Sometimes industries are relatively small,
and you only have a few firms to compare.
In other cases, you may know that one or two firms are extremely similar to the company you want to investigate,
so that adding other less similar companies to your multiple will only water down the quality of the comparison.
It's fine to only use one or two companies in your valuation multiple
as long as you have a sensible reason for doing that.
If you don't, though, then more is generally better,
since you don't want to base your analysis on one firm that may turn out to be an extreme case.
For the sake of comparison, here's what we get for the value of the Cheesecake Factory
using a price to book multiple in the same way that I used the price to earnings multiple before.
And then, here's what we get for the value of the Cheesecake Factory
when we use a price to sales multiple to value the company.
Wow! Notice that for the Cheesecake Factory,
the method of comparables produced estimates of the price that were fairly close together,
and in fact, in one case, was almost exactly equal to the current market price.
The earnings multiple gave a value of $24.29.
The book value multiple gave a value of $28.67,
and the sales multiple gave a value of $26.17.
These estimates are not only close together,
they're all pretty close to the Cheesecake Factory's actual stock price of $26.14.
Before we get too excited about the reliability of this method, though,
let me show you what would have happened if I would have used the same set of total firms
to value Cracker Barrel instead.
What I'll show you next is a similar set of comparables tables,
just like the ones I used to value the Cheesecake Factory.
But in these tables, I took Cracker Barrel out of the set of comparable firms
and replaced it with the Cheesecake Factory.
So now I'm using the Cheesecake Factory and the other seven comparable companies
to price Cracker Barrel.
I went through the same steps I did with the Cheesecake Factory.
For example, here's the PE analysis for Cracker Barrel.
On the table, you can see that I've separated Cracker Barrel out from the list of comparable firms
and added the Cheesecake Factory to it.
I calculate an average PE ratio for the eight companies, which is $15.27,
and then multiply this by Cracker Barrel's earnings per share of $4.
This gives an estimated price of $61.08.
Similarly, here's the analysis for the price-to-book ratio.
The average price-to-book ratio is $2.79 for the eight comparable companies,
and this is multiplied by Cracker Barrel's book value per share of $11.32
to get an estimated price of $31.54.
And finally, repeating this analysis for the price-to-sales ratio,
we get an average price-to-sales ratio for the eight comparable companies of $0.97.
We multiply this sales multiple by Cracker Barrel's sales per share of $105.43
and get an estimated price of $101.87 per share.
Well, this time, the multiples didn't do so well.
There's a big variation in the estimated prices,
and while the predicted price based on the book multiple is somewhat close to the current market value,
it's still about $9 lower than the current market price.
The other two predicted prices are far higher than the current market price.
What investing decision should we make based on this evidence?
Well, notice what the valuation ratios are really saying about the two companies.
On the one hand, they're saying that the Cheesecake Factory's multiples are about average
relative to these peer firms.
This may indicate that the company is more or less fairly valued,
and it doesn't look like there are any big opportunities for investors to profit from buying this company.
But if we look at Cracker Barrel, the variation in prices is saying that for at least two of the value drivers,
Cracker Barrel looks seriously undervalued.
Now, should we believe the evidence from these high multiples?
Well, not at face value.
We need to investigate why Cracker Barrel looks undervalued according to EPS and sales,
but overvalued according to book value.
Our further investigation will hopefully help us come to some conclusion about whether the company actually would be a good investment.
One of the ways we can do this investigation is by digging deeper into the ratios.
For example, stock analysts think that the PE ratio is itself driven by the expected growth rate of the company's earnings.
This positive relationship between the PE ratio and the earnings growth rate is well known,
and many analysts have actually tried to understand it.
And of course, they understand it by making another ratio.
In this case, what analysts do is they take the PE ratio for a stock,
which is usually some number greater than one, but less than, say, 100,
and then they divide this number by the forecast earnings growth rate expressed in whole percent.
This is called the PEG ratio, since it takes PE and divides it by G, which is the growth rate of earnings.
For example, in the case of the Cheesecake Factory, the price was $26.14 when I looked it up,
and the current year's EPS estimate was $1.67.
So the PE ratio was $26.14 over $1.67, which is 15.65.
So I take this PE ratio of 15.65 and divided it by the estimated long-term growth rate forecast of EPS,
which was 14.34% on the day I looked it up.
So the PEG ratio for the Cheesecake Factory is 15.65 divided by 14.34, which gives us 1.09.
What does this PEG mean?
Well, according to Investing Folklore, a fairly priced stock would have a PEG ratio of one.
An underpriced stock would have a PEG ratio less than one, and an overpriced stock would have a PEG ratio of greater than one.
Since the Cheesecake Factory's PEG is a little over one, this would be taken as evidence that this company is a little bit overpriced.
For Cracker Barrel, on the other hand, the PEG ratio is about .93, which indicates that it's a bit underpriced.
The benchmark of one for the PEG ratio has been around for a long time,
and it was popularized as a part of Peter Lynch's Investing Philosophy called GARP, or Growth at a Reasonable Price.
But if we think about it, there's not necessarily any reason why a company's PE ratio should naturally be equal to its EPS growth rate.
In fact, an academic paper I read a few years ago that used a ton of algebra and assumptions
came up with some incredibly complicated formula relating the PEG ratio to a stock's return.
But who cares?
This is a case in which it doesn't matter what the truth is, it matters what the people in the market think.
The investors in the market have established that the benchmark for the PEG ratio is one,
and people are making investment decisions based on this benchmark, so reality is actually being shaped by that idea.
A firm with a PEG ratio of, say, .6 will attract investors who will buy the stock and that pushes up its price.
The PE rises and with it the PEG ratio of the stock until the PEG gets close to one.
When that happens, investors stop buying the stock because they think it's not a bargain anymore, so the PEG comes to rest at one.
This phenomenon points out a potential problem with a method of comparables.
This method has been so successful that it's become more prescriptive than descriptive in many cases.
For example, we often hear the PE ratio being used in a prescriptive way to talk about the overall value of the stock market.
Investors pay a lot of attention to historic PE ratios, and they use average PE ratios to judge whether the entire market is over or undervalued.
For example, at the height of the .com boom in 2001, the PE ratio for the entire S&P 500 was about 26, when historically it had been about 14.
Over the decade of 2001 to 2010, the average PE ratio for the S&P 500 was about 18, and the range was between about 15 and 20.
Now, statistically, it's possible that there is some kind of long-run average PE ratio that the stock market should return to over time.
But the PE ratio itself is going to depend, as we've seen, on the underlying growth rate of earnings and all the economic forces that we know that are responsible for that.
We know that the economy is always changing and evolving.
So why shouldn't this long-run average PE ratio change and evolve over time as well?
Well, the answer is probably that it does.
But what we see in the market, in my opinion, is that people don't change their minds about the long-run average PE ratio very quickly.
So we continue to use long-run PE ratios that actually may be outdated.
But even though it may be outdated, this number still has a big influence on the prices that people are actually willing to pay for stocks.
The tendency of the PE ratio and other valuation multiples to be used prescriptively is only one possible drawback of the method of comparables.
There are several others that you should understand as well.
As I mentioned at the start of this lecture, one of the reasons why professionals like to use the method of comparables is their confidence that this method can't be easily manipulated.
But if you've been paying attention to some of the assumptions that I've had to make in order to implement this method, then you'll realize that this claim doesn't actually stand up.
It's possible to bias a method of comparables valuation fairly easily.
As we've learned, the key step in the method of comparables is to select the appropriate set of comparable firms to include in your valuation multiple.
In general, the number of companies that you'll be using to estimate valuation multiples isn't all that big.
Maybe you'll use 15 to 20 firms in a really big industry.
Choosing the firms that you include in a careful way can distort the valuation multiple that you end up with.
Another matter of choice is the value drivers that you choose to use in your estimates.
In many cases, companies will try to direct investors to modified measures of earnings or other value drivers in the hopes that the investors will plug these modified versions into their standard valuation multiples and be willing to pay higher prices for a company's shares.
For example, during and immediately after the dot com boom and bust, many companies started to get very aggressive in presenting what they called pro forma earnings.
Now pro forma means as if, so firms were presenting their own version of earnings that left out many expenses as if they didn't occur.
The companies who did this claimed that the expenses were one time expenses or extraordinary events and that the pro forma earnings gave a clearer picture of what the firm's true earnings actually were.
Of course, firms got really creative when they about what they termed these extraordinary expenses.
One waste disposal firm, for example, called it an extraordinary expense when it had its fleet of garbage trucks repainted.
After a while, pro forma earnings took on the alternative definition of earnings before bad stuff and firms began to emphasize their pro forma earnings more than their true earnings.
Well, this raised a big concern at the SEC that individual investors would accept the pro forma earnings as the firm's true earnings and use them as the basis of their PE valuations.
Naturally, if a company excludes all kinds of expenses from earnings, they look a lot bigger so the company doesn't look as overvalued.
This problem became such an issue that the SEC actually created a regulation in 2003 called regulation G that strongly regulated the practice of using pro forma earnings and forced companies to deemphasize them in their press releases and other filings.
Now fast forward to 2011 and the case of Groupon, a web-based company that markets group coupons for discounts at restaurants and other retailers.
Groupon came under fire from the SEC for pursuing exactly this type of practice with respect to its earnings.
Groupon constructed a measure of earnings called, get this, adjusted consolidated segment operating income or adjusted CSOI which basically excluded any marketing expenses from the calculation of earnings.
Now in the case of Groupon's business model, these marketing expenses were one of the largest expenses faced by the company.
So it seemed that Groupon was also trying to focus on an earnings number that made the company's PE ratio look small so that people wouldn't think the company was overvalued.
Now the flip side of this problem of understanding the PE ratios is that the accounting rules that firms are supposed to follow require some investments to be counted as expenses.
This lowers the amount of recorded earnings and hence raises the PE ratio making firms look overvalued.
One of the investments that's accounted for in this way is research and development costs or R&D.
Under the US generally accepted accounting principles, any money spent on research and development must be counted as an expense which directly lowers earnings.
But these R&D costs lead to the creation of knowledge and other assets that create future profits leading to increases in the company's stock values.
Because the R&D costs are expensed, this makes earnings look very low so that the PE ratio looks far too high and the shares look overvalued.
In fact, Federal Reserve Economist Leonard Nakamura has studied this effect and he's taken the time to construct an economy-wide measure of the PE ratio that adjusts for research and development.
He basically found that once R&D is accounted for, the PE ratio for the 1990s and after is almost exactly the same as in the 1960s.
His findings only reinforced to me the point that I made a few minutes ago, that we should expect the PE ratio to evolve with the economy and then take these age-old PE benchmarks with a grain of salt.
It's far better to judge the value of each company on its own merits.
Well, there's an overview of the method of comparables.
You can use the information from the four main ratios we learned about in this lecture, PE, price-to-book, price-to-sales, and the PEG ratio to help find stocks that seem undervalued.
But keep in mind that once you find a potentially undervalued stock, your work is just starting.
You need to get more information on the company to see whether it deserves its low ratio because of lackluster performance, or whether it really is one of these overlooked and underappreciated companies that has the potential to surprise the market.
In the next lecture, we'll learn another valuation method that can provide some of this additional information that we need.
