So far, we've been learning all about the ways to pick stocks, bonds, mutual funds,
and ETFs for your investment portfolio.
In the next few lectures, I'm going to branch out into some other assets that you may also
want to consider.
Some of the assets we'll learn about are ones that I consider must-haves for your portfolio.
Others are optional, and I'll even toss in a few assets that you hear about a lot, but
I think you're best off if you avoid.
In this lecture, I'll actually include both a must-have investment and one to avoid, and
they're both different types of foreign assets.
I've mentioned foreign assets here and there during the previous nine lectures, but it's
time that I got into some more details about what they can do for you.
Chances are, if you're holding well-diversified mutual funds, or if you're covered by a pension,
you already have some foreign assets in your portfolio.
After all, there are plenty of global blue-chip firms that aren't headquartered in the U.S.
like Toyota, or Adidas, or Petrobras.
Some bonds from foreign companies or foreign governments can also offer safe and attractive
returns.
But most of us, when it comes right down to it, would rather invest in companies that
are closer to home.
Actually, this is a well-known finding in behavioral economics called home bias.
And it makes sense that we're more likely to invest in companies and assets that we're
more familiar with.
The question then is this.
Is there anything about foreign assets that justifies the extra effort required to learn
about foreign companies and their markets?
Well I'm glad you asked.
There are two main reasons I can think of that make the extra work of investing in foreign
assets pay off.
The first of these is diversification.
One of your goals as an investor is to make sure that your portfolio is well-diversified.
In fact, I recently heard John Bogle, the founder of Vanguard Investments and a long-time
advocate of passive mutual fund investing, say that diversification was the first, second,
and third most important goal for your portfolio.
And if you're an investor who believes markets are pretty efficient, then you'll want to
own a slice of the entire market.
And that means the global financial market.
There's a lot more to this idea of geographic diversification though, including some controversy.
Now a couple of decades ago, most people who looked into the diversification benefits of
investing in foreign assets found that the typical American investor only needed a little
bit of foreign diversification, say 10 to 15 percent of the portfolio, to get a large
benefit from geographic diversification.
But as time went by, more and more investors and academics started to question this rule
of thumb.
That's because the world's been changing pretty rapidly over the past 20 years.
First, more countries are reaching the same level of economic development and sophistication
as the U.S. and Europe.
For example, you may remember the Asian tiger economies of the 1990s.
A few of these countries, like South Korea and Taiwan, have basically achieved the same
level of development of the U.S. and Europe.
People look at many of the so-called transition economies from the former Soviet Union, especially
countries from Eastern Europe like Poland, Estonia, the Czech Republic.
These countries have joined the European Union, and their economies have the same level of
development as the rest of the EU.
This means that these countries' financial markets will have the same types of companies
as the rest of the world, issuing stocks and bonds that basically behave like the stocks
and bonds issued everywhere else.
Well that's not good for diversification, because diversification depends on different
assets acting in different ways.
Why go to the trouble of finding, say, a chemical company in the Czech Republic whose stock
behaves just like the stock of Dow Chemical?
The other reason why foreign diversification has been under suspicion lately is because
of the globalization of all markets.
Financial markets around the world have become a lot more tightly connected than they were
even a few years ago.
That means that investors' money is flowing more freely between the global markets, pushing
prices up together across markets, and then pushing them down together as well.
If the prices in globalized financial markets become more synchronized over time, then again
there's much less diversification benefit.
The whole point of being diversified was that when the U.S. market falls, another market
somewhere else in the world is likely to be going up.
Therefore, many people think foreign diversification is losing its benefit.
Are they right?
Well, as an economist, I always try to let the data decide, and here's what I can tell
from the work that's been done by researchers.
Markets do seem to move together more today than they used to, though on average there
still seems to be plenty of room for diversification benefits.
You might, you just might not get it from the same countries that you used to.
On top of this, there's also evidence that the synchronization of the global economy
goes through cycles as well.
In other words, we go through periods when the markets seem to move together, and other
stretches of time when they just don't.
At the end of the day, I'm still a believer in the power of geographic diversification
in my portfolio.
I think that there are still many countries that are going through very different stages
of economic development, and these different stages of development will lead the financial
markets in those countries to behave in ways that are very different than the behavior
in the U.S. and Europe.
The idea that many countries are still at an earlier stage of economic development leads
to the second main reason to invest in foreign assets, and that's to take advantage of higher
economic growth in other countries.
On a very large scale, someone who invests in the assets of developing countries like
Vietnam, South Africa, and other rapidly industrializing nations is really taking part in a global
IPO for the entire country.
Not every company in these economies is going to be a winner, but the overall growth of
these economies means that a lot of the companies will be.
And even countries that are already developed can experience high growth.
For example, Ireland became one of Europe's fastest growing economies in the late 1990s.
To the extent that turnaround stories like these depend on factors internal to the country
and not on the international economy, investing internationally can give you both high returns
and diversification benefits.
So if you're convinced that holding foreign assets can both increase your average returns
and diversify your portfolio, the question of foreign investing becomes first a matter
of allocation.
That is, how much of your overall portfolio should you invest in foreign assets?
Well I thought that an interesting way to take a look at this question would be to show
you some numbers on the sheer sizes of the global bond and equity markets, to see just
how large they are and what fraction of them is made up of the U.S. market.
Let's start with the bond markets.
I found data from the Bank for International Settlements, or BIS, which is an international
organization that facilitates cooperation between central banks and bank regulators
around the world.
They collect data on the size of the global bond markets.
As of the end of 2010, the world bond market had about $67 trillion of bonds outstanding,
and the U.S. had $25 trillion of that total, or about 38%.
Now that total includes both government bonds and private bonds.
The numbers are even more interesting when you break it down between the two.
The total size of the global government bond market was $39 trillion at the end of 2010,
while the private bond market was $28 trillion.
The U.S. makes up a quarter of the global government bond market, and about half the
global private bond market.
In second, Europe and Asia both have large government bond markets and large private
bond markets, but the rest of the world really doesn't yet.
Now let me turn to stocks.
For this information, I went to the World Bank, which has data on the value of world
stock markets as of the end of 2010.
The global stock market was worth about $55 trillion at the end of 2010, and the U.S.
market was worth about $17 trillion.
Again, I broke down the stock market values by the region of the world and made a pie
chart out of that information.
In this one, we can see that the U.S. stock market is just under one-third of the entire
world market by value.
Also, notice that Europe and Asia each have an almost identical share of the world stock
market.
So the U.S. makes up a quarter of the global government bond market, a third of the global
stock market, and about half of the private debt market.
So if you were to truly make your portfolio reflect the global market, you could use the
weights from the pie charts as a starting point for shaping your portfolio.
But let me actually caution you against doing that, at least right for now.
Even though the rest of the world does account for a huge part of the financial market, foreign
markets just don't adhere to the same standards of transparency, rule of law, and basic fairness
that characterize the U.S. financial markets.
That means that investor protections that we take for granted in the U.S. simply don't
exist or exist only on paper in many other countries.
Even well-developed markets in Europe have different practices and different standards
of professional conduct from the U.S.
For example, for many years insider trading was not illegal in many countries and in other
countries is still only weakly regulated today.
Also, the level of government involvement in the economies of many countries is far
higher than in the U.S.
That means that companies may behave very differently in how they conduct business and how they
treat their shareholders.
It may also mean that governments will restrict foreign ownership of their domestic companies
so that foreigners may end up paying inflated prices for shares of successful firms.
Another thing to keep in mind is that the huge size of the rest of the world's markets
also disguises a wide range of sizes.
For example, the Asian markets are really dominated by Japan and Hong Kong.
If you want to invest in Vietnam stock market, you certainly can.
But as a friend of mine who does this for a living warned me, a stock investment in Vietnam
is much more like a venture capital investment in terms of the time needed as well as the
risk involved.
The size of many equity markets around the world is small enough so that they can be
easily manipulated by local investors.
So you have to be wary of plunging into these markets without doing a good amount of research
on them first.
So do invest in foreign assets, but don't try to overweight your portfolio toward them,
at least not yet.
I think that the day is coming when it will be wise to devote a majority of your investments
to companies and governments outside the U.S., but we're not there yet.
The other warning that I want to pass on about investing in foreign securities regards how
to do it.
In general, buying and holding foreign assets directly is expensive and inconvenient and
may even be dangerous.
Many U.S. brokers will help you buy foreign assets directly through business partners
in overseas markets, but this adds significantly to the trading costs you'll pay.
On the other hand, it's possible to hold a foreign brokerage account, but this is not
usually a good idea unless you have a truly compelling reason to do so.
Holding foreign bank accounts or brokerage accounts can make the IRS wonder whether you're
trying to hide income or assets overseas, so it usually attracts their attention.
And who needs that?
But the biggest concern for holding foreign assets directly is the danger of losses from
foreign exchange risk.
This is simply the risk that any capital gains or other returns on an investment in foreign
assets will be offset by unfavorable changes in the exchange rate.
For example, if you want to buy the stock of the French petrochemical company Total,
you would have to first exchange U.S. dollars for Euro and then purchase the shares with
Euro.
By the way, you'll pay a commission fee right off the bat for buying the foreign currency.
Suppose you buy 100 shares of Total for 20 Euros each, or 2,000 Euros.
With the commission, the price of the Euro was $1.35 each, so you pay a total of 100
shares times 20 Euros each times $1.35 per Euro, which equals $2,700 for the shares.
Suppose the price of Total rises to 21 Euros per share, but the value of the Euro falls
so that the price of 1 Euro goes from $1.35 to $1.26 after the commission on the currency.
So you sell your shares for 2,100 Euro and then buy dollars with the 2,100 Euro at $1.26
per Euro.
Then you end up with 2,100 times $1.26, which gives $2,646.
So even though the share prices went up, you've incurred a tidy loss of 54 bucks.
Now changes in the exchange rate could also work in your favor, and sometimes they will.
But the point I'm trying to make is that adding the foreign exchange risk onto the extra expense
and hassle of investing directly in foreign assets makes this option even less attractive.
But there are many good ways to invest in foreign assets.
They're just less direct.
For example, in my lecture on ETFs, I mentioned a stock instrument called an American Depository
Receipt, or ADR.
ADRs are basically claim checks on foreign stocks that have been deposited in American banks.
They trade like regular American stocks and are priced in dollars.
There are over 250 different ADRs listed on the New York Stock Exchange alone, representing
companies from all over the world.
As you might expect, though, it's mainly the blue chip companies that go to the trouble
of becoming listed on the U.S. stock markets.
And some observers claim that because of the increase in stock market regulations, such
as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, many foreign countries have abandoned their ADR listings in the U.S.
So these American-listed foreign company shares may be getting harder to find.
Similarly, some foreign governments and companies will issue bonds in the U.S., payable in U.S.
dollars.
I mentioned these so-called Yankee bonds in my introductory lecture on bonds.
You'll have to check the inventory of various dealers and brokers to find them, and the supply
of these bonds depends on U.S. interest rates relative to the interest rates available in
other countries.
Also, to the extent that U.S. investors have not been very big buyers of foreign bonds,
many foreign issuers tend to try other markets rather than the U.S.
For example, Japanese investors have long been known to buy lots of foreign bonds, since
the domestic interest rates in Japan have been extremely low for decades.
By far, the best way to buy foreign assets is through mutual funds or ETFs.
Mutual funds can hire experts who can navigate foreign markets, and they also have resources
to manage the foreign exchange risk associated with foreign investing.
And as we learned in connection with a previous lecture on picking mutual funds and ETFs,
the increasing specialization of these instruments means that you can probably find a fund that
invests in the countries and in the assets that you're most interested in in adding
to your portfolio.
ETFs are the champions of passive investing in country indexes or regional indexes of
stocks and bonds, which reflects the fact that they originated as a better way to invest
in foreign assets.
The only caution here, of course, is to check the annual reports of the mutual funds and
the ETFs to see exactly what foreign assets are being held in these funds.
Remember that distinction between global and international mutual funds that I mentioned
in the lecture on picking mutual funds.
You want to make sure that your global fund isn't just holding a lot of U.S. companies
and only a smattering of foreign assets.
Just as we learned in the lecture about picking mutual funds, there's no reason why you can't
or shouldn't blend a mix of passive funds and active funds in your foreign portfolio.
You should aim to hold a part of your foreign investments in a set of broad indices that
capture at least the European and Asian markets, and hopefully the up and comers in Latin America,
Africa, and the Middle East as well.
But there's also room to invest in individual countries that seem poised for high growth,
as well as choosing actively managed international funds with good track records.
Now as promised, I'm going to turn to the foreign asset that you should probably avoid
investing in, foreign exchange.
Foreign exchange, also known as foreign currency trading, or simply forex trading,
can seem really attractive.
This is one of the largest and most active asset markets on the planet.
Each day, about 4 trillion dollars in currencies gets traded, that is, 2 trillion dollars of
various currencies are traded for 2 trillion dollars of other various currencies.
And the rates always seem to be moving up and down, so it seems like there are plenty
of opportunities for traders to make money.
And some of the most legendary trades involve large bets on the direction of exchange rates.
You may have heard, for example, about how the famous investor George Soros made a billion
dollars betting that the value of the British pound would fall in late 1992.
Investment websites, and even newspapers now, are full of advertisements for foreign exchange
trading and the testimonials of traders who made hundreds of thousands of dollars a year
trading currencies, or so they claim.
Before I get too far into this, I should tell you what it is that you're actually trading
when you trade forex.
Basically, you're betting on the direction of exchange rates.
Let's take the euro as an example.
The price of one euro, since its introduction as a currency in the early 2000s, has fluctuated
between roughly 80 cents and $1.70 per euro.
If you think that the price of the euro, in terms of US dollars, will go up, say, from
$1.30 to $1.40 per euro, then you can buy euros in the hopes that the price of one euro
will go up, and you can sell the euro later for more dollars than you paid to buy them.
Now, fundamentally, I have no problem with trading currencies if that's what you really
want to do.
But I have two major complaints with this as an investment strategy.
First, trading currencies is basically a very short-term investing strategy, and it requires
a lot of active trading, which gets very expensive.
And it takes up a lot of time, which most of us don't have to devote to sitting in front
of a computer watching forex quotes.
My second major problem with trading currencies as an investing strategy is that exchange rates
are some of the hardest financial prices to predict.
Sure, academic economists have theories, but none of them have proven to be much good for
actually predicting the value of exchange rates or the changes in exchange rates.
When we invest in stocks and bonds, we can't predict the future exactly, but we do have
some models that do a decent job of explaining why some firms become more valuable over time.
But if you don't really have an idea of how to predict exchange rates successfully or
even explain why they change, then it's hard to tell trading from gambling.
And the last time I checked, gambling wasn't that great of an investing strategy.
But my real problem with trading foreign currency is the way in which most foreign currency
trading is done.
Generally, forex trading is done with huge amounts of leverage, and that's the big danger.
High leverage puts lots of price, high leverage plus lots of price fluctuations leads investors
to lose lots of money in short periods of time.
Let me show you the two main ways that individuals usually trade foreign currencies.
The first way is by using futures contracts.
A futures contract is simply a standardized agreement in which an investor pays a price
now called the futures price to be entitled to receive an asset on a later date specified
in the contract.
So buying a futures contract on an asset is really just a substitute for buying and holding
the actual asset.
You buy futures contracts for the same reason you'd buy and hold the asset itself.
You think the price of the asset is going to go up.
The main reason why an individual investor would want to buy a futures contract then
is that it could be a lot cheaper than buying the asset outright.
For example, one of the most popular foreign exchange futures contracts is the Euro Futures
Contract, priced in US dollars and traded on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange or CME.
When you buy a Euro Futures Contract, you're committing to buy 125,000 Euro and pay the
futures price which is expressed in US dollars.
Now if the Euro is priced at $1.40 each, then the value of this contract in dollars
is $175,000.
But the initial margin on this contract is about $5,400 and the maintenance margin is
only about $4,000.
That means that the initial margin is only about 3%.
This low level of initial margin makes it very cheap to invest in Euros which helps
explain why the contract is so popular.
On the other hand, the low level of margin also means that it's easier to get a margin
call since the price of the Euro does bounce around quite a bit and you'll have to meet
that margin call very quickly generally the same day or your position will be liquidated.
So one of the main reasons why investors are interested in futures contracts of any kind
is to take advantage of the low margin requirements.
But always remember that low margin means high leverage.
Think of that leverage multiplier that we learned about in the lecture on using leverage.
So unless you're an experienced investor who has studied the futures markets and really
know what you're getting into, I'd leave the leveraged investing in futures to the pros.
The second way that individuals generally invest in foreign currency is through a broker
using margin.
And in the case of foreign exchange, the leverage that brokers will let investors take on is
even higher than the leverage that is allowed in the futures contracts.
For example, the typical foreign exchange broker will let an individual investor use
margin to achieve leverage of 50 to 1.
And some brokers will allow leverage of 200 to 1 or even higher.
A leverage ratio of 50 to 1 means that an investor will deposit $1,000 with the broker
and control $50,000 with the foreign currency.
Now assume that you use 50 to 1 leverage to buy Euro, where the price initially is $1.40
per Euro.
So you deposit $1,000 with your broker and buy $50,000 worth of Euro, which is $35,714.29.
If the price of the Euro rises to $1.42 each, then your Euro are now worth $50,714.29.
You've made a profit before trading commissions in interest of $714.29.
Of course, if the price of the Euro falls to say $1.38 instead, your $35,714.29 Euro
will only be worth $49,285.71, which results in a loss of $714.29.
So a movement of $0.02 in the price of the Euro almost wipes you out.
This is precisely the reason I'm so down on investing in foreign currency.
If you really, really want to invest in foreign currencies, try the ETF route.
There are actually ETFs out there that directly hold foreign currency like the Euro.
No leverage, just a cheap way to make a bet on the exchange rate.
But if you do this, make sure that the ETF isn't using leverage.
There are lots of leveraged foreign currency ETFs out there, too.
Now there's a second way that people are investing in foreign exchange.
That is nearly as dangerous as these leveraged purchases of currency that I've just talked
about.
This is a strategy called the carry trade.
The carry trade is actually a way to take advantage of differences in interest rates
between countries, but it relies on stable exchange rates to make it work.
Professional investors have made billions of dollars in profits on the carry trade in
the past two decades, and this trade is increasingly being offered to individual investors as well.
The carry trade works like this.
First, an investor borrows a sum of money in a currency that has a very low interest
rate.
For many years, this currency was the Japanese yen.
But after the financial crisis, European countries and even the US had such low interest rates
that traders started to borrow in euros and dollars as well.
The next step is to find a country with relatively high interest rates, exchange your currency
for the high interest rate country's currency, and invest in the country's bonds.
For example, Australia and Brazil have had much higher interest rates than other countries
for long periods of time, so investors have been buying high-yielding assets in these
countries as part of the carry trade.
So imagine that you borrow $10,000 in the US at 2% interest, and then buy the equivalent
amount of Brazilian reels, and then buy a Brazilian government bond yielding, say, 12%.
Wow, the 10% difference in interest rates makes it look like you've earned $1,000 a year
for free.
Well, it's not for free, and that's the big problem.
The part of this trade that makes it the carry trade is that the investors doing it are carrying
or holding onto the risk that the foreign exchange rates will change between the time
they buy the foreign asset and the time they sell the foreign asset and change the currency
back to dollars.
Again, an example will show you best what I mean.
Suppose you're able to borrow that $10,000 at a 2% rate of interest, and you don't have
to pay anything back for one whole year.
So in one year, you'll need to pay your lender $10,200.
You take the $10,000 and buy Brazilian reels with it.
The reels cost 60 cents each right now, so you're able to buy 16,666 and 6,700 reels.
You put this in a one-year government bond yielding 12%.
So one year from now, your Brazilian bond pays you 18,666.67 reels, and then you go
to buy US dollars with that amount.
But wait, now the Brazilian reels is only worth 55 cents, not 60 cents, so you can only
buy 10,266.67 with your reels.
Well, on the positive side, you can still afford to pay back your loan in full, but
you only have $66.67 left over, and that isn't even counting the transactions cost you'll
have to pay in the real world.
So again, it's easy to lose money if exchange rates change, and they tend to bounce around
quite a bit.
Even by the surge in ads during the past few years, it seems like there's been an explosion
in interest in the carry trade among retail investors.
And even I used to dream about being able to do this trade in the abstract.
But again, this strategy boils down to buying currency and using a lot of leverage, so it's
just as easy to lose a lot of money as it is to make it.
The upshot is, of course, don't try this at home.
In the end, remember the idea of investing in real assets.
There are plenty of amazing opportunities outside the US.
About $80 trillion worth according to the statistics we saw earlier, and they're all
rooted in real assets.
So do invest abroad, but don't invest in money.
Invest in the companies and the projects that make money, no matter what color the money
is or what kind of funny pictures they put on it.
Don't over-weight foreign markets, since many of them have a lot of growing up to do.
But do make enough room in your portfolio that you can benefit from their growth and
development as well as from the diversification protection that they offer.
So tell your 401k to pack its bags, get ready to search the four corners of the globe for
the great investments out there waiting to be discovered.
