Well, we've been learning about all kinds of investments in this course, but everything
we've learned about so far are financial assets, or what we used to call paper investments
back when we still had paper bonds and stock certificates.
It's time that we learned about something real, some kind of tangible assets you can
really sink your teeth into, or at least reach out and touch.
In this lecture, we're going to learn about investing in two of the most popular tangible
assets, real estate and commodities.
Investing in tangible physical assets like real estate is certainly very popular among
many individual investors.
Many people invest in real estate by buying and renting out residential properties, ranging
from one small home to entire apartment buildings.
Since I live in a college town, several of my friends and neighbors, and even some professors
I know, have all purchased rental properties and become landlords.
And I can understand why they do this.
The cash returns to being a landlord, especially in an area with several colleges and universities,
can be substantial.
But of course, becoming a landlord isn't for everyone.
It has its own set of challenges and problems that can make it more of a hassle than it's
worth.
So, are there good ways to invest in real estate without needing to become a landlord?
Well, by now, you should know that I don't ask questions like that unless the answer
is yes.
There are several ways that individual investors can make real estate investments without having
to get dragged into the chore of day-to-day property management.
You'll learn about three of these ways in this lecture, beginning with mortgage-backed
securities.
Oops, did I just say something wrong?
Well, you might think so, since mortgage-backed securities developed a terrible reputation
during the financial crisis of 2008.
Before I address that issue, let me just define what a mortgage-backed security is and tell
you a little bit about how it works.
A mortgage-backed security is simply a specialized type of bond.
Now, in the case of regular bonds, the payments on the bond come from the borrower's income.
For example, companies pay out their bond payments out of the money that they earn from operations,
and governments make their bond payments out of the tax revenues that they raise.
Corporations that issue mortgage-backed securities pay their bond payments out of mortgage payments
that are made by homeowners.
A mortgage-backed security, or MBS for short, is issued by a special corporation that buys
and holds hundreds or thousands of mortgages.
Each month, the borrowers of these mortgages send in their mortgage payments, and these
payments ultimately get sent to the corporation that holds the mortgages.
This company turns around and pays out almost all this cash to the holders of the mortgage-backed
securities, but at six-month intervals, like the payments on a regular bond.
The company organizing the mortgage-backed security keeps a small portion of the incoming
mortgage payments to cover its expenses, which are small, and to compensate the owners of
the company for their efforts.
So holders of mortgage-backed securities are entitled to receive some slice of the mortgage
payments of hundreds or thousands of homeowners.
Now I say some slice of the mortgage payments because there are a couple of different ways
that mortgage-backed securities transmit this cash to the holders of the securities.
The simple way is called a pass-through security, in which the special corporation organizing
the MBS simply passes the mortgage payments onto the bondholders, after taking out a small
cut, of course.
The other way to organize a mortgage-backed security is to use the so-called CDO structure,
where CDO stands for Collateralized Debt Obligation.
The CDO divides its payments up into several different sets, called tranches.
The word tranche, incidentally, comes from the French word for slice.
The tranches differ according to the priority of the claim that each one has on the mortgage
payments, and the share of the total promised mortgage payments that each tranche is entitled
to.
If you have the highest priority claim on the mortgage payments, which is called the
triple A, or super senior tranche, then you get paid off first, and whatever is left after
you've been paid is then paid to the next people in line.
So in the CDO, different investors receive different sets of payments, while in a pass-through
every investor gets the same thing.
And in a CDO, the first people in line have an excellent chance of getting everything
they're entitled to, while the people at the end of the line are virtually guaranteed
to suffer some losses.
Mortgage-backed securities got such a terrible reputation, because many mortgage-backed
securities, organized in CDO form, were stuffed full of subprime mortgages that defaulted
in record numbers, beginning in 2007.
The losses on the defaults of the subprime mortgages were so large that even the first
investors to be paid off from the mortgage payments actually suffered losses.
And since these tranches were rated triple A, this came as a huge shock to these investors.
After that fiasco, why should anyone invest in mortgage-backed securities?
Well because not all MBSs are the same.
Not only is there a big difference between pass-through securities and CDOs, but there's
also an equally big difference between so-called private label mortgage-backed securities
and the MBS that carries a guarantee from a government agency or government-sponsored enterprise.
First, pass-through mortgage-backed securities really can't hold subprime mortgages, because
the default rate on subprime mortgages is too high for most investors' comfort.
If all the investors have to share equally in the default risk, as they do in a pass-through
mortgage-backed security, then the organizers won't be able to find enough investors who
are willing to share that risk.
These CDOs, which concentrate the default risk in the so-called lower tranches, which
are the last ones in line to receive the payments, remember, can work for subprime mortgages.
The second reason why you should still be interested in investing in MBS is that there
are plenty of mortgage-backed securities that carry a government guarantee.
For example, the MBS organized by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have a guarantee on all payments
of interest and principle.
Fannie and Freddie were actually taken over by the U.S. government in 2008, and so now
this guarantee remains in place, and will remain so until all the MBS arranged by these
companies mature.
But there's actually an even better source of mortgage-backed securities if you're looking
for safety.
This is the MBS that is arranged by Ginny Mae, the government national mortgage association.
Ginny Mae is a federal agency that was created in the late 1960s.
Ginny actually invented the mortgage-backed security in 1970 and has been successfully
issuing them ever since.
What Ginny Mae does is to organize pools of mortgages that are issued under the Federal
Housing Administration and Veterans Administration mortgage programs.
You may know that the FHA and VA programs are federal mortgage insurance programs for low-income
families and for veterans, respectively.
So Ginny Mae organizes mortgage-backed securities out of pools of mortgages whose payments are
already guaranteed by the U.S. government.
And on top of that, Ginny Mae adds her own guarantee to the payments on the bonds themselves.
So mortgage-backed securities organized by Ginny Mae carry a double government guarantee.
It's hard to get safer than that.
Of course, this means that the interest paid on Ginny Mae's mortgage-backed securities
is almost the same as the rate on government bonds of the same maturity.
But if you're looking for a safe way to invest in real estate, it's almost impossible
to find something safer than that.
But the safety of investing in government-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities can take away some
of the benefits of investing in real estate.
The returns on these safe mortgage-backed securities are not going to rise and fall
all that much with the property markets.
This means that you'll not only miss out on higher returns, but you could also miss out
on some potential diversification benefits.
Now, generally, real estate markets don't move in lockstep with the stock and bond markets,
and this means that they can provide good diversification.
But you have to find an investment that is more closely connected to the real estate
markets than government-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities.
One of these investments is the Real Estate Investment Trust, or REIT, for short.
A REIT is very similar in its organization to a closed and mutual fund.
It's a company that sells shares to investors once at the beginning of the fund and then
uses the proceeds to invest in a portfolio of real estate assets.
The shares of the REIT trade on stock exchanges, just like the shares of closed and mutual
funds do.
The big difference between REITs and closed and mutual funds, though, is that REITs are
required to pay out at least 90% of their income as dividends to the shareholders.
This means that REITs can be attractive for their dividends as well as the possibility
of capital gains.
The capital gains on REITs have tended to be modest, so the returns on them have primarily
been delivered through the dividends that they pay.
Now there are two main types of REITs that you should be aware of, and you'll probably
only be interested in one of them.
The main type of REIT, judging by the fact that 90% of REITs are organized this way,
is the equity REIT.
Many REITs invest directly in real estate, buildings and land.
They buy buildings and manage them, or even develop real estate projects and manage them.
Mortgage REITs, on the other hand, invest in mortgages and mortgage-backed securities.
Either type of REIT investment is fine in principle, but mortgage REITs tend to be highly leveraged.
And because of this, they also have to devote a lot of attention to hedging the interest
rate risk that comes with being highly leveraged.
So I don't recommend them unless you really feel comfortable evaluating and monitoring
highly leveraged investments.
Now that isn't to say that equity REITs don't use leverage themselves.
Actually they usually do.
But they do so at much lower rates.
Still, one of the things that you need to check before you invest in an equity REIT is its
leverage ratio.
If a REIT has debt of more than two-thirds of the value of its assets, then you should
pass it up in favor of another REIT with a lower ratio of debt to assets.
The other thing you'll want to pay attention to is the type of property that the REIT intends
to invest in.
A lot of REITs invest in retail space, like shopping malls and strip malls.
Office REITs invest in office buildings, which can be in the hearts of big cities, but can
just as easily be in the suburbs.
Health care REITs invest in hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, and even retirement communities.
And of course there are also residential REITs, which mainly invest in multifamily homes and
apartment buildings.
There are even hotel REITs.
The type of property, and of course its location, will determine a lot about the returns to
the REIT.
So as always, you need to do your homework by investigating what the REIT actually holds.
For example, there's a huge difference in office REITs that invest in buildings inside
the Chicago Loop, versus office REITs that invest in office parks in the suburbs of Phoenix.
In addition, keep in mind that the REIT is going to manage properties, and it will make
money by collecting rent.
Rents change as economic conditions change, so a great returning REIT today can become
a low returning REIT next year if the economy where the buildings are goes into a recession.
That also depends, of course, on how long the leases are.
If a REIT owns buildings that have longer term leases, then its income will be less
sensitive to changes in the local economy where the buildings are located.
Residential leases, for example, run only about one year into the future.
Most office leases last a few years.
Shopping mall leases run between 7 to 10 years, and health care facility leases can
go all the way out to 15 years.
Well, that's a lot to consider in terms of how to choose a REIT.
Now, if you're not excited about the prospect of researching a large set of REITs and trying
to choose one or more, then you can always invest in a mutual fund that buys REIT shares,
or an ETF that does the same.
In fact, this is not only a good way to go for US REITs, it's probably the best way to
go if you also want to try some foreign real estate investment.
If you've ever traveled to any large city in a developing economy like Mumbai or Shanghai,
you know that foreign real estate markets also present tremendous growth opportunities.
Unfortunately, investing in foreign real estate presents the same problems to investors as
any other foreign assets.
They're a hassle to buy and own, and they can generate tax problems for you.
Therefore, the best way to access this opportunity is through US-based mutual funds, or ETFs
that invest in the shares of foreign REITs.
One other very interesting real estate investment is Timberland.
The world's wood products increasingly come from managed forests, and many of these managed
forests are owned by private companies that specialize in buying and managing Timberland.
The attraction of Timberland is very similar to REITs.
The land that the tree sits on can appreciate in value, and over time the trees on the land
will be harvested and sold to the producers of various wood products.
In fact, most pieces of Timberland are divided up into trees of differing maturities so that
each year a different set is harvested and sold off to generate income.
Just like REITs, Timberland can offer an attractive dividend and a diversification opportunity.
Big institutional investors like pension funds and university endowment funds have taken
advantage of Timberland investments for decades.
Companies called Timber Investment Management Organizations, or TIMOs, are big players in
this business.
Unfortunately, the minimum investments in many TIMOs are quite large, typically at least
a million dollars.
But as always these days, ETFs come riding to the rescue.
You can buy into a Timber ETF that holds shares in many TIMOs.
In fact, the first Timber ETF adopted the ticker symbol CUT.
Now is it just me or are these ETF managers having just a little more fun than everybody
else in the investing business?
Real estate isn't the only intangible investment out there.
One category of physical investments that used to be only the realm of specialists and let's
just say eccentric people is commodities.
These days though, commodity investing has gone mainstream.
The amazing increases in commodities prices that we saw both before and after the financial
crisis of 2008 grabbed headlines as well as the attention of millions of investors.
And as I've already mentioned in my introductory lecture on ETFs, it's now easier than ever
to invest in commodities.
But ease of investing doesn't automatically make commodities a great investment.
Let's step back and think carefully about why you'd want to invest in commodities.
Then we can think about the types of commodities to invest in and the different ways you can
do it.
Commodities are different from the other investments we've been discussing so far in this course.
Stocks, bonds and real estate all either promise explicit income to the investor or they promise
growth that leads to increased value in the future.
Commodities don't do either one of these things.
For example, if you buy a million gallons of unleaded gasoline, it won't pay you any dividends
and it won't grow into more gasoline or anything else for that matter.
So we have to be careful about including commodities in our investment portfolios.
They shouldn't be a standard part of anyone's portfolio unless you have a compelling reason
to include them.
In my opinion, there are two possibly compelling reasons why you'd want to invest in commodities.
The first reason is that commodities could be an inflation hedge.
You may remember from my very first lecture that inflation is one of your worst enemies
as an investor.
So we should take any investment that's a potential inflation hedge seriously.
Now when the general price level rises, this means that most prices rise, but not necessarily
all of them.
So if we're looking for an inflation hedge investment, we need to find commodities that
tend to rise right along with a price level.
And that tends to be the main problem with investing in commodities as an inflation
hedge.
There are several regularities that we tend to see in the relationship between commodity
prices and some index of the general price level, like the consumer price index.
And they indicate that commodities are a so-so hedge against inflation.
First, over short periods, when inflation is high and increasing, commodity prices generally
rise very strongly.
It sounds good, right?
But on the other hand, commodity prices tend to rise very strongly and then decline very
strongly.
That is, they tend to overreact to fears about inflation and then they correct themselves.
So in other words, commodity prices tend to overshoot the target if the target is the
general price level.
And during the times when inflation isn't as strong, commodity prices tend to be driven
by events specific to the commodity, like weather for agricultural commodities.
So the price of soybeans can soar if there's an extended drought in the U.S. Midwest or
crop failures in China, but this will have a limited impact on the price level.
What the total picture seems to indicate is that most commodities just don't have a close
enough link to the price level to be considered all that great as inflation hedges outside
of the times when inflation is already a problem.
Of course, some commodities have a closer connection to the price level than others.
For example, for many years, oil was considered a good inflation hedge because of the dependence
currency of the entire economy on oil.
Also, gold has been traditionally known as an inflation hedge.
This is because of its potential role as a substitute for money.
Well, let's see how well they do as inflation hedges.
If we look at the price of a barrel of oil over the last few decades and the price of
an ounce of gold and compare both of these to the consumer price index, we can see some
of the problems I've been mentioning.
During times of inflation fears, the prices of oil and gold tend to overshoot.
And during times of low inflation, the prices of the commodities respond to supply and demand
conditions in their own markets without much regard for the general price level.
Notice for example, how the prices of both gold and oil fell or stagnated during much
of the past three decades, while the price level continued to rise.
Another commodity looks all that great as an inflation hedge, in my opinion.
The real question in my mind is whether commodities make a better hedge against inflation than
inflation index bonds, which we learned about in some detail in an earlier lecture.
Personally, I think inflation index bonds do a much better and more consistent job of
hedging against inflation than commodities do, so I'm not a big believer in commodities
as a good inflation hedge for a long run investor.
But there's still a second reason why you might want to invest in commodities, and this
is because you believe that there's a long term trend toward higher commodity prices.
This is basically a story about global economic growth, especially in the emerging market
economies like Brazil, India, China, many others.
As these economies develop, they'll demand more energy and raw materials that in turn
go into producing goods and services.
Also, as the people in these countries move up the income ladder, they'll demand more
luxury goods that consume more commodities.
For example, one of the things that people consume a lot more of as they get richer is
meat, so more grain is needed to feed the animals that produce meat because it takes
more grain to produce a pound of meat than a pound of bread.
That means that grain prices will rise.
Now most international organizations that deal with economic development, like the International
Monetary Fund, predict that economic growth in emerging markets will be much higher than
in the industrialized world for some time to come.
This means that these economies will continue to increase their demand for commodities,
which will push prices of energy, minerals, foodstuffs, and other commodities higher and
higher.
If you believe this story of long term economic development leading to increased demand for
commodities, then you need to think about what commodities are especially likely to
be in high demand and short supply over the coming decade or longer.
This is tricky because as the example of oil shows, when the price of a commodity rises
significantly, suddenly everyone scrambles to figure out how to make more of it and supply
will increase over time.
Sometimes the increases in supply will actually overtake the increases in demand and the commodity
price will fall rather than rise.
The recent discovery of ways to exploit the huge, untapped reserves of natural gas trapped
in shale formations throughout the world is a case in point.
On the other hand, there may be tremendous opportunities for people who can anticipate
how the tastes of people in emerging markets will change as they move up the income ladder.
For example, think what would happen if the populations of India and China all suddenly
switched to coffee from their traditional tea.
No matter which motivation you have for investing in commodities, if you want to invest in them,
you're going to have to do a lot of research.
If you think that commodities will give you good inflation protection, you'll have to
find the commodities that currently do the best job of keeping up with prices.
You may have to download data on commodity prices and, as I've done, graph the price
level and the commodity prices on the same graph and use your judgment.
And if you're going to invest in commodities as a bet on growth, then you'll have to keep
up with the developments in the global markets for the commodities you want to invest in.
You'll have to anticipate where the innovations in supply and demand for the commodities are
likely to be, and guess how much of these will affect the values of the commodities that
you're interested in.
Now that we have some idea of why we'd want to invest in commodities, let's consider
how to do it.
I want to start by going over an old argument about investing in commodities and see whether
this rule of thumb still works today.
Up to about 20 years ago, the old school advice for investing in commodities boiled down to
the following rule.
Don't invest in gold, invest in the mining company.
The general form for this rule is, don't invest in the commodity, invest in the commodity
producer, or perhaps the commodity distributor.
Why was this rule part of the conventional wisdom of investing back then?
Well, it's mainly because to invest directly in commodities, you had to do one of two things.
First, you could buy the commodity yourself, and that's just plain expensive, when you
factor in the dealer markups on both buying and selling and the storage costs.
The other way was to deal in the futures markets for the commodity, but that required a lot
of expertise in using these contracts, in fact it still does.
In the transaction costs of buying and selling contracts do add up over time, pushing down
your overall return.
On the other hand, if you buy into a commodity producing company, you get the same exposure
to the underlying commodity.
Again, think about a gold mining company.
If the value of gold goes up, then the value of the mining company's proven gold reserves
also goes up, and the price of the mining company stock should increase.
In addition, the managers of the mining company are also working to smooth the earnings of
the company, so that the stock won't bounce up and down nearly as much as the price of
the commodity.
So buying the mining stock was actually seen as superior to investing in the commodity
directly, since you avoid the transaction costs and get the chance for the managers
to smooth the value of the company out.
These days, of course, we have ETFs that offer us the chance to invest in commodity indexes
as well as in individual commodities, and ETFs can invest in both the commodity and the producers.
Did you know, for example, that in addition to gold and platinum, you can also invest
in ETFs that hold metals like lithium and uranium?
So if I can buy an ETF that invests directly in one of these commodities or commodity index,
I don't have to barrel the transaction and storage costs that people had to pay to own
the stuff directly.
In addition, when I buy the stock of a commodity producer, I do get the exposure to the commodity,
but I also might get a lot of exposure to stuff I don't want in my portfolio.
For example, let's think about oil companies.
When I buy the stock of a diversified oil company, I don't just get oil, but I also
get refining and distribution.
I could also get exposure to low-margin, low-profit gas stations.
And no matter what company I buy, I get exposure to all the problems of modern corporate management
like bad investment decisions, overuse of the corporate jet, tax problems, labor disputes,
and all sorts of other value-destroying headaches.
And all I wanted was an investment in a few barrels of oil.
So on the surface, it seems like this old-school argument isn't valid anymore.
We can find cheap ways to make investments directly into commodities.
So who needs the companies to do it for us?
Well, if the companies are cheap relative to the value of the commodity, even after
factoring in all the potential problems I just mentioned, then it could be a much better
deal to buy the stock of the producer than the commodity itself.
If you think that the commodity price will continue to rise and the producer's shares
are undervalued now relative to the current price of the commodity, won't they be even
more undervalued if the commodity price continues to rise?
Well, that seems like an even better opportunity to earn a high return than investing directly
in the commodity.
Of course, this may turn out to be a riskier investment than you want to undertake.
But it's important to realize that there are still occasions in which buying the commodity
producer seems like a better investment than buying the commodity itself.
Well, that about does it for my brief look at investing in intangible assets.
From this discussion, I hope you come away with the desire to look into using REITs or
mutual funds that invest in REITs as a way to invest in real estate.
The income-producing potential of real estate, combined with its diversification benefits,
make it a great choice for everyone's portfolio.
On the other hand, I don't think that investing in commodities automatically qualifies for
inclusion in your investment plans.
But if you think that commodities do a great job of hedging exposure to inflation risk,
or if you think that commodity prices are destined to rise as the emerging markets grow,
then you have sufficient reason to look into adding commodities to your list of investments.
But you should be prepared for a wild ride in any commodity that you add to your portfolio.
And you may be better off investing in great companies that are also commodity producers.
