In this lecture, we're going to use the time value of money tools we learned in the previous
lecture to do some hands-on financial planning.
Financial planning is one of those key first steps that you need to do when you start investing.
It helps you figure out some answers to your big questions like, how much should I be investing?
Good financial planning also helps you see the full range of financial possibilities for
your life.
If you have a financial plan that works for you, it will both help you sleep better at
night and it will help motivate you to keep investing.
Financial planning comes down to one basic task, finding a balance between the amount
of money you need to reach a particular financial goal and the value of your investments.
Since we're talking about balancing these two amounts, it suggests that we can set up
an equation to guide our financial planning.
And here it is.
The amount of money needed at some point in time is equal to the value of the investments
at that same point in time.
What this equation expresses is a condition, specifically a condition for personal financial
equilibrium that we're trying to satisfy.
We know that we'll have a workable financial plan if we can find numbers that make this
equation balance.
Now turning this basic equation into a tool that you can use to make decisions is the
tricky part of financial planning.
But I'll show you how to do it right.
First we need to pick a financial planning problem to solve.
I'm going to focus on financial planning for retirement because it's something that
everyone needs to do and it's one of the more complex financial planning problems.
You'll be able to apply everything we do in this lecture to other financial planning
problems and they'll all seem easier to solve than this one.
Well here's the basic retirement planning scenario.
Suppose you plan to retire at a certain age, say 65 or 70, and after that time your income
will either be close to zero or it will be much less than it is today.
During the years that you work you invest some money each year and these investments
will hopefully grow into a large sum that will be enough to provide for your needs during
retirement.
The retirement planning problem is to find the right numbers that turn this general idea
into a workable plan that you're comfortable with.
As I mentioned in the lecture on the time value of money, the best way to attack most
financial problems is to draw a picture.
So let's draw a timeline and start filling in information on the timeline that describes
our financial planning problem.
Start by making a mark somewhere toward the right end of the timeline.
This mark represents the number of years from now that you'll retire.
That number depends on your age now and the age you'd like to retire at.
Let's say that you think your retirement is 30 years away from now.
So I put a 30 under this mark, which means that my retirement date is time 30.
To keep things simple, you expect that during your retirement you won't have any income
from working.
You'll be living off the value of your investments and social security.
Now you'll need to estimate how many years you'll live during your retirement.
You really don't want to run out of money after you retire, so do think carefully about
how long you can expect to live.
For example, Americans who are 60 to 69 years old have a life expectancy of about 80 to
83 years.
Suppose you conclude that the best number for you, given when you want to retire, is
20 years.
So you expect to retire 30 years from now and live for another 20 years after that.
Now there's an even harder calculation you need to make.
How much money you'll need during each year of retirement.
And experts tend to think about this question in terms of the fraction of your pre-retirement
salary that you'll need in order to maintain your lifestyle.
From my reading, there seems to be general agreement that the number is around 70%.
That is, you'll want to spend about 70% of your pre-retirement salary each year during
retirement.
But we'll want to make two adjustments to this number.
First, we should account for social security.
The forecasts I've seen indicate that social security payments will be about 20% of your
pre-retirement salary.
We can use that number to reduce the amount that we'll have to pay out of our own investments.
We should also adjust this number for increased costs during retirement, especially medical
care.
As I mentioned in my first lecture, the price of medical care is rising more quickly than
the general price level.
And in addition, retirees consume more health care services than younger people do.
So to be on the safe side, let's assume that we'll need an additional 10% of pre-retirement
salary to pay for the increased cost of medical insurance and medical care that isn't covered
by insurance.
Let's review these numbers before we go on.
We assume that we'll need 70% of our pre-retirement salary.
Then we subtract 20% because we'll receive that much from social security.
That leaves 50%.
But then we add 10% for higher medical expenses.
That means that during retirement, we'll need to pay 60% of our pre-retirement salary out
of our investments.
Okay, now let's suppose you make $80,000 a year currently.
Won't we need to estimate what you'll be earning 30 years from now?
Well, this brings up the question of how to deal with inflation in these financial planning
problems.
One way to do this is to include inflation in every calculation you make.
You can do this, but it gets cumbersome and messy.
The other way to do this is to use inflation-adjusted numbers, in the sense that they're adjusted
for the average rate of inflation.
The nice aspect of the inflation-adjusted approach is that it allows us to use the following
neat little trick.
I can use today's price as my guess of a future price if I'm willing to assume that
this price goes up at the same rate as the general inflation rate.
So if I use today's salary as my best guess of my pre-retirement salary, I'm not assuming
that I'm getting no raises for the next 30 years.
Actually, I'm assuming that my raises on average will make my salary just keep up with
inflation.
Unless I have very good reason to believe that my raises are going up faster than the
average inflation rate, this seems like an acceptable assumption.
I like the inflation-adjusted approach because it keeps the calculations simpler.
The only thing I have to remember is to be consistent and only use inflation-adjusted
prices and rates of return in all my calculations.
As long as I keep all my calculations in inflation-adjusted terms, the answers I'll get to my planning
problems will be right.
And I can still adjust prices that I believe will grow a lot faster or a lot more slowly
than the general rate of inflation.
I'm going to use the inflation-adjusted approach and assume that your salary just keeps up
with inflation so that you make the equivalent of $80,000 the year before you retire.
So we're talking about spending 60% of $80,000 or $48,000 each year for each of the 20 years
of retirement.
On our timeline, we can put in $48,000 starting at time 31 and ending at time 50.
This set of expenditures represents your financial goal.
Notice that we start your spending at time 31 because it's a convenient and more accurate
way to represent the fact that the spending during your first year of retirement will
take place between time 30 and time 31.
Now let's represent your investing on the timeline.
I'm going to set the problem up, assuming that I want to find out how much I should
invest each year.
Let's let capital S stand for the amount of investing you do each year while you're working.
That means we put an S on top of each mark for each year, starting at time 1 and ending
at time 30.
Again, we put the first investment at time 1 to reflect the fact that even though you're
going to start investing right now at time 0, you'll probably invest steadily during
the year, setting aside part of each paycheck.
So it's more accurate and appropriate to represent the fact that your investing during
the first year takes place between time 0 and time 1.
Well that completes the timeline.
We visualized our retirement planning problem.
Now to solve the planning problem, we need to put this information into our financial
planning equation.
Let's start by finding the amount of money you'll need to have at time 30 in order to
be able to spend $48,000 a year for the next 20 years.
This is the point where we need to bring out one more time value of money formula, the
present value of an annuity.
An annuity is a financial instrument that makes a fixed payment each period for a finite
number of periods.
In the picture, C is the payment that is made each period, N is the number of periods
that the payments are made, so it's also the total number of payments.
Lots of financial instruments and investments are annuities, or are made up of annuities
plus other payments.
A set of mortgage payments or car payments is an annuity, and most bonds are a combination
of an annuity and one or more additional payments.
Note though that when I've used the term annuity here, I'm not referring to the annuities
that are sold to retirees.
Those are a special type of annuity, and we'll learn about those in the next lecture.
Now the annuity formula isn't terribly complicated, but it's not that intuitive either.
But let me try a little anyway.
In an annuity, we have N payments of C dollars each.
So when we find the present value of the annuity, it looks like this.
The present value is equal to C over 1 plus R plus C over 1 plus R squared plus C over
1 plus R to the third and so on up through C over 1 plus R raised to the N.
So we can factor out the payment C and then do some algebra to simplify this down.
Well when you do all that, you get this formula.
C over R times the quantity 1 minus 1 over 1 plus R raised to the N.
In the annuity formula, C is the amount of the cash flow or payment.
N is the number of periods the cash flow is paid or received, and little R is the rate
of return you're earning.
Since the time periods we're using are years, the rate of return is an annual rate and really
is the average annual rate you're earning on your investments.
If we put in the numbers that correspond to C, N and R from our retirement planning problem,
then the value of this annuity represents the minimum amount of money that we need to
have at time 30 in order to afford this particular retirement.
But we're still missing the interest rate on this annuity.
What should we use?
Well, let's assume that on your retirement date you move most of your riskier, higher
yielding, long-term investments into less risky, lower yielding investments.
I realize that you want to start this process sooner than that in reality, but again, we're
trying to keep the calculations simple.
You'll be spending some of your accumulated investments each year, but the rest will still
be invested, and it will be earning some lower but still non-trivial rate of return.
So what's a reasonable R?
Well, keep in mind that we're using inflation-adjusted rates of return, so the rate we pick represents
the extra return on top of inflation that we think our investments will earn.
As I mentioned in my first lecture, it's harder to beat inflation than you might think,
so choosing a return of, say, 10% would be amazingly high.
A solid long-term investment will probably generate about 2% more than inflation without
taking on very much risk.
So let's enter .02, 2%, for our interest rate.
Now we have all the numbers we need to calculate the value of the annuity.
Our cash payment C is 48,000, the number of payments is 20, and the rate of return on
the annuity is 2% or .02.
We put these numbers into the formula, and then we can use a calculator or spreadsheet
to find out what this value is.
Before I do that, though, I want to recommend that you take the time to put this information
into a spreadsheet and that you make some neatly organized tables to keep track of this
information.
If you do this, then as you follow along with this example, you'll be building up a financial
calculator that you can always use to help you think about your financial planning problems.
So let me do just that.
I'm going to build a table on a spreadsheet, and I'll give it a special title.
I'm calling it the amount of money needed table.
That's one half of the financial planning equation.
Since the amount of money needed is going to be the value of an annuity, I'm going to
put three columns in the table that will keep track of the variables I need to use to calculate
the value of the annuity.
Instead of just calling the variables C, N, and R, as I did with the general version
of the annuity formula, I'm going to put in labels that describe in words what these
variables represent.
That way I can always open up the spreadsheet later and remember what these numbers really
mean.
The first column I labeled the number of periods of spending, which of course is the same as
the number of years spent retired.
If you want to label the number of years retired, that's fine.
I'm trying to keep the labels fairly general so I don't have to change them when I use
this table to solve other financial planning problems.
Right below the label, I'll enter the value I assumed for this number, 20.
The next column I'll label amount spent per period, and in the row below the table, I'll
enter the value I assumed for the amount I spend each year during retirement, which
is 48,000.
The third column I labeled return on invested funds, and enter my return of 2%.
Now below these variables, I'm going to enter in the actual formula I need to use to calculate
the annuity value.
When I enter that formula, instead of entering numbers, I'm going to enter in the cell addresses
on the spreadsheet that contain the numbers that I'm assuming for the values of C, N,
and R. If I set the table up this way, then I can always go back and change my assumptions
easily and not have to keep entering the same formula into the spreadsheet over and over
to see how numbers change.
Hopefully, you diehard calculator users out there can see the benefit of doing these calculations
on a spreadsheet instead of a calculator.
Before I enter in any formulas though, I'll put in a label so I know what it is I'm calculating.
I'm going to call this the amount needed, and to remind myself of what formula I'm using,
I'll write the formula in there as well.
When I write the formula in there, I'll use the same special characters that the spreadsheet
uses when I put in actual formulas into the cells.
That will also help remind me what's going on in the table.
In the row below that label, I'll enter in the annuity formula so that it will take the
values from my assumptions about C, N, and R, and use them to calculate the value of
the savings needed.
When all this is entered in, the spreadsheet calculates that the amount of money we need
to have at time 30 is $784,868.80.
This is the amount of money we need to have at time 30 so that we can spend $48,000 per
year for the next 20 years without running out.
As long as the money we haven't yet spent is earning an inflation adjusted return of
2% per year.
Now we'll turn to the other side of the financial planning equation.
We're investing S dollars per year for 30 years.
Again, this is an annuity so we can find the value of this annuity by assuming some rate
of return.
What should we use for the rate of return here?
Well, let's use a higher rate of return than we did before.
We have more time to invest so we can afford to be more aggressive with our investments.
Let's assume that we can earn 3.5% more than inflation on average.
This is almost double the inflation adjusted return we assumed above so that even though
the absolute size of the increase in return doesn't seem all that impressive, it really
is.
Okay, so we're going to invest S dollars per year for 30 years.
And during these 30 years, every dollar invested is earning a 3.5% inflation adjusted annual
return.
What's that going to amount to when we retire?
To figure this out, we have to do a two-step time value of money calculation.
First, we recognize that our investments form another annuity, a 30-year annuity that makes
payments of S dollars per year, which earns 3.5% per year.
So we can calculate the value of this annuity using the annuity formula.
But notice that this answer tells us the value of the annuity at time zero.
But at the first part of the financial planning problem, we calculated the amount of money
needed at time 30, not time zero.
So we have to also calculate the value of our investments as of time 30.
That's why we need to take a second step.
We know that we can use compounding to calculate the future value of any amount of money that's
invested at some fixed rate of return, and we learned the future value equation in the
previous lecture.
The formula to remind you is simply this.
Future value at time n is equal to the present value times 1 plus r raised to the n.
The trick is to use the total value of the annuity at time zero as the present value
in this equation.
That means that we'll compound the time zero value of the annuity by 30 years at 3.5%
in order to find the future value of the annuity at time 30.
Well, here's what the calculation looks like.
I realize that we can simplify this expression, but I like to leave it in this form because
it reminds us that what we're calculating is an annuity value that is then compounded
forward in time.
Now let's return to our spreadsheet to show this calculation.
Just like we did when we calculated the amount of money needed, we neatly label the variables
we need to use so we can always go back and understand what we did later.
I'm going to put this table right next to the one I made to calculate the amount of
money needed, and I'm going to label this table the total value of investments.
The formula has three variables, so we can set up a table that looks exactly like the
amount of money needed table.
I'll label the first variable number of periods of investing, and the value I'll put in the
cell below the label is 30.
I'll call the second variable I put in the table amount invested per period, and the
value we'll have to use right now is just s.
I'll label the third variable return on invested funds, and below it, I enter the return we're
assuming for these investment funds, which is three and a half percent.
In the next two rows of the table, I'll put in a label called value of investment, and
then below it, I'll enter the formula that we need to use to calculate the future value
of that annuity.
Since we haven't entered any number for s, the spreadsheet can't calculate the value
of your investments at time 30, so it gives an error in the cell after we enter the formula.
Don't worry about that error message, because our next step will be to find a number for
s.
We could enter numbers for s into the table and use trial and error to find a value for
s that balances our financial planning equation, but a much faster way is to simply set up a
calculation that solves for s given the other variables in the financial planning equation.
This is easier than it sounds since we already have a number for the amount of money needed.
If we set up the basic equation of financial planning and enter in all the numbers we know,
then we get this equation, which, if you look at it, is surprisingly simple to solve.
Notice that on the right-hand side of the equation, we have s times some number, so
we can solve for s by dividing both sides of this equation by this number that's multiplying
the s, but then we have to translate this solution into the correct cell references
so that we can enter it onto the spreadsheet.
The numerator of the solution is the amount of money needed from cell A5.
The numbers in the denominator are the rate of return on invested funds from cell G3 and
the number of periods of investing from cell E3.
We can rewrite the solution for s, substituting in the cell references containing these numbers,
and this is the formula for the solution that we enter into another part of the spreadsheet.
Notice that I'm putting this solution all the way over in column K so that I have some
room for a few other things that I'll put in columns H, I, and J later.
When we enter the formula correctly, we get that the answer for s is $15,203.95 per year.
This is the amount that you'll need to invest this year if you want to reach your retirement
goal.
It's the actual amount you need to save this year.
I keep mentioning that all our numbers are inflation adjusted, and this one is too, but
keep in mind that inflation adjusted values mean that they're all measured in terms of
current prices.
So this amount really is the number you need to invest today at today's prices.
Does the amount you need to invest seem like a lot?
Well it is.
It's slightly more than a sixth of your salary, and you'll have to increase that amount each
year to keep up with inflation.
Now that we've solved for s, the amount of money you need to invest each year, we can
go back and enter this value into cell F3.
Once you do this, you can use these tables as a template.
Just copy and paste them to different areas of the spreadsheet or to different spreadsheets
entirely.
After you copy them, you can change one or more of your assumptions and see how this
change affects the balance of your financial plan.
This is a great way to compare various what-if scenarios to see whether different choices
will make you better off.
There are lots of scenarios that you'll want to investigate using these templates.
For example, what if you want to retire early?
Well, then you'll have to shorten the time you invest and lengthen the time that you're
retired.
What if I want to invest more aggressively while I'm working?
Well, then you can increase the return that you earn.
And so on.
One of the things that you'll discover is that changing different assumptions about your
investing and your retirement will have different sized impacts on your ability to reach your
financial goals.
Of course, you also need to reality check the assumptions that you make.
Can I really save that much each year?
Will my investments really earn that much year in and year out?
These are the types of questions you'll need to keep in mind as you propose changes to
your investment plan.
Well, these are almost the full set of recipes that you'll need to remember and use as you
do your financial planning.
But the calculations I've shown you so far assume that you haven't done any investing
at all yet.
I realize, though, that you may have already set aside some investments.
So how do you factor those in?
Well, the answer is fairly simple.
First, we need to modify our financial planning equation just slightly.
Remember that the financial planning equation sets the amount of money you need at a point
in time equal to the value of your investments at a point in time.
We need to spell out explicitly that the value of your investments at a point in time is
the sum of the value of your previous investments, that is, all the investments you made before
now, plus the value of your current and future investments.
The next step is calculating the value of those previous investments and what they'll
be at some point in the future.
Hopefully you know the current value of your previous investments, or you can look them
up easily by checking your account statements from banks, brokers, or mutual funds.
Then, it's a straightforward matter of compounding at an appropriate rate of return for the correct
number of years using the basic future value equation.
Remember, you want to find the value of everything as of the same point in time, and for this
problem, a convenient coordinating point is your retirement date.
As an example, let's assume that your previous investments are worth $50,000 right now, and
you anticipate that they'll earn an average rate of 2.5% more than inflation over the
next 30 years.
You'll want to add this information to the spreadsheet we've been building so that including
the value of previous investments can be a normal part of our financial planning.
We can simply add a new section to our template, which we label value of past investments,
and set it up as in my diagram.
For clarity, I've changed the label of the other section from total value of investments
to value of future investments.
Then we can add one more column for the total value of all investments, which is the sum
of the value of past investments and the value of future investments.
Now we're set up to use this template for our financial planning.
Copy, Paste, Modify, and Compare.
Well, it's been a pretty intensive lecture, but we accomplished a lot.
We developed a simple financial planning template that you can build on a spreadsheet.
You can copy and modify this template in order to compare all kinds of retirement scenarios
that you want to consider.
And you can use it to solve other financial planning problems as well.
In addition, this template enables you to reassess your investment plan at any time.
You can say, OK, here's what my investments are really worth right now, and then recalculate
what you'll need to invest from that point onward.
This is the kind of calculation that you'll want to do every so often to check on the progress
of your investments so you can decide whether you need to make adjustments to your strategy.
And if you do need to make adjustments, then this template will help you identify specific
changes to get you where you want to go.
