Hello YouTube. What you have just heard is a piece I composed for this video. It demonstrates
how a song can progress through chords. Just as we've learned in our skills, chords
also have the ability to build up and release tension. Before we can get into understanding
how to build these progression of chords, we must learn basic points of rest and tension.
Exam the diagram on the screen. This is called the circle of fists. Just as the name suggests,
we can pick any key on the piano, then move up an interval of five. The key we land on
will be a chord, a tension, and our home key, or the key we began on before we counted up
five is our resolution point. So if we began on C, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, G would be our fifth note.
Let's hear how our tension chord G resolves down to C.
Pay attention to how comfortable C sounds in our ear after G. Can you figure out why this
tension disappears at C? I think you can. Remember from our previous video, we learned
about the flow of notes in a scale. Let's take a look at the G major chord. We have the notes G,
B, and D. If we take a look at our diagram for the scale, we can recall that B resolves to C.
Additionally, D moves to our two resolution points, C and E. So we have two tension notes from our
chord, B and D. With these tension notes moved, our ears can relax. Before we can continue along
in the circle of fifths, we must be familiar with our major scale formula. Because we moved to G on
the circle of fifths, this means we're counting in G major now. Knowing this, we must proceed with
caution and pay attention to our steps. Let's count up from G, five keys, and see where we go.
One, two, three, four, and five. We end up on the D chord. Similar to when we counted up from C,
the circle of fifths shows us that when we play in G major, the D chord is our tension chord. What
does a tension chord really mean on the circle of fifths? Let's examine our scale degree diagram
from the previous videos. Here we can see what degree is major, what degree is minor. We know by
moving at a certain point in the scale, we may create tensions. So other chords other than our
fifths should create tensions as well, right? The fifth chord has a special name in music. It is
referred to as the dominant chord. That is because the dominant chord has more force than other chords
in our scale. Playing from the dominant chord in a key, and then proceeding with the chord on the
first degree in our scale is like putting a period at the end of a sentence. Remember that
short example we heard in the beginning of the video? Let's listen to that again. This time I
will display the chords being played throughout the song. You don't need to be concerned about all
of the chords. Just pay attention when we play our G chord, our dominant chord, then move down to our
C chord, our home key, the first chord in our scale.
Did you hear how the movement from G to C finished the short song?
It is just as if the chords in the song are words, and when we move from our dominant chord G
to C, we are putting a period at the end of our sentence. I'll introduce more and more word to
you in this video, and that is the cadence. This period or movement from our dominant chord
to the first chord in our scale is called a cadence. There exists other cadences in music,
and we will discuss these in future videos.
