Okay, everyone, I think we will get started.
So good afternoon.
Thank you very much for coming to the very first in our What Matters to Me and Why series.
My name is Marianne Hunt and I'm the Director of Lifelong Learning and Travel in the Office
of Alumni Engagement.
What Matters to Me and Why is a series of virtual presentations followed by discussion
that goes beyond the great research we've all heard about to give our community a chance
to get to know our faculty, how they came to their topics, and in their own words, what
inspires and is important to them.
But before I introduce Professor Mike Levin, I'd like to go over a few housekeeping items.
You'll notice your audio and video has been turned off to eliminate any distraction and
disruption from background noise.
We'll have an audience Q&A session after the presentation and if you would like to ask
a question, please do so using the Q&A function on the lower right portion of your screen.
This webinar is going to be recorded and will be uploaded to the Tufts Alumni YouTube channel.
My colleague Amy will post the link to that page in the chat feature now.
So please check it out for this recording and for our other faculty and alumni presentations.
You'll notice the closed captioning is on.
If you'd like to turn this feature off, click the live transcript button at the bottom of
your screen and click on hide subtitles.
Lastly, I'd like to call attention to our community values.
Our goal is to create an environment where everybody feels welcome to ask questions and
participate in respectful conversation.
Amy is going to post those values now.
Now I'm very pleased to introduce Professor Michael Levin, the Vannevar Bush Distinguished
Professor of Biology and Director of the Allen Discovery Center.
Michael Levin is an alum himself, having received dual degrees in computer science
and biology from Tufts in 1992, followed by a PhD from Harvard University and he did his
postdoctoral training at Harvard Medical School.
He started his lab at the Forsyth Institute at Harvard Dental School in 2000 and then
moved the group to Tufts in 2009.
His lab is interested in diverse intelligence, the understanding, understanding the origin
and mechanisms of cognition in natural and unconventional embodiments.
Using a range of computational and biophysics approaches, they work to understand how cells
and evolved and synthetic organisms work together to solve problems, such as making
and repairing a complex anatomy.
They developed the first tools to study bioelectric signaling within all body tissues that serves
as the medium for the collective intelligence of cell groups.
Examples of their work span birth defects, regenerative medicine, cancer, bioengineering
and artificial intelligence.
I'm so grateful he's agreed to kick off this series.
His research is truly groundbreaking and as I'm sure you're about to see, very exciting.
Please give a warm virtual welcome to Michael Levin.
Thank you so much for the opportunity to share some thoughts with you and in particular,
what really matters to me and why.
And we're going to talk about something we call unconventional intelligence.
And if you want to learn more, please feel free to contact me at these websites.
We each of us feels internally like a single centralized intelligence.
You have memories that underlie your personal identity.
You have goals that are your goals, not the goals of your various parts.
You have preferences and so on.
But remarkably, we are all made of parts.
In fact, we are collectives of cells such as neural cells that you see here and many
other cell types.
And inside of each of these are lots more parts.
You can see here all the amazing richness that goes on and all of these little molecular
machines that are doing various things.
We are all of our intelligence, our embodied cognition is basically created by numerous
parts working together.
And this is a fundamental mystery of science and philosophy.
Understanding how it is that competent tiny parts work together to give rise to emergent
selves with memories, with preferences, with first person perspective is not only really
critical for philosophy of mind, understanding personal identity, sentience, consciousness,
things like that.
But also, they have very practical implications, as I'll show you today, with dealing with
injury, aging, cancer, birth defects.
All kinds of aspects of biomedicine really hang on this question of how it is that parts
make large scale decisions.
This is partly why this is something that really matters deeply to me, because it's
not only philosophical questions that are, I think, fascinating and kind of at the root
of what it means to be a sentient human, but also they have practical implications for
making life better for everyone.
And in addition to these fundamental and biomedical applications, as you will see, there are also
some really important aspects of ethics that are impacted by our scientific understanding
of this, having to do with our understanding of various categories, things like words like
human, robot, organism, and so on.
I've been asked to talk a little bit about how I got into all of this, and my earliest
memories are basically these, that I was a kid in the old USSR.
I was born in 69, and in the early 70s, I had asthma.
And in the absence of proper medication, pretty much the only thing left to do was to try
to calm the child down so as to not exacerbate their restriction of the airways.
So we had this ancient television that had various TV shows that I liked to watch that
weren't that many, but this was one.
But actually much more interesting than the front of the TV was the back of the TV.
And what my dad used to do is to take off the back so that I could sit there and stare
at these components.
And this was, to me, just incredibly fascinating because it's very clear that someone knew how
to put all those things together in exactly the right organization to make the shows come
out the front.
So it was very clear that what this device did was somehow a function of what was going
on inside.
And all these little parts had some part to play in this construction.
So how did they know to do this?
At the same time, I was really into bugs and insects.
And here you can see, this is just an example, this is a video of a bombardier beetle spraying
down these ants, which are attacking him.
He's going to spray them down with some hot acid that he actually generates inside of
his body.
And here you can see some behaviors such as this crab, which seems to have a pretty good
idea of what this implement is for that he's holding.
And this here is our more recent work.
This is a slime mold.
This yellow organism is called a physarum polycephalum.
And what it knows how to do, the whole thing is one cell, by the way.
This is one giant cell.
And what it knows how to do is how to reliably identify the direction in its environment
where there are three disks of glass as opposed to one.
It's actually doing a kind of sonar in the medium to figure out where the larger mass
is.
What was really fascinating to me, playing with caterpillars and bugs and beetles and
so on, is this amazing idea that life is also made of parts.
It's very clear that living things are made of small components.
But it was quite different because unlike the TV and the other types of engineering devices
that I had seen, all of these parts come together to form a larger scale being.
These are larger organisms that have preferences.
They have behaviors.
They're very clear.
They like certain things.
They don't like other things.
How does that happen?
So where did intelligence come from in life?
Who arranged all the parts?
How did they get arranged?
And how do these parts scale up into a being?
What does it mean to be a sentient being having all these different kind of shapes and living
in the world?
So throughout the world that we see, there is really a continuum of agency all the way
from very passive types of machines that are really very mechanical.
The only way you're going to change what they do is to literally rewire them, alter the
hardware.
And then you have going all the way up, there's this massive ladder where you start to have
some devices with gold, such as a thermostat, which can keep one very simple goal of keeping
the temperature in a particular range.
You have some biologicals that have preferences.
They can be trained by rewards and punishments.
And then of course you have some symbolic reasoning systems such as humans, which can
be impacted by actual reasons as opposed to rewards or forces or rewiring.
And the amazing thing is that not only during evolution did these kinds of beings arise
from simple matter, but actually in our lifetime each one of us has made this amazing journey
from a single cell, in fact from a collection of chemicals here, from a collection of biochemical
networks, all the way through to one of these creatures.
In our case, here's a picture of Rene Descartes.
We all made the journey from a single cell, which you might say is physics and chemistry,
to a human which has profoundly advanced cognitions, in fact, metacognition, self-modeling and so
on.
So how did this happen?
How do we become what Descartes called the Cartesian cut?
How do we get from this example of physics and chemistry to a rational being?
Now, let's think about our origins here as individual cells.
This is an organism known as a lacrimaria.
This is a single cell.
There's no brain, there's no nervous system, there's no cell-to-cell communication or
stem cells, just one cell.
And this cell is highly competent at solving all of its local single cell level problems.
In other words, physiological, metabolic, morphological, it achieves all of these little
goals at the single cell level.
But the amazing thing is that during evolution, these individual cells learned to work together
to pursue very large-scale goals.
And here's an example.
This is a Mexican salamander known as an axolotl.
These animals regenerate throughout their lifetime.
They regenerate their limbs, their eyes, their jaws, their ovaries, portions of the heart
and the brain.
And the way it works is this.
If you have a limb and they bite each other's legs off all the time, and if one of these
salamanders loses a limb, these cells will grow very, very rapidly.
They recreate exactly what's missing.
So whether it loses it up here or here or here, whatever it's lost, it only recreates
exactly what's needed.
And at that point, it stops.
And so these cells are able to detect this kind of error when something goes wrong and
they're able to reduce that error and then they stop.
When do they stop?
When a correct salamander arm has been produced.
So much like a thermostat, but in a much more complex way, this is a system that can pursue
these very large-scale anatomical goals of having a correct body organ.
In fact, it's even bigger than single organs.
If you, there's a very old experiment, if you take a tail from a salamander and surgically
attach it to the flank, over time, it will actually remodel into a limb, because the
whole body is able to determine that this is not the correct location for a tail.
And even the cells up here, which are locally correct, they start to turn into fingers.
The whole thing starts to remodel into a limb.
Now, the champions of that kind of process are these little critters, which we use in
our lab nowadays.
This is, these are called planaria.
They have a true brain, central nerve cords, lots of organs, all the same neurotransmitters
that you and I have.
And the amazing thing about planaria is that they are incredibly highly regenerative.
So you can chop it up into pieces.
The record, I think, is around 275 pieces.
Every piece is, will give rise to exactly what's missing, no more, no less.
And then you have a perfect tiny little worms.
Not only are they highly regenerative, because of this, they're also immoral.
They've solved the question of aging.
There is no such thing as an old planarian.
They basically can, they can live forever.
Now regeneration is not just for so-called lower animals.
So the human liver, of course, can regenerate, even the ancient Greeks knew that.
I have no idea how they knew that, but they did.
Planaria, which is a large adult mammal, can regenerate its antlers every year up to
a centimeter and a half of new bone growth per day.
And then human children can regenerate their fingertips below a certain age.
But of course, we'd all like to be like the planaria able to regenerate everything.
And the amazing thing about these kind of repair and remodeling of the body is that
not just the body changes, but also minds can change.
And so here's an example of a, of a caterpillar.
This is a soft-bodied creature that needs to crawl around in true plants, but it has
to turn into this.
It's a hard-bodied animal that has to fly and drink nectar.
And so during, and those require very different brains.
And so during this transition here, basically the brain is pretty much liquefied.
Most of the connections between the neurons are broken.
Many of the cells die.
A brand new brain is reassembled, but the amazing thing is that the memories remain.
And this has been shown that if you train the caterpillar on particular tasks, the
butterfly or the moth actually still remembers.
So if you've taken philosophy 101 and you've been asked to imagine what's it like to be
another creature?
You know, what's it like to be a caterpillar?
You can take that one step further and ask, actually, what's it like to be a creature
changing slowly when the brain is actually changing into a completely different type
of creature with different capacities, different sense organs?
Some of your memories will remain, but your mind and your body will change drastically.
So we really need to understand that this process can occur not just through evolution,
but actually on the scale of a single organism.
Another example is this.
In these planaria, if you train a planarian on something and you cut off their heads,
the tail will sit there for about a week and then they start to regrow a new head.
And once they regrow this new brain, the rest of the body somehow imprints the memories
onto it.
And then you can check them for memory and then you can tell that they still have memory.
So this requires us to try to understand how is the, how are memories, how is cognitive
content stored in the physical medium of the body?
It's clearly not just in the brain.
How do these memories move throughout the body?
These are the things that keep me up at night.
Now if you, let's you think that this is just some bizarre capacity of these worms, you
know, in our lifetime, we are going to have technologies where human patients have portions
of their brain replaced with new stem cells for degenerative disease and so on.
And what's going to happen to the memories of a, of a patient with decades of, of personality
and memories and so on, when parts of the brain are actually regenerated or repaired
with various technologies, this remains to be, to be examined.
Now let's, let's get back to this idea now, having looked at how, how, how memory and
behavior and changes of the body interact, let's just think about intelligence again.
William James had this fantastic definition of intelligence and he said intelligence is
the ability to get to the same ends by different means or by various means.
And I'm going to show you what, what this means in a very different, different context
than typical behavior.
Here's a tappel and you can see the, these are the eyes.
This is the brain.
You've got some nostrils here.
This is the gut.
And these tappels need to become frogs.
When a tappel in order to become frogs, all the organs have to move.
So the jaws have to move forward.
The eyes have to come forward.
Everything has to move.
It was thought that before it was thought that this is somehow a hardwired, that every
organ moves in the right direction, the right amount and you get your normal frog from a
normal tappel.
So we did an experiment to test this and we wanted to understand how, how smart is the
collective intelligence of these cells that know how to get from this shape to this shape?
What else can they do?
And we created what's, what we call Picasso tappels.
These are tappels where everything starts out in the wrong configuration.
So here you can see the eyes on the back of the head, the jaws are off to the side.
Everything has been scrambled.
And you would think that if all of these organs just move the right amount in the right direction,
you're going to get a very, very messed up frog.
Actually that's not what happens at all.
All of these components move in novel unnatural paths to get to, and they keep moving.
In fact, sometimes they go too far and they have to double back until they get a correct
frog face.
So what the genetics actually gives you is a system that is able to do some sort of error
minimization.
It can recognize that it's starting off in a different state, but that's okay.
It'll keep remodeling in the right direction and stop when it gets there.
And so what you can see here is that these cells actually have in a very kind of a basal
cybernetic sense, they have a goal.
They have the goal to get to the shape and they can pursue that goal through different
paths.
This is, this is that story again of the same ends by different means.
Now the scale of your goals says something very important about your cognitive sophistication.
If the biggest thing that you can serve as your goal is sort of local, let's say local
metabolic state on a single cell level, you're probably a single cell or a bacterium or something
like that.
But you could work together with other cells and pursue very large goals like this giant
goal of having a limb.
Way bigger, no individual cell knows what a limb is or how to count fingers, but the
cellular collective does.
And so that's how evolution got us from these very humble single cell goals to much larger
anatomical goals and eventually behavioral goals that you and I can pursue.
But this process can actually go awry and this is where the medical issues come up because
individual cells in this collective can defect and they can disconnect as it turns out, I'm
going to tell you in a minute, electrically disconnect from the other, the other tissues
and their goals shrink right back down to the goals of a single cell.
They basically revert back to the behavior of our ancient ancestors, let's say an amoeba.
The goals of an amoeba are to become two amoebas and to go wherever life is good and that is
cancer.
Metastasis.
When cells stop working towards building normal organs and tissues and go off on their own,
they basically just treat the rest of the body as outside environment.
They're not more selfish than any other cell, than any other structures, just that their
cells have gotten much smaller and now they're pursuing that.
So the boundary between self and world can grow and shrink during these processes.
This is a very unusual way to think about developmental biology, but actually Alan Turing
who's one of my heroes, very interesting.
He's of course known as one of the forefathers of computer science and he was very interested
in computing and intelligence and so on, but he also wrote a paper on morphogenesis on
developmental patterning and why is it that somebody would be interested in both of these
things simultaneously?
I think he was onto something very important, cognition and morphogenesis are really the
same problem.
It's a problem of the working out of intelligence in two different spaces in the space of anatomical
structure versus the space of behavior or other things that we normally associate with
intelligence.
So let's ask that question, how do tissues know what size and shape to be?
So this is a cross section through a human torso.
So look at this incredible order, all the tissues, the organs, everything is in exactly
the right place, the right size, the shape, organization next to each other.
Just amazing.
Where does it come from?
Because we all start life like this.
These are all embryonic blastomers that have to work together to build this exact thing
every single time.
Where is this pattern specified?
Now you may be tempted to say DNA and the important thing about that is that we can
read genomes now and we know that when you read DNA, you read the genome, you don't see
anything about the shape or size or symmetry or structure of the final organism.
What you see is a description of the cell level molecular hardware.
You see all the little proteins that every cell gets to have.
But you still have this amazing question of now having had that hardware, how is every
cell going to communicate, cooperate, and compete with each other to make something
like this?
What's the software?
So how do the groups of cells know what to make and when to stop?
As workers in regenerative medicine, if something is missing, we'd like to know how to convince
these cells to rebuild.
And as engineers, we actually also want to go further and say, well, what else can we
build instead of this with the same genome?
What are these cells willing to build if we were to communicate with them?
So I've shown you that the collective intelligence of groups of cells has anatomical goals.
And one of the questions you might ask about that is how do they know what those goals
are?
How does the system, how does the collective intelligence represent its goals?
How does it keep track of its goals?
And in order to answer this in my lab, we took some inspiration from the brain because
that's, of course, a basic system that we know there's a collection of cells inside
each of us that's able to carry out all kinds of goals.
And so that's our inspiration.
The way it works in the brain is basically this.
The hardware consists of various cells that have ion channels in their membrane.
These are little proteins that can shuttle charged molecules back and forth, so potassium,
sodium, chloride, things like that.
And as a result of these going in and out, there's a voltage gradient, like a little
battery across the surface, and that can be communicated to other cells through these
little connections, these little synapses or linkages known as gap junctions.
So you've got this whole network where individual cells in the network can have different voltages
and they all communicate with each other to pass the information back and forth.
That's the hardware.
The software you're seeing here, this is a living zebrafish embryo.
It's been imaged.
In our video that's another group that was able to image this and see the electrical
activity of these cells as the zebrafish is thinking about whatever it is that zebrafish
think about.
So you can see all of this electrical activity encodes all of the cognitive content, the
memories, the sensory inputs, the goals, everything of this animal.
And the amazing thing is that this trick, this ability to have a cognitive software
that rides on this kind of hardware is in fact not something that just came along when
neurons evolved.
It's been here all along.
It's evolutionarily ancient from about the time of bacterial biofilms.
So all cells in your body have the ability to drive electrical states.
Most of them connect and communicate with each other electrically.
And much like we saw what was going on in this brain, here you can start to look, this
is an early frog embryo, and we've treated it with a special chemical that fluoresces
different signals depending on the electrical environment.
And you can see all of these cells having their conversations with each other about who's
going to be left, who's going to be right, who dorsal, ventral, how many eyes, all these
sorts of things.
So I want to show you.
So basically what we've been doing is we've been learning to read and write the simple
mind that exists in these cellular collective intelligences.
And the way you can read and write it is by reading and writing the electrical states.
So the pre-patterns, the electrical pre-patterns look like this.
This is an early frog embryo in a time lapse, putting its face together.
And you can see here that this is one frame out of this movie, that if you track the bioelectrics,
you can already see what's going to happen.
Here's where the eye is going to go, here's where the mouth is going to go, here where
the placodes are going to be formed.
You can already read long before the genes get turned on to actually start to pattern
a frog face.
You can already see the memories of the future here, of what's going to happen.
So this is a normal pattern that is absolutely required for normal craniofacial development.
If you manipulate this electrical pattern, we get those Picasso tadpoles that I showed
you, also various human channelopathies, the birth defects in this electric face arise
that way.
There are also pathological patterns.
Here is a tumor induced by a human oncogene, but long before this tumor arises and starts
to metastasize, you can already see the bioelectrical state of these cells as they've basically
disconnected from their neighbors and acquired a really weird, depolarized state that leads
to conversion and metastasis.
So this is how we read, basically read the mind of these collective intelligences.
We track, much like neuroscientists do with neural decoding of the brain, we can track
the electrical activity of all these other cells.
Not only can we track them, but actually we can rewrite them.
And the way we do it, we don't use applied, there are no electrodes, there are no electromagnetic
waves or magnets or anything like that.
We basically use the same tools as neuroscientists do, we use pharmacology and genetics and
light to control how cells talk to each other and what kind of electrical states they undergo.
So basically we can now write the kind of information that you just saw us reading.
When you do this, here's what you can do when you've learned the first thing is, here's
an example, there's our induced tumor with its weird aberrant bioelectrical state and
we had said, what if we put in the oncogene, but at the same time, we put in something
else, an ion channel that forces those cells to stay electrically connected to their neighbors.
In other words, even though the oncogenes disconnect and go become an amoeba, we are
going to force them to stay electrically connected to their neighbors.
And when you do that, here's where the red is where the oncoprotein is, it's blazingly
expressed, here's where the tumor should be, in fact it's all over the place, but there's
no tumor.
And there's no tumor because we've managed the bioelectric, so even though the genetics
say, go detach and go do metastasis, the bioelectric says, you are part of this collective that's
making some nice skin and muscle and whatever else, keep doing that and that is what wins.
So there's an obvious kind of path here to both diagnostics of cancer and to reprogramming,
not to kill it, not killing cancer cells like in chemotherapy, but actually to reprogram
them.
There is, here's another, here's another example, I showed you a minute ago in that, in that
electric face pattern, what it is that kick starts eye formation in the head.
And we had asked what happens if we simply kick start that same bioelectrical state someplace
else, let's say in the gut.
So here's a tadpole, here's the eye, here's the brain, this is a side view, here's the
mouth, here's the gut.
And so some of these gut cells, we've injected them with a specific ion channel RNA that
changes their voltage and it sets that voltage to the pattern that you saw that was normally
associated with eyes.
Once you do that, that is the reference that tells the local cells what they should be
doing.
Sure enough, as soon as that pattern is on, they make an eye, the eye has the same layers
that you would expect, retinal lens, optic nerve.
One of the coolest things about it is that if you only manipulate a few of the cells,
here are these blue cells, this whole thing is a lens sitting out in the tail of a tadpole
somewhere, it's induced.
The blue cells are the ones that we manipulated, they have an aberrant voltage that says make
an eye, but what these cells seem to have realized is that there's not enough of them
to make a proper eye.
And so what they do is they recruit a bunch of their neighbors, which we never directly
manipulated at all, and say, okay, we're all going to work together to build this lens.
So there's two instruction events, we instruct these cells to make an eye, and these cells
instruct their neighbors to participate in that formation.
In fact, the coolest part about this for regenerative medicine purposes is that we don't know how
to make an eye, we don't give it enough information to specify how to make an eye.
This is like a subroutine call, if anybody's done any coding.
This is like calling a whole long module of things that the animal already knows how to
make an eye, it's already done it during development.
What we found is a bioelectrical trigger, it's part of that electrical software that
tells these cells what it is they should be building.
So not only eyes, but you can make extra brain and ask whether that makes you smarter.
You can make extra inner ear, so odorsus for balance, you can make extra hearts, you can
see that here, beating hearts.
You can make extra limbs, so we've got some nice five and six-legged frogs, or you can
make fins.
Now that's kind of odd, tadpoles aren't supposed to have fins, we'll get to that momentarily,
but you can see that by manipulating the bioelectrical pattern memories that tell cells what to build,
you can make all kinds of organs.
Not changing individual cell behavior like stem cell differentiation, but actually whole
organs.
Now here's a planarian, we cut the planarian in half, you get this end is supposed to
make a head, this end is supposed to make a tail, how does it know?
Well it turns out there's this voltage pattern that you can read, here's the memory of these
cells of what a normal planarian is supposed to look like, one head, one tail.
And we can go in and we can manipulate that electrical pattern and say no actually a good
planarian should have two heads, and sure enough that's what they build.
This isn't photoshopped, these are real animals.
So you can make two heads, in fact you can make no heads and you can ask all kinds of
interesting behavioral questions, what's it like to have two brains, but one of the most
amazing things about this, and I keep calling it a memory why, because if you cut again
this two headed animal, so you cut off the primary head, you cut off the secondary head,
you leave just this nice middle fragment, that will in plain water with no more manipulations
of any kind, will continue to generate two headed animals forever.
So basically it's a memory because once you've changed the electrical pattern from saying
single head to saying two heads, that pattern holds, it holds until actually we know how
to change it back, we could change it back if we wanted to.
So the question of what determines how many heads a planarian has is tricky, it's not
just the DNA, the DNA creates a body that by default has a bioelectric pattern that's
as one head, that's not necessarily what it has to have, if you change it it can have
two and that's completely invisible at the level of the genome.
So I could go along and I could take some of these two headed worms, we're not going
to do that but you could throw them in a river somewhere and they would, they reproduce by
tearing themselves in half and then regenerating and that still generates two headed animals.
Some scientists might come along a hundred years later, take some samples and say, ooh,
single headed form and a double headed form, let's sequence the genomes and see what the
speciation event was, of course the genomes are completely identical, that's not where
this information is.
So we're starting to understand the importance of this physiological or bioelectrical software
that sits between the genome and the actual anatomy which is what we really care about.
Now in addition to asking the tissue to grow a second head of this correct type, you can
go one step further and you can actually take a planarian, let's say this one, this species
with a nice triangular head like this and if you manipulate the bioelectrics appropriately,
you can get them to grow a head that's round like an S-Mediterranean or flat like Pifelina.
They can grow heads of other species with no genetic modification, there's no genome editing,
there's no CRISPR, purely by altering the bioelectrics, they can call up these, you
can think of it as attractors in the space of all possible heads, there are shapes that
belong to various species that evolution uses and you can take this fragment and knock
it into these various other attractors in addition to the one it normally uses, not
just the external shape of the head but also the shape of the brain and the distribution
of stem cells becomes just like these other species and so we're taking now this ability
to really communicate to the tissue what it is that it should be building and using
it for regenerative medicine.
So here's an example, frogs unlike salamanders do not regenerate their legs and so 45 days
later after imputation there's nothing, we came up with a cocktail of bioelectric modulator
drugs that trigger these cells into a build whatever goes here state, again a trigger
of a subroutine trigger and when you do this the cells know perfectly well what goes there,
it's a leg, they turn on pro regenerative genes such as MSX1, they start to grow these
toes, here's a toenail and eventually, so this is an early stage of that leg but eventually
that leg becomes touch sensitive and multi, it's a very respectable looking normal leg
and the amazing thing is that the treatment that we discovered, we only do this for one
day, 24 hours, after that you get a month and a half of leg growth, month and a half
of leg growth, after convincing the cells that they should be building a leg, you don't
need to intervene after that, it's not a bottom up micromanagement, it's a top down trigger
communicating with that decision point of what are we going to do after injury and so
I think that the future of the future of biomedicine looks like this, this is where computer science
was in the 40s and 50s where you had to program computers by physically rewiring them and
eventually it was figured out that if the hardware is good enough and the biological
hardware is definitely good enough, what you can do is you can program them by experiences,
you can program by stimuli, you don't need to rewire them to do something different and
that's what brought on the whole information technology revolution for us but as far as
molecular biology and medicine, we are all still stuck at this stage, everything nowadays
all the excitement is about genomic editing, stem cells, pathways, protein design, everything
is focused on the hardware, we haven't even begun to scratch the surface of biological
software and so the medicine of the future is going to be much more about communicating
with cellular collectives, possibly training tissues, changing their bio electrically encoded
anatomical memories, not trying to micromanage them from the bottom up and so in the last
couple of minutes I want to take this now beyond medicine into synthetic biology and
show you kind of a really wild, recent project that we've been doing in the last couple
of years.
One can ask the following question, what do skin cells in your body know how to do?
And so you can imagine that, well what skin cells know how to do is they know how to have
this really sort of boring two dimensional life being the outer surface of the body
keeping out the bacteria and things like that.
And so we asked this question, is that really all they know how to do?
And so we took an early frog embryo, here it is, we let it develop for about eight hours,
this is it in cross section, all of these cells up here at the top, these are what's
going to be, what are going to be the skin cells, so they're already faded to be skin.
And so we cut off these cells and we put them in a dish to be by themselves, basically gave
them a chance to reimagine their multicellularity.
Now one can ask what will happen, there's a few possibilities, one thing is they might
die, they might crawl off into the different corners of the dish, they might form a monolayer
like cell culture, they might do nothing, all kinds of possibilities, in fact this is
what they do.
When you put these cells into this little depression, overnight they coalesce together,
they come together and they squeeze into this little ball and the flashing you're seeing
by the way is calcium signaling, it's even though there's no neurons here, this is exactly
what brains do, they do this kind of interesting computation with these calcium signals.
And one of the things that skin cells in the frog have is they have little hairs, little
motile hairs called cilia, these hairs usually are spinning to keep the mucus flowing down
the body of the frog and keep the pathogens from sticking.
Well when you do these little guys and we call them xenobots because the name of the
frog is for Xenopus lavas and you're about to find out why we call them xenobots because
they make tiny little bio-bots or proto-organisms either way.
And what they do now is they use the little hairs to swim, they use it to row against
the water and here it is, you can see one moving, they have different types of movement,
they go in circles, some of them patrol back and forth like this, here's some tracking
data from a bunch of them, this one's going on kind of a long journey, these two are interacting
with each other, these are just sitting still, all sorts of interesting motile behaviors.
Again, keep in mind this is just skin, this is just skin cells using their molecular
hardware such as cilia and various other things to organize a completely novel organism.
Here is a xenobot in a maze of still water, so here it is, it's going along, it's going
to take this corner without bumping into the opposite wall and then here for reasons known
only to the xenobot it decides to turn around and go back where it came from, so they have
spontaneous behaviors.
In fact, if they are damaged here, if they are cut almost in half they will seal up
to their new xenobot shape.
As I said, they have these amazing, these amazing calcium events, we are still working
to decode if they are talking to each other and so what they are saying.
They have another, just to finish up, they have another amazing capability, one of the
things that happens when you make these xenobots, we don't add anything, there are no new genes,
there are no nano materials, we don't add anything, but we take away something.
What we take away is the rest of the cells, the rest of the cells that normally tell these
skin cells to have this really, really simple two dimensional passive life and so what we
are really finding out now is what it is that the skin cells are really capable of and normally
in the context of the embryo they are simply prevented from doing that, but one of the things
we prevent them from doing is reproducing and so they can't reproduce in the normal
froggy fashion because they are missing most of the tissues that you need to do that.
Well within about 48 hours they figure out a new way of making copies of themselves,
we call it kinematic replication.
If you provide them with loose pieces of other skin cells in the environment, here they are,
the materials basically what they will do is they will run around, they will collect
that material into little piles, as you can see here, they sort of make these little piles
and when the cells become these little piles, well the cells become the next generation
of xenobots because that's exactly how these xenobots came to be and so they are able to
make copies of themselves so far we've seen about four generations form and this is basically
von Neumann's dream, a machine that will go out and find parts in its environment and
make a copy of itself and they are able to know other animal on earth, on earth there's
certainly nothing in the frog development lineage that ever looks like this so a single
frog genome can give rise to frogs, sure, but that's not the only thing it knows how to
do it also and maybe many other things, it knows how to make xenobots, has their own
developmental sequence, in three months the xenobots start to look like this, they have
their own different development and they have different behaviors and the thing about these
guys is that unlike every other creature on earth, when you ask why is a certain creature
of a certain color, why does it have certain shape capacities, the answer is always the
same because for millions of years its ancestors were selected to do this or that, well these
have no evolutionary back story, there's never been xenobots, there's never been selection
to be a good xenobot, why does this genome know how to make a creature that has these
very different capacities and what are their cognitive capacities, for example can they
learn, do they have preferences, all of these are open questions, how does evolution provide
novelty, so I want to close with this, the last thing I want to say is this, what we
are now seeing is that synthetic biology and bioengineering is going to impact our world
in a very massive sense, Darwin had this phrase which he was looking out at a riverbank and
kind of impressed with a variety of life and he called it the endless forms most beautiful
and what we are learning now is that biology has incredible ability to handle novelty,
it's highly interoperable, every combination of living materials, so cells, tissues, some
sort of designed machine, meaning a brain interface, computer brain interfaces, robotics
whatever and software combined together in some organization is a possible viable being
that we are going to encounter in the next decades, we already have cyborgs, so humans
with brain implants that let them drive wheelchairs and prosthetic limbs, we have hybrots which
are various kinds of brains driving robotic bodies, we have synthetic animals, everything
we know about, all the creatures that we know about are just a tiny little region with this
incredible option space of possible beings of different construction which never existed
on earth before and so what this means is that in the future and this is the impact on
ethics that we must think about really carefully, in the future when you encounter a creature
you will not be able to decide how to relate to it based on what it looks like, meaning
whether it looks like some other animal or human that you have seen in the standard evolutionary
tree of life or where it came from, meaning whether it's naturally evolved or designed
and came off a factory somewhere, there will be so many novel combinations that these questions
of whether something is really this or really that will lose all meaning and we will need
novel categories of understanding the cognition, the mind and the moral capacity of ourselves
and of these beings to know how to relate to them because what they look like and where
they came from are no longer going to be guides, so we need a deep profound understanding of
where minds come from, what determines the kind of mind that a given creature has and
what relationship we can have with them and this is an incredibly exciting aspect of the
biosciences going forward, it's going to affect everything, the legal system, intellectual
property system, everything is going to be affected by this.
So just to close I want to thank the various postdocs and students who did all the work
that I showed you today, our collaborators, all the animals we work with which really
do all the heavy lifting here, our funders and to do a disclosure of a company called
Morphosuticals and another one called Fauna Systems that we've spun off.
So I will just close by showing you a video, this is what the two-headed flatworms look
like when they're sort of on their own, the first time I showed off these data at a conference
somebody stood up and said that's impossible, those animals can't exist, so I show a movie
now and yeah, so thank you, I'll take questions.
Great, thanks Mike, as usual my mind is spinning and I don't myself know where to start, but
fortunately we have people who have already started the questions for us.
So the first one is DNA then must store an initial body plan memory set as a default.
So have we identified that in DNA code and I think I'm understanding this mean that without
these interventions our DNA still knows what to do, right?
So the best way we know of to think about this, so DNA definitely does not directly
store anything that looks like the code for a body, so when you look at the genome what
you're seeing in there is the specification of the parts, proteins, you do not see actually,
you don't see actually any information about the large scale structure.
So the best way to think about this is this, what the DNA provides is the specification
of your hardware.
So in the computer analogy the DNA might be the things like here's the silicon, here's
the copper, here's how they go together and make a transistor and all of that.
Now what the body actually ends up doing meaning morphogenesis, physiology and behavior is
the results of the software running on that hardware and it's as difficult to tell what
that's going to look like as it is to take a computer and try to figure out what it's
doing based on readings of electromagnetic signals or taking an x-ray of the copper that's
in there, those are all good pieces of information but they don't really tell you what's going
on if you don't understand the software.
And so the only thing you see in the DNA is a specification of the hardware, all of the
intelligence comes from that hardware exploiting the laws of physics and the laws of computation
to self-organize.
Hmm, okay, interesting, there a question from James, I recall evidence suggesting higher
rates of cancer in kids who grew up near high-power transmission lines.
The mechanism was a mystery, could this stuff be the explanation?
Probably not, I mean I know that literature, there's a lot of epidemiology around that,
there are other mechanisms by which applied electromagnetic fields can affect cell behavior
it's likely not this, these mechanisms are very robust, electromagnetics are not a great
way to manipulate them so that's probably not this, it's probably a related, a different
unrelated set of controls.
This is interesting from Alec about, are these xenobots a new form of life?
I also would just add that I heard you using the terms cognition and intelligence, not
interchangeably actually, so I'd love to hear more of your thoughts about this like new
form of life, how much can we attribute really in terms of it sounds like self-awareness
but do we want to go that far?
I don't know.
Yeah, so a couple of questions there, so are they a new form of life?
They're definitely a new form of organism, so they're definitely a different proto-organism.
They are not an entirely new form of life because we started with cells that already exist,
so we didn't make life from scratch, we took frog cells and asked the frog cells what they
know how to make, so it's definitely new in the sense that it's not what those animals
normally do, it's not anything that exists on earth other than this, so that's that.
In terms of intelligence and cognition, nobody has claimed that these guys have self-awareness,
self-awareness is an incredibly advanced form of cognition, they definitely have, as
all cells do, they have various types of processes that underlie simple basal kinds of cognition,
very simple things, sensing, response, possibly memories, we actually don't know, we're still
trying to figure out how smart they really are, we don't know, it's a spectrum, right,
all the way from very simple things like thermostats and all the way up to humans and then beyond,
so humans are probably not the top of this food chain eventually, so we actually don't
know where on that line, they lie, but they have intelligence in the sense that intelligence
is a problem-solving capacity in any space, it doesn't have to be three-dimensional space,
it doesn't have to be verbal, a language space, there are many different spaces, physiological,
we could go on, we could have a whole other conversation for an hour about other really
amazing ways that cells display intelligence, solving problems, metabolic problems, anatomical
problems and so on, so they have, for sure they have some basal kinds of intelligence, but
exactly how much is an empirical question for research. Interesting, I'm going to jump to
one from Kathleen about the planarians, because I was also, my mind was going to the planarians
as well, how long do the two-headed planarians live, how are their lives impacted by missing
organs, like how do they handle waste, what is loss without the tail they evolved to have, etc.
I was thinking about if they never really die, like would the world ever just be overrun by
planarians? Yeah, yeah, no, well the world won't be overrun by planarians because lots of things
eat them, so there's lots of fish and other things that will eat planaria, so no. The thing is,
as far as the waste, they don't excrete waste through the tail, so they have a little,
they have a little tube in the middle of their body called the pharynx, which takes in food and
outgo the waste. They in fact, the two-headed animals tend to often have two pharynxes as well,
so they're fine on that front. They can live, they can live basically forever, the only problem is
the two heads often disagree about which way they're supposed to go, and so feeding is not trivial
for them because as soon as one head tries to feed in a particular way, the other head just decides,
you know what, I'm going to go somewhere else, and they have trouble, but if you really help them
out to eat, they can live forever. I have one question I'm going to say for the last, but
one more. You mentioned emergence early on. Can you explain what emergence is?
Yeah, emergence is this idea that certain kinds of very simple behaviors when performed in
large numbers at the same time give rise to surprising novel outcomes. So for example,
there are things where very, very simple rules, like let's say ant behavior, right?
Each individual ant carries out a fairly simple set of behaviors that it knows how to do,
but when there's a million and a half ants, you find out that actually you have this amazing
super organism that knows how to build an ant hill and keep their numbers in appropriate ratios
and go out and find food and come back and make decisions about where they're going to go next
when the colony splits and things like that. All of that is emergent in the sense that no individual
ant knows how to do any of that. It's the collective. Another way to think about it is
traffic jams are emergent. They're not a problem of the combustion engine. They're not a problem
of any individual car. There's no traffic jam, a defect to be found in any car, right? The traffic
jam is a system level phenomenon that emerges when lots of cars perform certain behaviors.
So that's the point of the emergence. Okay. One more because I think we have time. My parents
contributed the DNA that made my hardware. How did they pass along their morphogenic information
since I do look like both of them? Yeah. So what happens is, I mean, the fact is that
most of the time acorns make oak trees and fish eggs make fish. And the way that works is that
what evolution has done is it has really sort of really refined every genome
to create an electrical and chemical and biomechanical set of circuits that by default
produce a certain kind of outcome. Think about getting the instructions for a calculator. You
follow the instructions. The instructions only talk about the hardware. They don't talk about
the laws of computation. They don't talk about what signs and cosines are. They don't talk about the
laws of arithmetic nothing. They just talk about what the parts are. So you build this calculator,
you turn it on, so the juice first comes on, and on the little LCD it says zero. That is an
incredibly reliable default outcome that this machine is going to perform because the recipe
for making it, the materials, just the right transistors, just the right chips, all of that stuff
has been really refined. So it's very reliable and it's going to be a particular outcome.
Now, as it happens, you might find out by not by rewiring it, but actually by giving it stimuli
inputs, you might find out that, wow, this thing is actually capable of a lot more. It actually
knows how to do a lot more things than just say zero. But by default, it will very reliably give
you that number. So that's the idea. The genomes combine to make a machine that all other things
being equal knows how to assemble a set of physical events that give rise to something
that looks like a fish or like frog or like us or whatever. But it's actually able to do a lot
more than that. So it actually kind of relates to the very first question in a way, right? I mean,
it kind of came full circle on that. Absolutely. Thank you. So there's one, I wanted to end on
this one because it's kind of a fun one, and I'm interested in it too, is what science fiction
books would you recommend? If you read science fiction, that's a bit of an assumption, right?
Yeah, well, I certainly read it a lot when I was younger and had more time to read for fun.
I think a couple of my favorites. So there's a Polish writer Stanislav Lem, L-E-M. So I think
he has some really interesting stuff. And I like all the old classics, Bradbury, Asimov,
those are the things Van Vogt, those are the things that I was raised on.
Yeah, I just picked up Octavia Butler, and I was reading her short stories
on on a flight recently. So this is great. We've got a great comment about totally mind-blowing
things for sharing. I'll be, so that's great. I just want to say, you know, thank you so much for
for your time again. We're out of time now, but for making yourself available. And for those of
you who are celebrating reunions this May and June, please check out the programming and registration.
Emil posts that link in the chat now. Mike has agreed to appear again at reunions,
although virtually on June 4th. So if you're a member of that cohort, please, please do check
that out. Our next What Matters To Me In Why event will take place April 19th at 5.30 p.m. with
Sarah Lewis talking about the wondrous world of fireflies. So with one final thanks to Mike,
really appreciate it. I'd like to thank all of our attendees for joining us. Be well, and we hope
that you can join us at another program in the future. Thank you. Thanks very much everybody. Thank you.
