Welcome.
I love geometry.
Both the classical ideas that you met
in high school geometry class
and modern geometrical ideas
that lie at the frontiers of mathematics.
It's going to be my great pleasure
to show you some of these beautiful ideas.
Geometric mathematics begins with what we see,
but then extends well beyond.
When we look around us, we see shapes,
we see patterns, we see forms,
but what we actually see is not mathematics.
We see circular shapes when we look at the moon or the sun.
We see somewhat straight lines
when we look at bamboo or at the horizon.
But one of the powerful strategies
for understanding the world
has been to let the world give us the seeds
for mathematical ideas,
but then to allow ourselves the freedom
to pursue those ideas in the abstract on their own.
The foundational study of our visual world
is Euclidean geometry.
On that foundation,
mathematicians have built a vast edifice
of mathematical realms that include concepts,
methods of proof, and strategies of analysis
that Euclid never dreamed of.
Often we find that the abstract exploration
returns us back to the real world
via unexpected insights
that give us insights into nature.
While mathematicians are exploring these ideas,
the motivations that they have
are often anesthetic within the realm of mathematical thought.
We seek elegant reasoning and startling connections.
While the geometrical insights that I most like
are those where different ideas
unexpectedly come together
to reveal some sort of a relationship
that was not obvious at first.
For example, the Pythagorean theorem
can help explain Einstein's theory of special relativity
and we'll see that in a future lecture.
I also like visual surprises
and mysterious connections,
and so I've tried to include as many as possible
in this series of lectures.
Well, let me take a minute
to describe the overall structure of the course.
The lectures are grouped into four different themes.
First, we'll consider Euclidean geometry,
but we'll discuss both classical results
in Euclidean geometry from ancient times
and newer insights.
And what delights me about this topic
is how many unexpected relationships
we can discover when we look for them.
One strategy for finding connections
is to seek different ways of proving the same theorem.
For example, take the Pythagorean theorem.
This theorem, the Pythagorean theorem,
is the most famous theorem in all of mathematics,
and it's been known for thousands of years.
But people across the globe
and across the eons have found new ways
to look at that same theorem.
So we'll see several proofs of the Pythagorean theorem,
including an artistic one by Leonardo da Vinci.
We'll see some insights about this ancient subject
of Euclidean geometry that were discovered
by mathematicians who are living today.
While we're examining the evolving applications
of Euclidean geometry,
we'll also look at its relationship with art.
One of the points of intersection between art and mathematics
occurs when artists attempt to render
our three-dimensional world on a two-dimensional canvas.
That challenge leads to artistic
and mathematical explorations of perspective.
During our lectures on Euclidean geometry,
we explore basic ideas
that apply throughout this series of lectures.
In the second section of the course,
we'll discuss what are called non-Euclidean geometries,
and we'll understand how we can build, describe,
and understand geometries in which no lines are parallel
or in which infinitely many different lines
are all parallel to a given point,
to a given line through a given point.
Well, these non-Euclidean geometries
at first seem strange and unreal.
However, as I said before, mathematical ideas
have an uncanny history
of finding amazing connections with actual real nature.
So now, non-Euclidean geometries
are centrally involved in scientific descriptions
of our real universe.
The third section of our course
explores mathematical ideas
that arise from studying symmetries.
We'll see ancient and modern examples
of symmetric patterns from around the world.
In fact, there are some modern variations of this idea.
One of them, of the idea of symmetry,
one of them occurred recently
and produces things that are called aperiodic tilings.
And these are bizarre patterns,
but they've been used by architects in Australia
to produce a whole suite of buildings
that present us with an aesthetically challenging combination
of order on the one hand and chaos on the other.
We'll conclude the course with a study of graphs
and the somewhat non-geometrical geometry
that's grown out of that study.
Graphs are apparently rather simple objects.
They're just constructed of dots and lines.
They help us model connections all over the world,
connections among people,
connections in electronic circuits,
connections in games, connections in maps,
connections everywhere.
While coloring these graphs and tracing paths around the graphs
present us with some of the most challenging questions
that have ever been considered and ever resolved,
and some that remain tantalizingly still out of reach.
Well, let's put this study of mathematics
from the visual world into a bit of historical perspective.
Geometrical ideas have been known and studied
around the globe since ancient times.
The word geometry means measuring the world.
And although it may have begun as a practical subject
associated with land measurement,
the term geometry actually encompasses mathematical subjects
that abstract our sense of the visual world
and create a coherent mathematical system.
The ancient Egyptians certainly had to have
a clear working knowledge of geometrical ideas
when they built the pyramids
around 2700 BCE, the Great Pyramids.
Geometrical mathematics appears on two ancient Egyptian papyri,
the so-called Moscow mathematical papyrus,
and the Rhined papyrus.
These were written in Egypt in about 2000 to 1650 BCE,
and they contained things such as an approximation
to the number Pi.
Well, the earliest mathematician whose name is known to history
is Thales of Miletus.
He lived in about 600 BCE, and he studied geometry.
One thing that he understood was that things about similar triangles,
which we'll be introduced to in the next lecture,
and from that he was able to figure out
how to measure the heights of the pyramids.
And one method that he used was to stand near
one of these Great Pyramids at a moment
when his shadow was exactly the same length as he was tall.
And then he deduced that the shadow of the pyramid
at that moment would also be the same height
as the length of its shadow.
So the length of its shadow is the same as its height,
so measuring the length of the shadow
gave him the height of the pyramid.
Well, Thales' method really was using similar triangles,
and we'll discuss those in the next lecture,
and they come up throughout these lectures.
In the 6th century BCE, Pythagoras in his school
proved his famous Pythagorean theorem.
That we'll explain, by the way, later.
That theorem, as I said before, still has a claim
to be called the most famous and most basic theorem
in all of mathematics.
Geometry and mathematics were central
to the Pythagorean sense of how to understand
the world and the universe.
But when we think of geometry, we think of Euclid.
Because in 300 BCE approximately,
Euclid wrote the most famous textbook
in any subject at any time in history,
and it was called the Elements.
When Euclid wrote the Elements in about 300 BCE,
geometry had to clearly have been well-developed
since he wrote 13 volumes about it.
Euclidian geometry has been extremely influential
in education and culture for thousands of years,
even beyond its role as mathematics.
For centuries, the seven liberal arts
formed the foundation of a classical education,
and those seven liberal arts were divided
into three disciplines called the Trivium
and four more advanced subjects known as the Quadrivium.
And Euclidian geometry was one of the four
higher liberal arts.
And thus for centuries, geometry, Euclidian geometry
was considered one of the central subjects
that any educated person should master.
In fact, above the entrance to Plato's Academy,
stood the injunction,
let no one ignorant of geometry enter here.
Well, over the years,
the role of geometry in the curriculum
has, I'd have to say, diminished somewhat.
For many years, students were introduced
to the concept of mathematical proof
in their geometry classes,
and some of that still occurs.
However, formal proofs are emphasized less
in geometry classes now than they were formerly.
That may be a good thing, maybe a bad thing.
It's difficult to tell.
The elements established the gold standard
of rigorous argument,
and that standard has lasted for millennia,
and largely, by the way, exists to this day.
And we're going to describe the elements
in more detail a bit later in this lecture.
But the Euclidian template for defining terms,
then stating unproved assumptions
that he called axioms,
and then proving assertions step by step
from the assumptions,
that format of reasoning influenced thinking
well beyond geometry.
For example, the structure
of the Declaration of Independence is an example.
How does it start?
It starts by stating assumptions,
or axioms.
It says, we hold these truths to be self-evident,
that all men are created equal,
that they are endowed by their creator
with certain unalienable rights,
that among these are life, liberty,
and the pursuit of happiness,
that to secure these rights,
they're just powers from the consent of the governed,
and so on.
So those are the axioms.
It then describes the grievances,
and from those, it deduces,
these United Colonies are,
and of right ought to be, free
and independent states.
Well, in the ancient world,
scholars felt that their mathematical ideas
were directly describing
the way the world is.
Until the 19th century,
people considered the Euclidean axioms,
or assumptions, to be statements
of absolute truths about the world.
However, in the 19th century,
mathematicians realized
that non-Euclidean geometries
could exist.
That is, they found that the axioms
that Euclid assumed,
you could assume different axioms
that contradicted the Euclidean axioms
and still produce a coherent,
self-consistent geometrical system.
Well, we're going to describe these non-Euclidean geometries
in detail in later lectures.
Now, in the present day,
we have a different view of mathematics
and its relationship to the real world.
The current view is that mathematics
is an exploration of self-consistent systems,
not systems that are absolutely true in the world.
But we still face the cosmic challenge
shared by ancient thinkers and ourselves
of describing the shape and nature of the universe.
But now, both Euclidean
and non-Euclidean geometries
figure centrally in that quest.
And let me say a word about
what I think mathematics is.
Albert Einstein described mathematics
as merely a refinement of common sense.
And I think there's a lot of truth in that.
The heart of all of mathematics
is captured in definitions, examples,
theorems, and proofs.
A definition captures an essential concept,
and that concept often emerges
from looking at specific paradigmatic examples.
And then theorems arise
that describe relationships among the concepts
that we've already isolated and defined.
Theorms can assert some mathematical structure
that may be unexpected,
but after it's proved, we know it is true.
Theorem is a statement that has been proved.
A proof is a formal argument
that verifies that a theorem is true.
That is, that the conclusion
follows logically from the premises.
And every proof has to confirm the truth of the theorem.
That is the defining feature of a proof.
But some proofs, in addition to that,
give some insight into why the theorem is true.
And to me, one of the satisfying aspects
of a great proof occurs
when the proof reveals some underlying, often surprising,
connection or relationship
from which we see some truth
that we previously could not fathom.
When we see that kind of a proof, we say,
aha, that's why it's true.
And hopefully, you'll have several of those aha moments
during these lectures.
Well, a great place to start an exploration
of geometric mathematics is with Euclid's elements.
So let's begin by looking at the elements of the elements.
Euclid's elements begin with definitions,
axioms, and common notions.
The definitions, axioms, and common notions
are the unproved assumptions
from which all of the future theorems are derived.
For example, Euclid defines a point as, quote,
that which has no part.
Well, of course, that definition doesn't really
mean much of anything, that which has no part.
And in fact, modern axiom systems admit
that we have to start with some terms
that don't mean anything, literally undefined terms.
And in a modern axiomatic system of geometry,
a point, the term point, would be a non-undefined term.
But think about a point as an abstraction of a dot,
as being a single location, but it's reduced to size
to have no extent in any direction.
Euclid then went on to define a line as breathless length.
And then again, more modern convention
would be to consider the term line to be an undefined term.
Well, but we should think of a line as a straight segment
or an infinitely extended straight line
that goes off in both directions.
And a line is an abstraction of something
that you could actually draw on a piece of paper,
but it has no thickness.
The concept is of something that has no thickness.
And then Euclid went on to define a plane surface
as that which has length and breadth only.
So it's just a flat thing, and we should think of a plane
as an infinitely large and flat surface
having no thickness whatsoever.
The word plane, in fact, comes from the Latin plantum
that means flat surface.
Well, we're going to continue with some of Euclid's definitions,
but instead of talking about what he said,
we'll just give you some proof,
some definitions of some standard terms
that we'll be using throughout this course.
First of all, an angle.
An angle is a shape that really consists of two rays
that emerge from a common point.
And a ray is a half line.
It starts at a point and just goes off in one direction
in a straight line.
And an angle can be measured from 0 to 360 degrees,
360 degrees being the measure around a whole circle.
So, for example, if you take a straight line
and put a point in the middle of it,
that line has an angle of 180 degrees.
It's called a straight angle.
And if we have two lines that meet at right angles,
perpendicularly, then a right angle has 90 degrees.
That's exactly half of a straight angle.
A circle is the set of points that are equidistant
from a fixed point in the plane, as you know.
That's what a circle is.
Parallel lines. Parallel lines are simply straight lines
in the plane, extended infinitely,
so they're lines that don't have any ends
that don't meet anywhere in the plane.
So those are the defining feature of parallel lines.
Well, after defining terms,
Euclid proceeded to list some statements
that he was going to assume without proof.
These statements are the axioms,
or equivalently, the postulates of Euclidean geometry.
And by the way, the terms axiom and postulate
mean precisely the same thing.
His first postulate says that,
given two points, it determines a line.
His second postulate says that,
if you have a line segment,
you can extend it to create an infinite line.
Postulate 3 says that,
if you're given any point in the plane and any radius,
you can construct a circle that has that radius.
The radius is the distance from the center
to the outer boundary of a circle.
His postulate 4 says that all right angles are equal.
But once again, that kind of a postulate,
it's hard to know what it means,
and modern systems of axioms
would alter that postulate somewhat.
Euclid's fifth postulate is the most famous of his postulates.
It is the parallel postulate.
It says the following.
Here is his formulation of the parallel postulate.
He said that, if you have one straight line
and two lines cross that straight line,
and the sum of the angles on that side of this line
are less than 180 degrees in sum,
then those two lines will meet on that side of this line.
So that is a rather cumbersome statement
of the parallel postulate.
But there's another version of the parallel postulate
that most of us learned in high school,
which is an alternative formulation
that was framed by the mathematician John Playfair in 1795.
So John Playfair's parallel postulate states the following.
If you are given a straight line,
given a line and a point not on the line,
then there is one and only one line
through the point that's parallel to the given line.
Well, Euclid's axioms over the years
have been discovered to have some deficiencies
from the point of view of modern mathematicians,
and so a modern axiom system for Euclidean geometry
often has more than 20 axioms,
and they're rather complicated axioms,
so they're very difficult to remember, for example.
But to understand geometry,
it's much more important and it's sufficient
to accept these kinds of intuitive facts about the plane
and then explore the amazing richness that follows.
So let's begin right now to look at some basic theorems
that lie at the foundation of plane geometry.
The first theorem that we're going to explore
is that opposite angles of crossing lines are equal.
And, of course, you can see visually
that that must be the case,
and we can prove this by simply taking the picture
of these two straight lines
and rotating the whole picture by 180 degrees.
When we rotate 180 degrees, each line falls back on itself,
and therefore the angle that was at the top
gets rotated to become the angle at the bottom.
So that's a basic theorem in geometry.
I don't think a very exciting theorem,
but it is a true theorem that, of course, we use all the time.
It's absolutely fundamental.
The next theorem we'll explore
has to do with parallel lines.
Suppose that we have two parallel lines
that are cut by a third line called a transversal.
Then the corresponding angles are equal,
and the alternate interior angles are equal.
Let's see why this is true.
Well, we can use Euclid's formulation of the parallel postulate
because it was actually designed to make this theorem obvious.
And the reason it would be obvious
is that if we consider this transversal
and we have the two lines crossing,
if the alternate interior angles were not equal,
then the sum of two angles on one side of the transversal
would sum to less than 180 degrees.
And therefore, by his postulate,
it says that they will meet on that side
and therefore not be parallel.
So that was his proof
that these alternate interior angles are equal.
However, we can see another way
that these alternate interior angles are equal
that maybe is visually compelling,
which just says that if we take this bottom parallel line
and slide it up,
you can see that the corresponding angles will be equal.
And once corresponding angles are equal
and we know that the opposite angles of crossing lines are equal,
then that shows that these alternate interior angles are equal.
And likewise, these other alternate interior angles
are also equal.
And we'll use it many times in the future,
which says that if we have two lines and a transversal
and the alternate interior angles are equal,
then in fact, the two lines are parallel.
Well, now we come to what I think of as the first real theorem
that we're going to prove that whose statement is not obvious,
and we might not even guess that it's true.
So the statement that we're going to prove now,
this theorem, which is the first theorem that is what I view
as a really a theorem that's not obvious,
is that if you take any triangle whatsoever,
it has, of course, three angles.
And the fact is that the sum of those three angles
is precisely 180 degrees.
Well, it's not obvious why this theorem is true.
But it is true, and this is the way we can prove it.
We take our triangle A, B, C,
and we'll use one of the postulates of geometry,
namely the parallel postulate,
to draw a line parallel to the side B, C through the point A.
Now, when we have seen this construction,
we can now look at the picture
and see what angles must be equal to each other.
Well, notice that the side A, B is a transversal
that cuts these two parallel lines.
And therefore, the angle at B,
the angle that's inside the triangle,
is equal to the angle, the alternate interior angle,
at the top line and that parallel line outside of the triangle.
Likewise, if we look at the angle at C inside the triangle,
it's equal to the other angle at the top at A,
next to the parallel line.
And therefore, we see that the three angles add up
and exactly fill up that straight line angle,
which is 180 degrees.
And therefore, we have seen that the sum of the angles
of any triangle add up to 180 degrees.
Now, to me, this is really a clever proof.
I like this proof because it's a theorem
that was not intuitively obvious,
and yet we could prove that it's true.
Okay, let's do another theorem.
Another theorem has to do with isosceles triangles.
So if we take a triangle that has two sides
that are exactly equal in length to each other,
that's the definition of an isosceles triangle.
So two sides have equal length.
The theorem says that if we have a triangle
where two sides have equal length,
then the angles opposite those two equal length sides
are also equal.
So that is the theorem,
that angles opposite equal sides of an isosceles triangle
are equal.
And actually, the converse is also true,
which says that if we have a triangle that has two equal angles,
then the opposite sides of those two equal angles
have equal length, and therefore the triangle is isosceles.
Well, let's see if we can understand how to prove this theorem.
If we take our triangle that has two equal sides,
we can simply take that triangle,
pick it up, and flip it over to exchange the sides,
and you see the sides will exactly fit on each other.
And therefore, what we've actually done
is taken the angle that used to be down here at point C,
and it's now moved over and is now the angle at point B,
and therefore those angles must be equal.
Similarly, to prove the converse of this theorem,
suppose that we have a triangle
in which two angles are actually equal to each other.
Then we can take the edge between those two equal angles
and flip the triangle over the midpoint.
So in other words, we just take that side and flip it over,
and then those two angles will come back to themselves
because we assume that they were equal angles,
and the triangle comes back to itself.
And therefore the triangle must be isosceles
because the side that was over here near this angle
has become the side that is on the other side.
So those lengths must have been equal.
Well, this theorem that we've just been talking about,
the theorem that says that if you have an isosceles triangle
that opposite angles are equal, has a name.
It's called the Pons Assonorum, which means Asses Bridge.
And the reason for the name,
it's not clear exactly why it was originally called this,
but it refers to this theorem in Euclid's elements.
In fact, this was the fifth theorem in Euclid's elements.
And if you look at Euclid's elements,
and I strongly urge that you actually do this,
you can find it for free online at Euclid's elements,
and look at the proof of this fifth proposition
that I just proved to you right now.
And you'll find that the proof is very difficult.
It's actually quite an elaborate proof.
It involves adding extra lines and following several steps around.
It's quite a difficult proof.
And so the term Pons Assonorum has come to mean difficult for a beginner.
It's a phrase that's used outside of mathematics,
meaning difficult for a beginner.
The phrase Pons Assonorum means Asses Bridge,
and the conjecture is that the term Asses Bridge
was meant to be a challenge,
suggests a challenge because it was difficult
to get a donkey to go over a bridge.
Well, I'm not sure about the exact history of this.
Some people think that it's called Asses Bridge theorem
because the picture in Euclid's elements looks like a bridge.
But whatever it is, this is an example of a case
where the elements have had an impact on the culture
even outside of mathematics.
Why did his proof have to be so complicated?
Well, it's because he didn't have clearly in mind
that you could pick up a triangle and turn it over.
If he knew that, he would have done that.
But he sort of didn't assume that as an axiom
and therefore didn't want to use that kind of a construction.
But later in modern view of the axioms of geometry,
we came to believe that we had to actually make an assumption,
some sort of an assumption that you could in fact pick up
such a thing as a triangle and move it to a different location
and the angles would be preserved.
So that makes the proof much easier in our day.
Well, in any case, these theorems begin our study
of the Euclidean plane.
When King Ptolemy of Egypt asked Euclid
whether there was a simpler way to understand geometry,
Euclid's famous reply was,
there is no royal road to geometry.
However, I hope you'll find our road to geometrical insights
to be a delightful journey.
In the next lecture, we'll discuss congruence, similarity,
and the Pythagorean theorem.
See you then.
