Welcome back.
One theme of this course is to see features of the real world and extract from those features
some essential idea that becomes a mathematical concept.
In the last lecture, we began our investigation of the Euclidean plane, which is an abstraction
of a perfectly flat surface that extends forever.
And in it, we identified several objects such as points, lines, angles, triangles, and concepts
such as being parallel or being perpendicular.
Whenever we create mathematics, one of the foundational issues that we have to confront
is to decide what we mean by being the same.
And in fact, we'll see this theme repeated often during this series of lectures, particularly
as the concept of geometrical reasoning embraces increasingly varied and new ideas.
Well, in the Euclidean plane, two basic concepts of sameness capture two different views of
being alike.
The most stringent view is captured in the concept of congruence.
Two triangles or other figures are congruent if one can be moved rigidly to overlay the
other exactly.
And we'll, of course, describe this in more detail in a few minutes.
Congruence is the basic concept of geometric equality.
A weaker concept of sameness is similarity.
Similarity describes figures whose shape is the same, but whose size may be different.
And in this lecture, we'll discuss congruence and similarity, and then use those ideas to
prove some basic theorems of geometry.
And then we'll end the lecture by using congruence and similarity as the central idea in proving
the Pythagorean theorem in two different ways, including one proof by the artist Leonardo
Da Vinci.
Well, let's start with the most rigorous concept of sameness that we can think of, namely,
two figures, such as these two triangles, will be said to be congruent if we can take
one and rigidly move it and make it look exactly like the other one.
However, we are allowed to not only move it, but to flip it over.
So in this case, we needed to flip it over, but since they coincide entirely afterwards,
those two figures are congruent.
Well there are three basic congruence theorems for triangles, and these theorems are often
used, and you may remember them from high school geometry.
Each theorem basically tells us that if we know certain facts about the lengths of the
sides or the angles of one triangle, then the entire triangle is completely determined.
That is to say, only one shape of triangle can have exactly those features.
So let's look at these three theorems.
The first theorem says that if we know all three of the lengths of one triangle, then
in fact that triangle must be equal to any other triangle whose lengths are the same
three lengths.
This theorem is abbreviated SSS, which is shorthand for side, side, side, and that reminds
us of the hypothesis of the theorem.
So let's see why this theorem is true.
So suppose we have two triangles so that the sides of this one are equal to the sides of
this one respectively.
Then what we could do is we could take the edge, let's say BC, and move it and make it
coincide exactly with this corresponding edge on the other triangle.
Then the remaining edges, we don't know exactly whether they're going to fit exactly or not,
but we know how long the two remaining sides are.
Therefore, we know that that third vertex must lie on the one hand on a circle centered
at one end of our edge, and on the other hand of a certain radius, namely the length of
that side, and then on the other hand, it must be on a circle that's centered at the
other end of this side because we know the length of that side.
Well, if you take two circles, they'll intersect in two points, and therefore our third vertex
must lie at one of those two intersections of the circles.
But these circles are completely symmetrical, so we could flip the whole picture over showing
that that triangle is congruent to the opposite one, and therefore the entire triangle is
determined.
Well, the one consequence of the side-side-side congruence theorem is that triangles are rigid
because if you make a triangle with three rigid rods, then the theorem says that it's impossible
to change anything about the triangle.
Its shape is completely determined.
In contrast, let's look at this square.
Now, a square, suppose we imagined that we had a theorem that said side-side-side-side,
that that would determine the shape of the figure.
That's not true because a square is not rigid.
You can move it to a different shape where these sides remain the same lengths, and yet
this shape is not congruent to this shape.
Well, the rigidity of a triangle means that it is a useful object in actually building
physical things.
For example, if you look at any bridge, say, you'll see that the structural elements that
keep the bridge rigid are triangular, and also it's used on things like garden gates.
If you look at a garden gate made of wood, and it has these two bars across the top,
then there are two choices for a garden gate.
One choice is that it has a diagonal support that creates a triangle, and in which case
the garden gate will be true.
Otherwise, the only other possibility for a garden gate is that it will sag, so those
are two possibilities.
Either it uses the side-side-side theorem of rigidity of triangles or it sags.
Okay, the second congruence theorem states that if you have two triangles, and two sides
of this triangle are exactly equal to two sides of the other triangle, and the included
angle is equal, then the two triangles are congruent.
And once again, this theorem is abbreviated SAS, which is short for side-angle-side.
And the way to see that this is true is we just simply take this triangle, we move a
side over to its corresponding position, the angle is the same, and the length of that
other side has to go the same direction because that's part of our hypothesis, and therefore
when the third line of that triangle is determined.
The third congruence theorem is angle-side angle.
So suppose that you have two triangles, and you know that one side is the same length
as another side, and this angle is the same as the angle on the left side, and the angle
on the right side is the same also, then these two triangles are congruent.
Why?
Because if we pick up this triangle and put the base at the same position, since their
lengths are equal, we know that the third vertex must lie on the ray extending at this
given angle position, and likewise it sits on the ray coming out from the other vertex,
and those can intersect at only one point, and that determines the third location of
the third vertex of the triangle.
So those are the three congruence theorems.
There's another potential theorem, so to speak, that isn't true.
I wanted to say this.
If you have a side-side angle, you might think that that would work.
It doesn't determine a triangle because suppose that you know a length of a side of a triangle,
you know the next length of the side of a triangle, and then you know the angle at this
vertex.
Well, notice that there are two different positions where this side of that length might
hit this extended line.
So there are two different triangles that would satisfy the side-side angle criteria,
and therefore that is not a theorem.
Well here's an example of a consequence of one of our congruence theorems, and that is
the following.
Suppose that you consider a line segment and you take its perpendicular bisector, then
any point on that perpendicular bisector is equally distant to the two ends of the segment.
The proof is to just draw the picture that you see, and notice that the right-hand triangle
and the left-hand triangle are congruent.
Why?
Because they satisfy the side-angle-side criterion.
These sides are the same because it's the perpendicular bisector, so the two lengths
of the segments are equal.
The angles are the same because they're right angles, because it's a perpendicular bisector,
so they're both right angles, and then they share a common side, so of course it's equal
to itself.
Therefore those two triangles are equal, therefore the last of the sides is equal because they
are congruent, and that's the distance between this point to the other two ends of the segment.
So and in fact, by the way, the converse is also true that the set of all points that
are equal distant to the two end points of a line segment is in fact the perpendicular
bisector of that segment.
Okay, so we've been talking about congruence, but congruence is only one meaning of equal.
When we look at two pictures that are identical except that one is magnified, we also recognize
some commonality between those pictures, and that relationship gives rise to another concept
of geometric sameness called similarity.
So two triangles are similar if they have the same shape, but may be of different sizes.
Basically, if we put a triangle on a photocopier, and we set the photocopier to magnify or to
shrink it, and then we look at the result, the resulting picture will be a triangle that
is similar to the original one.
And there are several ways to tell if two triangles are similar.
One is that two triangles are similar if they have the same angles, because you see if you
take a picture and you magnify it or you shrink it, the angles don't change.
They stay exactly the same.
In fact, by the way, you don't really need to know that all three angles of a triangle
are equal to know that two triangles are similar.
If you just knew that two angles of one triangle are equal to two angles of another triangle,
you'd know the triangles are similar.
Why?
Because remember that the sum of the angles of any triangle is 180 degrees.
So if two angles are the same, we know what the third angle is, and so it's got to be
the same as well.
Well, the second way to tell if two triangles are similar is to see if the corresponding
sides have the same expansion factor, or that's equivalent to saying that the ratios, that's
the fractions, of the lengths of corresponding sides of one triangle to this similar triangle
are all the same.
So let me give it to you specifically with an example.
Suppose that we have triangle ABC, similar to triangle DEF, then AB, the length of side
AB over the length DE, is equal to BC over EF is equal to AC over DF.
So for example, if every side of the DEF triangle might be twice as long as the each corresponding
side of the ABC triangle, well, a third way to see that two triangles are similar is a
criterion that will remind us of the side angle side theorem for congruence that we
saw before.
Namely, if we have two triangles, and they have two sides that are in the same ratio,
and the included angle is the same, then the triangles are similar.
So this is what this means.
Suppose we have triangle ABC, and we have triangle DEF.
These are triangles, and K is some constant, and you can think of, say, two.
Then if side AB is twice as big as side DE, and side BC is twice as big as side EF, and
the angle between them is the same, then ABC is similar to DEF.
So think of it this way.
If you start with a triangle, and you just look at two of the sides, and you expand each
of those sides by the same factor, let's say multiply it by three, make it three times
as long, but you keep the included angle the same, then you will produce a similar triangle.
Well, so we have one way to think about similarity of triangles then, is that the angles of one
triangle are the same as the three angles of the other.
That's one way.
Another way to think about similarity is that each side has been magnified by the same amount.
And the third way to think about similarity is that you've expanded two sides by the same
factor while keeping the included angle the same.
These are all equivalent formulations of being similar, and in fact, we'll use all of these
characterizations of similarity in future work.
All these ways correspond to enlarging a picture on a photocopy machine.
Similarity of triangles also has an interesting interplay with parallel lines.
A line crossing a triangle that's parallel to a side automatically creates a similar
triangle because notice that the angles are equal to each other.
Because if you have parallel lines, you know that corresponding angles are equal, and therefore
the big triangle has at least two angles the same, in fact three angles the same, because
the top angle that they share is of course the same, and then the two corresponding angles
from the parallelness are the same.
Also if we had a triangle, if we have two triangles that are similar to each other, but through
crossing lines, so for example suppose the lines cross, you would have and you have two
parallel lines that are on opposite sides of those crossing lines, then the little triangle
on the top will be similar to the triangle on the bottom.
And the reason for that is that the opposite angles are equal to each other because crossing
lines, those opposite angles are equal, and then alternate interior angles are equal,
and therefore we have two of the angles, in fact all three, of the angles on the top triangle
equal to the angles in the bottom triangle.
Well one of the basic things that in fact will come up many times in the course is surprising
how often this happens.
When we take a triangle, if we connect the midpoints of two sides of that triangle together,
first of all we're going to create a line that is parallel to the opposite side.
And the reason for that is that if it's the midpoint of this side from A to B, and the
other point is the midpoint of the side A to C, then we know that the small triangle
is expanded by exactly two, those two edges are expanded by two to get those two sides
of the bigger triangle.
So the side angle side formulation of similarity tells us that that small triangle is going
to be similar to the big triangle.
And in fact all sides are going to be twice as big, if two of the sides are twice as big,
all sides are twice as big, meaning that the line segment between midpoints of a triangle
are exactly half as long as the opposite side, the parallel side.
Well that allows us to do an interesting thing and that is to take any triangle whatsoever
and we can join the midpoints of sides to create four sub-triangles of our triangle.
And each of those triangles is going to be similar to the original triangle and congruent
to all of the other three triangles, all four are congruent to each other.
And let me tell you why.
Well we saw why each of the three triangles in the corners are similar, they're all similar
because each one goes between the midpoints as we just talked about, and then that center
triangle also is similar because notice that its sides are exactly in proportion to the
big triangle half, half, and half, right?
Each one has half the length of a corresponding side of the big triangle and therefore it
also is congruent to each of those other three.
Well so it's interesting that any, I find it interesting, that any triangle can be divided
into four congruent triangles that are all similar to each other and similar to the big
triangle.
One consequence of this is that we could actually tile our floor with any shape triangle.
In other words if you get a whole bunch of tiles that are all of exactly the same shape
of triangle, you can put them together to create a tiling of the floor.
And why?
Because we can work this process in reverse.
Instead of taking a triangle and breaking it into four congruent sub triangles, we'll
start with one triangle and surround it by three more to create a bigger triangle that's
similar to our original one, and then we could put three more of that size around and break
each of those into four pieces to create yet a bigger part of our bathroom floor.
And then we could just continue this as much as we wanted and tile the floor with any shape
triangle.
I find that rather interesting.
Well here's a consequence, another consequence of this idea of similarity, and that is suppose
that we take any quadrilateral.
Now by the way a quadrilateral is just a four-sided figure, it's just four edges, they
don't need to be the same length, they don't need to be in any pattern, they just arbitrarily
four lines as long as they match up, that's a quadrilateral.
Suppose that we take the midpoints of each of those four edges and we connect them together.
Now I'm going to give you a moment to think of what would you get, what shape do you think
you'd get?
Well, surprisingly, no matter what shape the original quadrilateral is, the figure you
get by connecting adjacent midpoints is a parallelogram, parallelogram meaning that
the pairs of opposite sides are parallel to each other.
Well at first it's amazing, why is that true?
Well the reason it's true, once I tell you it's easy to see, because what we'll do is
in the original quadrilateral, we'll just make a diagonal, just think about a diagonal
in there dividing the quadrilateral into two triangles.
And then we're connecting the midpoints of two edges of a triangle, and notice when
we do that we get a line that's parallel to that side, that diagonal of the quadrilateral.
And likewise, the other pair of midpoints is creating another line parallel to that
same side, so since they're parallel to the same side, they're parallel to each other.
And of course doing the same for the other diagonal will give us that the other pair
of edges is parallel.
Now equality of ratios, that is the fractions of corresponding sides of similar triangles,
has an implication.
And the implication is that the ratios of two sides in one triangle will give the same
value as the ratios of corresponding sides in a similar triangle.
So let me tell you what this means.
So let's use letters.
Suppose that you have triangle ABC is similar to triangle DEF.
And by definition of being similar, we know that AB divided by DE, the length of AB divided
by the length of DE, is equal to BC over EF.
But by cross multiplying, we see then that the length of AB divided by the length of
BC must equal the length of DE divided by the length of EF.
And you can see why this is true.
If you have a small triangle here and a big similar triangle, then if this side is twice
as long as this side, then even if you've expanded it, this side will be twice as long
as this side.
So you can see that this is true.
And I have to tell you that I was trying to explain this to my daughters when they were
about 10 and 12 years old, and we were visiting Paris, France, and I thought it would be fun
to measure the height of the Eiffel Tower, you see.
So what we did is we stood directly under the Eiffel Tower, and we paced off distances.
In fact, we paced off 200 yards, 600 feet.
And we just did it.
We didn't use any measuring devices.
We just did it by striding and guessing.
So we measured about 600 feet up, and then I had my daughter stand there, and at that
time she was about five feet tall, one of my daughters, was about five feet tall.
And then I lay on the grass and looked right above her head to see where I would have to
position my eye in order to just graze the top of her head and see the top of the Eiffel
Tower.
Well, you can see that in that fashion, I created two similar triangles.
One had her height five, and my length was three.
It turned out that it was three feet from her feet to the position I had to put my
eye in order to see the top of the tower.
So we have a triangle that has three feet by five feet, so five is to three, as the
length that we strided off, which is 600, the height of the Eiffel Tower is to 600.
In other words, we have the equation five over three is equal to the unknown height
of the Eiffel Tower divided by 600 feet.
During the cross multiplication, we estimated that it is a thousand feet tall.
Well, in fact, the Eiffel Tower with the antenna is 1,063 feet tall, and in fact, without
the antenna, it's 986 feet.
So we got a very good estimate without using anything except for trigonometry.
Well, the fact, by the way, about the relative size of one side over another of similar triangles
is the basis of trigonometry, which is ultimately about similar right triangles.
Well, the first book of the Euclid's Elements concludes with the statement and proof of
the most famous theorem in mathematics, as I've said before, the Pythagorean theorem.
So what we'll do in this lecture is to conclude this lecture in the same way.
We've seen two basic concepts of geometry in this lecture, congruence and similarity,
so let's see two proofs of the Pythagorean theorem, one of them by Leonardo da Vinci,
which emphasizes congruence, and then we'll see another proof that uses similarity.
Well, so let me first explain the Pythagorean theorem.
Pythagoras is a fame which is enduring and lives forever because of the geometrical theorem
that bears his name, and the Pythagorean theorem states that if we take any right triangle
whatsoever, and if it has sides A, B, and C of length A, B, and C, then if we take this
side and we square it, that is multiply it by itself, that length by itself, and we take
the length of this side and square it, we'll exactly get the length of this side squared.
Well, and notice by the way, when we say that sometimes it said the sum of the squares of
the two sides is equal to the square of the hypotenuse, it's a slight abuse of notation
because we really mean that it's the lengths of the sides, the sums of the lengths of the
squares of the sides that equal the square of the length of the hypotenuse.
Sometimes I may forget to say those things.
In any case, the inside of the Pythagorean theorem really is an example of an insight
that transcends time and space.
It's universal and eternal.
In fact, we see illustrations of the Pythagorean theorem on ancient Babylonian tablets from
1600 BCE, and it has many different proofs and they show different geometrical relationships
but lead to the same conclusion.
So we learn not only about the truth of the statement, but we also have insights from
the proofs themselves.
In fact, there's a book called The Pythagorean Proposition by Alicia Scott Loomis, which
contains 367 proofs of the Pythagorean theorem, and we're going to see them all.
No, I'm just kidding.
I did present three proofs of the Pythagorean theorem in other teaching company courses,
so I'm going to present two different proofs here, one using, as I say, congruence and
the other similarity.
Well, let's start with Leonardo da Vinci's proof.
Leonardo da Vinci wanted to prove the Pythagorean theorem.
So here's the picture of the Pythagorean theorem situation.
We have the original triangle, and we want to show that the area of this square plus
the area of this square is equal to the area of this square.
And what Leonardo da Vinci did was that he drew this picture and then added another copy
of the triangle right up here, and then he added another copy of the triangle down here,
and we'll see how these come into play in a moment.
What he then showed is the following, that if we cover up this area right here, it's
a six-sided area, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 sides, that what he observed is that by cutting it
straight down the middle and just rotating, this figure exactly fits into this region,
and if we take this one and turn it over, it exactly fills up the remaining part of
this piece down here.
Now let's do some analysis and see what this means.
This piece up here consists of the a squared plus b squared plus two copies of our triangle,
and this region down here consists of c squared plus two copies of our triangle.
So having shown that these two things exactly are equal, this area and this area, he successfully
showed that this square plus this square has the same area as this square.
So this was a wonderful proof by Leonardo da Vinci of the Pythagorean theorem.
And notice that it used congruence because we moved those pieces around, these puzzle
pieces, and that's an example of congruence.
Well now let's go ahead and prove the same theorem, the Pythagorean theorem, using similarity,
and this is the way that we do it.
We take our right triangle and drop a perpendicular from the right angle point to the hypotenuse.
And when we do that, notice that we create two sub-right triangles inside our original
right triangle, and each of those two triangles is similar to our original right triangle.
Well remember, if we have similar triangles, we know that there are certain ratios that
must be preserved.
So for example, look now at the side that has length a at the bottom of our right triangle,
and the hypotenuse has length c.
Then we know that the ratio of the length a over length c is going to be the same as
the corresponding ratio of sides in each of our sub-triangles.
For example, look at this sub-triangle down here.
You see it shares this angle, so we know that the length from the point b to this point
d is going to be this length divided by the hypotenuse of that triangle, which is just
length a.
That fraction will be the same as the ratio of length a to the hypotenuse of the original
triangle, a over c.
So that means that this part of this sub-triangle, we can compute exactly how long it is.
Because putting those two ratios together, we have that this unknown length, let's call
it x, we know that x over a is equal to a over c.
And then cross-multiplying, we see that x is equal to a squared over c.
Well similarly, this line up here is because we have another similar triangle here, this
line up here will be exactly equal to, for the exact same reasoning, b squared over c.
But look at our picture.
Our picture shows that the length c is equal to this segment plus this segment.
This segment is b squared over c.
This segment is a squared over c.
So we have that c is equal to a squared over c plus b squared over c, multiplying through
by c.
We have a squared plus b squared equals c squared.
So this was a neat proof of the Pythagorean theorem using similar triangles.
Well, in this lecture, we took two intuitive ideas of sameness and used them to create
mathematical ideas.
And these ideas were congruence and similarity.
Then we proved several theorems that gave conditions, and these were abbreviated side,
side, side, side, angle, side, angle, side, angle, about when triangles would be congruent.
And we also proved some theorems about when they would be similar.
And then we used those ideas to give different proofs of the Pythagorean theorem, one emphasizing
congruence by Leonardo da Vinci, and then another proof using similarity.
Well, in the next lecture, we'll discuss the most symmetrical shape in geometry, the circle.
See you then.
