One of the most interesting parts of the story of geometry is the amount of insight and structure
that we can find in even the simplest of geometrical forms.
And perhaps the triangle holds the record for the most hidden complexity in an apparently
simple form.
In this lecture, we'll look at points associated with triangles that each are in some sense
a center for the triangle.
Now a circle has just one point that we'd want to call its center.
And in fact, if we had an equilateral triangle, that's a triangle where all three sides are
exactly the same length, it also has only one natural center.
However, we'll find that many different perspectives show us different points of view on what we
might think of as a center of a triangle.
We get different senses of centrality for a triangle.
Often locating these centers involves the interplay between circles and triangles.
So we'll begin our search for centers by thinking about locating a place where a triangle will
balance.
That's a concept of a center.
And this goal of finding a place where a triangle balances illustrates one of the common methods
for solving difficult mathematical problems.
And that is to start by solving a simpler problem.
So in this case, instead of seeking a point on which the triangle balances, let's begin
by finding a line on which it balances.
Now this problem is simpler because if we're allowed to balance on a line, we don't have
to worry about falling forward or backwards.
We just have to worry about falling side to side.
Well, this is an easier problem.
The way to balance a triangle on a line is to draw a line from a vertex of the triangle
to the exact center point of the opposite side.
The reason that the triangle will balance on such a line is that if we look just at the
bottom edge of the triangle, since this is the center point, we see that that edge is
going to exactly balance.
So in other words, if we just had a pole at the bottom instead of being attached to the
triangle, it would balance on its own.
Likewise, every parallel line going up is going to be cut in half, exactly in half, by this
line from the vertex to the midpoint of the opposite side.
And so each individual line will be exactly balanced.
The line segment from a vertex to the center point of the opposite side is called a median
of the triangle.
So we can see that the triangle will balance on any one of its medians, and so it's balancing
here on this median, but I can turn the triangle and we can see that in fact it will balance
on this other median as well.
Well now, physically, this gives us an idea that the point at which the triangle would
balance on a pin should be the intersection of where the medians hit, and it also should
tell us that if we have all three medians, they will hit at one point because they would
have to hit at the point at which it would not fall any direction.
Indeed, it is true that the medians do intersect at a single point and that if we take a pin
and put the pin exactly at the point of intersections of these medians here, then if all goes well,
the triangle will balance.
Look at that.
That's pretty good.
Well, this is a physical reason that the medians of a triangle would meet at a single point.
By the way, that central point is called the centroid of a triangle.
That's where the medians all meet.
But that's not really a mathematical proof.
So we need to find a mathematical proof that would show us that those medians, the points
from the vertex to the middle of the opposite side, those medians all meet at a single point.
Here's how we do it.
Suppose we take our triangle and we draw in two of the medians.
They of course intersect at some point, and we're going to notice something about those
two intersecting medians by connecting the midpoints of the two sides that are the ends
of those two medians.
Remember when we connect the midpoints of two sides of a triangle, we create a line
segment that's parallel to the base of that triangle.
And its length is exactly half of the base of the triangle.
Remember that because the top of the triangle there, the top triangle is similar to the
whole triangle and is exactly half, each side is exactly half as long.
Well, this allows us to make some observations about the two triangles that are created by
the crossing medians, namely those are similar triangles.
You see because those two lines are parallel, so we can see that alternate interior angles
are equal.
And also by the way, of course, the angle across the place where they're crossing, those
angles are equal.
So we have a smaller triangle and a larger triangle created by the crossing medians.
But we can make an observation that is even more specific about where those medians meet.
Namely, since that upper triangle is exactly half the length of the base, that is the top
line between the midpoints is exactly half the length of the base of our big triangle,
and we know that the proportion of similarity is two to one.
Everything about the top triangle there is half as big as the bottom one.
And therefore, if we look at the length between the vertex going up to the intersection point
and then going on to the midpoint of the opposite side, the place where that crossing happens
is exactly two times as far until it goes to the end.
In other words, it's two thirds of the way along the median.
And likewise the other median, two thirds along the way of the median.
Well, that shows that on any median, the crossing point occurs at a very specific point, namely
the point that's two thirds of the way along from that vertex to the opposite midpoint.
And therefore, that third median will also have its intersection with either of the two
medians that we've already talked about at exactly the point that's two thirds of the
way along, and therefore all the medians meet at a single point.
Well, I think, first of all, that's a neat proof, and I need to give a name to that
central point that's created by the intersection of the medians.
It's called the centroid.
Okay, so so far we've located another, we've located a center for any triangle, the centroid,
is the point at which the triangle will exactly balance.
Well, the next, we're going to now investigate another center of the triangle.
Let's think about the place where the angle bisectors will meet.
And in fact, the fact is, and we'll prove it in a minute, that if we take the three
bisectors of the three angles of a triangle, those three lines all meet in a single point.
But I wanted to illustrate to you why we need to prove things.
And so let me show you here on the screen two pictures of the exact same triangle.
And you can see that I've drawn lines in each of those that appear to be bisectors of the
angles.
They appear to be bisectors.
But in one of the pictures, you notice that these apparent bisectors do hit all at one
point, and in the other picture, they don't hit at one point.
There's a little triangle in the middle.
And by the way, if you personally took a piece of paper and a triangle, and by eye, you tried
to draw very carefully a bisector of each of the three angles, and then you extended
those lines and saw what happened, probably you would construct a little tiny triangle
in the middle, as you see in the incorrect picture.
So we need to figure out which picture is really correct.
What is reality here?
Well, the way that we do this is we have to have a proof.
We have to have a reason for showing that, in fact, the angle bisectors do, in fact,
meet at a single point.
And this is, it's not obvious, but here's a case where the proof really reveals the
reason for the truth of this statement that the bisectors metered a point.
And what we do is we use an auxiliary construction, that is to say, we look at something associated
with the triangle.
In this case, we look at a circle that's exactly inscribed in the triangle.
That is to say, this circle is tangent to each of the three sides of the triangle.
That by the way is called the in-circle, because it's inside the triangle, it's the in-circle.
Well notice that each of the vertices, if we bisect the angle, that angle is going
to bisect the lines that are tangent to the circle from an external point of a circle,
and that bisector will of course go through the center of the circle.
That's true for each of the vertices of the triangle, because there are two lines coming
out that are tangent to two points of the circle.
And therefore, those three bisectors must all meet at the same point, namely the center
of the inscribed circle.
And that gives a name, by the way, to that central point.
That point is called the in-center, because it's the center of the in-circle.
Okay, so now we have found two different centers for a triangle.
And we'll move on now to look at yet a third center for a triangle.
Well, a third center is created when we take our triangle, and every one of the three sides
of the triangle, we take the perpendicular bisector through those three sides.
Now, I claim that those three perpendicular bisectors all meet at a single point.
Well, this one actually is the easiest one of the four centers that we're going to be
talking about today, and the reason that it's so easy is that we've done it before.
Because if you look at the perpendicular bisectors of all three edges of the triangle,
the reason that they meet in a single point is that if we draw the circle around the triangle,
that circumscribes the triangle, that is to say, all three vertices of the triangle are
on the circle, and the triangle is inside the circle.
So this circle circumscribes the triangle.
And all three of the sides of the triangle are cords of that same circle.
Now, remember what happens when you take the perpendicular bisector of the cord of a circle.
Well, any perpendicular bisector of a cord of a circle goes through the center of that
circle.
And therefore, the three lines that are perpendicular bisectors to the three sides of our triangle
all meet at a single point, and we call that point the circum-center.
It's called circum-center because it's the center of the circum-circle, the circle in
which that circumscribes, that goes around the triangle.
OK.
So now we have, and as I say, we did that before when we were taking three points and
finding that they determined a circle, that there was a unique circle that went through
those three points.
OK.
Now, the fourth and last center that we're going to be talking about is called the orthocenter,
and it's the point at which the three altitudes of the triangle all meet.
Now, let me tell you first of all what an altitude is.
If you have a triangle and you take a vertex and then you drop a perpendicular to the opposite
side, that's called an altitude.
So there are three altitudes of any triangle.
You have a triangle, you take a vertex, you drop a perpendicular, that's one altitude.
From this vertex, you drop a perpendicular to the opposite side, that's an altitude,
and we have the third altitude.
Now, by the way, if you sit down and try to prove that those three altitudes meet at
a single point, I think you'll find this to be a very challenging fact.
But it's one of these cases where there is an amazingly clever insight that allows us
to see why it's true, and this is the insight.
Let's take our triangle and do something that we saw back in lecture two, which is to realize
that we can take that triangle and surround it by three identical copies of itself, three
congruent copies of itself, to create a larger triangle that's similar to the original triangle
that we're given.
Now, let's now look at this picture of this larger triangle and notice something about
the altitudes of that inner triangle in relation to the big triangle that we've just created.
Well, the big triangle that we've just created, remember, it has the property that the three
edges of the original triangle go from the midpoints of the big triangle, from midpoint
to midpoint to midpoint.
Therefore, the altitude of the small triangle goes through a midpoint of the side of the
bigger triangle, and it's perpendicular to the opposite side because of the fact it was
an altitude, but that line is parallel to the line on the outside triangle because of
the fact these are similar triangles.
Remember, we saw that when we created these four identical triangles that filled up a
triangle?
So that line is parallel to the baseline, and therefore, the altitude of the small triangle
is the perpendicular bisector of the big triangle.
But we already proved that the perpendicular bisectors of a big triangle, of any triangle,
meet at a single point, and therefore, the altitudes of that smaller triangle meet at
that same single point.
In other words, they meet at the point that's actually the center of the circle that we
would get that circumscribes this bigger triangle that we constructed.
Well, this is a very clever proof, and by the way, this center is called an orthocenter,
and in mathematics, orthogonal means perpendicular, and so it reminds us the orthocenter is where
the altitudes that are perpendicular to the opposite side meet.
And I want to show you, by the way, that the fact that this is true even if the altitudes
don't meet inside the triangle.
You see, if we take a different shaped triangle, as you see here, the altitude might have to be
perpendicular to the extension of the opposite side and might not actually hit on the side,
but on the side itself, inside the triangle.
Nevertheless, it's still true that this orthocenter is the place where the three altitudes all meet.
Well, what we've done then so far is isolated four centers for a triangle.
One is the centroid.
That was the point where the medians met.
Remember, the median was the line that went from each vertex to the center of the opposite side.
The point where the bisectors of each of the three angles meet was called the in-center.
The point where the perpendicular bisectors of the three sides of our triangle all met
was called the circum-center.
And the point where the three altitudes all met is called the orthocenter.
Well, it turns out that these centers were known to antiquity,
but an amazing fact about them was not known until the 18th century.
And that was that it's an amazing fact, but that for any triangle whatsoever,
the orthocenter, the centroid, and the circum-center all lie on one straight line.
And that straight line is called the Euler line.
Now, I want to tell you a little bit about why all of those three lie on the Euler line.
Now, that is to say why there's a one straight line that contains the circum-center,
the centroid, and the orthocenter.
And it's a very clever argument that, in fact, uses some theorems that we've seen before
about similarity and parallel lines.
And here's the way it goes.
Remember that if we think about a median of a triangle,
that the centroid, the place where the medians meet, is two-thirds of the way down that line.
Now, if we go from that center point where the median meets the opposite side
and we go straight up, that is perpendicular to the center,
we're on the line that contains the circum-center.
Because remember, the circum-center was the place where the perpendicular bisectors
of each segment, of each side of the triangle meet.
So if we go down on the median and then we go up to the circum-center,
and then we take the line segment that goes from the circum-center to that centroid,
we've created a little triangle at the bottom, centroid, midpoint of a side, circum-center.
Now let's go from the circum-center to the centroid and go twice as far as that further on and put a dot.
Well, it turns out that that dot that we place is going to be the orthocenter.
And we're going to prove it here in just a second.
Notice that we've really created two similar triangles.
Because if we look at the centroid, remember there was a 2 to 1 ratio along the median
from the vertex to the midpoint of the opposite side, twice as long to the centroid
as it is from the centroid to the midpoint of the opposite side.
But then we go from the circum-center up to the centroid and then twice as far and we put our dot.
So that line is also twice as long by construction.
We made it twice as long.
And therefore, if we complete the triangle here, that is from the vertex down to this point,
which is going to turn out to be the orthocenter, we've created a similar triangle similar to this base triangle.
Well, since those two triangles are similar, their opposite sides are parallel.
You see, because alternate interior angles are equal, the opposite sides are parallel.
And therefore, the segment that goes from the center of the edge up to the circum-center is perpendicular to that edge of the triangle.
And therefore, the point from the vertex down to this point that we've located, if extended,
will also be perpendicular to that side of the triangle.
And therefore, it will contain the orthocenter.
Okay, the reason that that is now the orthocenter is just to realize that we didn't need to be talking about this top vertex A.
We could draw the same picture focused at vertex B.
You see, because we went from the circum-center to the centroid and then twice as far up to locate that third point,
which turned out to be the orthocenter, and we proved that if we drew the straight line from the vertex down to that point,
it was perpendicular to the opposite side.
But then if we just turn our picture and do the same thing going from this vertex B,
we'll see that the line from B to that same point is also perpendicular to this opposite side.
And so the effect is that we've proved that that point must indeed be the place where the altitudes meet at a single point.
And we've proved that those three points, the circum-center, the centroid, and the orthocenter, all lie on one straight line.
And this was an amazing theorem of Euler.
Well, we've seen four centers of a triangle.
But in fact, in recent years, and recent being starting several hundred years ago,
but then many more recently, there are literally thousands of centers of a triangle.
And you can see on a website pictures of, first of all, lists of these thousands of centers,
and then actually see pictures of how they look when we move the triangle around
and you see all these centers moving in a really, I think, rather artistic display.
So in a way, this concept of the centers, I find them fascinating in their own right,
and they were discovered for their fascination.
But it turns out that the exploration of triangle centers and the Euclidean geometry of circles
was used in the year 2008 to make improvements in skin surgery.
So here's the situation.
Suppose we have a patient who has had an operation such as, say, removing a skin cancer,
and the surgeon has left what is basically a circular wound where the cancer was removed.
The surgeon then can take a patch of skin, a skin graft, usually from the inner arm,
to use to cover the wound.
And for easy healing of the place where the graft was harvested,
the surgeon cuts the graft in something that's the shape of a lens,
and the surgeons call it a fusiform.
Well, we can think of this lens, although the surgeons aren't this precise about it,
but we can imagine these lens to be bounded by arcs of two circles,
one circle on top of the other circle that overlap in this lens shape.
Well, traditionally, the graft has been chosen so that the height of this lens shape piece
is the same as the diameter of the original wound so that it can be covered entirely,
so it covers the wound entirely.
However, recently a surgeon, Dr. Joshua Lane, had the idea that instead of covering the wound entirely,
what you could do is instead take a smaller graft, in fact one that's only half as tall,
and then harvesting that graft, but then cutting it in half and assembling those two pieces
to cover up more or less the circle.
Now, by the way, the fact about skin is that it's somewhat stretchable
so that it doesn't have to completely cover the hole that can be stretched to cover,
but it has to more or less cover.
Well, of course, using both halves of the skin graft allow the graft to be smaller,
which is a great benefit to the patient, and all that is great,
but in fact it even could be improved more, because this is where a mathematician,
Dr. Margaret Simington comes in.
She realized that we could do even better than just taking a graft that was half as high.
In fact, if you notice in the picture where you take this skin graft
and you cut it straight up and down and assemble them inside a circle,
you can see that there are some parts that stick out on the sides,
and she thought, well, wouldn't it be better instead of cutting straight up and down on that little lens-shaped piece,
suppose that you just made an angle so that it would fit more comfortably in the circle.
That is, you wouldn't have parts that were sticking outside of the circular wound.
And so she did some mathematics, and this is the way that she proceeded.
She said, well, let's imagine that we have this lens-shaped graft that we're taking,
and we're going to cut the graft into two pieces by taking this vertical line
and tilting it at some angle through the center of the lens.
Then she posed the question, what angle should you tilt it at
so that the two pieces best fit into a circular hole?
Now, by the way, let me just say a word about how mathematics proceeds.
When a mathematician tries to face a problem of application,
the strategy is to simplify the situation in some way,
to make assumptions that may or may not be completely true.
For example, in this case, the assumption was made that the graft consists of,
as I said before, two parts of two circles that are overlapping circles.
And then we can do this kind of analysis because we made that assumption.
Now, maybe that's not literally true, but it gives some idea of how to proceed.
Well, anyway, what the answer is that she came up with was that
for the shapes of grafts that are usually used,
that is the amount of curvature on these two parts of the lens
that are usually used in actual surgery,
that really cutting at an angle of about 22 degrees
is optimal for putting the skin graft in the wound.
Well, to analyze this situation and to find this optimal solution,
the strategy is to look at the picture of the graft
and consider different possible angles of this potential cut.
Let's call them EF.
So Dr. Simington reasoned that the halves of the graft would fit best in the circle
if the three vertices, A, E, and F, first of all,
all were on the boundary of the circle itself.
But remember, this is what we've been talking about in this lecture.
When are the vertices of a triangle on a circle?
Well, the answer is when the three vertices lie on a circumcircle, the circumcircle.
Well, she realized that the two halves would fit on each side of the diameter of the wound.
And so she looked for the place where the circumcenter of the triangle, A, E, F,
would lie on the boundary of the graft.
In other words, if those two halves were to fit together,
then the center of the circle that contained the three vertices would lie on the diameter.
And if you're going to fit these two graphs together,
that diameter would be right on the place where these two pieces were touching each other.
Therefore, it would be on the boundary of the graft.
Well, for each possible angle EF,
we can look at the circumcenter of the triangle, A, E, F,
and look at the set of all those circumcenters.
They create an arc of a circle.
And in fact, that circle goes through the centers of the two circles that made the lens-shaped piece.
So there's one angle EF where the circumcenter of the triangle, A, E, F, lies on the top of the lens.
And that's the angle for the optimal cut.
And as I said, it's about 22 degrees from off of the vertical.
Well, in this lecture, we saw four triangle centers.
The centroid, where the medians meet, and where the triangle balances, remember.
The in-center, where the angle bisectors meet.
The circumcenter, where the sides, the perpendicular bisectors of the sides all meet.
And the orthocenter, where the altitudes all meet.
Well, those centers, as I said, have been known for millennia.
But the application of these ideas to skin graphs is a 21st century development.
In the next lecture, we're going to see some facts about triangles that were not discovered
until thousands of years after Euclid was discussing Euclidean geometry.
I'll see you then.
