Welcome back. During the last lectures, we've seen several theorems about triangles. We had
our congruence theorems, namely side, side, side, side, angle, side, angle, side, angle
theorems that gave us criteria for determining whether or not two triangles were congruent.
Then we had some similarity theorems of some of a related type. Then we saw a theorem, for example,
in the first lecture that the sum of the angles of a triangle is exactly 180 degrees.
Of course, we proved the famous Pythagorean theorem. In the last lecture, we gave the
existence of many triangle centers. We showed why there are different triangle centers.
In this lecture, we'll see theorems about triangles that were discovered more than 2,000 years
after Euclid wrote the elements. The theorems about triangles are varied, and proofs about
triangles introduce us to many different strategies of geometrical analysis. One theorem about
triangles is called Napoleon's theorem, even though Napoleon probably didn't discover it himself.
But we'll see a proof of Napoleon's theorem that involves constructing a beautiful tiling of the
plane, whose symmetries really reveal the truth of the theorem. Another theorem about triangles
was discovered in 1899, and it's nicknamed Morley's Miracle. And it allows us to demonstrate
a modern puzzle proof by a living mathematician John Conway, and I further streamlined it for this
lecture. Well, these theorems help illustrate one of the themes of this course, which is that if we
ask interesting questions, we'll find structure and relationships that lie hidden even in the
apparently simplest parts of our world. In this case, the triangle. Well, before starting the
mathematics per se, I wanted to make a few comments about what I see as different types of theorems
that have different reasons for being interesting. Some theorems are important because they contain
insights that have a myriad of applications. And when I think of that type of theorem,
I think of the Pythagorean theorem as the greatest example of that reason for being interested in
the theorem. In my teaching company course on calculus, I talked about the Pythagorean theorem
because it's used so many places in calculus. For example, when we're trying to compute the
integral that tells us the path length, the length of a path, what do you use? The Pythagorean theorem.
And in fact, the Pythagorean theorem is basically used whenever we talk about the distance between
two points. Well, later in these lectures, we'll see how the Pythagorean theorem can also be used
to explain Einstein's theory of special relativity. Carpentiers use the Pythagorean theorem to make
corners that are at right angles. So the Pythagorean theorem is important because it's used in so many
places and in so many ways, both in the mathematical world and in the real world.
Well, I'd say that the congruence theorems, like the side-side-side theorem, the side-angle-side
theorem, angle-side-angle theorem, that these theorems are important because they're used so
often to prove other theorems in geometry. They are basic facts that sit at the core of an important
mathematical subject. So that's what makes those theorems interesting. But the theorems that we're
going to see in this lecture, frankly, aren't important from an application point of view.
I don't know of any practical uses for these, and they're not even used particularly in proving
other things in mathematics. But actually, having said that, I have to say that abstract mathematics
has a long history of having unexpected applications. For example, we saw an unexpected
application of triangle centers to surgery in the last lecture. And there are plenty of examples
where completely abstract mathematics has turned out to be of immense practical value.
And one of the prime examples of such a thing are the theorems and abstract number theory
that are used as the foundation for everyday encryption on the internet. We use it every
time we use a credit card. So we should never say that theorems will not have a practical
application in the future. But the theorems that we're going to see in this lecture
were not discovered with any practical aim in mind. And their interest, frankly, to me and to
mathematicians in general, doesn't arise from potential applications that they might have.
Instead, these theorems are intriguing because they each expose some regularity,
some connection in our world that's not at all obvious. And yet, it's true. So they show us
somehow that ideas are connected in deep kinds of ways, and that if we seek out patterns and
relationships, then in fact, we will find these connections. Okay, so let's get to the actual
mathematics and start with our first theorem. So the first theorem that we're going to discuss
today describes something called the nine-point circle. And the nine-point circle theorem tells
us that if we take any triangle whatsoever, there's a single circle that contains nine
special points related to the triangle. Specifically, the nine-point circle contains the
following nine points. First, it contains the three midpoints of the three sides of the triangle.
It also contains the three points where each altitude touches the base of the triangle. Remember,
the altitude starts at a vertex and is perpendicular to the opposite side. So there are three places
where that perpendicular altitude intersects the opposite side. It's called the foot of the
altitude. So those three feet of the altitudes are all on the same circle. And also, if we look at
the three midpoints of the segments between each vertex and the orthocenter, and now remember what
the orthocenter was, the orthocenter was the place where the altitudes all met at a single point.
Well, if you go halfway toward the orthocenter from the vertex, you get three other points.
This one circle contains all nine of those points. Well, first of all, let me explain
why this theorem seems so remarkable to me. And the reason it's unexpected is because remember
that any three non-colonial points determine a unique circle. That's to say, if we have three
points that don't line a straight line, then there's exactly one circle that goes through
those three points. We saw that three points determine a circle. So for example, if we took
the three midpoints of the sides of a triangle, that those three points determine a unique circle.
So we wouldn't expect that that circle would contain some fourth point like the foot of an
altitude, nor any of the remaining special points that we've just talked about. So the fact that
all nine of these points lie on a circle is a surprise. It's a surprise. It looks like there
should, you know, that we wouldn't be able to, why do they fit? It seems like a miracle that they
all lie on the same circle. Well, anyway, it was in the 18th century or maybe the early 19th century
that mathematicians discovered that all nine of those points lie on this single circle. And the
circle that contains those nine points, it turns out, has many names. So the most common name for
it is the nine point circle. But it's also known as Feuerbach circle, Euler's circle, Turkwem circle,
the six point circle, the 12 point circle, the end point circle, the Medioscribe circle,
the mid circle, and the circle mid circle. Maybe it holds the record for the most number of aliases
for any circle. Well, okay, so let's get down to business and actually see why this nine point,
what the nine point circle theorem tells us and why it's true. Well, first of all, it tells us,
as I said before, that for any triangle, there's a single circle that contains the following nine
points. So I'm going to review them for you. The three midpoints of the sides of the triangle,
the three points where each altitude touches its base, that is the feet of the altitudes,
and the three midpoints of segments between each vertex and the orthocenter.
Okay, so let's get down to the proof of this theorem. And the reason I want to show you this
proof is because the proof contains that this circle, in fact, does exist, that it contains
all these points, that a single circle contains all these points. The proof that that's true
involves many of the theorems that we've learned about angles and circles,
about similar triangles, and about some of our triangle centers. So it really
puts together all the things that we've learned in our previous lectures. So that's sort of fun.
Well, the nine point circle, by the way, has some additional properties that we'll talk
about later. But let me, first of all, get down to the proof. Okay, so let's start with our triangle
and we'll call it ABC as usual. And our goal is to prove that we have all of these nine points
on the circle. And so, first of all, let me, let's just draw a circle here, the nine point
circle, and you'll see that it goes through these nine points, the midpoints of the sides,
the feet of the altitudes, and the midpoints between the vertex and the orthocenter.
Okay, so let's see, how would we prove that this is true? Well, we'll start in the following way.
Let's look at the two triangles that start at the vertex A, go down to the orthocenter,
and then go to vertex B, that's one triangle, and then also starting at the vertex A, going down to
the orthocenter, and going to the vertex C. So we have two triangles, they're sort of on the sides
of that, of the, of our original triangle ABC. Now, the first thing that we're going to do is use the
fact that if we connect the midpoints of triangles, we construct similar triangles,
and that these sides are parallel to things. So let's, let's see this exactly. Suppose we take
the midpoint of the side AB, that's, that's the point D in your figure. Well, if you connect
that midpoint of the line AB to the midpoint of the line BO, where O stands for orthocenter,
it's the orthocenter of, of the triangle, it's not going to be on the circle, on the nine-point
circle, but it's the orthocenter. And remember, we said that the point that's halfway between
a vertex and the orthocenter was going to be a point on our circle. So that name is G. Now,
if we connect the midpoint D to the midpoint G, then we could, we construct a line that's parallel
to the line AO. Likewise, if we do the same thing on the other side, we can, we can connect the
midpoint of the line AC, that's the point F, down to the point H, which is the midpoint of the,
the line segment between the vertex C and the orthocenter. Then we construct another line
that once again, because of similar triangles, is parallel to the line segment AO. Now, by the way,
notice that both of those line segments being parallel to AO and A to O, remember O is the
orthocenter, meaning that it lies on the altitude. So that means that these two lines being parallel
to that line are also perpendicular to the base of the triangle. Well, now let's do something
we've done many times before, which is to connect the midpoints of the two sides,
A, B, and AC, that is connect D to F. We construct a line that's parallel to the base. Well,
since it's parallel to the base of the triangle, then it's perpendicular to those two other lines
that we just created. Likewise, if we connect G to H, notice that this triangle from B to,
to O to C, that's a triangle. And if we connect its midpoints, we get this line GH,
which is also parallel to the base. So what we've constructed is a rectangle.
Well, that rectangle DGHF, that rectangle, is going to be the rectangle whose center is the
center of our nine point circle. And here's why. We look at the diagonal DH and notice something
about that diagonal DH and compare it to the angle HJD. Well, you notice that
the triangle HJD and then D back to H is a right triangle because J was the foot of this altitude.
You see? So we have the, it's a 90 degree angle. And what do we know about a 90 degree angle
whose endpoints are on the ends of the diameter of a circle? Well, we know that that point lies on
the circle. And therefore, the point J lies on the circle whose diameter is DH. And likewise,
we just turn the diagonals of that little rectangle around and we go from G to F. And
the same argument says that when we go to G to L to F, that's a right angle. And the right angle
comes down and meets G to F, which is the other diameter of the circle, another diameter of the
circle. And therefore, that point L also lies on the circle. So, so far, we've gotten six
points all lying on the same circle. And now we just turn our heads a little bit to get the
remaining points. Because we notice that the line segment DH, it's the diagonal of the rectangle
that we just talked about, DGHF. But it's also the diagonal of the rectangle if we had turned our
heads and started at, instead of thinking of A as the starting point, if we thought of B,
we would have created a rectangle that sits sideways, as you see. And it's the rectangle
DEHI. So, that rectangle also has the same diameter of DH. And therefore, we can conclude that the
foot of the altitude there, K, lies on that circle as well. Okay. Now, look, I have given way too
many details for this argument. And what do I want you to get out of this? I don't want you
to be able to say, oh, yes, I know how to prove that the nine point circle has all these points
on it. If you ask any mathematician on the street, they won't be able to do this either.
It has a lot of details. But I wanted to do it for the point of saying that it uses all of these
neat theorems that we've had before, similar triangles, parallel lines, the fact that if you
have a diameter of a circle, then the right angle lies on the circle. That's Thaley's theorem,
remember? So, I hope that you'll enjoy just realizing that these are all theorems that
have application and we see them here. So, the nine point circle exists. The nine point circle
actually has some additional properties that are interesting. One is that the center of it
lies on the Euler line that we talked about in the last lecture. And it's also true. Remember,
the Euler line was the one that contained the orthocenter, the centroid, and the circumcenter,
that they all lie on a straight line. Well, the center of this nine point circle also lies on
that Euler line. It also has two additional interesting properties. One is that it's tangent
to the n circle. If we draw the inscribed circle, it's tangent to the nine point circle. And it's
also tangent to three x circles. And I won't describe them too much. It's just if we extend
the three sides of the triangle, we have sort of three regions that we can draw circles in,
and our nine point circle is tangent to those. Well, okay, let's move on past the nine point
circle and move on to Napoleon's theorem. So, Napoleon's theorem asserts the existence of an
equilateral triangle that seems to emerge from an arbitrary triangle in an unexpected way.
It states the following. Suppose that we start with any triangle whatsoever. And then what we do
is we take that triangle and put an equilateral triangle on each of the three faces, on each
of the three sides of that triangle. And then look at the centers of each of those three
equilateral triangles. If we look at the centers of those three equilateral triangles, Napoleon's
theorem asserts that, in fact, those three are vertices of an exact equilateral triangle
themselves. And this seems amazing because we just start with an arbitrary triangle. Why should
this be true? Well, first of all, we can just see visually that it appears to be true, and indeed,
it is. Now, by the way, Napoleon's theorem is traditionally associated with the famous emperor.
It's named after him. And he did, apparently, like geometry very much. However, unfortunately,
it's not true that he personally discovered the theorem, as I said. Well, the reason that I wanted
to tell you about Napoleon's theorem is first that it's just a neat fact, but also that its proof
involves drawing a picture that is a tessellation of the plane. And so here's the way that we can do
it. Suppose that we start with our triangle, arbitrary shape triangle, and then we put on those
three equilateral triangles, a blue one, a red one, and a green one. And then what we can do is just
keep building out, putting copies of our equilateral triangles and copies of the original shape triangle.
And as you see, we can put them in and just keep going and actually what's called tessellating
the plane, meaning filling up the plane exactly. And when we do that, we can make some observations.
Here we've got a part of the plane here. Notice that if we go from this green center, that is,
the center of this green triangle to the center of this green triangle, to the center of this
green triangle, that all the distances between adjacent centers are exactly the same length.
So in other words, just focus on the green triangles. And if you look at the centers
of those three green triangles, you can see that you could just rotate the blue central triangle
by 120 degrees, and each of the triangles would just go to the next one around, so that those
segments are equal, just equal length. Therefore, the green triangles form equilateral triangles.
Now, notice that if we look at the center of, say, this blue triangle, focus your attention on the
center of the blue triangle, and look at its distance to the centers of the three green
triangles that are around it. Well, notice that those distances are all equal to each other,
and they're all equal to each other. We could do it the same way as before, just rotating 120
degrees, takes one line segment from the center of the blue to the center of the green to the
next one around, or we can just see how it interacts with the picture. It crosses exactly
the way through the part of our original triangle, the copy of it, in exactly the same way in all
three pictures. Therefore, that center of the blue triangle is centered in that one of the
equilateral triangles created by the centers of the green triangles. Well, the same thing,
of course, is true for that red triangle over here, and therefore, if you have two equilateral
triangles next to each other, as we have by connecting the centers of the green triangles,
we see that we have the center point of each of those triangles connected together will,
of course, make an equilateral triangle, and therefore, that proves the theorem that we,
in fact, create an equilateral triangle. Well, one thing that's interesting about this is that
we have created this intriguing tessellation. It has an interesting look to it, and it incorporates
these many repeating patterns, and we could actually use this to tile an actual floor. You
could physically put these down and create a nice tiling of the floor, choosing good colors and
shapes of the original triangle. So this was interesting to me that we could use this fact
about the patterns being symmetrical kinds of patterns, this tessellation of the floor, to prove
Napoleon's theorem. Well, now we come to our third and last theorem about triangles,
which is called Morley's Miracle. Morley's Miracle was a theorem, and it has this name,
people refer to it as Morley's Miracle, and it was discovered in 1899, and it's really quite late
for a theorem that could have been noticed in ancient times. It's a theorem about triangles.
And what it states is the following. Suppose you have any triangle whatsoever,
and you trisect each of the angles of the triangle, and you look at the three places
where adjacent trisection lines meet, then those three places are the vertices of an
equilateral triangle. Now, let me say a word about trisection. We can't trisect any angle by using
a straight edge in compass, and we'll talk about constructions, in fact, in the next lecture,
but every angle can be trisected. Given any angle, you can divide it into three equal parts.
One proof of Morley's theorem was discovered by the living mathematician John Conway,
and that's the proof that we'll see is basically his proof, which I've modified a little bit
for this lecture. And the strategy of Conway's proof is interesting because it involves working
backwards. That is, instead of starting with an arbitrary triangle and then trisecting angles
and seeing that you get an equilateral triangle inside, his idea was to start with an equilateral
triangle and build the triangle around it. So you construct the larger triangle in such a way
that it has these trisection properties. Well, here's the way that the proof goes.
If you have any triangle, and we're looking at trisections of the angles,
let's call the angles little a, a, a for the three angles at vertex a, b, b, b for the three
angles at vertex b, and ccc for the three angles at vertex c. Now, since the three angles of a
triangle add up to 180 degrees, we know that 3a plus 3b plus 3c equals 180 degrees. And consequently,
a plus b plus c equals 60 degrees, one-third of that. Well, so this is the way Conway proceeded
to prove the theorem. As I say, he started with an equilateral triangle in the middle,
and he's going to construct a triangle around it whose angles are 3a, 3b, and 3c. And the way he
does it, he's going to first put out these spikes coming out from the three sides of the equilateral
triangle. So we put the equilateral triangle in the middle, and the first thing is to put
three equilateral triangles around it to create a larger equilateral triangle.
And then these spiky things coming out are going to involve, each spike involves the three angles a,
b, c, as you see in this picture. For example, this one has angle at the bottom, angle a,
and then up at the top, it's angle c between that line coming up and the outside of the bigger
equilateral triangle. That's angle c. And then angle b has to be this other angle, because if you
remember, an equilateral triangle has angles 60, 60, 60. And so in order for this triangle to be,
have 180 degrees, a plus b plus c plus 60 plus 60 equals 180 degrees.
Now let's focus our attention on the spike that's coming out in the direction of b.
Likewise, it has angle b at the bottom instead of angle a at the spike. This one had angle a
at the spike, end of the spike. This has angle b at the end of the spike. But it also has angle c
coming up above the equilateral triangle. And it has angle a as the little angle in here in order
for those angles to add up to the appropriate amount. So we now have these two spikes sticking
out. And now the strategy is to prove that if we connect the ends of those spikes,
then in fact, the angle that we create is going to be a on the a side and b on the b side.
And then we'll proceed to do the same thing on above to complete the proof. But let's just focus
on these bottom two spikes. Okay, so how are we going to prove this? Well, it's really, I think,
a very clever proof. And to be honest, I'm very proud of it because this is this is where some
of the things that I did came in to try to improve this proof. So here's what here's what we do.
Let's just extend the base of that larger equilateral triangle until it hits the two ends
of the lines coming up from vertex a and vertex b. And we'll call those points d and f or the end
points. And let's call e the vertex that's right in the middle of our original equilateral triangle
d e f. And notice that since those top lines both have angle c, that that the distance between d
and e is exactly equal to the distance from e to f because you see it's just all symmetrical,
I just forget everything else except those two lines coming down with equal angles, they're
symmetrical. Well, now now look at the triangle a d e. Well, notice that that triangle has angle a
at the vertex near the vertex a and it has angle b by construction at the point e.
But now now look at the exact the the triangle over to the to the right that has vertices e f b.
And notice that it also has angles a and b. And if you have two triangles where two of the angles
are the same, of course, all three of the angles are the same as we talked about before, because
the angles of any triangle add up to 180 degrees. And therefore those two triangles are similar to
each other. Now, what we're going to prove is that in fact, the big triangle a e b is also
similar to those two true two triangles. And the reason for that is we just use some basic facts
of similarity, which which are the following. Now, that if we look at the side a e, that is the
side on the triangle a d e, that is between the a angle and the b angle. So that's line a e.
And we compare it that is we divide by the length of e b, which is the corresponding side on the
e b f triangle, the one over there, that that ratio that fraction has to be the same as looking at
the the fraction of corresponding angles in particular a d to the angle e f to the side e f,
because a d is the the the side at the a angle and e f has the angle. So those ratios are the same.
But e f is equal to d e. And therefore we can conclude that this triangle a e b that the the
sides a e divided by e b are exactly in the same ratio as the side a d is to d e. And therefore,
those two triangles are similar. And therefore, we have this bottom angle as angle a doing exactly
the same thing on the other two sides proves that we have trisected these these three angles,
and that we built a triangle around an equilateral triangle. And this then is actually a proof of
Morley's theorem. Well, in this lecture, we saw three theorems about triangles,
which illustrated several strategies of proof. The nine point circle proof used similar triangles
and parallelness associated with similar triangles. It also used Thaley's theorem about right angles
and circles. Napoleon's theorem involved test relating the plane. And Morley's miracle had
this puzzle proof that also used similar triangles. The geometry of simple triangles is impressively
complex. So I hope that you get a general picture of this and enjoyed it. But this will be the last
of the theorems about triangles that will do. In the next lecture, we'll discuss compass and
straight edge constructions. I'll see you then.
