Welcome back.
The ancient Greeks viewed the straight line in the circle as the most basic of geometrical
shapes.
A straight edge constructs a straight line, and a compass constructs a circle.
That's pretty good.
So this is the reason that straight edge and compass constructions are fundamental to Euclidean
geometry.
Traditionally, every student of Euclidean geometry learned about constructions, that
is, seeing what figures can in fact be constructed using only a straight edge and a compass.
Classical construction challenges include bisecting an angle, finding the midpoint
of a line segment, drawing perpendiculars, bisecting line segments, copying angles,
constructing parallel lines, and many more.
And these are fun to do, by the way.
I think they're great challenges to have for fun.
Well, one thing that we can construct is a golden rectangle.
We can construct that with a straight edge and compass.
One basic construction challenge is to construct regular polygons.
That is, polygons that every side is the same length, and every angle is the same angle.
It took nearly till the 19th century to describe which regular polygons can be constructed,
and which cannot.
And for example, a regular seven-sided polygon cannot be constructed with a straight edge
and compass, while a regular 17-sided polygon can be constructed.
As is often the case, here, too, we find unexpected connections.
In this lecture, for example, we'll find that the construction of the regular pentagon
uses the features of the golden rectangle.
We'll start this lecture with some basic constructions.
So let's begin by constructing an equilateral triangle.
If we start with a given length, we can simply open our compass to that length, draw a circle
segment here, draw a circle segment here, where the intersect will be the vertex of
an equilateral triangle.
We can construct a perpendicular bisector of this same segment by just finding its and
finding its midpoint by the following method.
We've constructed an equilateral triangle above it.
We can do the same thing below it.
And then connecting those upper and lower vertices gives us the perpendicular bisector
of our segment.
We can construct a line that goes through a given point that's perpendicular to a given
line.
How do we do it?
We start at that given point, open our compass, draw a circle centered at that point.
That gives us two points on this line.
And then all we do is construct our perpendicular bisector that we've already done.
And that will be a perpendicular line through a given point perpendicular to a given line.
We can use this fact to construct a line parallel to a given line through a given point.
How do we do that?
First construct a perpendicular bisector and then just construct a perpendicular to that
perpendicular bisector, and those two lines will be parallel.
Using this fact, we can easily construct a square.
We can bisect angles.
Here's how we bisect an angle.
We just open our compass, make the center of the circle that we're drawing at the angle
point and draw a segment, and then open our compass to the distance between the intersection
points of that arc and draw a sector of a circle centered at each of those two intersection
points.
And then we can connect the angle point to that point we've located and that will bisect
the angle.
We can copy an angle.
That is to say if we have an angle over here and we have a line segment and a line and
a point on it, we can construct that same angle over here.
And here's how we do it.
We just once again draw a using our compass.
We put the center of the circle that it's drawing at the angle point and make an arc.
That locates two points on our angle.
And then we can take that same distance that we constructed and move it over to the other
point on the other line and draw a circle of that radius.
And then we can come back over to our original angle and open our compass to the distance
between those two intersection points and then bring that over to this picture, put
the center point at the point of intersection that we'd already created, and then make an
arc to see how far up we have to go to copy the angle.
This last construction actually brings up a technical issue about compasses.
Does our compass collapse when we lift it off the page or can we open it to a given
size and then move it to a new location keeping the opening at that size?
You notice that's what we did in this copying and angle construction.
The answer is that anything that can be constructed with a compass that holds its size, which has
more good properties than a collapsing compass, but it also can be constructed with a compass
that collapses every time you lift it from the page.
In other words, a collapsible compass can do everything that a fixed compass can do.
It's just that it will require more steps.
By the way, this issue may seem like a technicality, whether or not the compass collapses or not.
But it turns out that mathematicians have found that being attentive to such issues
often takes us to the heart of some important issue or insight.
Well, okay, let's turn now to one of the most famous shapes in geometry, the golden rectangle.
The golden rectangle is, first of all, let me tell you what it is.
It's a rectangle whose proportions are such that when we remove the largest square from
it, the remaining rectangle has the same proportions as the original rectangle did.
Many people view the golden rectangle as the most attractive rectangle.
And in fact, it appears frequently in art and in architecture.
Although in some cases, like in the Parthenon, we don't really know whether it's there
or whether it's just an approximation.
Look at this picture of the Parthenon.
And here we've superimposed the golden rectangle on it.
And notice that if we put the golden rectangle so that the top of the golden rectangle is
at the point where the top of the Parthenon would be if it were complete, that it fits
pretty nearly the facade of the Parthenon.
But if you look at it closely, it really doesn't fit absolutely perfectly.
The bottom line is sort of on the second step.
It's not really at the base of this building, so it's not clear that the Parthenon was intentionally
created to emphasize the golden rectangle, but maybe it was, maybe it wasn't.
However, in some modern buildings, such as some by the architect Le Corbusier, the golden
rectangle was overtly used in the design.
And in fact, the feature of removing the largest square and then creating another rectangle
having the same proportions actually figures in the construction of the building.
Well, from our purposes, we need to see that the golden rectangle can be constructed.
And this is the way we construct a golden rectangle.
We take a square, which we know how to construct, and then we take the midpoint of the base
of the square and draw a diagonal line between that midpoint and the upper right-hand corner
of the square.
We can do that with our straight edge.
And then we put our compass so that the center point of the compass is going to be the midpoint
of the base of that square, and then we open it to the size of that diagonal line, and
then sweep down until we hit the extended base of the square.
And the point of intersection there will be the width of the golden rectangle, and then
by constructing perpendicular lines, we can complete the rectangle.
Now, you may ask, why is it that that rectangle that we've just constructed has the desired
properties?
Well, the way that we can prove that, that we can verify that, is that we assume that
we start with a unit square, and then we can use the Pythagorean theorem to compute the
length of that little diagonal line, because you see the bottom side is one-half, the vertical
side is one, and therefore we can compute what that length is, and then, it's the square
root of five over two, by the way, and then we can slide it down and compute what the
length of the longer side of the golden rectangle is.
And turns out it's exactly one plus the square root of five all divided by two.
Let's call that length phi.
If we just do the algebra, we can show that that number of phi, one plus square root of
five over two, has the property that phi divided by one does in fact equal one divided by
phi minus one, which is, you see the width of that remaining rectangle.
And I've shown the algebra here on your screen, but I don't really want to go through it very
much, because the fact that what we, what I want to focus on is that we've constructed
a line segment of this length phi, where the number has the property that phi over one
equals one over phi minus one.
Well, my collaborator, Ed Berger, and I discussed the golden rectangle at greater length in
our joy of thinking teaching company course, but for now, let's move on and talk about
how to construct a regular pentagon.
And a pentagon is interesting because it figures in the secret society of the Pythagoreans.
The Pythagoreans society had a symbol, the pentagram, which is this sort of star like
figure inside a regular pentagon.
So it's interesting that constructing a regular pentagon, as we'll see in a minute, actually
uses our construction of the golden rectangle.
So let's go ahead and see how to construct a regular pentagon.
The first thing that we'll do is just take our golden rectangle and just draw it here.
So here is our golden rectangle with the unit lengths demonstrated or shown, the unit lengths
are shown.
In other words, we have this unit square, and then we've extended it so that its width
is this number phi.
So here are the steps to construct a regular pentagon.
The first thing we do is we open our compass to distance phi, that is to the base of the
golden rectangle, and then proceed to draw a circle segment, an arc of a circle, centered
at the bottom left-hand corner of the golden rectangle, and then going down.
Then we take our compass and move it and create a circle that starts at the bottom right-hand
corner of the golden rectangle and has unit length, unit length.
In other words, we put the other end of the compass at the top corner, for example, of
the golden rectangle, and just sweep it down to create a circle.
Where those two circles intersect is this point that we've identified here.
Now notice that we know some things about that.
First of all, we've created, if we connect the bottom right-hand corner of the golden
rectangle with that point we've identified, we can say things about that point.
Namely, first of all, the distance from the bottom left corner of the golden rectangle
to that point is distance phi, because it was on a circle of that radius, and likewise
it was on the circle of radius one from the bottom right-hand corner, and consequently
it is distance one from that bottom right-hand corner.
If we look at this big triangle, the base of the golden rectangle, and then this other
line, those two lines are exactly the same length, so those two lines are both phi, and
then the base of this is unit length.
Well, what we're going to see is that the properties of the length phi tell us that
if we make a little triangle by going from that bottom point up to the place of unit
distance along the base of the golden rectangle, that triangle that we create right here is
actually similar to the isosceles triangle that has phi, phi, and one as its dimensions.
The reason for that is that those two triangles, this one and this one, share this angle in
common, and look at the proportions of the sides.
Here we have phi to one, and here we have one to phi minus one.
The property of phi is that those two ratios are exactly the same number, and consequently,
by our side angle, side kind of theorem for similar triangles, we see that those two triangles
are similar. The important consequence is that the line segment between the point that's
unit one distance away on the base of the golden rectangle down to this point is also
unit length.
Well, now we have a picture that has lots of unit lengths in here, and we are going
to do some computations with angles. First of all, the angle alpha, let's call this
angle alpha, the angle at the left bottom corner of the figure, and notice that since
we have now an isosceles triangle here, that this angle is also alpha. Therefore, this
angle up here is 180 degrees minus 2 alpha, and so this angle is 2 alpha. But this is
an isosceles triangle, so this angle is 2 alpha. But since the big triangle was isosceles,
that means the bottom vertex has angle 2 alpha, but alpha is here, so this means that this
angle at the top is alpha. Therefore, if we look at that little triangle on the right,
we see that it has three angles, alpha, 2 alpha, and 2 alpha. So altogether that's 5
alpha that has to add up to 180 degrees. Therefore, alpha is 36 degrees, 5 into 180.
Well, what's important about 36 degrees? We've shown now that we can construct an angle
of 36 degrees. Well, the reason that's important is that 36 is exactly one tenth of 360 degrees.
So we can merely copy that 36 degree angle ten times around a single point to create
ten spikes coming out with equal angles, and then just draw a circle of unit length around
that center at that same point and connect every other intersection point, and we will
have constructed a regular pentagon. Okay, so we've now shown how a regular pentagon
can be constructed, and surprisingly it uses the construction of the golden rectangle.
Well, we can construct a regular hexagon by just putting six triangles together, but
in fact, if we've constructed any polygon, we can also just by dividing any regular
polygon of any number of sides, by bisecting each of the angles, we can construct a polygon
that has twice as many sides. So once we've constructed something of, say, three sides,
we can construct six, or 12, or 24, any multiple of two, two to a power times that side we
can also construct. Okay, now the question then about regular polygons that we're coming
to is which regular polygons can be constructed. So let me first of all tell you, remind you
again that a regular polygon is a figure made of a finite number of equal length lines
and where the angles are equal at each vertex. And one of the significant construction questions
is to determine which regular polygons can be constructed, and we've already seen that
an equilateral triangle, a square, a regular pentagon, and a regular hexagon, all of those
can be constructed, but it turns out that not all regular polygons can be constructed.
Just before the year 1800, when Carl Friedrich Gauss was still a teenager, he worked on the
question of constructing regular polygons, and one thing he was able to do was that he
proved that a regular 17-sided polygon can in fact be constructed. Now he didn't actually
carry out the construction. What he proved had to do with algebraic equations. The algebraic
equations themselves came from trigonometric formulas, and these trigonometric formulas
were associated with the angles. And so he proved that if the trigonometric formula associated
with a particular angle had a certain kind of solution with certain algebraic properties,
then it would be possible to use a straight-edge encompass to construct that angle. And he
showed that the angle that we need to construct a regular 17-sided polygon had those desired
algebraic properties. Therefore, he proved that a regular 17-sided polygon could in principle
be constructed, but he didn't personally show what the construction steps were. The actual
construction of a regular 17-sided polygon was done several years later by Johannes Erkinger,
and in fact I'll show you the 64 steps that are needed to do the job. And here they are.
I hope you followed that. I hope you followed that. It's very complicated. Well, Gauss made
a conjecture that of characterizing the values of n for which an n-sided regular polygon
can be constructed. And the characterization involves the prime factorization of the number
n. And recall that a prime is a whole number bigger than one that cannot be written as
the product of two positive whole numbers that are less than it. So, for example, 3,
5, 7, 11 are primes, whereas a number like 10 is not prime because it's 2 times 5.
Okay. Well, in 1837, Pierre Vonsel actually proved Gauss's conjecture, and I'll now tell
you what Gauss's conjecture is, which is now a theorem. It says that a regular n-gon can
be constructed if and only if the prime factorization of n contains, first of all, any power of 2
and some number of so-called Fermat primes, each raised just to the first power. So, a
Fermat prime is a prime that's one more than 2 raised to 2 to a power. So, for example,
number 17 is a Fermat prime because it's 2 to the power of 2 to the 2 power plus 1.
So, 17 is a Fermat prime, and as we saw, a regular 17-sided polygon can be constructed.
Now, one thing that's interesting about Fermat primes is that nobody knows whether there
are infinitely many Fermat primes or only just a few. And in fact, only five Fermat primes
are actually known, and these are the numbers 3, 5, 17, 257, and 65,537. And you see why
each one of those can be written as 2 to the 2 to a power plus 1. But the next number
in the pattern, 2 to the 2 to the 5th power plus 1, is not a prime, you see. It's not
a prime. So, we don't know whether there are infinitely many Fermat primes or not. Well,
using this theorem, characterizing those constructable regular polygons, here's a chart that will
show you for some small numbers which regular polygons can and cannot be constructed with
a straight-edge encompass. Well, constructing regular polygons is a fundamental construction
question, but perhaps even more fundamental is the basic question about constructing lengths.
Given an initial unit length, just a straight segment that we'll call unit length, what
distances can be constructed? So, specifically, suppose we start with a straight line with
two points marked on it, and we call out the unit length, and starting there, we're allowed
to do one of two operations, and that's all. Here are the two operations. One, we could
draw a straight line between two specific points that we've already located. Or two,
we can open our compass to have one end at one point that we've already determined, and
the other point of the compass at another identified point, and then we can pick up our compass
and put the central end at a specific point that we've already identified, and then draw
a circle with that radius, where the compass opening remains the size that we had opened
it to before. Well, if two circles intersect, or if a circle and a line intersect, or two
lines intersect, we've identified a new point that we can then use. What we're interested
in is the distances between any two points that we can construct when we follow the rules
that we've just said, and any such distance between two constructed points is called a
constructable distance. Well, anyway, this will become clearer in a minute, so let's
look at some facts about constructable distances, and you'll see how we proceed. First of all,
suppose that we have two constructable distances, then we can construct the sum of those distances,
and here's how we do it. We just take a line, we take one of those lengths and open our
compass to that length and make a mark on the line, so we have length A, and then we
take our compass and open it to the length B of the other length that we had already constructed,
and move it down and put it at the end of A and make a mark, and then the two of them
put together is obviously the sum of those two lengths. Of course, we can do the difference
the same way just by putting the smaller length inside and then taking the difference. Okay,
so the sums of constructable lengths are constructable. Next, suppose that we're given two constructable
lengths. Well, then the product of those can be constructed, and we'll see some of our
geometry theorems about similar triangles in use to show this, so let's see how to do
this. Suppose that we have two lengths that we've constructed, length A and length B.
Well, first of all, just make an angle so that we have length A at the bottom on the,
let's say the horizontal line, and length B on the other ray of the angle. Now our goal
is to produce a length whose size is exactly A times B. Well, here's how we do it. We mark
off a unit length on the line that has length B. So this is a unit length, and then connect
the point that's at the end of that unit length down to the end of A. Now construct a line
parallel to that line, but through the point that's at the end of B. You can see that in
this fashion we've constructed a pair of similar triangles that share this angle in common.
Notice that this side, in order to go from a unit length to length B, we multiplied that
side by B. We went from one to B. Therefore, this other side must also have been expanded
by that same amount. But it started out being A, and therefore it must be expanded to A
times B. So using similar triangles, we see that this length of where that parallel line
intersects our horizontal line must be distance A times B from this point. So we've shown
that if we have two constructable lengths, then the product of those lengths is also
constructable. Okay, so this is fun. Now let's think about the quotient. Suppose that we have
two lengths, A and B, and we've constructed both of those, then I claim that we can construct
the quotient of these two in a very, in a way reminiscent of what we've just been doing,
using similar triangles. Here's how we do it. Once again, we'll put length A on the bottom,
and we'll have an angle and go out length B in this direction. Now this time, let's
just connect the two ends, the end of B to the end of A. And now let's locate the point
that's distance one up on the B line, and make a line that's parallel to that line,
and it will hit between on the A line. You follow me? So this is now parallel. Now, once
again, let's do some analysis about similar triangles. How did we get from the side here
that had length B to the side that had length one? Well, we multiplied by one over B, right?
Length one is one over B times B. Therefore, this length here, which was A, in order to
get down to its size, we had to multiply it by one over B. Therefore, this length is
A over B. Well, that's sort of fun. Now, the final one that's interesting is that,
in fact, it's also possible to find the square root of a length that we've constructed. So
given any length, we could actually construct a square root, and here's how. It's a clever
use of the Pythagorean theorem, and we use the Pythagorean theorem, in fact, three times
in this proof. So here's how we do it. We first start with our length of A, whose square
root we're seeking, and then we just append a unit length onto it. So we now have a segment
of length A plus one, and we construct a circle whose diameter is that segment. In other words,
the diameter is A plus one. We do that just by taking its midpoint and drawing a circle.
Then we take the point that's at the end of A and draw the perpendicular segment straight
up until it hits that circle. Then the claim is that the length of that vertical line is
in fact the square root of A, and let me tell you why. Let's first of all call that height
X. Well, then we have several right triangles here. First of all, we see that if that height
is X, then by the Pythagorean theorem, we know that A squared plus X squared equals
this line segment AB squared. So AB is the square root of A squared plus X squared. Likewise,
looking at this right triangle over here, we see that one squared plus X squared is
equal to AC squared. So AC is the square root of X squared plus one squared, which is just
not X squared plus one. Well, remember that triangle ABC is a right triangle because its
diameter is the, its hypotenuse is the diameter of a circle, and therefore, and the vertex
is on the circle. Therefore, it's a right angle. Therefore, we know that this line segment
AB squared plus AC squared is equal to the hypotenuse BC squared. Well, if we just do
the algebra, we see then that A squared plus X squared, that's AB squared, plus X squared
plus one, that's AC squared, is equal to BC squared. Well, the length of BC, the diameter
is A plus one, so when we square that, we get A squared plus two A plus one. Well, just
canceling out the things that cancel, we see that two X squared is equal to two A, so X
equals the square root of A. So the conclusion is that a length can be constructed if it
can be written starting with a number one, and then we can use any number of sums, products,
quotients, and square roots we want, and doing those operations any finite number of times
will give us a constructable, a length that we can construct. Well, in this lecture, we
learned how to construct some basic figures using the traditional tools for Euclidean
constructions, namely a compass and a straight edge. We saw a surprising connection between
the construction of the golden rectangle and the construction of the regular pentagon,
which led to the famous pentagram symbol of the Pythagorean society. We concluded the
lecture by seeing that we could construct lengths obtained by starting with a number
one and doing a sequence of arithmetic operations, addition, subtraction, multiplication, division,
and taking square roots, and we could do those any number of times. In the next lecture, we'll
see that this insight will be one of the keys to the resolutions of questions that remained
unresolved for more than 2,000 years. I'll see you then.
