Welcome back.
Three famous construction problems were posed in the ancient world and remained unsolved
for more than 2,000 years.
These classical construction questions were, one, is it possible to double-acquire the
cube using only a straight edge and compass?
Two, can every angle be trisected using only a straight edge and compass?
Three, is it possible to construct a square whose area is exactly the same as a given
circle, again, using only a straight edge and compass?
Well, first of all, I'll explain exactly what these questions really ask in a few
minutes.
These construction questions were finally resolved in the 19th century when all three
constructions were proved to be impossible.
The resolutions of these questions involve an exploration of connections between geometry
and abstract algebra, and it was the algebraic description of constructable points that turned
out to be of critical importance in answering these classical questions that had remained
unresolved since antiquity.
Well, let's begin with the problem of doubling the cube.
So the first question is, what does this question mean?
Because a cube, after all, isn't something that lies in the plane, and in fact, understanding
a question really is a very basic step in solving it, and in this case, the misunderstanding
the doubling of the cube question actually is an issue that has a fabled story associated
with it.
In times of trouble, Athenians would consult oracles to seek wisdom, of course.
So when a plague hit Athens in 430 BCE, they sought the advice of the Oracle of Apollo
at Delos.
The oracle responded with an answer that, sadly, the Athenians misinterpreted.
The oracle said that to stop the plague, they should double the size of their altar, and
the Athenians interpreted this sage wisdom to mean that they should double the length
of each side of their altar.
And by the way, their altar was in the shape of a cube.
So they had their cubicle altar, and they doubled each side.
You'd think that would do the trick, but it didn't work.
The plague continued.
In fact, it even got worse.
Later did they realize that the oracle had actually meant that they were to double the
volume of the cube, not the length of each side of the cube.
So this problem of actually doubling the volume of the cube was much harder.
And in fact, the plague had ended long before the challenge of doubling the volume of the
cube had been solved.
But because of this story, the doubling the cube question is sometimes called the Delian
question.
In the context of straight edge and compass constructions, this challenge really asks
us whether it's possible, given a length one, a unit length, can we construct a segment
whose length is exactly the length of the segment you would want so that if you made
a cube, each of whose sides is that length, the volume of the cube would be two.
In other words, can you construct a length that's exactly the cube root of two?
So that's the question.
Is it possible to construct with straight edge and compass a length that is exactly the
cube root of two?
That is the number which times itself three times is equal to the cube root of two.
It times itself times itself.
We saw in the last lecture that certain lengths can definitely be constructed.
Namely, we can start with the number one and then do any sequence of additions, subtractions,
multiplications, divisions, and taking square roots.
And then any number that we can write in that way, we can construct a line segment that's
exactly that long.
Remember, that was last in the last lecture.
But here, we'll see that the converse of this is also true.
Namely, that those are the only points that can be constructed with a straight edge and
compass.
In other words, suppose we start with only a unit length on a line.
And then all we allow ourselves to do are the following things.
One is that we can draw a line through two points that we've already constructed.
Or we can draw a circle whose center is at a previously constructed point and whose radius
is equal to the distance between two previously constructed points.
And if we do those construction steps all day long, what we're going to say now is that
every distance between any two points that we locate in that way, that we construct in
that way, will always be constructable, will always be expressible by starting with the
number one and then doing a bunch of additions, subtractions, multiplications, divisions,
and square roots in any order.
We can see why this is the case by using Cartesian coordinates.
Let me remind you that Cartesian coordinates are used to describe points in the plane.
And there's an x-axis, the x-axis is the horizontal one, and the y-axis is the vertical one.
And any point in the plane can be located by going a certain distance away from the origin
in the x-direction, positive or negative, and then up or down in the y-direction.
So two points determine a point in the plane.
So let's assume that the two points that we were originally given are unit length apart.
One is at the origin, zero, zero, and one is at the point, one, zero.
And then we can ask the question, what numbers can appear as coordinates of points
that we can identify by construction?
And then this allows us to use equations of lines and circles that we can write
in terms of x, y coordinates.
And that analysis is what's going to help us.
Well, first of all, let's remember, the equation for a circle of radius r centered at some point,
a, b, is just x minus a squared plus y minus b squared equals r squared.
And the description of those points is exactly the way that we get that equation
is to just use the Pythagorean theorem.
You see that r, the distance from the center to a point on the circle, x, y,
just using the Pythagorean theorem, we see the two sides are x minus a and y minus b,
and the hypotenuses are, so we have that relationship.
And we can solve that equation for y just by moving things over.
We see y is equal to the square root of r squared minus x minus a squared plus b.
So the point is that this equation involves addition, subtraction, squaring, and a square root.
Well, let's also look at the equation for a line through two points.
So suppose we have two points, a, b, and c, d, then we can construct the equation
for a line through two points by just using the fact that the slope of,
if you take an arbitrary point, x, y, that's on that line actually uses similar triangles.
We just say that x minus a divided by y minus b, that's the ratio of these two sides of that triangle,
has to be in the same proportion as c minus a divided by d minus b.
It's really similar triangles.
So we can solve for y.
And once again, we see that y is expressed just in terms of the arithmetic operations
using the coordinates that we started with, a, b, c, d.
Well, when we intersect two lines, or we intersect a line in a circle, or we intersect two circles,
we can write down an algebraic expression for the coordinates of the intersection points
because the intersection points are places where the two circles, or two lines,
are aligned in a circle where they meet.
And we can solve the resulting equations by setting the expression of y in one equation,
like the equation of one circle, equal to the expression for y in the other equation,
either another circle or a line, and then we can solve for x.
Well, the steps that we need to solve for x involve a sequence of what?
Addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and taking square roots.
So if the lines and circles were constructible, that's to say, if all of the numbers involved,
a, b, c, d, and the r, all of those things in the equations for the lines and circles
were all numbers that we had previously identified by construction,
then we find that the coordinates of the intersection points can also be expressed
by starting with those numbers, the a, b, c, d, r, and so on,
and using arithmetic operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, division,
and taking square roots to solve those equations and find the coordinates of those intersection points.
Well, the important conclusion is that the x and y coordinates of each point of intersection
of constructible lines and circles can be written starting with a number one,
that is the unit length, and using sums, products, quotients, and square roots,
and doing those processes some finite number of times.
Okay, we've had a long excursion, and this long excursion interrupted our story about doubling the cube.
Recall that our challenge was to construct a length equal to the cube root of two,
but now we see that our challenge is to prove whether or not that number,
that is the cube root of two, can or cannot be written starting with natural numbers
and then using just the processes of sums, products, quotients, square roots,
doing those processes any finite number of times,
and proving that whether the cube root of two could be written in that fashion.
Now, what we're going to prove is that it cannot be written in that fashion.
Well, proving that something cannot be done is often difficult,
because when you don't succeed in doing it, you might just say,
well, geez, maybe I just didn't think of the right idea of how to do it.
Well, so here in the story enters the person of Everest Galois.
In the 1820s, Everest Galois conceived of some mathematical ideas
that are exactly what you need to prove that various numbers, including the cube root of two,
can't be described using only those arithmetic operations and square roots.
And I have to say, it would be wrong of me not in mentioning Galois,
not to tell you a little bit about his extremely short and very tumultuous life.
So, Galois was a political radical, and in fact he was imprisoned for his being a radical,
and while in prison he worked on his mathematics, which was a good thing,
in fact that's his enduring legacy.
Well, somewhere along the line he was jilted by a girl,
and in the process accepted a challenge of a duel associated with this girl,
and, well, Galois knew that dueling wasn't really his strength,
so he stayed up the previous night writing letters to friends and improving his mathematics.
The next morning he dueled, he was shot, and died the next day, all at age 20.
It really is a sad story to imagine what he might have done had he conducted his other affairs in life
as he did his mathematics.
Well, proving the fact that the cube root of two can't be expressed using the arithmetic operations
and square roots entailed developing a whole new collection of ideas in abstract algebra,
and those ideas are now called Galois theory.
The basic idea is that the cube root of two solves what's called an irreducible equation of degree three,
namely the very simple equation x cubed minus two equals zero.
You can see that if you move the two over, you have x cubed equals two, so cube root of two is a solution.
And by the way, the term irreducible is a technical condition.
It just means that x cubed minus two can't be factored into lower degree polynomials,
and another condition, it has rational coefficients, but don't worry about this.
Galois theory basically proves that numbers that are solutions to this kind of irreducible third degree equation
can't also be expressed as arithmetic combinations of numbers
or solutions to irreducible equations whose degree is two or a power of two.
And the final step then is to prove that constructible numbers are arithmetic combinations of solutions to equations that are of power two.
And because you can't write only, you can't express these numbers, the constructible numbers,
since they are expressed as a combination of numbers that solve equations that are powers of two,
and the number we're trying to aim for is a power of three, is a solution of an irreducible equation of power of three,
then that's the strategy of the proof that says you cannot construct those kinds of numbers.
Well, the argument then involves taking a question from geometry
and finding a way to look at it from an entirely different point of view, namely as an issue in algebra.
And frequently, problems that appear to fall in one domain actually find their resolutions by viewing them in a totally different way.
And in this case, algebra was used to help solve a problem in geometry,
but actually, it's very often the case that geometric insights can solve algebraic problems.
And in fact, we'll see several examples of that common occurrence in future lectures.
Well, the resolution of the trisection problem follows from exactly the same kind of analysis,
and we'll start by explaining the problem.
Recall that every angle can be bisected with a straight edge encompass, and some angles can be trisected.
For example, a 90-degree angle can be trisected.
The trisection question asks whether every angle can be trisected using a straight edge encompass.
Well, in the 19th century, it was proved that not all angles can be trisected,
and the proof again uses Galois theory, and to be specific, a 60-degree angle cannot be trisected.
If a 60-degree angle could be trisected, it would be possible to construct a 20-degree angle.
That's what it would mean to trisect, divide it into three.
Therefore, it would be possible to construct a segment of the length that you see represented in this figure
that's the base of the right triangle where it intersects a unit length hypotenuse.
So you could construct that length, and we'll call that length x.
Well, you can use the Pythagorean theorem and similar triangles in this figure.
We can deduce a relationship between the length x and the length one-half,
which in the figure is the base of the right triangle that has this 60-degree angle in it.
And the reason that it's a half when the hypotenuse is one is because a 60-degree angle is the angle for an equilateral triangle.
And so that vertical line is just cutting the base of an equilateral triangle in two.
Well, the relationship that you can find is that 4 times x cubed minus 3x minus one-half equals zero.
And for those of you who know trigonometry, you might recognize that this relation really comes from the triple-angle formula,
namely cosine of 3 alpha equals 4 times the cosine cubed of alpha minus 3 times the cosine of alpha.
But we're not going to do the trigonometry.
Just notice that if we were able to trisect the 60-degree angle, then we'd be able to construct a line segment of that length x.
But the length x satisfies this cubic equation.
But then x is a number that's the solution to this irreducible cubic equation.
So Galois theory again tells us that that number cannot be expressed with the arithmetic operations in square roots,
and therefore we can't construct a segment that has length x, and therefore we can't trisect a 60-degree angle.
So that's the form of the argument.
Well, the third question from antiquity of squaring the circle actually required several more decades before that ancient challenge could be resolved.
That challenge is, suppose you're given a circle.
Is it possible to construct a square whose area is exactly equal to the area of the circle using only a straight edge and compass?
Well, in this case, if we have a unit circle, its area is pi since the formula for the area of a circle, as we'll see in the next lecture,
is pi times the radius squared, pi r squared.
So the area of a unit circle is pi.
So if we could square the unit circle, it would be possible to produce a square whose sides are the square root of pi.
In 1882, Ferdinand Lindemann proved that the number pi is what's called a transcendental number,
meaning that it can't be the solution of any polynomial whose coefficients are rational numbers.
And from that insight, once again, it can be proved that pi, and therefore the square root of pi, are not numbers of the form whose lengths can be constructed.
Well, also, the proofs about which regular polygons can and cannot be constructed that we talked about in the last lecture,
those, the proofs of those theorems come about by analyzing the constructable lengths just as we've done here.
The construction question of which regular polygons can be constructed,
it's another of those ancient construction questions that was solved using these same ideas of Galois theory.
So the proofs that it's impossible to double the cube, impossible to trisect all angles,
impossible to construct all the regular polygons and which ones can be and can't be,
all of those appeared in a paper in 1837 by a mathematician by the name of Pierre von Zell.
And one thing interesting about this is that most mathematicians have never heard of Pierre von Zell
because the real core ideas were the Galois theory that really solved this problem.
Well, we've seen the impossibility of various compass and straight edge constructions.
However, if we relax the rules just a bit, we'll find that we can get different results.
In fact, Archimedes showed that if our straight edge has two marks on it,
then we can actually trisect any angle just using that marked straight edge and a compass.
And I'll show you how it works. It really is very clever and I think you'll enjoy this.
So suppose that we have an angle given to us and you see it drawn here.
Here's this angle and our goal is to construct an angle that is one-third that angle.
If we have a straight edge that has just two marks on it, then we can mark off that distance
from the angle point out to that distance and then put our compass at that distance and make a circle.
So far so good.
Now we can extend the base of our angle and then position our straight edge so that it goes through
the intersection of our circle with the other angle line and it has the property that the distance
between where that line, our straight edge, intersects the other point of our circle
and the point where it intersects the extension of the base of our angle that that distance
is also equal to the distance between the two marks on our straight edge.
And so we can slide the straight edge there so it just fits as you see.
Well now we have this figure drawn and we have lots of lengths that are the same.
And now let's look at this angle over at the bottom left.
That angle, let's call it alpha.
We can see some things about alpha.
First of all, this first triangle is an isosceles triangle because both those sides are the radius of the circle,
the distance between those two marks and therefore we have that distance and that distance are equal,
isosceles triangle, so that other angle is alpha.
Since those two angles are alpha, the angle at the top is 180 minus 2 alpha,
which means that the angle next to it is 2 alpha.
But you have two radii of this circle so they're equal length and therefore another isosceles triangle appears
and so we conclude that that angle up there is 2 alpha.
But since the sum of the angles of that triangle is 180 degrees, this angle is 180 minus 4 alpha.
And therefore, since this baseline has to of course add up to 180 degrees,
we see the arithmetic tells us that the original angle was 3 alpha.
So what we have done is shown that we have constructed an angle that's exactly one third as big as the angle that we started with.
And of course we can slide it over and copy it to actually trisect the angle.
So that was a proof that you could trisect an angle using a straight edge with two marks on it and a compass.
Well, it turned out that it's also true that you can double a cube using those same implements,
that is a compass and a straight edge that has two marks on it.
And this was demonstrated by Sir Isaac Newton.
And remember Isaac Newton was one of the most famous mathematicians of all time who was one of the two inventors of calculus.
And so it shows that the greatest mathematicians of all time concern themselves with this kind of question.
And his construction was very clever.
And here's how he proved that using a straight edge with two marks and a compass that you can construct a line segment whose length is exactly the cube root of 2.
It's very clever.
So here's how it goes.
He started with an equilateral triangle and then extended one of the sides of the equilateral triangle to make it twice as long.
And then extended the base of that equilateral triangle out to the right and drew a line from the bottom of the extended downward line up through the other base point of the equilateral triangle to construct this figure.
Now, here's where he's going to use his straight edge with two marks.
He positioned that straight edge so that it goes through the top point A and then he slid it back and forth until the distance between where it intersects this sort of diagonal line and the place where it intersects the horizontal line is exactly that same unit distance.
The unit distance, by the way, was the original equilateral triangle.
We assume that the marks on the ruler or on the straight edge were what we call one unit apart and their equilateral triangle was one unit on each side.
So now we have this figure where we have lots of ones and we can just go through and use similar triangles and our knowledge of the angles to show that that length there is exactly the cube root of 2.
So, and here's how we do it.
First of all, all of the sides of the equilateral triangle are one and this angle is one.
This length here we extended it twice as far, so that's one.
And consequently, we have an isosceles triangle.
Since the equilateral triangle has angle 60 degrees, then this angle is 120 degrees.
Since this triangle is isosceles, these are each 30 degrees, but then 30 plus 60 is 90, so this is actually a right angle.
So the other side is a right angle.
And so we have a right triangle.
Let's call x the length of the side, which will turn out to be the cube root of 2.
That's x.
And so we have a right triangle.
The hypotenuse is x and one side is one.
So we can compute by the Pythagorean theorem that this side is the square root of x squared minus one.
Now what we're going to do is extend that triangle down to construct a bigger similar right triangle by going to this last point here and making a line parallel to the base of, to that diagonal line that we have there.
And notice that the, that these two similar right triangles have a certain constant of proportionality because it goes, the hypotenuse goes from x for the shorter one to x plus one for the bigger one.
So we multiply the lengths of the sides of the shorter one by the number x plus one over x.
And therefore this side of the right triangle goes from one to x plus one over x.
But therefore the length of this little piece is one less than x plus one over x.
Therefore it's just one over x.
Well, notice that the angle here is a 60 degree angle of this.
We have yet another right triangle here and that's a 60 degree angle because it's the opposite angle from this angle in our equilateral triangle.
And consequently, we see that if this is one over x, the hypotenuse is two over x because it's half of another equilateral triangle.
Well, the long, the short of it is that the base of this right, bigger right triangle that we've constructed, we can look at it in two ways.
One, we can use the Pythagorean theorem on this bottom right triangle and see that its length has to be the square root of the hypotenuse, two over x squared, minus one over x squared, the length of this side.
So it's length is the square root of two over x squared, minus one over x squared.
But it's also equal to, by the proportionality of these two right triangles, the length of the base of this top triangle, which remember was the square root of x squared minus one, times the proportionality, x plus one over x.
So we now have an equation in x, and then I won't do the algebra, but if you just plug in the number, cube root of x you see, cube root of two, you'll see that x equals cube root of two actually satisfies that equation and therefore proves the, that you could construct a length of the cube root of two.
So this is Isaac Newton's proof.
Well, it's also true that the circle can be squared if, if we were allowing something that's not legal, which is just to roll the circle.
This is actually an easier one, because all we would do is roll the circle, and then we'd know if we took a unit circle and we rolled it, we'd know that the length, if you rolled it, you know, once around, the length would be two times pi.
And then you could bisect that to make length pi, and then we saw how to construct the square root of any segment we could construct. So if you called that constructing, you could construct the square root.
Remember, we made, added a unit piece onto that and drew a semi-circle and took the vertical line, and that would be a length of the square root of pi, and therefore we could make a square that had a square root of pi on each side and therefore had area pi, which would be the area of the circle.
But rolling the circle is, is not really allowed.
Well, there's a, is there a basic reason, you might ask, for thinking that straight edge and compass rules have a special significance or importance?
Well, the answer is that they arise from the ancient bias about the centrality of the importance of the circle and the line as the basic shapes on which geometry is built.
However, in some sense, that choice is arbitrary, and these other construction techniques are equally legitimate and deserve to be investigated, as indeed they have been.
Well, these ancient challenges were not only mathematical issues, but they also had a metaphorical significance in the broader community.
In fact, many cranks, up to and including some living today, continue to produce faulty proofs of these challenging questions.
But some false proofs aren't from cranks, but they're just simply very subtle errors.
An example of somebody who worked on this was Thomas Hobbes, who in his old age actually convinced himself that he had found a way to square the circle.
In fact, the phrase, squaring the circle, still has the meaning of an impossibility.
And Carl Jung thought it was very important. He said the following.
The squaring of the circle is one of the many archetypal motifs which form the basic patterns of our dreams and fantasies, but it is distinguished by the fact that it is one of the most important of them from the functional point of view.
Indeed, it could even be called the archetype of wholeness.
I really don't know what that means, but in any case, in this lecture, we saw outlines of the arguments that three ancient construction challenges were impossible to achieve with straight edge and compass alone.
However, we saw that if we slightly modify the implements that we could use, we could double the cube, trisect angles, and square the circle.
In the next lecture, we'll take up another classical issue, namely, conic sections. I'll see you then.
