Welcome back.
In the previous lecture, we explored the classical issue of constructions.
Here we turn to the equally classical topic of the conic sections.
If we take a right circular cone, that's a cone that's exactly straight up and down,
and we cut it with a plane, we get various shapes called the conic sections,
which we'll describe in a minute, but they're called...
there's a circle, an ellipse, a parabola, and a hyperbola.
We'll describe them in a few minutes.
But each of these shapes actually has an alternative description.
That is, alternative to being the intersection with a cone.
For example, a circle is the set of points on a plane that's equidistant from one fixed point.
And we'll see why the two types of descriptions,
intersection of a cone and this set of points that has a property,
do in fact describe the same curves.
We can also describe these curves using equations.
So the conic sections arise many ways in the world,
particularly in physics.
For example, the orbits of the planets are elliptical,
and the path of a baseball hit into the field is actually a parabola.
Well, the conic sections are figures in the plane
that actually arise directly from objects in three-dimensional space.
And it was Menachemus who introduced conic sections in the 4th century BCE.
Menachemus actually was a pupil of Plato,
and he actually was a tutor of Alexander the Great.
So he developed conics while working on the classic construction problem of doubling the cube
that we were talking about in the last lecture.
And in fact, we'll see later in this lecture how the intersection of two conic sections
can be used to solve the problem of doubling the cube.
Of course, unfortunately, drawing a conic section in the plane
is not really an allowable process that you can do with a straight edge and compass.
Well, so let's first of all describe what a conic section is.
A conic section arises when we take the right circular cone.
Now, a right circular cone means that you take a horizontal plane like a tabletop
and you draw a circle, and then right above the center of the circle,
you put a point and then make your cone.
So it's straight up and down.
That's what the right part means here.
If we take a plane and cut the cone, we get different shapes.
For example, if we cut it exactly parallel to the base plane,
exactly perpendicular to the axis, we get, of course, just a round circle.
If we tilt that plane a little bit, we get an oval shape, which is an ellipse.
If we tilt it at exactly the angle so that the plane is parallel to one of the lines of the cone,
then we get what's called a parabola.
And if we tilt it even more, more steeply, we get a curve that's called a hyperbola.
And sometimes we imagine having two cones on top of each other, tip to tip,
in which case the hyperbola would intersect both the top cone and the bottom cone.
So it actually has two branches, which is a feature of the hyperbola.
And by the way, for the hyperbola, the plane need not be directly up and down.
It can be at any angle as long as it's steeper than the angle of the side of the cone.
Well, it was Apollonius of Perga, who lived about 262 to 190 BCE, who worked on conic sections.
In fact, he wrote eight volumes on the conics of which seven survived.
And he was the one who actually gave the names to the conics, that is, the ellipse, the parabola, and the hyperbola.
And in fact, those words for the conic sections have an English meaning that somehow reflects their shapes.
And by the way, the words elliptical, parabolic, and hyperbolic are associated with the angle of the plane
compared to the angle at which the cone hits the plane.
Elliptical is if it hits at a lesser angle, and parabolic, para, meaning the same,
like parallel and other words of parabolic, means the same angle, and hyperbolic and more of greater angle.
And in English, these words have an English meaning that reflects that.
Elliptical means obscure, parabolic, it means allegorical, parallel, and hyperbolic means exaggerated or hyperbole.
Well, we actually see these conic sections all the time in the real world.
And in particular ellipses show up all the time.
So let's begin by looking at some places where ellipses come into play.
Suppose you take a flashlight and you simply shine it at a piece of paper or at the table.
Then the shape of the image is going to be an ellipse because the light comes out in sort of a cone shape
and it cuts the table, which is a plane, causing an ellipse.
The shadow of a ball is an ellipse.
If you take water and or some liquid inside a conical glass like a martini glass,
then the top of that liquid will be in the shape of an ellipse.
It's also true if you take just a regular cylindrical glass and you tilt it.
If you tilt it like this, the top of that liquid is an exact ellipse.
So that's rather interesting that ellipses come up just in real life in this way.
Well, the conic sections are described, as I just described them,
as the intersection of a plane with a cone.
But each conic section also has a different kind of a description,
which is called the locus of points description.
For example, a circle, the most familiar shape that we know,
a circle is the set of all points that's equidistant from one fixed point to center.
So we know that.
But an ellipse has another description that's similar to that.
Namely, an ellipse is the set of points so that all of the distances between two fixed points,
the sum of the distances to two fixed points, is a constant.
So let me demonstrate this so that I'm going to repeat that definition for an ellipse.
Suppose that we have two points and I'm going to mark these with these pins right here on this piece of paper.
So here are our two points and I want to look at the locus of points
so that the sum of the distances to these two fixed points is a constant.
Now, this definition actually allows us to create this locus of points physically in the following way.
What we do is we just take a loop of string and we take this string and loop it over these two pins.
And then what we can do is notice something about this loop of string.
If we pull the string taut so that the string is making this triangle,
then since the length of the string is a fixed distance and the distance between these two pins is fixed,
then the remaining part of the string, the part that goes from one of these pins
up to the point where I'm holding it down to the other pin,
that that sum is going to be a constant no matter where I put the pin, where I pull it.
So I can actually use this fact to draw an ellipse and here's the way I draw it.
I simply pull the string tight and make the mark by going around.
Notice that the sum of the distances to those two points, the two foci, is a constant.
All the way around.
And let's see if it's going to work.
Perfect.
So this is then a perfect ellipse.
It's the set of points so that the sum for every point here, the sum of those two distances was the same.
Well, an ellipse has a wonderful reflecting property.
That is that if you start at one focus, by the way, these two points are called the foci of the ellipse,
if you start at one focus and you emit a sound or light, it will reflect exactly on the other focus.
And one of the results of this is that if you are at two foci of the ellipse,
if you stand at one focus of an elliptical room and you say something,
then all the sound that you make goes out, reflects off the walls of that elliptical room,
and reflects exactly back to the other focus.
And the distance is the same for every reflected direction that it goes,
and therefore a very soft voice will be heard at the other focus.
This property is actually taken advantage of in several places.
First of all, the Tabernacle Salt Lake City is elliptical in shape because it has this wonderful acoustic property,
but also you use these are called whisper points, use these kinds of ellipses.
The Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago has a permanent exhibit called the Whispering Gallery
to show how it is that a whisper can travel from one focal point to another.
But one application of this feature of an ellipse that I think is really interesting
is the use in medicine, which there's a method called lithotripsy,
and it's a method for breaking up gallstones by focusing shock waves.
And the idea is that the patient's gallstone is positioned at one focus in sort of an elliptical pool,
and then a shock is created at the other focus, which is outside the patient's body.
And then the shock permeates through the liquid in which you're sitting
and it reflects back and focuses exactly on that gallstone and breaks up the gallstone.
So that's an interesting application of this property of the ellipse.
Well, a hyperbola, remember, was once again another conic section where you took a steeper plane
and cut it through the cone, but we're going to also describe it as a locus of points.
It's the locus of points such that the difference in distance between two fixed points is a constant value.
Remember the ellipse, you had two foci and the sum was constant.
So for a hyperbola, you have two foci and the difference in the distances is a constant.
And in fact, if you say the absolute value of the differences,
that means that you take the positive difference, then you actually get two branches of your hyperbola,
which correspond to hitting the top and the bottom branches of two cones that are meeting tip to tip.
Well, a hyperbola occurs in nature in the following way.
You actually can see it. Namely, suppose that you have a completely still pond
and you drop two stones in the pond at different times.
And suppose that the leading edge of the wave that propagates out from these two stones
are propagating at a constant speed.
Well, if you look at where the waves from this stone start to intersect the waves from this stone,
the leading edge of the wave, they'll continue to intersect first at one point
and then two points from then on, and that set of points will draw out a perfect hyperbola.
And the reason is that just think about this.
If you look at a place where the leading edge from this stone is hitting the leading edge from this stone,
the distance to that point of intersection is going to be a constant.
Namely, the constant is how much head start this stone had,
what was the radius that it got to before the other one started.
And then that difference will always be the difference in the distance from one stone's location to the other.
Therefore, it describes a hyperbola.
A parabola also has a locus of points definition, which is it's the set of points
so that the distance between a fixed point and a fixed line is a constant.
And what that means is that if you go up to this, first of all, the midpoint between the point and the line
is going to be a point on the parabola.
But then also, there are other places where you go up to the parabola and then straight down to the line.
If those are equal, you can just find equal points all along, and that draws out a parabola.
Well, a parabola also has an interesting reflecting property,
which is that if you take light rays that come straight into a parabola parallel to each other,
they all reflect and focus at the focus of the parabola.
And some telescopes use that kind of a mirror, a parabolic mirror,
because it focuses all these parallel lights, like from the stars, into the one focus.
You can also use it to heat things. There's something called Le Four solaire at Font-Romeau,
which is a solar furnace in the Pyrenees Mountains.
And it's made of 9,000 mirrors that are arranged to create a huge parabolic mirror.
And reflections from the sun can heat up the focus to nearly 6,000 degrees Fahrenheit.
Well, each conic section can be described in several ways.
One as an intersection of a plane with a cone, two as a locus of points,
and then we'll later describe it also in terms of equations.
But you should be realizing that we have a challenge in front of us,
and that is that we've got alternative definitions,
and the question is, do these actually describe the same shape?
You see, I said that an ellipse was what you got when you took two points,
you took the sum of the distances to be a constant, and you got an ellipse.
I also said that if you cut a right circular cone with a plane, you get an ellipse,
but those are two very different ways of describing curves.
How do we know they are, in fact, the same shape?
Well, there's a very clever way to see that this relationship,
the relationship between the plane cutting a cone definition and the locus of points definition,
really give you the same shape.
And it involves a construction, an insight that was due to a mathematician
by the name of Germinal Pierre Dandelion, who discovered them in 1822,
or wrote about them in 1822.
Well, so let's begin.
Instead of thinking of an intersection of a cone, a right circular cone, with a plane,
let's instead do a related question, which is to take just a vertical cylinder
and intersect it with a plane.
It turns out that, first of all, you do get an ellipse,
and the proof will carry over to the proof that you get an ellipse when you cut a right circular cone.
So we're first going to do an analysis here with this cylinder.
Now, here's the way we're going to look at it.
We have a cylinder here, and through the cylinder, we're passing a plane.
And I hope you can see inside this cylinder, and inside it, you can see this orange shape,
and it actually is supposed to represent the intersection of a flat plane with the cylinder.
And in fact, it is an oval shape.
It is an ellipse, we'll see.
Well, Dandelion had this extremely interesting strategy for proving that that shape has the property,
that there are two points on it, so that the points on the boundary of that shape are exactly the set of points
so that the sum of the distances to those two foci are a constant.
So let me see if I can say how he did it.
What he did is he said, suppose that you put a sphere inside the cylinder,
and the sphere is exactly big enough to fit into the cylinder.
It just fits, and you just bring it up until it just touches underneath this purported ellipse.
In other words, underneath the plane, where the plane hits.
It hits at one point.
And then we do the same thing from the top.
We put another ball, another sphere that exactly fits into the cylinder,
and just ease it down until it touches that crossing plane exactly at one other point.
So we have a sphere under and a sphere over.
They each touch in a point.
Now, what's interesting and what he proved was that those two points of tangency of the upper sphere
with this plane, those two points are the foci of that ellipse.
And so the goal is to prove that there's a constant distance from any point on the boundary of the ellipse
to the sum of the distances to those two points is a constant.
Well, here's how we do it.
Take a point on this curve
and draw the line directly to the point of tangency of, say, the upper sphere.
Now, that point of tangency of the upper sphere, the distance to that point of tangency
is going to be exactly equal to the vertical distance along the cylinder
up from that point of tangency straight up to the place where that sphere nestles in the cylinder.
In other words, where the equator of that sphere is.
And those two distances are the same because, remember, if you take a circle
and you take an external point and you take two tangents to the circle,
then the distances from that external point to the two points of tangency are the same.
Remember, we saw that in lecture three.
Well, this is exactly the same principle here.
That if you take two points of tangency to a sphere, the distances are the same.
And therefore, when the distance from this external point on the curve
to the point of tangency is exactly the same as the vertical distance up to the place where the equator is.
Likewise.
We take that same point on the boundary and we go down to that other point of tangency
of the lower sphere with our plane.
That distance is equal to the vertical distance down to the place where the bottom sphere is nestled inside the cylinder.
Therefore, the sum of those two distances, the distance from that point on the boundary of the ellipse
to those two foci is precisely equal to the vertical distance between the equator of the top sphere
and the equator of the bottom sphere.
But that is true for any point that we take along this entire ellipse, right?
Because for any point on that curve, the distance to the top one, the vertical distance will be the same.
The distance to the bottom tangent point will be the same as the vertical distance down to that equatorial curve.
And so we have a constant sum, namely the constant distance along this cylinder
between the equatorial curve of the top sphere and the equatorial curve of the bottom sphere.
Well, this is an extremely clever argument.
And it demonstrates that, in fact, these two definitions of an ellipse are the same.
Now, by the way, I have to tell you that this also works for a right circular cone.
We used a cylinder here because it was a little bit easier to see, but a right circular cone works equally well.
Let me tell you one other consequence of this vision of an ellipse.
Namely, that we can now look at this ellipse as a circle that has been stretched.
It's really just a stretched circle, you see, because think of it this way.
Suppose that I remove my ellipse from this cylinder.
So here is the diagonal-shaped ellipse, and then here I have the round circular cross-section of the cylinder.
I'm just imagining that I have this darker-colored circle is the one that's exactly perpendicular to the cylinder,
and then the ellipse is the tilted one.
Well, notice that if I say B is the radius of the circle.
So B is also the small dimension of the ellipse, and suppose A is the longer dimension of the ellipse.
Then there's a constant proportion between the vertical lines, the lines that are parallel to the long axis of the ellipse.
It's always going to be longer than just going straight horizontal on that circle, on that circular disc.
How much longer?
Well, at the middle, it's B distance from the middle straight across because this horizontal one is a circle of radius B,
but the long axis is distance A on this ellipse.
But by similar triangles, every horizontal line, that is, every line that's parallel to the long axis of the ellipse,
is stretched by exactly that same proportion.
What proportion?
A over B, because we went from a length of B and stretched it to a length of A,
and therefore every curve, we can view an ellipse as simply a stretched circle.
Well, once we see that, we can see that we see ellipses all the time,
because we frequently see circles from different angles.
For example, if we look at the top of any glass, anytime you see somebody who's holding a glass and you see the top of it,
when you look at this glass, you don't see a circle on your screen,
but if you actually took a magic marker and went up to your TV screen and you drew what exactly you're seeing on the top of this glass,
you would be drawing an ellipse.
Okay, well, as I said, this dandelion sphere method of showing that the locus of points definition for the ellipse is the same
as the definition of cutting with a plane, that those two definitions are the same,
that that works equally well in a cone, first of all.
It's just that the constant distance is at an angle instead of vertical.
But you can also use the same principle to show that if you intersect a right circular cone with a plane at a different angle,
that the different definitions of a hyperbola and a parabola also work the same way.
And so I'll leave it to you as a challenge to see where to put those spheres so that there are points of tangency
identified the foci of a hyperbola or of a parabola.
In the case of a hyperbola, where it intersects both the top branch and the bottom branch of the cone,
the plane is cutting through it, you put one sphere on the top branch and one sphere on the bottom branch,
and those two points of tangency are the points where the difference in the distances are a constant.
And as I say, the parabola also works the same way.
It's a little bit more complicated because you have to have a line to deal with,
which actually comes out to be associated with the plane.
Well, there's another way to look at conic sections, and that is by looking at equations.
So we can write equations for the circle, for the ellipse, for the parabola, for the hyperbola,
and we can use Cartesian coordinates, as we did before, and write equations for these curves.
And I just wanted to show you some of these equations for the curves.
We actually saw a more general equation for a circle, but the circle equation x squared plus y squared equals r squared
is an equation of a circle centered at the origin.
An ellipse has an equation x squared over a squared plus y squared over b squared equals 1, so it's a similar equation.
We can see that a parabola has an equation such as y equals x squared.
So this gives you an exact parabola, and there are two different kinds of equations for hyperbolas.
One that looks like the circle or ellipse equation, which is x squared over a squared minus y squared over b squared equals 1.
Or there's another equation, which is that you just say x times y equals a constant.
In other words, if you look at all of the points, for example, x times y equals 2, you would draw a hyperbola.
And by the way, if you wanted to derive all of these equations, all of them would come about by using the Pythagorean theorem many times.
Well, we can use the equation descriptions for the parabola and the hyperbola to see how conic sections can be used to solve the doubling of the cube problem.
Remember that this was one of the inspirations for Menachmas to work on these questions of the conic sections, and this is the way that you can do it.
Suppose it were possible to construct a parabola with equation y equals x squared and a hyperbola with the equation x times y equals 2.
Now, first of all, let's just see these curves.
So the parabola is a curve that goes upward and goes through the origin.
And remember, all of the points on the parabola have the property that the first coordinate, if the first coordinate is a number, the second coordinate is the square of that number.
That's what it means to satisfy the equation, y equals x squared.
The hyperbola satisfies the condition that the product of the two coordinates of each point multiplies together to give the constant number 2.
Well, let's look and see where these two curves intersect each other.
They intersect at the point the cube root of 2 comma the square of the cube root of 2.
And let's see why.
Well, if we look at the point whose x coordinate is the cube root of 2, what is the y coordinate of that point on the parabola?
Well, we just square it.
So, cube root of 2, square of cube root of 2 is on the parabola.
But notice that the cube root of 2 times the cube root of 2 squared, when we multiply them together, we would get 2.
And therefore, the intersection of that particular parabola and that particular hyperbola give us a point whose x coordinate is exactly the cube root of 2.
And so, this was what we wanted to do when we were seeking to double the cube.
Well, of course, this way to locate a point with x coordinate equal to the cube root of 2, it used drawings of these conic sections, the parabola and the hyperbola.
And that's something that we're not really allowed to do with the straight edge and compass construction.
So, it doesn't solve the straight edge and compass problem, but it does produce the cube root of 2 using conic sections.
Well, as we've seen, the conic sections have many applications and occurrences in nature.
We'll talk some more about the elliptical orbits of the planets in the later lecture.
If you look at how a baseball travels when it's hit into the outfield, it travels in a parabola.
Hyperbolas, you see them all the time actually.
For example, if you take a lampshade, like a cylindrical lampshade in your living room that's next to a wall and you turn on the lamp and you see it has that shape of light, well, that shape is a hyperbola.
If you think about a supersonic jet creating a sonic boom, then it's in the shape of a hyperbola because it has sort of a cone of sonic boom coming out
and intersecting the flat ground, so that's going to be a hyperbola.
The terminal at Dulles Airport was designed by an architect, Aero Serenin, and it is interesting because it is a parabola in one direction and a hyperbola in the other direction.
Well, we saw in this lecture that we can view the conic sections in actually three different ways.
One as the intersection of a plane with a cone, two as the locus of points of various kinds, and three via equations.
And each method was instructive and helped us to see applications in physics and geometry and in aesthetics, and we saw that they were actually describing the same curves.
In the next lecture, we'll investigate the basic geometric idea of area.
I'll see you then.
