Welcome back.
One of the most basic features of a geometrical object is its area.
And computing the area, for example, a plot of land was a very specific problem
that had direct practical consequences.
So finding formulas for the areas of various geometrical figures,
it's a natural goal of geometry.
Finding those formulas often involves intriguing ways to look at an area
or cut it up and reassemble pieces.
And it's, I think, rather interesting.
Well, one of the strategies is first to find formulas for some very simple shapes,
such as squares or rectangles.
And then to show that that area of a more complicated shape
is related to the area of the simple shape.
Well, areas of regions that are bounded by curved lines
present us with a whole constellation of additional problems.
And those areas often require that we use an infinite process
to pin down the exact area.
Even though the challenge of finding areas has been with us for literally millennia,
new strategies are still being developed today.
One such geometrical strategy for computing areas
was discovered by the living mathematician Mamacone Menatzicanian
and was published in this century, in the 21st century.
So in this lecture, we'll see examples of the geometrical analysis of area
that spans history from the ancient world to the present day.
We'll begin our investigation of area
by considering rectangles, parallelograms, and triangles.
Well, first of all, a rectangle, remember, is just a four-sided polygon,
has four straight edges, and has four right angles.
That's what a rectangle is.
And the area of a rectangle is its base times its height.
And here in this picture, you can see if we have a rectangle
that has three units on the base and two units high,
that the area is completely comprised of six unit squares.
And that's a motivation for the idea that the base times the height is the area.
Well, a parallelogram is a four-sided quadrilateral.
A quadrilateral is a four-sided polygon made of four straight sides.
But a parallelogram has both pairs of sides being parallel,
as the name implies, parallelogram.
Well, the formula for the area of a parallelogram
is once again base times height,
but this time height refers to the vertical height,
not the slanty height, the vertical height.
To see why the formula is true, here's how we can do it.
Let's just take our parallelogram
and cut a piece off, a triangular piece off the corner of the parallelogram
by drawing a vertical line,
and then sliding that triangle over to reassemble it to make a rectangle.
And that's why the area of the parallelogram is the length of the base times the vertical height.
Now, by the way, suppose that our parallelogram, though,
instead of being, if it were slanted even more,
it may be that the vertical line that starts at the bottom right corner of the parallelogram
might not even hit the top, and so we couldn't do this exact method.
Well, one way to deal with it would be to draw a parallel line in the middle,
or maybe several of them if necessary,
and then do this same procedure for each one individually
to create two rectangles and then put them on top of each other to create one rectangle.
And let me just make an aside about this.
When you look at this slanted parallelogram,
does it look to you as though the height of it is exactly the same
as the height of the rectangle and the parallelogram we had before?
To me, it looks much, much taller,
and I don't know if that's just me or if it will appear that way on your TV set as well.
But anyway, I think, so this is a method of seeing that the area of a parallelogram anyway
is the base times the height.
Well, the area of a triangle is just one-half the base times its vertical height,
because if you take a triangle,
you can simply draw another triangle to the right of it on top
to create a parallelogram that's exactly two triangles,
and therefore the area of a triangle is one-half the base times the height.
Well, knowing this formula is true for the area of a triangle,
it has an interesting consequence,
and one is that we can solve a conundrum associated with a birthday cake.
Now, if you have a birthday cake that's square and you have people come over
and they're all trying to share the birthday cake,
how can you cut the birthday cake in a way so that everybody gets not only the same amount of cake,
but also gets the same amount of icing, particularly on the outside,
which is a prized possession?
Well, here's how you do it.
Suppose that we have a square cake, let's say it's 10 by 10,
and suppose that we have five people, just to pick a specific one.
Well, the way that you cut the cake is you just go to the center of the cake
and then you divide the perimeter distance around the square by the number of people that you have.
For example, in this case, you have five people, and it's a 10 by 10 by 10 by 10 cake,
and so that's 40 total linear inches around, so you divide that by five and get eight,
and then just start cutting from the center, start anywhere,
and then go eight inches along and cut there,
and then eight inches along, which may go around the corner, like two inches, six inches, cut there,
and then four inches, four inches, cut there, and so on.
Each of those pieces will not only have the same area, but the same icing on the outside.
Of course, they have the same icing because that's how we did it,
but the reason it has the same area is the fact that we can divide each piece,
in some cases, into two, so that the area of each piece is the,
remember, the vertical height, which is constant,
all of these triangles have the same vertical height from the center to the side,
and then times the length of the base.
So that's sort of an interesting application of the formula for the area of a triangle.
Well, computing the areas of shapes that are bounded by curved lines is often complicated,
because sometimes we need to think about infinite processes to do this,
and I might say that calculus, one of the main applications of calculus,
was to compute things like and is to compute things like areas that are bounded by curved lines.
But there are some shapes that we can compute without the need of calculus,
and so let's do a couple here.
The first one is a circle.
Well, why is the area of a circle the famous formula pi r squared?
Here's a good way to see it.
Just take a circle and divide it into a lot of pi-shaped pieces from the center.
And then after we've divided up into pi-shaped pieces,
then assemble those pieces up and down, up and down, up and down.
And if we do that, we get a sort of a rectangle,
except it's a little scalloped at the top and a little scalloped at the bottom.
But suppose that we had like a billion pieces,
then the scalloping would go away.
It would look just exactly like a rectangle.
Well, how big is the rectangle?
Well, the surrounding circumference of the circle is divided up to the top and the bottom.
Half of it is on the top and half is on the bottom.
If you have a circle of radius r, the circumference is 2 pi r.
So that means that half of that, or pi times r, is the distance along the top of the rectangle.
And then the radius, which is slightly slanted when we just had a few pieces,
but looks almost exactly vertical when we have a million, is r.
So the area of the circle is the same as the area of a rectangle
whose vertical distance is r and whose width distance is pi r, so its area is pi r squared.
Well, an alternative way to do the same thing for a circle is to unroll it.
Imagine that you have your circle and it's wrapped up of a lot of concentric circles.
And then we just slit the circle from the center out to the outside and then just unroll every piece.
So for example, the circumference unrolls to a segment whose length is 2 pi r.
So it's 2 pi r, and when we unroll all of them, you see that what we construct is a triangle
whose height is r and whose base is 2 pi r.
So the formula for the area of a triangle is base times height divided by 2,
so we see again that the area is pi r squared.
Well, so we now have the area of a circle and Archimedes showed how we can compute the area of an ellipse.
And the way we're going to compute the area of an ellipse is to remember that an ellipse can be thought of as a stretched circle.
Now remember from the last lecture that we saw that an ellipse would occur if we look at a plane cutting through a cylinder.
Well, when the plane cuts through the cylinder, you can see that if we look at a horizontal circle through the center of the ellipse,
we have this kind of a figure where the ellipse is at an angle and the circle is horizontal.
Let's suppose that the long direction of the ellipse, half of the total length of the ellipse in the longest direction is A,
and the radius of the circle is B.
Then as we saw last time, the ellipse can be viewed as just a stretching of the circle.
Well, since it's a stretching of the circle, we can ask ourselves how long is every line stretched?
Well, every line that we imagine just dividing up our circle and ellipse into horizontal lines,
and we notice that every line is stretched the same amount by the same fraction, namely A over B.
Because we stretch it from distance B, which is the radius of the small circle, to something of distance A.
What do you have to multiply by to get from B to A? You have to multiply by A over B.
Therefore, we see that the area of a circle, this circle here whose radius is B, its area is pi B squared.
But then every line is stretched by a factor of A over B, and consequently the area of an ellipse is just the pi B squared times A over B.
The B's cancel, and we have the formula that the area of an ellipse is pi AB.
So that's very clever.
Well, I wanted to tell you another example of finding areas of interesting figures, and one of them is called the loons of Hippocrates.
And one reason that this is rather interesting is because it seems very close to trying to successfully squaring the circle.
And so that's an interesting thing.
So anyway, here is his theorem. Suppose that you have a right triangle, and on each of the three faces of the right triangle, you draw a semicircle.
So you draw a semicircle on side A, a semicircle on side B, and on the hypotenuse though, instead of drawing it outward, just draw it inward.
That is to say, so that it overlaps and contains the triangle.
Now, and remember, by the way, back in our lecture about circles, that when you have a diameter of a right triangle, that the semicircle on the diameter will go through the right angle point of the right triangle.
Now, let's, here it was Hippocrates' theorem.
He said that the area of these two loons, the sum of the areas of those two loons, is exactly equal to the area of the right triangle.
That's rather surprising because you have something that's sort of made of circles whose area is equal to something that's rectilinear, a triangle.
Well, here's how we prove this. It makes use of the Pythagorean theorem.
And the way it uses the Pythagorean theorem is the following.
In this right triangle, we know that A squared plus B squared equals C squared.
If we multiply that equation through by pi, we see that pi A squared plus pi B squared equals pi C squared.
So we have the relationship that, and if we divide it by half, by the way, since we're just talking about semicircles, half those circles, then we know that the area of the entire half circle on A is pi A squared over 2.
And the area on B, pi B squared over 2, and that the sum of those is equal to the area of the semicircle on C, pi C squared over 2.
Now, notice then that having that relationship, suppose that we now subtract the area of the semicircle from the sum of the two semicircles plus the area of the right triangle.
So we know that the area of the semicircle on A plus the semicircle on B plus the right triangle is equal to the area of the semicircle on C plus the right triangle.
So if we look at the figure that's composed of the right triangle plus the semicircle on A plus the semicircle on B, and we subtract out the semicircle on C, then the difference is precisely equal to the area of that right triangle.
So this was Hippocrates' theorem that said that the sum of those two loons is precisely equal to the area of that right triangle.
Now, by the way, if we made a square, suppose we just take a square and we draw a circumscribed circle around it, that is a circle that goes through the four points of the square,
and then we look at half circles on each of the four sides of the square, then the sum of those four loons is exactly equal to the area of the square.
And the reason for that is it's just an application of this Hippocrates' theorem for each of two halves of the square.
Now, the reason I want to do that is it looks like we're almost squaring a circle, you see, because you're taking a square whose area is equal to four parts of a circle,
and Hippocrates was probably working on trying to square a circle problem when he discovered this wonderful theorem about areas.
Well, I want now to turn to modern methods.
It turns out that there are some really modern methods for finding areas that were discovered by this living mathematician and actually proved in this century, the 21st century.
So his name is Mamakon Manatsykanian, and what he discovered was that you could compute areas of objects in a very clever way.
And so let me begin by giving you a very simple observation, because his whole method is founded on a very simple observation, but then it works its way and has wonderful implications.
So let's go ahead and start with the following situation.
Suppose we take a polygon, for example, this four-sided figure you see, and you take a piece of a line segment, and let's say that the length of this line segment is r.
And what we're going to do is to construct a collection of sectors of a circle of radius r by the following method.
We just slide that segment up to a corner and then along one of the sides of the four-sided figure, and then rotate it down to get a sector of a circle.
And then we slide it forward and rotate until it hits that next side of the quadrilateral, and then slide it forward and rotate until it hits the next side of the quadrilateral, and so on until we go around the entire quadrilateral.
Well, notice that those four sectors of a circle easily can be reassembled to construct an exact circle, a complete circle.
And the reason is very simple, because all you've done is you've taken a radius r and you first went around a certain number of degrees, and then you went around another more degrees, and they went more degrees and more degrees until you came back to where you started.
So obviously, you have constructed a circle as the total of those sectors.
Well, this is rather interesting, because notice that it didn't matter we started with a four-sided figure, but we chose the sides not to be the same, but it doesn't matter what kind of a convex figure we started with, this same analysis would work.
Notice if we had, for example, a ten-sided figure, as long as it was a convex figure, and we took this segment of length r, we could go ahead and do the same thing, making ten sectors, and they would add up to exactly one circle.
So this is quite clear, but let's look at some implications of this.
So one implication is that we can compute the area of an annulus.
Now, an annulus is the region between two concentric circles.
So this is the way that you can do this. Suppose you have these two concentric circles.
Well, you can imagine the inner circle being, instead of a round circle, suppose that it were a million-sided regular polygon.
In other words, indistinguishable from a circle, but it was made a little tiny pieces.
Then you could take your line segment from the top of that polygon, many, many-sided polygon, and just go straight out to the outside of this annulus and do this sweeping of getting these little sectors, except you'd get a million of them.
But the sum of all those would be equal to the area of a single circle, as before.
And therefore, what you can see is that the area of this annular region, the region between these two concentric circles, is exactly equal to the area of a circle whose radius is the distance from the top point of the inner circle out to the boundary of that outer ring of the annulus.
It's pi that number squared.
Now, by the way, this analysis allows us actually to do something extremely clever, which is to give another proof of the Pythagorean theorem.
So I'm going to do this in just a second here, which is this. I'm doing it right now. Suppose that we have a right triangle.
Then we can construct the following annular picture by first taking one vertex of the right triangle and drawing a circle whose radius is equal to the small side of the right triangle.
And then we can draw another circle whose radius is the hypotenuse of that right triangle.
Now, what Menatzekinian showed us was that the area of that annular region is equal to pi times that third horizontal side squared.
So we know that the area of that annulus is pi times that side squared.
But there's another obvious way to compute the area of an annulus. You just take the area of the outer circle and subtract the area of the inner circle.
Well, if we call the outer circle capital R, radius capital R, that's the length of the hypotenuse, then its area is pi capital R squared.
And then we subtract pi little r squared.
And so these two methods of figuring out the area of the annulus, Menatzekinian's method, which says that the area is equal to pi, let's call this A, A squared.
So his method told us that the area is pi A squared.
But the other method of just taking the area of the outer circle minus the area of the inner circle tells us that that number, pi A squared, is equal to pi times capital R squared minus pi times little r squared.
And canceling out the pi's and moving the little r to the other side, we see that capital R squared is equal to little r squared plus little i squared, which is the Pythagorean theorem.
So that's a very clever method of proving the Pythagorean theorem.
Well, Menatzekinian's method can be used to compute all sorts of interesting areas.
Here's another one.
Suppose that you are riding a bicycle and you're on your bicycle and you start out going, say, south. You're heading straight down on your bicycle.
And then you turn all the way around until you're going due south again.
Always turning to the left, but it doesn't matter whether you go straight for a while and then turn more to the left and so on.
It doesn't matter that you follow any particular kind of a curve.
Well, your front wheel and your back wheel are both making marks on the ground.
When you get back to going south, Menatzekinian's theorem tells you that the area that you sweep out between those two bicycle tracks, the front tire and the back tire, are exactly equal to the area of a circle.
Because, you see, you could imagine, as we did before, looking at all these little sectors of the circle as you make little turns, you approximate your whole bicycle turning by little turns,
and you see that that area is exactly between the tire tracks will be exactly equal to the area of the circle, whose radius is the distance between the front and the rear tires.
One particular kind of trip you might make on a bicycle is the following.
Suppose you started your bicycle, once again facing due south, and you just put the wheel of your bicycle on the x-axis, that's horizontally, and you always went just due east.
And then the back tire of your bicycle would just follow along.
Your front tire continues to go due east, and your back tire just tries to catch up and it becomes asymptotic, is the term, to the x-axis.
Then, that curve has a special name, it's called the Tractrix, and that curve will actually see it in a future lecture, when we talk about the hyperbolic plane.
But, that curve is interesting because the area under that curve, by Menazocanian's method, you could reassemble the pieces to make a quarter of a circle.
You see, because you start this way, and then you sweep the tangent curves until you get to a quarter of a circle.
Well, so Menazocanian's method is rather amazing that it can do these complicated things, some of which you couldn't do at all, like the area between a bike's tracks.
Because if you don't know what the curve is that the front tire was traversing, you wouldn't be able to apply calculus to find the answer.
Well, there's another example of an area that I want to show you that's also clever using Menazocanian's method.
And that is the area that's over a curve that's called a cycloid.
So, let me describe what a cycloid is.
Suppose you take a circle, and you put it on a line, and you just start at the bottom of that circle, you put a point there, and then you roll the circle along the line, along this horizontal line,
and you just follow where that fixed point on the rim of the circle goes.
And it traverses this nice curve.
It goes up, and finally meets the top, and then comes down and ends at the bottom.
And the distance between the beginning and the ending is, of course, just the entire circumference of the circle.
Well, it turns out that computing the area above the cycloid would be rather difficult, even with calculus.
You'd have to first find the equations and figure out how to compute integrals, and so on.
It would be a complicated procedure.
But Menazocanian's method makes it simpler, not completely simple, but makes it much simpler.
And here's how you can look at it.
As this circle is rolling along, let's think about what direction a point is moving at any given time when you're moving.
So suppose that we've rolled along, and here we're at a point, say, that looks like about 10 o'clock on our circle, and you see we've rolled the circle around, and here it is.
And what I'm going to claim is that the direction in which it is going, which will be a line that's tangent, actually, that just touches the cycloid curve that we're drawing,
that the direction it's going is very simple to describe.
Namely, as we're rolling along, if we look at the point of the circle that's drawing our curve,
if we look at the straight line between that point and the point at which the circle is touching the top horizontal line, that's the direction that you're moving at that moment.
So as we roll it, you're moving in the direction of the top point of tangency of that circle, the highest point of the circle.
And let me tell you why.
Suppose we think about what we're doing as we're rotating our circle to make the cycloid.
And we've rotated, we've gotten to this point at 10 o'clock, and we could imagine instead of rolling along, which is what we're actually doing, let's decompose that motion into two separate motions.
Namely, one is that we could imagine just keeping the circle fixed and rotating it a little bit.
But at the same time, we also slide it along by the same amount that we rotated, that is the same arc length that we rotated.
So in other words, if we wanted to get to the next position, to another position on our rolling, creating the cycloid, one way to do it would be to first rotate a little bit and then slide.
It wouldn't be nearly as graceful as just rolling.
But looking at it that way allows us to compute why it is that that direction goes exactly to the top point, and here's why.
Because rotating, if you just left the center at the same place and rotated, then the direction of travel would be the tangent direction to the circle.
You'd just go straight up in that direction.
But then you're also rotating sideways the same amount.
Now, notice that if you look at that point of intersection of where the tangent hits that top horizontal line, that is a point external to the circle.
And we know something about points that are external to the circle, and that is that the distance from an external point of the circle to the two exterior tangents is exactly the same.
And therefore, if we're thinking about sliding the same amount as we're rotating up, then we can decompose that motion into these two pieces, and since they're exactly equal, then adding them up is the direction in which you're moving.
Well, the point is that if we put together all of these pieces as we're rotating, you can see in this picture how those pieces neatly fill up an exact half of a circle as we're rotating.
You see, because all of these fan-like lines exactly fill up half of the circle, and then, of course, you could continue and fill up the other half as you complete the cycloid.
And so what we've proved is that the area above a cycloid and under this horizontal line on top is exactly equal to the area of a circle.
Well, that's a rather interesting thing and difficult to prove using other methods.
Well, in this lecture, we started by finding formulas for some simple polygons, such as a rectangle and a parallelogram and a triangle.
And then we saw how to deduce the formula for the area of a circle and also the area of an ellipse.
And finally, we saw how to use Menazocanian's method to compute the areas of various curved figures, such as an annulus and the area above a cycloid.
And I want to say that the mathematician Thomas Apostle has worked with Menazocanian to make these concepts both public and also for helping to teach children about mathematics.
And I think it's a wonderful project that they're doing.
In the next lecture, we're going to discuss something called the art gallery theorem, which was posed in the second half of the 20th century.
So we'll be right up to date.
I'll see you then.
Thank you.
