Welcome back.
The visual arts are a testament to the beauty of geometry.
Art galleries are places to view art, but in this lecture we'll entertain the question
of viewing the gallery itself.
Many geometrical questions have ancient roots, but some simple questions were not considered
until recently, and one such question is the one we'll discuss in this lecture known as
the Art Gallery Theorem.
The mathematician Victor Clee, as opposed to the artist Paul Clay, posed a question about
how many security guards would be necessary in order to look at every point in an art
gallery when the gallery may be extremely elaborately shaped and have many nooks and
crannies.
Well, in the 1970s, Clee's question was answered using a clever proof that illustrates two
effective strategies of analysis, divide and conquer, and seek essential ideas.
This proof delivers a moment of aha when the pieces all click into place.
Well, some questions related to the Art Gallery Theorem involve illuminating galleries in which
the walls are mirrored, and these illumination questions have some popular culture fame because
the TV mathematician detective Charlie Epps on the TV show Numbers mentioned an illumination
problem while applying mathematics to solve crime.
Well, we're going to end the lecture by describing an illumination question that remains unsolved
to this day.
Well, let's begin.
First of all, it's a sad commentary on life that art galleries need guards and security
cameras, but thinking about where to place those cameras gives rise to an intriguing
mathematical question.
So suppose we have an art gallery that has a lot of straight walls, however, it may be
very complicated, in fact much more complicated than any real gallery would be, and in fact
it would have lots of indentations and hallways.
In fact, it can be any shape at all.
But let's just to start this, we'll stick to the case where there's just one large room.
In other words, the boundary is just one long collection of straight line edges, but they
just close up to make one enclosed area.
Well, remember, a polygon is just a collection of straight edges, and so what we can phrase
this as saying that the room is bounded by a polygonal closed curve, polygonal closed
curve.
Well, there are many indentations, so we can't expect to see the whole gallery from one vantage
point.
We're asking the question, where would we put the cameras to see everything?
Well, obviously we can't do it with just one camera if there are these kinds of nooks
and crannies.
So the question that we're going to consider is, how many cameras are needed to see the
whole gallery?
Well, so far the question isn't yet well posed, because we'd need different numbers of cameras
depending on how complex the gallery is.
To make the question specific, let's ask, how many cameras will suffice to see every
point in any gallery whose rooms have just some specified number of walls, as enclosed
by just some specified number of walls?
How many cameras will always work?
Well, first of all, notice that this question could have been posed in ancient times, but
it in fact wasn't actually posed until the 1970s by this mathematician, Victor Clee.
But one thing that I want to do in this lecture is to illustrate some strategies by which mathematics
actually is developed, and how you go about settling a question and investigating an issue.
So for one very good strategy to begin to address any kind of issue like this is to look at
examples.
And when we look at examples, we can try to find some sort of a pattern.
Well, in this case, what we're seeking is some sort of pattern that connects the number
of walls of a gallery with the number of cameras necessary to see every part of the gallery.
And by the way, before we go on, I want to assume that the cameras are these fisheye
lenses that can see any angle.
So even if you put a camera at an indentation, it can see all around.
So any number of degrees, it can see.
Well, OK, so if the room is convex, now convex means that a polygon is convex.
If for any two points, the straight line between those two points is also inside the room.
Well, if the room is convex, then of course you could put the camera anywhere and one camera
would suffice.
And a camera anywhere would see the whole room.
But so what we need to do, obviously, is to draw some figures that are not convex,
but are more complicated.
And so what we're going to do is to attempt to make the most convoluted rooms possible
with increasingly more walls.
So first of all, let's start with a three-sided room.
Well, that's easy, because every three-sided room, that's just a triangle.
And a triangle, obviously from any point in the triangle, you can see the whole triangle,
so one camera will work.
Let's consider rooms with four walls.
Well, it turns out that four walls, you can make rooms that are a little bit more interesting
looking.
For example, you can make a four-walled room that looks like a sort of a dart shape.
That four-walled room actually can be guarded with a single camera, though.
You can see, you could put the camera either near the top or you could put the camera using
a sort of fisheye effect.
You can put it at this indented vertex.
And by the way, we're going to be mostly talking about putting the cameras at the vertices
of the room, although that's not really a necessary condition, but that's what we're
going to be discussing.
Putting the cameras just at the places where the walls meet, the vertices of that polygonal
boundary of the room.
Well, so with four walls, we can pretty much convince ourselves that one camera will suffice.
Let's move on to five walls.
Let's think about how you could make a five-walled room.
Well, you can see that you can move things around, but putting this camera in this location
here, you can see that it can still see the whole room.
Now, it might be difficult to prove that every room that has five walls can be seen
with just one camera, but we'd have trouble finding a counter example.
In fact, it is true that one camera suffices for a five-walled room.
But when we get to six walls, things get more interesting, because with six walls, we can
make a room that has two spiky corridors.
And these spiky corridors entail the necessity of having two cameras, or you could have sort
of a Z-shaped room that would require two cameras.
Let's see why it is that this six-sided room that has two spikes coming up, why can we
absolutely prove that two cameras are necessary?
Well, here's one way to do it.
In this long corridor on the left, we know that in order to see up to the top of that,
we've got to be able to place the camera somewhere that would be visible to that point.
Well, the points that are visible to that point are a triangle that comes down.
Likewise, the spiky corridor on the right also has to have a camera somewhere that could
see into that spike, and therefore you've got to locate a camera over in that triangular
place of visibility.
Therefore you know, since those two areas of visibility don't touch each other, you've
got to have one camera to see this spike over here, another camera to see the other spike
over here, and therefore you know that you need at least two cameras, and in fact, two
cameras suffice, because you could put the two cameras either at the bottom corners here,
or you could put them at these two places, and those cameras would see the entire gallery.
So, we've now seen that for six walls, you need sometimes two cameras.
Now, seven-walled rooms are complicated.
Well, let's go ahead and try a few.
If you try to take a seven-walled room, you'll see that you still can view the entire room
with just two cameras.
In fact, eight-walled rooms also seem to need only two cameras, but by the way, if you really
had to sit down and prove that every single eight-walled room, you could do it with only
two cameras, just by looking at all possible configurations of those eight walls, you would
give up in despair, because by the time you have eight walls, how do you know you're just
not thinking of some convoluted way to draw them so that three cameras would be necessary?
We're going to prove later why two cameras suffice, but that's for later.
For now, if we consider a nine-walled room, then we start to be able to require three
cameras, and here's why.
Remember we had sort of an idea for how to prove that two cameras were necessary when
we had those two spiky corridors.
Namely, we said, okay, at the ends of the spikes, you've got to see them, and therefore
we got those two sort of triangular viewing areas.
Well, if we have nine walls, what we can do is create another spike, and the way to think
of it is take our six-walled example and make three points on the bottom and pull up the
middle spike, and you can have now three spiked corridors sitting out there, and then those
three spikes each have to have a camera in order to see into those spikes, because they
have disjoint places where you need a camera in order to see into this one, you need a
camera here to see into this one, you need a camera here to see into this one, and they're
disjoint.
Well, in fact, then, we now have developed an actual strategy of how to construct interesting
shaped rooms that will need more cameras.
For example, we can now construct a room that has 12 walls that will need four cameras.
How do we do it?
Well, we just make four spikes coming up, and if we count the walls, you can see it's
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
So there are 12 walls, and we can see now we have a method.
The method is that in general, we can create a room with three N walls that requires N
cameras.
You can't do with less than N cameras.
So we've bounded our conjecture on one side.
We know that we need at least that many cameras, but we are in a position now to make a conjecture.
Now, a conjecture is just a guess.
A conjecture is a guess based on evidence of something that may always be true, and
a conjecture becomes a theorem if we prove that what we guess to be true is actually
true.
So here is the conjecture that we make.
We make the conjecture that if we have any room that has N walls, it can always be viewed
with N over three cameras.
So any room with N walls can be viewed with N over three cameras.
Now we have an issue here.
Let's deal with it now.
Suppose that you have an N number of walls like eight that's not evenly divided by three.
It's not evenly divisible by three.
In other words, three into eight doesn't go evenly.
How many cameras do you need?
Do you need two, or do you have to round up and use three?
Well, the conjecture would be that you only need the integer part of that division.
So in the case of an eight-sided room, we're going to prove that you only need two cameras.
So this then, this conjecture is in fact true, and it is the art gallery theorem.
And what it states is that any room that has N straight walls can always be viewed with
N over three cameras.
Okay, now how can that is we can put N over three cameras to see the entire room.
Now how in the world would we prove such a theorem?
Well, one of the strategies for proving complicated questions almost always is to start by considering
some simpler questions, and then working toward the more complicated situations, because often
what we can do is we can see that the complicated situation really is a collection of simple
pieces that fit together in some way.
So let's begin trying to prove this art gallery theorem with the simplest shape that we can
even imagine, namely a triangle.
And of course a triangle is so trivial, we can see everything inside the triangle from
any point in the triangle.
So it doesn't really get us very far toward dealing with the complexities, but at least
we're off to some sort of start.
Well, suppose that we're faced with a complicated gallery.
Let's use sort of a divide and conquer kind of strategy by taking this complicated gallery
and dividing it up into simpler pieces.
Well one way to take a complicated gallery and divide it into pieces is to find a spanning
edge that would go from one vertex to another in our polygon and be inside the room, and
therefore divide our one big room into two sub rooms, and each of those pieces would
have fewer number of sides to them.
You see, so we're measuring the complexity of our gallery by how many edges it has.
So the first question is how can we find a straight line that goes from one vertex to
another in an arbitrary polygon and stays inside the gallery?
Well, okay, we need some answer to that.
Why can we always find such a segment between a vertex and another vertex that crosses inside
the gallery?
Well, the answer is this.
Start at any vertex, that is a corner of the gallery, and just think about looking out
with a beam of light or just looking, and start at one wall and just sweep across looking
for other vertices that you might attach this one to that span into the gallery until you
get to the other wall that comes from the same gallery.
In other words, at that vertex there's an angle, and you just sweep from one side to
the other.
Now, either you're going to be able to connect this vertex to some other vertex that you've
located by that kind of sweeping, or you can't.
You'll all agree with that, either you can or you can't.
Well, if you can, then do it, and you've done it.
But if you didn't find any other vertex as you swept across, then you can take these
adjacent vertices, this one and this one, and they can be connected.
You see, because if there were anything that went inside, then you would have located a
vertex that you could connect.
So the fact that you couldn't find anything here, because maybe there was a long quarter
across the back, then that means that you could connect these two adjacent vertices,
and you would have divided your room into two simpler rooms.
Well, once we've seen by this method that you can always find some way to divide a
complicated room into two simpler rooms, that is by finding this spanning arc, in the case
of thinking of it as a plane, spanning line or putting a wall in there if you think of
it as a gallery, that there's no reason that we have to stop there.
In other words, after we've found one spanning arc, we've divided our room into two subrooms,
and then we can continue the process.
That is, find a spanning arc in this subroom, find a spanning arc in this subroom, and keep
going.
Now, what happens when you keep going?
Well, you keep going until you have divided the room maximally into the smallest pieces
you can, and the smallest pieces you can are triangles, because once you have them divided
into triangles, there's no possibility of dividing smaller.
And so what we have seen then is that we can take any gallery of any complexity and divide
it into triangles by putting in these lines, and here you see some examples of this.
Now, remember that if you put a camera at any point of a triangle, then you can see every
point of the triangle.
That's obvious.
So here is an obvious observation.
If we put a camera in every triangle, we will be able to see the whole gallery.
Well, you have to agree with that.
If you've divided the gallery into little triangles and into triangles, they may not
be little, but into triangles, and you put a camera in each one, then you definitely
can see the whole gallery.
Well, a triangle has three vertices.
Right?
Every triangle has three vertices, and so that suggests an idea, and although I think
this is just a brilliant idea that sort of came from the blue, but it's a wonderful idea,
which is to color the vertices with three colors.
So let's imagine taking a triangle and just take one of the triangles into which we divided
our gallery, and color the vertices red, white, and blue, okay?
Red, white, and blue.
So we've colored that one triangle.
Now we can systematically color the vertices of the next triangle so that it also has a
red, white, and blue vertex.
And in fact, we're going to color all of the vertices, of all the triangles, red, white,
or blue.
So here's how we do.
We start with one triangle, and we just color it red, white, and blue.
Well now look at the adjacent triangle to it.
Well two of those vertices have already been colored of this adjacent triangle, and so
just color that third vertex with the remaining color.
So once you've colored one triangle, you certainly know how to color the vertex of
an adjacent triangle.
Now just continue.
You take an adjacent triangle to that, an adjacent triangle to that, and so on, and since you've
always colored two of them, the third vertex always has to be colored by a required color.
Well you just can continue to do this until all of the vertices of every triangle are
colored.
Now by the way, notice that the vertices of all the triangles are exactly the same as
the vertices of our entire polygon, right?
They're the same thing.
Because all of these subdivisions we put in went from vertex to vertex of our original
shape.
Okay, now let's make an observation.
We've got this room divided up into triangles.
So the vertices of every triangle are red, white, and blue.
Suppose we put a camera at each blue vertex.
Well, since every triangle has a blue vertex, we know that we could see inside every triangle.
But the triangles make up the entire gallery.
So if we put a camera at every blue vertex, the cameras would definitely be able to see
the whole gallery.
Well, obviously that's also true if we put cameras at each red vertex, or if we put the
cameras at every white vertex.
You see, in other words, if we didn't have them at the blue vertexes, but we put them
all at the red vertices, then that would also be able to see the whole thing.
Okay, well, they're all together n vertices in a gallery.
See, if it has n walls, it also has n corners.
So if the gallery is, if all of those vertices are colored red, white, and blue, one of those
colors must appear n over three or fewer times, right?
Because the number that appear, or that are white, plus the number that appear that are
blue, plus the number that are red, add up to n, and so they can't all be bigger than
a third, that one of them has to be n over three or fewer.
So all we do is we pick the color that appears fewest number of times, and we place a camera
at each vertex of that color, and then that allows us to see the whole, the whole gallery.
Well, this proof, I think this is just such a clever proof.
And this proves the art gallery theorem, that is that you can see the entire gallery
with n over three cameras.
And this really, really elegant coloring proof was actually created by, once again, of course,
living mathematician, Steve Fisk.
Well, computational geometry is, puts together computer science, that is, how we do things
using algorithms with geometrical kinds of questions, and so our solution is really
an example in the field of computational geometry.
As I said, this question about art galleries was posed and proved within the last 40 years.
But the way mathematics develops is that every question that we answer suggests variations
that raise new questions.
One of the variants of the art gallery theorem concerns galleries where the walls are each,
say, vertical or horizontal.
So in other words, you're not allowed to have pointy things like this, but every wall
is either straight up or down.
Well, that gives us another question, you see.
It's related to the art gallery question and some more refined question, and that kind
of refinement is often what happens in developing mathematics.
In this case, it requires only n over four cameras to guard any gallery where each edge
is horizontal or vertical.
Well, here are two other questions that are related to the art gallery question, and in
fact, they actually preceded.
They were asked before the art gallery question, and they were posed in the 1950s by a mathematician
by the name of Ernst Strauss.
And here was one of the questions.
He posed two questions.
One of them was this.
Suppose you have an art gallery, it has straight walls, just as we've been talking about, but
in this case, every wall is a mirror, a mirrored wall.
And he asked the question, if you put a light bulb anywhere in the room, will the reflected
light eventually reach every single point in the room?
He said, it bounces, bounces, bounces, and goes off in every direction, bounce, bounce,
bounce.
Will it go to every single point in the room?
Or another question, which is a related question, is this.
Once again, suppose you have an art gallery with straight walls, and they're all mirrored,
as before, everyone's a mirror.
Can you find a place to put a single light bulb that will, in fact, see the whole gallery?
The difference between the questions are the first question says, can you put the light
bulb anywhere and illuminate the whole gallery?
And the second one says, is there some place you can put the light bulb that you could
illuminate the whole gallery?
Or by the way, we could phrase both these questions in terms of guards, which would be
to say, if you had a mirrored gallery, will one guard suffice?
And in the first question, could the guard stand anywhere?
And the second question, is there some place the guard could stand to see the whole gallery?
Well, one of the strategies for facing a question in mathematics that is very often used is to
give up.
You give up.
And instead of doing the question that you were asked, you do something easier.
If you do something easier, then you can learn something and then apply it to the question
that you were originally after.
Well, in 1958, the now famous physicist Sir Roger Penrose took an interest in this illumination
question when he was a young man.
And he used the reflective properties of an ellipse to construct an example of a gallery
with curved walls that could not be illuminated from any point.
And in fact, his gallery involves three different ellipses.
He starts with a large ellipse and splits it into two halves and then pulls them apart.
And then he makes some indentations at the ends and connects them in the middle to form
this shape where no light source can illuminate the whole room no matter where the light source
is put.
And you can see from different light sources here, positions, where the shaded parts are,
that is the part where that light never penetrates.
So Penrose's example then shows us that the question 2, Strauss's question 2 about polygonal
rooms can't be generalized to rooms with curved walls, you see, because Penrose's example
said there's no place to put a light that can illuminate the whole wall.
And the question about the straight walls was, if you had straight walled mirrored room,
can you find a place from which you can illuminate the whole room?
Well, in 1995, George W. Tokarski produced an example of a gallery that has 26 straight
walls in which there are two points such that a light source at one of those points will
never reach the other point.
In other words, he showed that it's not the case that any positioning of a light source
will definitely illuminate the whole room.
And by the way, one sort of interesting way to look at this situation is to realize that
when you, a light beam comes out and strikes a mirror and reflects off it, instead what
we could do is imagine taking the entire gallery and turning it over, reflecting it over that
wall and drawing another picture of a gallery and having the light just continue through.
And so you draw sort of a reflection of the room to see where it's going to go next.
And if you have a sequence of these reflections of the gallery, then you can see, you can
analyze how the light beam would go after it's been actually bouncing back and forth.
And in any case, he was able to prove that no light which emanates from this specified
point P will ever reach this other specified point Q.
Well, in these examples though, in Tokarski's example, if you move the light source a little
bit, the whole gallery can be illuminated.
And in other words, there are points in the gallery, in fact, most of the points in the
gallery where if we put a light bulb, it would in fact illuminate the whole gallery with
the mirrored walls.
So that example, that is Tokarski's example, does not settle the question of whether every
polygonal gallery with mirrored walls can be illuminated with one light bulb that's strategically
placed.
Well, this question, whether you can always find a place for a light bulb that can light
the whole gallery in a mirrored gallery, is unsolved to this day.
Now maybe there's going to be some clever way to take Penrose's example and somehow
combine it with Tokarski's ideas to create some polygonal example where there is no place
that you can put a light bulb that would illuminate this whole polygonal room.
Or maybe it's always possible to find a place in a room that has straight mirrored walls
in order to put a light bulb that would in fact see the entire room.
And maybe we could use some modification of this wonderful proof of the art gallery theorem
and modify it to show us how to prove that more general, the mirrored illumination case.
Well, nobody knows.
Nobody today knows.
But I would bet that somebody is going to resolve that question in the next decade or
two.
I would just bet that.
But one thing that shows us is that the world is just full of unanswered questions.
And they're just waiting for our curiosity to raise them and our creativity and cleverness
to solve them.
So in this lecture we saw a collection of questions about the placement of cameras or
lights in an art gallery.
And the mathematical questions concerned how to reach points in a polygon that you can
get to with straight lines with various constraints, like bouncing off mirrors.
So we saw that some of these questions remain unsolved to this day, which I think is the
true state of the world, that most questions that we ask are still not answered.
In the next lecture we're going to turn our attention to the issue of perspective in art.
I'll see you then.
