Welcome back.
Mapmakers and artists both have a keen interest in how a flat two-dimensional picture can
best depict our three-dimensional world.
Artists have to take countries from around globe and somehow depict them on a flat piece
of paper.
Well, one kind of projection, called stereographic projection, takes the surface of the globe
and displays it on the plane, and we'll see that.
Artists use perspective to convey a third dimension while we look at a two-dimensional
picture.
The concepts of perspective were investigated vigorously during the Renaissance, and developments
both in art and in geometry reinforced one another.
Connecting three dimensions with the plane contains many techniques and insights that
are both artistic and mathematical.
Well, recently, an interesting new method for conveying a three-dimensional image using
a two-dimensional plane was invented, namely this magic eye or stereogram method that involves
looking at carefully created images in a sort of cross-eyed way with the result that we
feel that we're seeing an actual three-dimensional object.
Exploring representations of three-dimensionality in the plane has had significant mathematical
consequences as well as being influential in the artistic world.
So, how can we represent a three-dimensional world on a flat plane?
Human beings have been trying to do this for thousands of years, tens of thousands of years.
They've made paintings and drawings that depict our three-dimensional world, including
back on caves in ancient times.
Well, each of our eyes, however, notice records only a two-dimensional kind of impression
of the world.
Namely, if we close one eye, we just see that impression of the light coming in is on a
surface, not on a three-dimensional kind of an object.
So our challenge then is to take objects in space and somehow project them effectively
onto a flat plane.
Well, there are several common projections that are used.
Questions that we have to investigate about these different strategies of taking our three-dimensional
world and drawing them and representing them on the plane include what features of the
three-dimensionality of the world will be preserved or how will they be reflected in
the two-dimensional rendition?
Well, let's start with a practical issue of how to represent the globe on a flat map.
So here's a globe of the world.
If we want to take all of the countries of the globe and somehow draw them on a flat
plane, some distortion is absolutely necessary.
Well, one strategy for doing this is really a very simple idea, but it does have some
drawbacks.
So here is the simple idea.
Since this globe is attached at an angle, I'm going to instead look at this and imagine
this to be our globe, because what we're going to do is take our globe and put it just on
a flat surface on the plane.
Now all we do is take a light at the north pole, and just thinking of this as a globe
of the earth, take a light at the north pole and simply shine it through the globe.
So in other words, think of this globe as a transparent globe with the countries just
drawn on the outside, and then draw these straight lines from the north pole straight
down through every point down onto the plane.
Well, you can see that every single point on the entire surface of this ball is going
to correspond to a single point in the plane, because the straight line from the north pole
will go through the sphere and then come out and hit exactly one point in the plane.
So there's a one-to-one correspondence between the points on the sphere, except for the north
pole, and the points in the plane.
Well, let's think about what this kind of a projection preserves and doesn't preserve
in its activities.
First of all, every country will be displayed on the ground, because you see you draw some
country here and it'll be displayed, and if you have two countries that are, say, next
to each other, they will be next to each other on the ground.
So it does preserve that kind of feature of the plane.
However, some of the geometrical features are going to be distorted.
For example, suppose that we consider a country that's near the north pole.
Well, what happens?
The straight lines from there go almost parallel to this plane, but do eventually hit, but little
distances near the north pole are greatly exaggerated.
They become much larger.
So the area of a country that's up near the north pole will look gigantic on the plane.
However, it's good to analyze what features of the geometry of the plane, how they correspond
to the geometry on the sphere.
Well, here's one thing to notice, that if we take a straight line in the plane, we take
a straight line in the plane, anywhere in the plane.
What points on the sphere go to that straight line?
Well, we can figure this out, because if we have a straight line and we look at the north
pole, there's a plane, a straight flat plane that goes through that straight line and goes
through the north pole.
And all the straight lines from the north pole to the line go through that, or lie on
that plane, you see?
So that plane intersects the sphere in a circle.
Any plane intersects a round ball in a circle, right?
It cuts exactly in a circle, because the sphere is round.
And it will contain the north pole.
So that means that circles that contain the north pole are the ones that correspond to
a straight line in the plane.
So that's rather interesting.
Well, another thing that's interesting about this projection is that if you take a round
circle on the plane, and you look and see, well, what corresponds to that round circle
on the plane, we might think it would be something like an ellipse.
But no, it's actually a circle.
So this projection, the stereographic projection, does have the property that it preserves circles.
So let me be specific, that if you take a circle on the sphere, and you shine a light
from the north pole, and you shine it down onto the plane, it will actually produce an
image that's an exact circle.
However, the center of the circle will not go to the center of the circle on the plane.
You see, the center of the circle on the plane will be a point on the sphere when you go
the straight line to the north pole, but it won't be at the center of the circle that's
on the sphere.
But circles go to circles.
So this projection does preserve angles.
If you take an angle on the sphere, and you measure that angle, just locally, what does
it look like, it'll go to the same angle on the plane.
Well, this was stereographic projection, and stereographic projection, as you saw, preserved
some features and didn't preserve others.
Well, another way that we can project three-dimensional space onto the plane is simply to ignore the
third coordinate.
In other words, the up and down direction.
We just imagine squashing everything vertically down onto the plane.
Now this projection has some features that it preserves and some that it doesn't.
One thing is that if you take a straight line, any straight line, you take a pen, then its
projection is just going to be a straight line.
So it does preserve straight lines.
However, this projection has some defects, and that is that it does not preserve angles.
For example, suppose that we take this right angle.
Now if you look at the right angle exactly straight on, it looks like a right angle.
However, if I tilt this in certain ways, the apparent angle that you see changes drastically.
So I'm hoping that I'm holding it so that you see a small angle.
Here I'll try it again down here to see if we can see a position to hold it like this,
where you see the angle is very small.
And likewise, you can find other places where the angle appears much larger than 90 degrees.
And then of course it actually is a 90-degree angle in the real world.
So this projection of just projecting straight down has some good features.
It preserves straight lines, straight lines go to straight lines.
By the way, we'll use that fact in the next lecture.
But it also has some defects that angles change.
Well another feature that it has is that it takes a circle and projects a circle to an
ellipse.
You see?
It takes a circle and projects it down to something that looks exactly like an ellipse.
Now we actually saw before why this is.
The reason is that an ellipse, remember, is really a stretched circle.
And we saw that when we saw how an ellipse comes about when we think of it as a cross
section of a cylinder, and that just every line was stretched from a circle.
Well stretching in one direction is the same as shrinking in the other direction.
In other words, if you wanted to take a circle and take every line in this direction and
make it twice as long, you get an ellipse.
But the shape of that ellipse is the same thing as taking a bigger circle and shrinking
every line that's this way to half the length.
So that's the effect that you get when you project a circle straight down.
It looks like an ellipse.
So the vertical projections, once again, it has some positives and some negatives.
And every kind of projection is going to have some features that it preserves and some that
it does not.
But this vertical kind of projection has this kind of distortion that does not accurately
capture what our eye actually sees.
Well, some ancient art uses something like this kind of vertical projection, and it looks
funny to our eyes.
So let's now turn to what we actually see when we look at the world.
Well if we imagine looking at the world with just one eye, let's start with just one eye,
and what we're actually seeing is that we take something in the world outside and draw
the straight line where the light comes to our eye.
So that means that all of the points out in three-space, three-dimensional world, are
coming toward our eye from different places.
And so the concept of how to represent what we see with an eye, one eye, is to say, well,
let's just take the world that we see out there and imagine all these straight lines,
all converging to a single point, and then put a picture frame around that.
And so we are imagining that these lines are coming through that picture frame and that
we would depict a location of how we would draw something out in the world by seeing
where that line hits the picture frame.
Well, we can analyze concepts of perspective that arise naturally from this view, and in
fact in the Renaissance, artists study this idea of perspective in great detail.
So let's first of all ground ourselves by thinking of the most basic idea about this
image of the world, and that is that if something is farther away, it appears smaller than if
it is nearby.
In other words, if I have two points that are a certain distance apart and I look at
them and I bring them farther away, then they appear closer in my view.
And the reason for that is very simple.
It's because if you have two points that are the same distance apart and they're close
to my eye, the angle that they raise that go to the two ends is a bigger angle than when
they're further away, the angle is smaller, and that's why things that are farther away
should be drawn as smaller.
Well, let's think about parallel lines.
So suppose that we're standing on the earth and we see a railroad track heading out into
the distance.
Well, the tracks are parallel to each other.
They stay a constant fixed distance from one another as they go off into the distance.
As we look at them, of course, they appear to be getting closer and closer because they're
the same distance apart, further things appear closer.
So in our drawing, or in this, if we think of this picture frame that the image is coming
through, the distant points of this railroad track should be closer together.
And then the ties, that's the things on which the track lies, that are equally spaced apart
will appear closer together as we go further out and depict the points of the railroad
track that are off in the distance.
Well, now, how are we going to draw this picture of the railroad tracks so that it's a correct
representation in the plane?
Well, this is the way we should think about it, and this is the way we should think about
perspective altogether.
These tracks will appear to converge to a single point in the distance.
And if you actually look at the world and you see railroad tracks and they're going
just straight off in the middle of a flat plane, they will appear to be just heading
toward one point that you're looking at.
Which point?
I'll tell you which point.
And this is the key idea of perspective, and I think this is very, very clear.
I hope it'll be very clear, which is this.
We know that parallel lines will appear to get closer as they get more distant.
So if we have some parallel lines in the world, like railroad tracks, suppose we just take
a line from our eye that's exactly parallel to those tracks.
In other words, it's a line out in the real world that's parallel to those tracks, but
it goes exactly through our eye.
Of course, we're thinking we're in one point, we're not moving.
So where eye is fixed, and if we close one eye and we look out, then there's one line
that's parallel to those two railroad tracks.
Well, what does that line that comes from our eye look like as it passes through this
plane of the picture plane that it's cutting through?
What does it look like?
Well, it looks like just a single point.
Because anything, any straight line from our eye that really starts in our eye, all you
see is one point.
Well, these other parallel lines are getting to appear increasingly close together.
That's what we said when we said things that are the same distance apart, looked at a distance,
appear to be getting closer together.
Consequently, you know where these lines, the railroad track lines are going to converge
They're going to converge exactly to the straight line that comes from your eye and that's parallel
to those tracks.
So that tells you exactly how to draw parallel lines in a picture.
Now let me show you this in the case of suppose you're trying to draw a cube.
So you have a cube in front of you.
Now one thing that's sort of interesting is that a cube, if you look on it straight on,
it'll just look like a square.
But if you tilt the cube, then you'll find that none of the angles looks like a 90 degree
angle anymore and the lines instead of going parallel to each other, they won't be parallel
to each other.
But I'll tell you exactly how to draw them so that they look correct.
This is how you draw them.
You say to yourself, okay, I have this cube out in the real world and I'm looking at it
with my eye.
Well, if I look at the line of sight from my eye parallel to these four lines here, you
see in a cube, there are four parallel lines this way, four parallel lines this way, and
four parallel lines this way, okay?
So each of those sets of parallel lines, we treat just like the railroad track.
In other words, we say, you look with your eye, you take the line that's parallel to
those lines and you just see which direction that is.
From your eye, there's only one line that's parallel to the way you're holding this cube.
And so you put a dot there.
And then when you're depicting these lines that are parallel in real life, they will
appear to head toward that exact spot.
And then you look at the other set of parallel lines and you look at the line from your eye
in the direction that's parallel to those.
And then those lines will converge to a single point.
And that point, the point that you look, the line from your eye that's parallel to those
sides.
And the same thing for the third set of parallel lines.
And when we draw that, we actually get an example of what's called three-point perspective.
I recommend that you don't think about three-point perspective or two-point perspective.
What you should just think about is that you understand where any parallel line seems to
be converging.
Namely, the single point that is the straight line from your eye that's parallel to that
line in reality, you see?
So this is an explanation of how perspective is used to depict the three-dimensional world.
And by the way, it doesn't have to be a parallel line.
If you have any line that's in the actual world, you draw the line parallel to it and
that line will head toward that point.
Okay.
So one thing that's quite interesting, by the way, is to see some cases of paintings
where they have not used perspective correctly, particularly before they figured out how
it worked.
There were some interesting paintings and they're sort of amusing to look at.
Well, one thing that we can do is in understanding these principles of perspective, we can construct
impressions by somehow manipulating the environment to fool us.
Well, Thomas Jefferson did this.
Thomas Jefferson understood these principles of perspective and he intentionally used them
to trick our eyes when we view the lawn, which is the main quadrangle at the University of
Virginia.
He designed the University of Virginia.
And so what he did is he realized that when we see a line of buildings like next to this
big rectangular lawn, we have the expectation that the buildings which look the same would
be placed evenly along the sides of the lawn.
But Jefferson wanted the rotunda, which is at the center of the campus, to be the focus
of observation.
So he intentionally tricked our perspective by spacing the buildings farther apart as
they were more distant.
The effect was that from the perspective of the rotunda, they looked like what we would
expect to see with a shorter rectangular lawn with evenly spaced buildings.
You see, because we have in our mind, well, these are probably evenly spaced, what would
they look like?
You see?
So from the point of view of the rotunda, the quadrangle looks shorter and the buildings
look closer than they actually are.
And perhaps they even make the distant mountains appear closer, although now there's a building
at the end which obscures the view of the mountains.
Well, likewise, from outside the quadrangle, looking toward the rotunda, the spacing being
further than you'd expect, has the effect of appearing to lengthen the distance to the
rotunda, thus presenting the illusion of a grand building in the distance.
Well, the analysis of perspective that we've been talking about really involves looking
with just one eye.
But when we use both eyes, we see more three-dimensionally.
The Mars rovers that are the space missions to Mars, the Mars rovers use this technique
of binocular vision to compute distances to objects that it's seeing.
The Mars rover has a pair of navigation cameras, and they're about six inches apart, and they
face in exactly the same direction, so they're parallel to each other.
And when they detect the same object in the two cameras, they can see that the object
will appear at slightly different positions on their two sensors.
So by seeing how far apart those images are, the rover can compute how far away the object
is.
And it's used in navigation, both by the scientists at Jet Propulsion Laboratory and
also on the rover itself, to avoid things, because they can see how close they are to
something.
Well, if we want to see an image that makes us feel that we're actually looking at the
world, the basic idea is that we want each eye to see the same scene from a slightly
different location.
And therefore, our experience will be just as if we ourselves were actually seeing that
three-dimensional world, because that's how we see in three dimensions.
We have two eyes, and they're seeing the same thing from two different perspectives.
And then our mind puts those images together to create this impression of three-dimensionality.
Well, one method that we can use to make the illusion of three-dimensionality is to use
red, blue glasses like this, a pair of glasses where one lens is blue and one lens is red.
And then the picture contains some lines.
Some lines stand out that you can only see through the red lens, and others that you
only see through the blue lens.
And you take the same picture and draw it twice, one visible from one eye and one visible
from the other eye, and they're slightly off.
And then the mind puts it together and makes it look three-dimensional.
So in effect, your two eyes are really looking at two different images or maybe the same
image from slightly different positions.
Well, and by the way, the old 3D picture viewers that you may remember that these little devices
that you put on your eyes and you have two pictures in them, well, they worked by showing
two views of the same scene that were from two slightly different positions.
Well, a recent development in how to capture three-dimensionality in plain figures was
popular a few years ago and still used, and they're known as these magic eye images.
And they involve looking cross-eyed or focusing behind the plane of the picture.
And when you see these pictures, they might look like nothing at all.
They're just sort of a jumble of little tiny things.
You don't see anything.
But when you look cross-eyed at them, they look like a three-dimensional image.
Well, these pictures rely on some ability of the brain and the eye to detect repeated patterns.
And you interpret the spacing of the repeated patterns as indicating how far away the object
is from the plane.
And so that's what tricks the eye into imagining that it's a three-dimensional image.
Well, when we look at three-dimensional world, there are inherent ambiguities involved in
how we see it.
And we can create some optical illusions that take advantage of those ambiguities.
And they're really quite interesting.
So here are some optical illusions that depict impossible things.
For example, you can draw things that locally seem possible, but in fact globally are impossible.
One of them is called Escher's Impossible Cube that the artist M.C. Escher constructed.
Another one is Penrose's Try Bar, which is an impossible configuration.
But locally, it looks all fine.
But one that is a very striking illusion is one that I want to ask you to actually do
and that you can construct for yourself.
And when I was showing this a couple of years ago, and it's just amazing.
So even though it's going to take some time and you'll have to work on it a little bit,
I strongly urge that you actually try this.
Here's what you do.
You take just a square of paper, and it can be just like a regular eight-inch paper, or
more or less any size works, but this is convenient.
What you do is you fold the paper in half like this and make a crease and then unfold it.
And then fold it in half again and make a crease and unfold it.
You have two creases.
And then, I'm going to sharpen this one because I want to tear it.
You tear just one of those folds to the middle of the paper.
So you just tear it like this or cut it to the middle, right to the middle, and then
stop there.
Don't go beyond.
And then you see that it'll fold up into the corner, what looks like the corner of a cube.
You see that?
Now this is the only slightly tricky part, so I want to demonstrate it.
Here's what you do.
You folded it up so there are two squares that are on top of each other.
Now from this corner where the crease ends, just fold it back a little bit, just a little
bit from that corner to, you see, you've folded it so that you've folded it down.
One thing, it'll hold it together a little bit, and then you fold the other one down
in the same way.
So what you've done is that this, instead of being a 90-degree angle as it was before,
you've changed it to be an angle a little more than 90 degrees.
You follow me?
Okay.
I know this will take a little time, but don't worry.
Okay, now do the same thing for the other corners, exactly the same thing.
And it's not too important to be too exact, but it's good to fold them back.
Okay?
That'll take you a little time.
Now you have a corner where these are no longer 90 degrees.
Now take a pencil, take your pen, and just make the edges more visible by drawing them
in the crease.
And it's easy to draw because there's a crease there.
And so you have three lines that you draw in the crease, there you go.
And now you have it.
Now what you need to do is the following, and this is really an amazing illusion.
Stand under a light so that you don't have a shadow.
You see some shadows here, it's best if you don't have shadows.
So hold it where there are no shadows, and then close one eye and look at the point that
you've created there.
And if you look at the point that you've created, you'll see that that point will pop
out at you.
And instead of looking like it's an invented corner of a cube, it will look like it's coming
out at you, like you're seeing the outside of a cube.
So you hold it up, and then very carefully, when it's in that position, and that'll be
interesting in itself, hold it very still, but then move your head just slightly, very
slowly, or move your hand very slowly, and you'll see a very weird sense that it's floating
on your hand, because when it's in this popped out position, it gives you an impression that
it's not working exactly right.
So it's a really interesting illusion.
Now, by the way, when I was taught this, it took me about 10 or 15 minutes of closing
one eye and saying, I don't see anything, I don't see anything.
I really urge you to keep after it until you see it, because when you see it, you're going
to say, whoa, it really is an interesting illusion.
OK, well, in any case, the challenge of depicting three-dimensionality on a two-dimensional plane
led us to explore things like stereographic projection, which led us to depict the globe
on a flat plane.
We thought about the ideas of perspective that came from analyzing how a line of ray
of light from an object in the world comes to our eye and crosses the plane where we
want to draw the figure.
And the inherent ambiguities in depicting three-dimensional world, the three-dimensional
world, and a two-dimensional surface led us to create this strange optical illusion.
In the next lecture, we'll see how to use the three-dimensional world to prove some
theorems about the plane.
