Welcome back.
Areas are measures of the size of objects that live in the plane.
But when we measure three-dimensional objects, we naturally turn toward questions of volume.
In this lecture, we'll demonstrate the volume formula for a cone by actually pouring sand
from martini glasses that are conically shaped into a cylinder.
When we're studying volumes of objects with curved surfaces, like a sphere,
we often have to employ an infinite process.
That is, of dividing the object into a whole bunch, in fact infinitely many parts,
and seeing that the assembled parts add up to the whole.
Archimedes derived a formula for the volume of the sphere using such a method that we'll see.
Seeing how the three-dimensional world interacts with the plane allows us to use three-dimensional
insights to prove theorems in plane geometry.
Well, let's begin with volume.
The fact is that the volume of a cone is one-third the area of its base times its height.
And in fact, this is also true for other objects that are pointed in this way.
For example, the volume of a pyramid is one-third of the area of the base times its height.
Well, the area of a, that is the volume of a cylinder, is the area of its base times its vertical height.
Because just imagine that you have a square unit of area at the base of this cylinder,
and you went one unit up, then you would have one cubic mass of volume.
And if you went two units up, you'd have two cubes on top of each other.
So that's why if you have a, something like a cylinder, which is just an area, and then just crossed upward,
then you get just the volume is equal to the area of the base times the height.
Well, so the formula for the volume of a cone is one-third, as I said, the volume of the base times the height.
And so I'm going to demonstrate this by using this martini glass here.
Now, this martini glass is conical, the part that contains the sand is conical.
It'll contain sand in a minute.
And you see that the size of the top of the glass is almost exactly the same as the size of this cylinder.
So here we're going to demonstrate that the volume of this cone is one-third the area of the base times the height.
So therefore, it's one-third of the volume of this cylinder.
So here's how we're going to do it.
We're going to fill up this conical shaped object with sand,
so that the volume of this sand is going to be the volume of this cone, the conical container here.
So that's more or less filled up.
Okay.
And so we're going to pour this into the cylinder, and there is one glass worth.
And here is a second.
Fortunately, you see I have two more.
So here we're going to pour them in.
I'm going to try not to spill too much, although it's hopeless.
So here we go.
I pour another one in.
So that's two martini glasses of sand.
Let's see if we can shake it down a little bit first.
And now we're going to pour the third one in and see if it just exactly fills up this cylinder.
And lo and behold, it does.
I'd have to shake it.
And this is in a precision operation.
You can see it exactly fills it up.
So this shows that the volume of a cone is one-third of the volume of the cylinder.
Now, that's not a proof.
I actually proved this in my teaching company calculus course,
so I thought this time it would be better to demonstrate it.
Well, that was fun.
So we have then seen that the volume of a cone is one-third of the volume of the corresponding cylinder
with the same base and the same height.
Well, knowing the formulas for these volumes of the cylinder and the cone,
what we're going to do is use an ancient technique that was created by Archimedes
to find a formula for the volume of the sphere.
So here's our goal.
Our goal is to imagine that we have a sphere of radius r.
Our goal is to find some formula that associates that radius r with the volume.
In other words, like the area of a circle was pi r squared,
we want to know what the formula is for the volume of a sphere of radius r.
Well, here's how we do it.
We're going to start with a cylinder whose radius is exactly r,
the same radius as our sphere, and whose height is also r.
So we have this cylinder, radius r, height r.
And what we're going to do is remove a cone that we put point downward inside of that cylinder.
And that cone will have the same circular top as the cylinder,
and also it will have the same vertical height, namely r.
So it fits neatly inside this cylinder.
Well, now, by the way, notice that what we're going to use
is the fact that we know the relationship between the volume of the cylinder
and the volume of the cone, but that comes in a minute.
So let's first of all notice that if we look at this cylinder
and we imagine that we've removed the cone from it,
and we look at a cross-section at some height h above the ground.
So it's at some height h, we just pass a plane through there,
and since we have the cone inside, we see that the region outside of the cone
but inside of the cylinder produces a ring.
This is a ring or an annulus.
And remember when we were talking about area, we talked about this annulus.
Well, at each height h, we can compute the area of that ring, of that annulus,
by just subtracting the area of the small circle.
That's the part that's inside the cone from the area of the big circle.
Now let's see how we can do that.
You see, the cone, since when you go up distance r, it splays out by radius r,
then if you just go up distance h, then the radius at that height is just h by similar triangles.
And therefore, at height h above the ground,
the area of this annular ring is going to be the area of the outside,
which is pi r squared, because that's just the circumference of the cylinder, is r,
so pi r squared is the outer area, minus the inner area, which is pi h squared.
So that's the area of that annular ring.
Now, but notice something interesting, and that is, suppose that we look at a hemisphere,
half of our sphere that we just put on the same level as the base of our cylinder,
and we look at this hemisphere whose radius is r, and look at height h in that hemisphere,
and look at the cross-sectional plane that cuts through it.
What is the area of that disk that we get when we cut the plane?
It's a circle at height h above the ground.
Well, we can use the Pythagorean theorem to compute what it is,
because remember that if we have a sphere, its radius is r.
So that means from the center of this hemisphere, from the center,
up to the edge of the circular part that we're trying to compute the area of, the slice,
that that distance is r.
But we're saying that we're h distance up,
and therefore by the Pythagorean theorem, since we have this right triangle that goes h up,
and then the unknown that we're seeking, the radius of that part of the cross-section,
and then r is the diagonal, we know how to compute the radius at that height,
because the radius at that height by the Pythagorean theorem is the square root of r squared minus h squared.
So what's the area of a circle whose radius is r squared minus h squared?
Well, the area is simply, remember, pi times the radius squared.
Well, since the radius is r squared minus h squared, the square root of r squared minus h squared,
the area at that level is pi times r squared minus h squared.
So, well, notice, that's what we computed before as the area of that angular ring at the same height
in this object that we took where we took the cylinder and removed the inverted cone.
So, since at every height the area is the same of those two objects,
two objects being the hemisphere and the cylinder minus the cone,
since at every height the area is the same, then the volume of those two objects must be the same.
So, we know how to compute the volume of the cylinder minus the cone,
because the volume of the cylinder is just pi r squared times r, the area of the base times its height.
That's pi r cubed.
And we saw that the volume of the cone was one-third of that.
So, the volume of the cylinder minus the cone is, of course, just two-thirds pi r cubed.
And so, that's the volume of half a sphere.
Well, if that's the volume of half a sphere, doubling it gives us the volume of the sphere,
which is four-thirds pi r cubed.
And that is indeed the correct formula for the volume of the sphere.
Well, I think that's a very clever demonstration.
Now, by the way, you might say we didn't actually prove that the volume of the cone was one-third area of the base times the height,
but I did prove it in my teaching company course on calculus, and so you can see the actual proof there.
But we demonstrated it, so that's almost as good.
Well, Archimedes devised this method, and he actually devised other methods as well.
Archimedes was such an amazing mathematician.
I wanted to just take a minute to say a little bit about his life.
Archimedes was such an incredible mathematician that you certainly would put him on a short list for the best mathematician of all time.
He lived in Syracuse, Sicily, and he was renowned there during his own lifetime for his practical inventions, as well as for his mathematics.
He built various things that were used in war that involved pulleys and levers, and these were used to defend Syracuse, his home city-state.
So Archimedes was known to concentrate extremely deeply on his mathematics when he was working, and this made him completely oblivious to his surroundings.
And in fact, he was killed by a Roman soldier during the Second Punic War in 212 BCE.
And one story about this tragedy is that he was run through with a sword when he was so immersed in a mathematical problem that he didn't notice that the city was under siege.
Well, what's very sad about this is that he was so close to inventing calculus about 1900 years before it was actually formulated that it just certainly makes me wonder what would have happened to the history of humanity
had he seen the next few insights during his lifetime and that calculus had been invented much earlier.
Well, one thing that we've seen with here Gawa being killed in a duel and Archimedes being slain, that mathematics is a very dangerous enterprise, and I should be much more worried than I usually am.
So, okay, well, in any case, let's return to the three-dimensional world.
Often, we can use relationships between the three-dimensional space and their images in the plane to help us understand geometrical results about the plane.
And so let me show you one that I think is rather fascinating. This is a theorem by a mathematician by the name of Manji, and the theorem states the following.
Suppose that we have three circles drawn in the plane, and these three circles are of different radiuses, they're different sizes, and they're not touching each other.
Then Manji's theorem says the following, that if we draw, we look at these circles in pairs, so we take two circles, and we draw the tangent line, the exterior tangent lines through both of those circles.
So you see you get two lines that then come and cross each other, because since the circles are different sizes, those lines are not parallel, and therefore they will intersect one another.
Likewise, if you look at two of the other circles, and you look at these two exterior tangent lines, they will cross each other.
And finally, you look at the third pair of circles, you look at the pair of exterior tangent lines, and they cross each other to form three points, P, Q, R.
Then what he proved was that in fact those three points miraculously lie on one single straight line.
And first of all, I think it makes very beautiful pictures just to see the representation of this theorem, but it's rather fascinating.
Well, Gaspard Manji proved this theorem in about 1800, so that gives you some sense of its age.
And what we're going to do though today is to present a proof that takes us into the third dimension.
And in fact, it was my collaborator, Edward Berger, who in fact has done some teaching company courses that are very good, that devised this proof, so I'm indebted to him for this proof.
Well, the basic strategy of the proof is to realize some fundamental thing about three-dimensional space, and that is that if you have two separate planes that are not parallel,
then those two planes will definitely intersect in a single line, two planes intersect in a line.
So, if we can find two different intersecting planes, and we can show that each of those planes individually must contain all three of these points that we're talking about,
then we could conclude that those three points must lie on a straight line.
Well, so here's the way Ed's proof goes. He says, OK, we have these three circles, and then the clever part of the proof is that we go up into the third dimension.
Even though the statement of the theorem is entirely about the plane, we go up into the third dimension, and here was the strategy.
Here was the strategy. What we do is for each circle, we construct a cone whose base just fits in that circle.
So here, for example, is a cone just the size to fit on that circle. Here's a cone that's just the size to fit in this circle, and here's the cone just the size to fit in this circle.
And the properties of the cones are that they are in the same shape. That is to say that they're the same relative relationship between their height and the radius of the circle.
See, they're similar to each other. One's just bigger than the other.
Well, so the first thing that we notice is that if we look at two of these circles, let's say this circle and this circle,
and we look at these two exterior tangents that just graze it, that the tips of the vertices of these two cones are also going to create a straight line that hits exactly at that same point.
The reason for that is because of similar triangles. You see, we know that this picture is just an expansion of, that is to say that if we look at this angle here,
and we expand the picture of that angle by just putting it through a photocopy machine and expanding it, then this circle would eventually become this circle.
It would get out, be proportionally bigger, and this, if we did it in a three-dimensional copier, we would see that in fact this cone would become this cone.
It just all would expand together. And so everything is just an expansion, and therefore if you just draw the line from this point through this tip to through this tip,
you're just expanding it as we saw in similar triangles that they will line up in a line.
Well, of course, the same argument will tell us that if we take any two other tips of the cones, for example, this tip of the cone and this tip of the cone,
that it will go straight down and it's going to intersect at that point of intersection of the exterior tangents here.
So what we've seen is that the three, and the same thing, of course, for the third pair of tips of the cone, that line will intersect at this point.
But now we have the clever part. Let's imagine a plane that goes through all three of these tips of the cone.
Because you see in three-dimensional space, if you have three points that aren't in a line, three points not in a line determine a plane.
They determine a plane because the two points determine a line. If you have two points, they determine a line, and then you can tilt that plane all the possible planes that contain that line until it hits that third point.
So three points that don't line a line definitely determine an exact plane.
In this case, these three tips will determine a plane.
And so if I just lay a plane on top of those three tips, then the effect of this is that that plane, notice, will contain all three of the lines that go from the tip of one cone to the tip of the other cone.
So it contains the three points of intersection, PQR.
And since it contains these three points of intersection, this plane does, and since the intersection of this plane with the horizontal plane must be a straight line, just one line, we can conclude that all three of these points lie on a single straight line.
So this is a very clever proof of Manji's theorem in by going up to the third dimension to allow us to create a plane so that the horizontal plane and this plane containing the tips all must intersect in the line that contains all three of these points of intersection.
Well, I find that to be a fascinating proof.
Now, now what we're going to do is go ahead and do another proof using about another theorem.
Another theorem that's a plane theorem that is a theorem just about plane geometry, but where we'll go up to the third dimension to prove it.
So this next theorem that we'll talk about is a theorem that was proved by Gerard Desargues, who proved this this this theorem, and he proved it much earlier than Manji's theorem, by the way, he lived from 1591 to 1661.
So, Desargues theorem, though, also has the same type of conclusion that Manji's theorem did. Namely, remember Manji's theorem, the conclusion of it was that three points were all lie on a single line.
They were they were collinear.
And in the case of Desargues theorem, it has the same kind of of conclusion.
And so let me first of all state Desargues theorem.
Remember that it's phrased refers back to the concept of perspective that we saw in the last lecture. Namely, what the way it's phrased is that if you have two triangles and the corresponding vertices are perspective from a point, then their corresponding
sides are perspective in a line.
And let me tell you what those things mean.
Being perspective from a point means that if you look at the corresponding vertices of these two triangles, so let's suppose we have these two triangles, and one of them has has vertices say ABC, and the other one has vertices def.
They correspond in that way. That is A to D and B to E and C to F.
Then what the hypothesis of Desargues theorem says that if we draw the straight line through A and D, the corresponding vertices and the straight line through B and E, the corresponding vertices and the straight line through C and F, that those three lines all meet at a single point.
That's the hypothesis. So you've drawn two triangles with that that condition.
And then the conclusion is that as it's phrased, their sides are perspective from a line.
Now what that means is that if we look at corresponding sides of these two triangles, now corresponding sides would be like a B and D E.
Those are corresponding sides that they will intersect in a point.
And then the other corresponding side, a pair of lines will intersect in a point and the third one will intersect in a point giving us three points.
So let me say these again.
We would have the extension of line AB will intersect the extension of the line D E. They'll intersect in a point.
Same for the second side of the triangles.
That is to say BC, if we extended that, we get a line, and it will intersect the line EF, the extension of that line, in a point.
And finally the third side.
Same for the third side.
The AC side of the first triangle will intersect the DF side of the third triangle and they will intersect in a point.
And the Disarge theorem says that those three points all lie in a line.
Now this is an interesting theorem and it has an interesting proof which I will attempt to demonstrate with this model.
So what I have here is two triangles and they are perspective in a point, meaning that when I hold this straight, when I hold this exactly straight, then it all converges to a point.
So here's my converging in a line over here.
Now, okay, so I admit there are some defects in this picture, but here's the point that our strategy of proving the theorem will be to lift up this corner, the point at which they're perspective, and we'll lift it exactly straight up.
So we don't lift it to the side or anything.
We lift it straight up and you can see that what that does is to lift these two triangles up.
Because if you actually look at the picture of the two triangles and the three lines that all converge to a point, you'll see in your mind's eye that it looks like a tetrahedron.
It looks like a drawing of a tetrahedron.
And so if we say, well, in fact, we could imagine it as actually coming from a tetrahedron in three-dimensional space, then what we're going to prove is that the two planes that are the intersection of the planes of those triangles,
as they are suspended in three-dimensional space, that those two planes are going to contain an interesting intersection point.
So let me go to the graphics and explain this better.
So suppose that we have imagined that we have the hypothesis of DeSarge's theorem.
And then we imagine just lifting that vertex up vertically.
Then both of the triangles, by lifting up their vertices exactly vertically, we actually can imagine in our minds, like this little demonstration, two planes that are created by those two triangles, just extensions of those two triangles.
And those two triangles, which are sections of the tetrahedron.
You see, a tetrahedron, by the way, is like a pyramid.
It's a cone over a triangle, though, instead of having a square base.
It's a triangular base, and it doesn't need to be a vertical tetrahedron.
It can be up at any angle.
And so we have these two triangles that cut through that tetrahedron that we've created.
And the idea is that we say to ourselves, well, if I actually had in three-dimensional space this tetrahedron, and I had those two triangles that are sitting in that fashion,
then they would vertically project down exactly to the two triangles that I was given in the hypothesis of DeSarge's theorem.
You see?
So what we've done is we've sort of lifted it out of the plane to make a situation in three-dimensional space.
Now, as before, our strategy is going to be to find two planes whose intersections, whose intersection, first of all, the intersection will be aligned,
because the intersection of any two planes is aligned if they're not parallel.
It'll be a straight line, but we'll say that that straight line contains three points of intersection.
And I'll tell you which ones.
On each face of the tetrahedron, the corresponding sides of our triangle, as they're lifted, lie on that same face.
In other words, the lift of AB and the lift of DE lie on this face of the tetrahedron.
And therefore, they will intersect at a point in space.
If we actually had this thing in space, like my demonstration, those two extended lines would actually meet in space.
Same thing for the other corresponding pairs of lines.
You see?
For the same reason, it's on another face of the tetrahedron, and therefore, since the face of a tetrahedron is a plane,
then you have two lines on a plane, unless they're parallel, they'll intersect on that extended plane.
And therefore, they intersect at a point in space.
The same thing happens for the third side of the tetrahedron, and the third pair of corresponding lines, they intersect at a point in space.
So what that says is that those three points in space, first of all, they lie on the extension of one triangle,
and they lie on the extension of the other triangle that's cutting the tetrahedron, the lifts of ABC and DEF.
So therefore, those three points of intersection are in the intersection of the plane determined by ABC and the plane determined by DEF.
That is the lifts of ABC and DEF, the ones that are floating above.
And therefore, those intersections are all in a line in space.
But then if we look at the vertical projection of that line in space, we get a straight line in the plane that must contain those intersections of those points on the plane.
And therefore, this proves that those three corresponding sides are perspective in a line, which was the conclusion of DeSarge's theorem.
Well, I know it's difficult to see three-dimensional objects in this kind of way, but it is a very clever way of trying to prove something about the plane by going to three-dimensional space.
So in this lecture, we saw Archimedes' method for determining the formula for the volume of a sphere.
We saw how to use cones sticking up out of the plane to prove Manji's theorem about exterior tangents to circles.
And we saw how lifting a picture out of the plane allowed us to prove DeSarge's theorem.
In the next lecture, we'll continue to explore the relationships between three-dimensional space and the plane.
And in that lecture, we'll use the shapes of nuclear reactor cooling towers.
I'll see you then.
Thank you.
