Welcome back.
Well, we've already seen a rich interplay between three-dimensional space and plane geometry,
both in the last lecture and when we discussed the conic sections.
In this lecture, we'll see how the three-dimensional world can help us understand a theorem
about an ellipse, namely it's called Briongeon's theorem, which states the following.
If we have an ellipse and a hexagon that circumscribes the ellipse,
that is to say that each of the six sides of the hexagon is tangent to a point on the ellipse,
then the three diagonals of the hexagon all meet at a single point.
When he was about 16 years old, Blaise Pascal proved a related theorem called his
Hexagramm mysticum theorem, Hexagramm mysticum theorem.
And the proofs that we'll see of these theorems involve shapes that have architectural significance.
In particular, they involve that distinctive shape that may come to mind most commonly
when you think about nuclear reactor cooling systems.
Nuclear reactor cooling towers.
Well, let's begin, though, with a challenge question.
And I want to tell you a story.
When I was about 20 years ago, I attended a mathematical conference.
And at this mathematical conference, as sometimes happens, there was a sort of a puzzle question
that was circulating among the attendees of the conference.
And the question was the following question.
Suppose you take a cube and you suspend the cube by diagonally opposite points,
and then you spin the cube around that line through the diagonals.
The question was, if you looked at it from the side, you looked at its profile of that spinning cube,
what would it look like?
What would it look like?
Now, so just to warn you, I am going to be talking for a few minutes about things that you can ignore if you want.
But I'm talking for a few minutes so that you can be thinking about that question,
because I want you all to actually make a guess as to what's going to happen when I spin a cube
and you look at it in profile.
But I wanted to tell you the story of this conference.
So at the conference, we were all trying to guess what it looked like,
and we had different possibilities of shapes that we thought it might be.
But attending the conference was one particular individual who is a very famous mathematician by the name of Bill Thurston.
And he's won the mathematical equivalent of the Nobel Prize.
There's no Nobel Prize in mathematics, but there's a thing called the Fields Medal, which is sort of the equivalent.
And he won this Fields Medal, and one of the things that he's known for,
maybe not surprisingly, is for being extremely bright.
He's a very, very smart guy, and particularly able to visualize things.
So we were all asking ourselves this question, asking each other, and people would make these guesses,
and we didn't really know.
But then I came up, and there was Bill Thurston, so I said,
OK, Bill, we've got this question. What do you think happens?
And he said, oh, well, it looks like this.
It goes down like this, and then it's curved in the middle.
It goes down like this.
He instantly saw it.
Now, I was, of course, extremely impressed.
And the conclusion that I drew from that is that I should never work on any mathematical problem
that Bill Thurston is working on or has worked on.
And that, by the way, was probably excellent advice for a mathematician.
But later I learned that it was really not that he could visualize so well, although he probably can,
but it actually was that he had some knowledge that I didn't have at the time.
But it's knowledge that you will have by the end of this lecture.
So now I have now been talking for a while so that you can make your guess about what's going to happen
when I spin this cube and look at it in profile.
So before I tell you too much more about it, I want to actually demonstrate it.
So I hope you can see this. Here we go.
I have to spin it pretty fast so that you can see it.
You see it?
You see how it goes down at the top and then there's a little curve there in the middle?
You see that?
And that little curve in the middle is actually part of a hyperbola.
Well, it turns out that this kind of a shape, the shape that you get by spinning a cube,
is one that has some very interesting properties.
So let me, first of all, clarify now the mathematical shape that we're going to describe
that basically tells us why if we knew what you're about to learn,
we would be able to guess that that profile will have that curved appearance to it.
So here's really what's happening when we're spinning that cube around.
What we're really doing is we're looking at the edges of the cube spinning around the central line
that was the suspension line of the two diametrically opposite corners of the cube.
So let me ask you to visualize the following situation.
Instead of spinning around the diagonal of the cube, let's suppose my eye
and this vertical line about which we're going to be spinning things.
And so what we're going to spin is we're going to take just a line,
and this stick represents a line, and what we're going to do is keep a fixed distance
from the center of the cube and just spin the line around.
Well, if I were to spin a line around so that the line was just vertical as I'm holding it now,
then obviously when I spin it around, I would simply get a cylinder, right?
So I would just get a cylinder if I spin it around like this,
but instead what I'm going to do is I'm going to spin it around so that I hold it,
I affix it to the edge of the circle at a particular angle.
You see? So in other words, I just tilt it at a particular angle,
and then I spin it around and I look at what I create in that way.
In other words, I just imagine taking all of the different lines,
one for every direction of spinning it around, and I accumulate all of them.
So I just go all the way around and I see what I would sweep out in that motion.
And let me, first of all, point out that there are different ways that I could hold this line attached to the surface,
to the circle, and so I wanted to point out the different ones that there could be.
First of all, I could just take this line and rotate it forward or back on the circle and spin it around.
Or alternatively, I could also have it tipping in or outward, like I could have it tipping out like that.
And spin it around.
Now it turns out that both of those methods will actually produce the same kind of a surface.
And we'll see that in a minute.
But the reason is that, or the thing to think about in this sweeping object,
is that when we tilt the line, notice that the line no longer forms a cylinder
because since the line is tilted, it gets infinitely far away, arbitrarily far away from me,
because it's tilted out and so it just keeps going farther and farther away.
If it's vertical, of course, it just stays the same distance.
But if it's tilted, it goes out.
That means that if I look at a point at a certain level above the place where I'm holding this line,
it's going to sweep out a circle that's bigger than the circle at the center here,
if I'm just tilting it forward.
See? Because this is more distant from me than this point is.
Okay, well, it turns out that if we take this line and we sweep it around,
what we get is called a hyperboloid.
And I happen to have a hyperboloid here.
So let me show you, first of all, this really interesting hyperboloid.
Okay, so this is a hyperboloid.
And for now, I want you to ignore the blue threads.
They're going to come in in the proof of Breonchon's theorem.
But for now, we're just trying to understand this shape here.
What it consists of is these lines and that I've taken a line such as this
and spun it around.
You see, it's just spinning around.
And all of these different lines are next to each other.
Now, my inclination is to say they're parallel.
Well, they're not actually parallel.
You see, they're not parallel because you have a line here.
And when you rotate it a little bit, since it's not actually in,
it's not tilted in the same direction anymore because when you rotate it,
for example, over here, now it's going backwards from where it was here.
Here it was tilted forward and here now it's tilted backwards.
So it's not actually parallel, but they don't touch each other.
They're just next to each other and they accumulate to make this kind of a surface.
Now, by the way, there's sort of a belt area here.
The thin area here.
I'll try to make it as distinctive as I can.
There's a thin area right at the belt.
And it's at that thin area at the belt where if we look at this line,
then if we attached it at that line, then this line would be just tilted,
as I said, just forward from the line, forward and back.
It wouldn't be tilted in or out.
Whereas if I look at a point up here, say at the top of this paraboloid,
notice that if you look at the circle at that height that's created,
then at that point, the line is attached, pointing, tilting inward, you see?
But there is always a point, namely the closest point that it comes to the axis,
at which the line is exactly just tilted forward or backward.
Okay, now, so this is a hyperboloid is what you get by spinning this line around.
Well, there's one thing to realize about the hyperboloid.
And first of all, it's rather interesting to me, the first interesting feature.
This has many interesting features.
But the first interesting feature to me is that when you take things that are straight lines
and you sweep it around in this fashion, you get something that's curved.
And by the way, you have seen these objects before.
For example, I think you may have seen some chairs that have the base of the chairs
that are structured in this way or waste paper baskets.
But let me point out something about this structure before we go on and talk about some other examples.
Basically, we've created this structure by taking a line and sweeping it around in one direction.
But there's another set of lines that exactly fits onto this structure.
There's another family of lines that are, as I say, they're not parallel,
but they're next to each other and created in exactly the same way.
And that they go in exactly the opposite direction.
And I can demonstrate this for you in this following way.
So this surface is curved.
Look at this.
I can fashion this line exactly here and it exactly touches and lies right on this surface.
And at every point, I can do this.
So in fact, I could sweep another family of lines that are in the opposing direction.
So actually, the hyperboloid is created with two families of lines.
And as I say, it just surprises me that there'd be any straight line on this curved surface,
but in fact, there are two families.
And this family of lines is exactly the angle at which it sits,
is exactly opposite the angle that this sits.
In other words, it deviates from the perpendicular in exactly the same amount.
Let's see why that's true, by the way.
The reason it's true is because suppose that our first set of lines were created at a certain angle like this.
Then look at what this sweeping motion is creating at a particular height above the plane of this circle where my hand is.
Well, it's creating a circle whose radius is the distance from this point,
the end of the line at that level to the center axis.
But obviously, if I just symmetrically put the line facing backwards and spun it,
it would sweep out that exact same circle because the distance would be exactly the same.
And so therefore, both of those sweeping lines, the one tilted this way and the corresponding one tilted the other way,
both of them will create the same surface.
So that means that this surface can be viewed as having these two families of lines.
Now, as I said that things like chairs and nuclear power stations are created this way.
And the reason for that is that there's a strength to them.
You see, because even though you have this nice curved looking surface, it's actually made by straight lines.
And so if you have something that is structurally strong, like that made out of into the shape of a line,
by putting them together in this hyperboloid shape, you get a nice rigid object.
So the hyperboloid has this property.
Now, let me point out some properties of these two families of lines.
And these are going to be crucial properties in how we use the hyperboloid in improving the theorem.
Namely, the following.
If you have a line in one family and you have a line in the other family,
then any two of those lines will meet one another.
Any two of those lines will meet one another with one exception.
The one exception, let's do the exception first.
Here's the exception.
If you have this family of lines, and I think about this line here that's tilted forward.
Now, as we pointed out, when we go 180 degrees around, it's tilted backward.
But you see the line that is the opposite direction at that 180 degree point is going to be exactly parallel to the original line here.
So in other words, the line that you start with tilted forward on this side,
if you look at the opposite family generating line and you sweep at 180 degrees around,
then this line is parallel to this line.
So there's that one case where you have a line in one family that does not intersect a line in the other because they're actually exactly parallel.
However, I'm claiming that every other two lines, that is a line from one family, any line from one family,
and any line from the other family, with that one exception, will intersect one another.
Now, here's why they intersect each other.
The reason they intersect each other is this.
Suppose that we think about this belt circle, the smallest circle in here,
and we have this line that's sticking up, it's attached to the circle, and it goes off at some angle.
We could project that line down onto the plane, and it would be just a flat tangent line to that middle circle.
Now, suppose that we imagine having one line that is attached at this point,
and then at some other point, we have a line in the opposite family.
Well, the line in the opposite family will, of course, also project down to another tangent line around the circle.
Well, notice that if you take a circle and you draw two tangent lines to the circle,
those two tangent lines will intersect one another in the plane, right?
Any two tangent lines to a circle intersect one another in the plane.
But because of the way these lines were constructed, that intersection in the plane really corresponds to the fact
that they must intersect out in space here someplace at the same level,
and therefore that's an intersection point on this hyperboloid.
So, the neat thing about this is that on this apparently curved object, it's really made of two families of straight lines,
and therefore we can move on this hyperboloid along these two families of straight lines.
And here's how we can do it.
So, in other words, we can actually draw things like polygonal simple closed curves.
That means to say something where we started a point, we go in a straight line, out in space, then we go in a straight line,
we go in a straight line, a straight line, straight line, and come back to where we started.
That's called a polygonal simple closed curve.
It's not in a plane, and that's why it's not actually a polygon, but it's a polygon that lives in three-dimensional space,
and in this case, on the hyperboloid.
Well, so here's what we're going to do.
We can make a polygon by simply starting at a point, and that's what this blue, you see this blue cord is here?
This is an example of a six-sided polygonal figure on this hyperboloid.
So, here we go. We started a point, we go up on one family, and then this next line, you see, lies on this opposite family.
And then we go up a line on this first family, and then this next one goes on the opposite family,
and then we come back and forth until we get back to where we began.
Okay, so this is one of the features of a hyperboloid that makes it really interesting.
And now, what we're going to do is finally return to how to take advantage of these insights about the hyperboloid
to actually prove a theorem in the plane.
And so, let me once again state for you Breonchon's theorem.
Okay, so it says that suppose we have any ellipse in the plane, and we have a six-sided figure that circumscribes it.
That is to say, each of the six sides has a point of tangency, just touches at one point the ellipse.
Then, Breonchon's theorem says that the three diagonals of that hexagon, and by the way, it's not a regular hexagon.
Don't get me wrong, it's not a regular hexagon, it's not that the six sides are the same size.
It's just a six-sided polygon, that's all it is.
But the three diagonals of that hexagon all meet in a single point.
Well, first of all, notice that hexagons don't generally do that.
If you just draw a six-sided hexagon and you draw the diagonals, they're not generally going to meet in a single point.
So, it's a special kind of a hexagon to have this property that the diagonals meet in a point.
So, let's first of all look at some examples so that we can see what this means.
You can see we can take different shapes of hexagons around, different shapes of ellipses,
and in all the cases, the diagonals do in fact meet at a point.
So, at least we feel some confidence that there is some hope that this theorem is actually true.
Well, the first step in our strategy is to show that proving this theorem about ellipses is actually sufficient to prove the theorem about a circle instead of an ellipse.
And here's why. That is to say, suppose that we knew that every six-sided hexagon that was circumscribed as circle had the diagonals meet at a point.
If we could prove that, then it would prove that every ellipse has the same property.
And the reason for that is something that we saw before.
Remember, we saw that an ellipse is just a cross-section of a cylinder.
And therefore, if we just project everything straight down onto the table, onto the plane that is horizontal that cuts the cylinder vertically,
then that ellipse would project down to a circle.
And if we had a circumscribing hexagon on the ellipse, it would just push down to a circumscribing hexagon on the plane.
You see, on the circle that's in the plane.
And then if the diagonals there hit at a point, then just sliding everything up again because it was a vertical projection,
those diagonals would have intersected in the ellipse.
So that was the first fact, that it's sufficient to prove it for a circle.
Okay, so now let's go ahead and see if we can prove Rianchan's theorem.
And so here is the strategy.
So suppose that we have now a circle.
And now remember, all we have to do is think about a circle because we've seen that we don't have to worry about an ellipse anymore if we can prove the theorem for a circle, we're done.
So suppose we have a circle and there's a hexagon that's circumscribed around it, okay?
Then the first thing that we can do is to think of the circle as the belt circle of this hyperboloid.
So the belt circle of the hyperboloid.
And if we think of that circle as the belt circle of the hyperboloid, of course we have our six lines tangent and they're just sitting on that horizontal plane.
But instead of that, what we're going to do is to create a family of curves, I mean of arcs of straight line segments that correspond but that go on to the two families of lines in our hyperboloid.
You see?
So here's what we do.
We take this first point of tangency and draw the straight line through it up to a certain point.
And I'll tell you which point it is.
It's the point that you get to so that if you go to the next point of tangency at that circle and you go off in the second family direction that those two are going to intersect at a point.
Because remember, every line in one family intersects the line in the other family.
So that what you start at this point of tangency of the circle and go up and then and go back down and then you go down to the next point and then up to the next through the next point of tangency up until it hits at the at the point where you go down to the next
point of tangency in the second family, first family, second family, first family, second family.
And so what we have done is we found a six sided polygonal figure sitting inside this hyperboloid that corresponds to our six sided figure in the hexagon that was circumscribing the belt circle.
Well, so what we're going to do is now do some analysis that will allow us to show an amazing thing, which is that in fact, in fact, these the three diagonals of this hexagon that's out in three dimensional space, all meet at the same point.
You see, they will in fact all meet at the three, the same point, even though they're not in it's they're not even in the same plane, but it will have three lines in space, and they all meet at the same point.
And then that's going to be exactly what we need to show. Well, let's let's first of all see why that is true.
Suppose that we take one side of this hexagon, and then we take the opposite side. And by opposite, I mean the one that is is like if this is number one, two, three, four, we take number one and number four.
Okay, or two and five, or three and six. And we take these opposite opposite sides, and we notice that one of them is in one family. And then so one family, other family, one family, other family.
So the two opposite sides are in the opposite families. And therefore they meet at a single point somewhere. It's probably way up at the top of, you know, way above the what we see here in this hyperboloid, but they meet at a single point.
Well, since those two lines meet at a point, they create an angle in space. And so that angle determines a plane in space.
You see, it's a plane that contains both these opposite sides of this hexagon.
Well, since you have a plane, if you have a plane and two lines in the plane, then the diagonals of those two lines, you know, from the endpoints of those two lines, you connect them.
They're going to cross in the plane because both of those lines are in the plane.
So at least we've seen that two diagonals in this three dimensional thing will meet at the same point.
But then look at the next pair of lines in our six sided figure that is opposite ones. They do the same thing again.
They determine a plane, and that plane has two lines in it that meet at a point, and then the third pair determine a plane, and they have a plane that has two lines that meet at a point, two of the diagonals.
So the three diagonals that we have in three space, every pair of them lies on a plane, plane, plane, plane.
Well, if you have three planes in space, two planes intersect in a line, and then the third plane, if it's not parallel to anything, will intersect so that they all intersect at a single point.
And that proves that the diagonals of this hexagon sitting out in space all must meet at a single point.
And I don't know if you can see these black lines in the graphic. You'll see that they're actually straight and they do meet at one point.
Well, knowing that these meet at one point, just the vertical projection of this down to the plane shows that these three diagonals of the circumscribing hexagon meets in a single point.
Well, this is a clever proof. I know it's a complicated proof, but you get the spirit of using the facts about this interesting hyperboloid to prove the theorem.
Well, it turns out that Pascal's hexagon theorem refers to a hexagon in the plane.
But we'll see that it actually has a proof-like Brownschon theorem, which we won't talk about.
But his hexagon theorem, by the way, is called the hexagramomisticum theorem, because it seems so amazing.
And what it states is that if you have a hexagon inscribed in an ellipse and you look at the three points determined by extending opposite pairs of sides,
so you look at the first and fourth side and you extend it and you get a point, and the second and fifth and you get a point, and the third and sixth you get a point,
that all three of those points lie on a single line.
So it's really rather amazing.
And in fact, it's even true for any conic section, and it's even true if you take the order of the vertices and you don't put them in order one, two, three, four, five, six,
but you just put the numbers randomly and you have sort of a crossing, a six-sided figure that crosses itself.
Even so, the first extension plus the fourth extension and the second and fifth and third and sixth will always lie on one straight line.
Well, Blaise Pascal proved this theorem, stated it when he was about 16 years old.
And there's a natural duality between his theorem and Breonchon's theorem, because one of them talks about three lines all meeting at a point,
and Pascal's theorem talks about three points that all lie on a line.
And in fact, the dual nature of these results can be actually formalized in a topic that's called projective geometry.
Well, so in this lecture then, what we did is we saw how to take a shape in space, namely this hyperboloid, this wonderful shape,
which has the same shape as nuclear cooling towers or some waste baskets and some chairs,
and we saw how to use the facts about the hyperboloid to compose two families of lines,
and that those two families of lines allowed us to prove this theorem about the hexagon, Breonchon's theorem.
And a similar thing could be used to prove Pascal's theorem.
I know these arguments are difficult to visualize, but there is something elegant about a demonstration that takes a connection,
that takes an insight into three-dimensional space and tells us something about the plane.
Well, in the next lecture, what we're going to discuss is non-Euclidean geometry and some geometry on a sphere.
I'll see you then.
