Welcome back.
Spherical geometry differs from Euclidean plane geometry in that the parallel postulate of Euclidean geometry fails,
since there are no parallel lines in spherical geometry.
The other way in which the parallel postulate could conceivably fail is if for a given line and a given point not on that line,
there are more lines than one through the other point that are parallel to the given line.
Hyperbolic geometry has that peculiar property.
In fact, for every line and point not on the line, there are infinitely many lines through that point that are all parallel to the given line.
And remember again, parallel just means that they never meet.
It took thousands of years for mathematicians to realize that such an apparently impossible geometry could actually exist.
To pin down the possibility for such a space, we'll describe some physical models that contain features of hyperbolic geometry,
and then a mathematically complete model of hyperbolic geometry called the Poincare disc.
The Poincare disc model of hyperbolic geometry has been the source of artistic work, including some iconic work by M.C. Escher.
Let's set the scene.
Euclide described geometry using a set of axioms, one of which was that troublesome parallel postulate.
Mathematicians asked whether the parallel postulate was really necessary.
That is, they asked the question, if we remove the parallel postulate from Euclid's list of assumptions, is there any freedom about parallel lines?
In other words, if we assume Euclid's other axioms, would it still necessarily be true that for any line and any point not on the line,
that there was one and only one line through that point that's parallel to the given line?
So really there are three alternatives about parallelism.
Given a line and a point not on the line, either we have exactly one parallel line, we have no parallel lines,
or we have two or more parallel lines through that given point.
Without using the parallel postulate, Euclid himself proved in the elements that there must exist at least one parallel line through that given point.
So the spherical geometry that we saw in the last lecture was not really a conceptual challenge for mathematicians,
because it differed from Euclidean geometry in other ways besides merely contradicting the parallel postulate.
In particular, lines in spherical geometry remember were great circles, so they don't extend indefinitely, they don't extend infinitely long.
Spherical geometry is a geometry in the sense that we described in the last lecture, namely locally it looks just like our tabletop.
But the big question that remained was whether a geometry would be possible in which more than one line through a single point could be parallel to one line.
For centuries, mathematicians had hoped that the parallel postulate could be proved from the other postulates.
Well, the mathematician Giovanni Girolamo Sacheri published a book in 1733 entitled Euclides ob omni neivo vindicatus, Euclid freed from all flaws.
His strategy was basically to imagine that there existed a line and a point through which there was more than one line parallel to the given line.
Then he proceeded to deduce consequences of that assumption.
And his goal was to deduce some consequence that would contradict some of the other axioms or some theorem that could be proved without the parallel postulate in Euclidean geometry.
And the logic of his approach is completely valid.
And in fact, Sacheri proved many consequences of this assumption about having more than one parallel line.
He deduced results from that assumption that were so counterintuitive that he thought they were ridiculous.
In fact, as he phrased it, he said the consequences were, and I quote, repugnant to the nature of a straight line.
So he concluded in his own mind that the parallel postulate must be true.
Unfortunately, for Sacheri, the consequences, though definitely counterintuitive, actually did not lead and cannot lead to a contradiction.
The consequences of assuming that more than one parallel exists are not ridiculous.
So first of all, let's look at some of those consequences that follow from assuming that there's more than one line through a given point that's parallel to a given line.
And here are some of these consequences.
First, there are infinitely many lines, all going through that given point, all parallel to the given line, not just two.
You can assume that there are two that are parallel, but notice that any line that's between those angles will also be parallel.
So in fact, there are infinitely many lines that go through a point, all parallel to a line, if there are as many as two.
Another consequence, the sum of the angles of triangles varies.
Well, of course, we saw that in spherical geometry, that that's also the case.
The sum of the angles of any triangle will always be less than 180 degrees in hyperbolic geometry.
Another consequence. Now, and by the way, once again, spherical geometry had the property that every triangle, the triangle sums were more than 180 degrees.
Here, they all would have to be less.
Another consequence, there are no similar triangles that are not congruent.
Well, once again, that's the same as in spherical geometry.
There were no similar triangles that were not congruent to each other.
The next one, the Pythagorean theorem is false in hyperbolic geometry.
By the way, that's also true for spherical geometry. The Pythagorean theorem doesn't hold in spherical geometry.
Another consequence, no two lines are everywhere equidistant from one another.
In other words, you couldn't have, as we have in parallel lines, you know how the distance from one line to the other stays the same forever.
Well, there are no such pair of lines in hyperbolic geometry.
Another consequence, there exist triangles for which no circle circumscribes them.
Remember how we took a triangle in Euclidean geometry and we found a circle that went through the three vertices of that triangle?
Well, in hyperbolic geometry, there are some triangles for which you cannot find such a circle.
Hyperbolic geometry, another consequence of assuming that you have more than one parallel through a line, there are no rectangles.
No quadrilaterals that have 90 degrees on each corner.
Actually, that's pretty easy because you could cut it into two triangles and if you already knew that the sums of the angles of the triangles were less than 180, you couldn't have a rectangle that had four right angles.
Another consequence, there's a fixed number such that the area of every triangle is less than that number.
Well, these are sort of weird properties and at first, we might be inclined to feel that Sacheri was somewhat correct in feeling that, well, could there be a consistent geometry that had all of these weird properties?
But in the 19th century, a non-Euclidean geometry called hyperbolic geometry was described that is as self-consistent as Euclidean geometry and it has all of the properties listed above.
So, here's our challenge. How can we describe such a hyperbolic geometry?
Well, let's think about what we did with spherical geometry.
We found that we could construct a geometry in which no two lines are parallel because we built a model in which we could interpret certain curves on that model as lines.
In the case of spherical geometry, we said, well, let's think of a great circle as a line and then we realized that everything would fit together.
So, our goal here is to describe a space and describe what we mean by a line in such a way that, first of all, it's self-consistent and we want it to satisfy all of the other axioms of Euclidean geometry other than the parallel postulate.
And we want it to fail to satisfy the parallel postulate in having more than one line parallel to a given line through a given point.
Okay, well, before we describe the whole geometry, let's, first of all, realize that there are some ordinary objects that we know in the world that have some of the properties that we seek.
And so, the first thing that we're going to look at is a saddle.
So, imagine having a saddle here. So, here's a saddle and let's think about what we would mean by a line on the saddle.
So, once again, we imagine ourselves as a bug whose entire existence is a saddle and light rays don't go off on the saddle, it just stays right on the saddle.
So, we'll think of a line as the shortest path between two points on the saddle.
And let's just look at them. So, in the graphic you can see that the shortest distance is on a saddle, you sort of go in and they sort of curve down.
That's the shortest distance. And if you actually, by the way, go out and take a saddle and take a rubber band and put it down in two points and stretch it, it will go to that shape of a curve.
Well, just seeing how these things are curved, you can see that we can have more than one parallel that's parallel to a given line through a given point.
And this is the way, for example, you could just take sort of a line on the top of the saddle and then you could take two lines that sort of curve down.
They would intersect at a point and neither one of them would ever hit that line on the top.
Well, also notice that if we draw this triangle on the saddle, notice that the angles are sort of pinched and you can see that those angles add up to less than 180 degrees.
Well, so one way to think about our quest is to ask whether we could construct a surface that had these interesting properties that a saddle has, except that it has them at every single point.
You see, the problem with a saddle is that once you sort of extend beyond the place at which you have the saddle part, then it doesn't have all of these properties anymore.
Well, an initially, partially successful model was constructed by a mathematician by the name of Eugenio Beltrami, and he constructed something called the pseudosphere.
And it has the same kind of this curving shape as a saddle, except that it occurs over an infinitely long, horn-like shape.
And in fact, what it is, is the following. You take a tractrix and rotate it around the x-axis.
And you may remember that I actually very briefly mentioned a tractrix in a previous lecture where we had the bicycle and it was facing due south.
And I said, well, suppose that you have your front wheel and you aim it due east and you just keep the front wheel always on the due-easterly direction, then it pulls down the back tire in a curve, and that curve was a tractrix.
Well, if you take that tractrix and you rotate it around the x-axis, you get Beltrami's pseudosphere, which is a model of part of the hyperbolic plane.
It has the advantage over a saddle that the kind of curvature is the same at every point.
But again, it's not a complete model because it has this boundary where it starts, and it also has a hole at the other end.
So it isn't really a model for the entire hyperbolic plane.
Well, there's another way to visualize hyperbolic geometry that we can make out of cloth, and I'm going to show you this model and where it comes from.
So here is the idea. Before I tell you the model of the cloth, let me just say, suppose that you had a flat piece of paper and your goal was to produce something that looked like a saddle.
You see? So you wanted to produce a saddle, but you had a flat piece of paper like this green paper here.
Well, the problem is that when you try to curve it up, you need to have some room here, you know, where your legs go.
And so one way to do it would be to sort of slit the piece of paper, pull it apart, and put in some extra material here.
You see? Well, that's the motivation for this wonderful model that I'm going to show you here.
This was a model of hyperbolic space that was created by the mathematician William Thurston.
He invented this model, and I've shown you the motivation of the model, which was that you took something flat like a piece of paper and put some more stuff in it in order to get that kind of a saddle shape.
So what Thurston did is to say, well, let's go ahead and do that, but do it everywhere.
Now, here is this model, and I'm going to explain this cloth model to you.
Okay. So here's the idea.
It's the idea of how we make something that looks more like a saddle.
What we know as a fact that if you take six equilateral triangles, then those six triangles exactly fit flat on a piece of paper, right?
Because each one has 60 degree angles, and six of them make 360, it fits flat.
So Thurston's idea was to say, well, we wanted to look more like a saddle, as we saw the way to create it is to put some more stuff in there.
So he said, let's just, instead of putting six equilateral triangles around a vertex, let's put seven.
You say, so you're putting seven together around a vertex.
Now, when you do that, and you may be saying to yourself, why doesn't he straighten that thing out?
It's such a mess.
Well, the reason is you can't straighten it out because there are too many, the angle is too much here.
You've got seven 60 degree angles all coming together at that point.
So that's the start of our model.
And you can see that it allows you to be more easy at that point, more satellite.
Okay.
Now, what you do though, is you just continue.
That is, you go to another vertex like this vertex, and you add some more equilateral triangles.
And by the way, this is made of just a whole bunch of equilateral triangles.
They're all identical.
So what you do is you put in enough equilateral triangles so that you have seven around this vertex.
You see?
And then you go to the next vertex, and you put, you sew in seven equilateral triangles around that vertex.
And then you just continue.
Now, just continuing means seven around this vertex, seven around this vertex, seven around this vertex.
And you can see there's no theoretical obstacle to just having this go on forever.
Because there's nothing, you could make sort of a ring of these circles, then another ring of them, and then another ring of them.
And just continue on.
However, notice something about these rings.
That because you're putting too many, so to speak, equilateral triangles at each point, the surface becomes extremely wiggly.
Do you see how wiggly this thing is out here?
Because there are way too many triangles around this circle as there would be if it were flat.
So in fact, this whole thing reminds one a bit the way it gets more and more wiggly at the outside.
It reminds one of a bit of the shape of a kale leaf or one of these leaves that get more and more wrinkly toward the end.
You see?
And in fact, because of this, I wonder if you were a bug who lived on this kale leaf, you would presumably learn what the shortest distance is between two points on the kale leaf.
Namely, if you had sort of a ridge coming up here where the kale leaf had a bump and you were on one side and wanted to get on the other, you'd probably go toward the middle and come back around that bump.
You see?
Because that's a shorter path than going over and down.
And so I think what this means is that bugs who live on kale leaves probably intuitively think of geometry as hyperbolic.
You see?
So they have this intuition.
Well, okay, so let's see if we can understand what a straight line is on this model.
Well, a straight line is actually surprisingly obtained in the following way.
Let's suppose I want to take two points and get from one place to the other on this model.
Here's what I do.
I just pull it straight and that is a straight line.
And you see this straight line is marked by this little tape here.
So that's a straight line.
But what's interesting is here's another straight line.
Here's another straight line.
See, it's all wiggly.
Here's another straight line.
And you see that when we put it down, it's straight.
You see?
Because I'm pulling it completely straight.
So it's nice and straight.
But when I put it down, look how it looks relative to this first line.
By the way, this is the first line I showed you right here.
You see?
It's straight.
And when I put this one looking sort of straightish, this one looks, you see this one right here?
That's the one I held up a minute ago.
It doesn't look straight at all.
You see how it's curved?
And it just curves away and never hits again.
Now look, here's another one.
You see this one right here?
This one?
Look, they're crossing.
They're crossing.
Here we go.
Look, that's a completely straight line.
And yet when I put it down like this, look what happens.
It's curving away, it's curving away from this line right here.
And therefore, you can see that these two lines, first of all, they're straight.
They don't look like it when they're in this wiggly position, but they're straight individually.
And they're both parallel to this line.
So this model contains these lines that go through the same point and that are all parallel to this line.
You see?
So that's sort of interesting.
Now let's look at another feature of this.
Another feature is that triangles have a sum of angles less than 180 degrees.
So here we go.
This I already showed you was a straight line, but this is a straight line also.
You see?
That's a straight line.
All right?
And this one is also a straight line over here.
And look at the three angles of this triangle.
See?
I can make it so you can sort of see those angles.
You see how these angles are pinched together?
They go like this.
They're all small.
And so the sum of those angles is certainly less than 180 degrees.
So this model has these wonderful properties.
It shows us that it has more than one parallel through the given point.
It shows us that the sum of the angles of a triangle is less than 180 degrees.
And also, by the way, it has another feature.
And that is that there's no special point in this object.
Because I sort of pointed to this one first, this red and pink area.
But there's no reason.
If you were out here, you could say, well, we'll start with these seven things
and then make the triangles around them.
This would be viewed equally well as the central point.
There is no central point.
In other words, it's all completely homogeneous.
It's the same at every single place around,
which is one of the properties that we want in a geometry.
We want it to look the same from one place to another.
And also, by the way, it has this wonderful feature
that this wrinkledness at the end is what's characterizing.
The way you should see yourself, if you're trying to imagine yourself living in a hyperbolic plane,
that's what you should imagine, that it gets sort of infinitely or indefinitely more wrinkled
as you move away from yourself from any place.
Well, by the way, you might want to make models.
You can make this model yourself, of course, using paper and tape or cloth like this one is.
But another way to do it is crochet models.
So the way you can crochet a model is that you just start crocheting in sort of circles, concentric circles.
But as you go around the circle, every seventh stitch, you put in an extra one.
And then you make a circle and you put in an extra one and so on.
And then it'll automatically give that kind of wrinkly look to it.
Well, this representation is very good at giving us an intuition about hyperbolic geometry.
But it's not perfect.
And the reason that it's not perfect is that very locally, that is, if we look just inside one of these triangles,
it's that triangle by itself is Euclidean.
You see, because it's just a flat triangle.
Whereas in the actual hyperbolic plane, even the smallest region would not be Euclidean.
Although it would approach being Euclidean, but it wouldn't be Euclidean.
So mathematicians proved that hyperbolic space is possible in the first half of the 19th century.
A young mathematician by the name of Janos Bolia proved this,
and it was published as an appendix to a mathematics textbook that his father had written.
When Gauss, the most famous mathematician, one of the most famous mathematicians in all of history, Carl Friedrich Gauss,
when he read this appendix, he wrote to a colleague that, quote,
I regard this young geometer Bolia as a genius of the first order.
On the other hand, Gauss also wrote to Janos' father, Farkas Bolia.
He wrote, to praise this work would amount to praising myself for the entire content of the work
coincides almost exactly with my own meditations which have occupied my mind for the past 30 or 35 years.
Now, that response does not paint a very flattering picture of Gauss' character.
However, in his defense, he apparently was just stating the accurate truth of the matter.
In other words, Gauss had actually worked out these ideas earlier, but he hadn't published them.
Meanwhile, independently in Russia, Nikolai Ivanovich Lobachevsky had also proved the possibility of hyperbolic geometry.
He basically duplicated the work of Bolia without seeing it. It was independent work.
So, in fact, so Bolia, Gauss and Lobachevsky independently developed hyperbolic geometry.
Well, to construct a complete model for hyperbolic geometry, we need to describe a set of points
and what things that we're going to call lines such that the axioms of Euclidean geometry, except for the parallel postulate, hold.
And yet, there is a line and a point not on that line through which there are two or more parallels.
So, the model that we'll describe right now is called the Poincare disc model of hyperbolic geometry.
And the points are points in the unit disc.
However, the method of measuring distances and drawing lines between points is not at all the same as lines in the regular Euclidean disc.
The idea is that as you get near the boundary of that disc and the boundary is not in the disc, in the model, it's open boundary.
As you get close to the boundary, the distances increase a lot.
So, in fact, they increase so much that you never get there. It's infinitely far from a point inside the disc toward the boundary.
Well, with this particular concept of distance, and of course it's specified, in order to get from one point to another,
it turns out that the shortest distance between two points is staying on an arc of a circle where the circle is perpendicular to the boundary of the disc.
In other words, some circles that intersect the unit disc have the property that if you look at where they intersect the disc,
the tangent line to the unit disc and the tangent line to the circle at that point meet at right angles at both ends.
And if that happens, then you say that it turns out that that's the shortest path in the Poincare disc model between one point and another.
Well, if you have that feature, and by the way, there are other straight lines, the other straight lines are the straight lines right through the center of the disc
because it doesn't do you any good to move to the right or the left as you're moving through.
Well, given this model of hyperbolic geometry, we can verify that it has many of these strange properties that we saw before.
One of them is that for every line and a point not on the line, there are infinitely many lines through it that miss this line.
Two, we can see that in a triangle, the sum of the angles of the triangle is less than 180 degrees.
Three, you can prove that the area of a triangle is actually proportional to 180 degrees minus the sum of the angles, alpha plus beta plus gamma.
So this is similar to the property on spherical geometry where the area is determined by the angles.
And therefore, there are no similar triangles that aren't exactly the same.
You can also prove that the Pythagorean theorem does not hold.
However, you can show that the Pythagorean theorem holds better for small triangles than for large triangles.
And you can see it here where we've actually measured how close or not close the sum of the squares of the two sides is to the square on the hypotenuse.
Well, so therefore, this is actually a complete model of hyperbolic geometry.
And one of the neat features about it is that it shows because of the distortion of sizes as you get near the boundary,
it presents a kind of symmetry to it that has enticed artists, and one of whom is M.C. Escher.
It turns out that this Poincare disk model has the symmetries that he really loved, and he exploited them in several drawings,
and they depict the regions in the Poincare disk.
And you can see those circle lines that I was talking about.
Those are the shortest distances.
And it turns out that in this model that he has, each region is the same size.
So that is each figure that you see, some of them look bigger than others,
but from the point of view of the Poincare disk measure, they all are the same size.
So this is an artistic result of hyperbolic geometry.
Well, hyperbolic geometry seems more foreign to us than spherical geometry does.
But actually, hyperbolic geometry is in a sense closer to Euclidean geometry than spherical geometry is.
Hyperbolic geometry retains all of the other Euclidean axioms for geometry except for the parallel postulate,
whereas spherical geometry has other differences as well.
For example, in spherical geometry, lines don't extend forever.
You know, they close up on themselves.
And in fact, they must in any elliptic geometry that has no parallel lines.
Well, so in a logical sense, I should have presented hyperbolic geometry first and then spherical geometry,
because hyperbolic geometry is less different from Euclidean geometry than spherical geometry is.
However, the model of a sphere is more familiar than the models for hyperbolic geometry,
and that's why I presented spherical geometry first.
Well, in this lecture, we've explored geometries that differ from our familiar flat Euclidean geometry.
And these geometries are nevertheless coherent and self-consistent.
When they were discovered, people viewed them as purely abstract ideas.
Today, however, these alternative geometries are viable candidates for best describing the actual universe in which we live.
In the next two lectures, we'll describe ways in which geometrical insights, including non-Euclidean geometries,
have played and are playing a role in how we understand the shape and nature of our universe.
I'll see you then.
