Welcome back.
In any attempt to understand the world around us, it's only natural to wonder about the
shapes and sizes involved in our physical existence, including the shape and size of
the earth, the solar system, and in fact the entire universe.
While beginning in the ancient world, scholars realized that geometry plays an important
role in our understanding of our physical existence.
In about 240 BCE, Eratosthenes used geometry to deduce the size of the earth, and in fact
he did so with remarkable accuracy.
At 1600, Johannes Kepler noted that planets orbit the sun following elliptical orbits.
Geometric considerations inform us about the shape and nature of the entire universe as
well.
Olber's paradox, also known as the dark night sky paradox, asks the basic question, why
is it dark at night?
Well, geometrical considerations about the answer lead to our making deductions about
the possible size, age, and character of the universe.
Geometric ideas also help us to understand relativity.
We'll see a simple argument using the Pythagorean theorem that tells us why the Lorentz transformations
arise in Einstein's special theory of relativity.
And that of course describes how time dilates for someone who's moving relative to us.
Well, before we consider these grand questions about the entire universe, I think it's about
time that we get down to brass text.
Let's begin with a much more mundane question, but one that's a practical consequence to
ants.
In the last two lectures, we came to realize that one of the basic questions that we have
to answer about geometry is, what is the shortest distance between two points?
Because that's what we're going to mean by a straight line.
And of course, the answer depends on our environment.
But we always are going to ask the question, what is the shortest distance between two
points?
Well, in a plane, a completely flat plane, the Euclidean plane that we're so familiar
with, the answer is obvious.
We simply take a literally straight line.
But we saw in spherical geometry that the shortest distance was on a great circle.
A great circle segment so that when we were going from Chicago to Rome, we looked at the
great circle, the biggest circle that contains Rome in Chicago, and we stayed on that curve
to get the shortest path, 500 miles shorter than staying on the latitude.
Well, in hyperbolic geometry that we saw in the last lecture, we saw that the shortest
distance looked rather curved.
It looked like in the model, it was the part of a circle that hit the boundary at right
angles or on that wiggly cloth that looked like it was sort of curved.
But so the question is, how do we determine the shortest distance?
Well, it depends on our environment.
So now, as I said, this is a lecture for getting down to so much more mundane matters.
At least we'll start there.
And so let's start with thinking of ourselves as a taxi cab driver in Manhattan.
Now what's the shortest distance between two points for this taxi cab driver?
Well, in Manhattan, the streets run east and west and north and south.
So if you're going to go from one place to another, you can't go diagonally.
You've got to go this way and then go this way.
And in fact, this is a technical term in the mathematics jargon that's called the taxi
cab distance between two points.
You go over and up.
Remember the hypotenuse of that triangle, which would be the straight line the way the
crow flies, you would compute that distance using the Pythagorean theorem, and it would
be shorter than going, of course, straight on the east and west streets and the north
and south streets.
Well, this is just a start for finding shortest paths, but I want us to really come to grips
with this problem situation of an ant that's trying to find a bit of food sitting on a wall
of a room.
So let's suppose that we have a room, and in this room there's an ant sitting on one
wall.
Now this is very important for the ant, that the ant sees some food in some other place,
and the ant has to make some decisions.
The ant can't fly, so it has to move from place to place by just walking along the walls.
Now it turns out that our ant is a bit of a mathematician and very much interested in
efficiency, so our ant wants to find the shortest path from where that ant is to her food that's
sitting in a distant place.
So let's begin to analyze this.
Well, first, the first case.
Suppose that the ant and the food are on the same wall, then of course the path is easy.
You just go straight from the place where the ant is up to the place where the food is.
There's no question about that.
Well, but suppose the food is on an adjacent wall, maybe just around the corner, and the
ant is sitting on this wall, and how would the ant go from the ant's location to where
the food is in the shortest distance?
How would the ant think about this?
Well, first of all, if you were to stay on those two walls, how would you know where
to go in that place where the walls meet and then move toward the food?
Well, one excellent way to accomplish this is to think about it, is to take that wall
and imagine unfolding it.
Or if you'd prefer, you could think of the ant as sitting on a door, and suppose the
ant were trying to get from that door to some place, and then somebody closed the door so
that the door was flush with the wall on which the food was.
Well, after that wall is unfolded, of course, it's clear how to get from place to place.
You just go on a straight line on the unfolded room.
So that's the strategy that the ant uses.
If the ant is on one wall and the food is on some other wall, there are different ways
to unfold the room, and then the ant just follows the straight line distance in each
unfolding and sees which one is shorter.
Now sometimes it is actually rather surprising how to find the shortest path from one point
to another.
Oh, and by the way, this strategy of unfolding the rooms, I find it sort of reminiscent of
the strategy that we talked about in the illumination problem for art galleries.
Back in lecture 10, when we were talking about the mirrored walls and how we could imagine
a beam of light when it went to a mirror, we just reflected the whole gallery and just
had it go in a straight line.
I think of this as sort of a similar strategy.
Well, so let's take this ant and the location of the food and just think about unfolding
the walls and then finding a straight line in the unfolded room.
It turns out that it's possible to have a room where the location of the ant and the
food are such that very surprisingly, it requires the ant going over five of the six walls to
get from where it is to the food location in the shortest possible distance, and that's
really rather interesting.
So I actually have a little model here to show you this fact.
So here we have a room, and suppose the ant is sitting on this wall of the room here,
somewhere near the bottom, and the food is on this side of the room, somewhere near the
top.
Now you might think that the ant would want to go just straight down across and straight
up the other wall, but it turns out that by this unfolding strategy, look what happens.
If we unfold it and we see then that the ant is about here and the food is about here,
which now by the way, notice that this food before we unfolded it is near the top, whereas
when you unfold it, it's near the bottom.
And it turns out that if the dimensions are just right, that this path, which we would
get by drawing a straight line from the ant's location to the food location, that that straight
line is, of course, it's the shortest distance in the unfolded room, and in fact it's the
shortest distance on the actual path that the ant can take from where they are to where
the food is.
Now, I find this rather interesting, first of all, because I wonder about real ants.
I mean, you have to wonder, does a real ant in going from place to place actually find
the shortest path?
I don't know, but it's very interesting to me that this path literally goes over this
wall, one, two, three, four, five, and that's the shortest path.
Very interesting.
So this is the conundrum of the ant and the food.
Well, this is a good start in answering this basic question about the earth, and I think
it's good to get ourselves grounded in the problems of the ant world.
Well, but let's go on now and consider another basic question about our world, namely the
size of the earth.
In about 240 BCE, Eratosthenes measured the circumference of the earth using geometry.
And one thing that I was wondering about as I was thinking about this is, well, did people
even think the earth was round in 240 BCE?
But apparently, and this is what I've learned, and apparently it was true that basically
no educated person has believed that the earth is flat since about several hundred years
BCE.
But I always learned that Columbus was worried about falling off the edge of the earth.
Well, apparently that was a myth.
The myth being that people actually believed at the time of Columbus that the earth was
flat, that was apparently a myth that came into being in the 19th century, partly created
by a story by Washington Irving that's called The Life and Voyages of Christopher Columbus.
So we all came to think that at Columbus's time, people were worried about falling off
the earth, where apparently that's not true at all.
Of course, people knew that the earth was round, even in, as I say, 240 BCE, when Eratosthenes
was working.
Well, so back to Eratosthenes, how did he work on this problem of trying to figure out what
the circumference of the entire earth is?
And well, here's how he did it.
He said to himself, well, if the sun is coming from a distant place and the rays of the light
are parallel, he used a little geometry, and here's how he did it.
He went to a city called Cyene, and that city was at a location so that at the summer solstice,
the sun at noon was exactly overhead, exactly overhead from Cyene, and he observed this
because he could look down a well, a deep well, and see the sunlight reflected from
the water in the depths of the well.
Of course, there are other ways you can tell whether the sun is overhead.
If you hold something up and let it dangle, it will go in the direction of gravity, and
if you put a stick in that direction, then that stick would have no shadow at that moment
when the sun is directly overhead.
Well, so at Cyene, on the summer solstice, the sun was directly overhead, and then he
observed that at a different location, namely in Alexandria, either on that same day with
somebody else measuring it, or a different year, or just looking at records, he found
that at Alexandria, at that same time, at the highest point in the sky in Alexandria,
the sun cast a shadow that was 7.2 degrees.
In other words, in other words, the straight line in Alexandria, that's the straight vertical
line, that's the line you'd get by just dangling something, letting gravity tell you what's
straight, that the direction that the sunlight was coming deviated from that direct outside
line going outside from the earth by 7.2 degrees, and then he could make a computation to show
him what the circumference of the whole earth is.
That's because he had another piece of knowledge.
The other piece of knowledge was that the distance from Cyene to Alexandria was 5,000
stadia, and he thought at least that Alexandria was due north of Cyene.
So let's see what his computation was.
The computation is a simple one, and it uses just basic geometry, and so here's the picture.
You see that if the sun is directly overhead at Cyene, and at the same time, it makes a
7.2 degree angle from the vertical at Alexandria, then we see that we have two parallel lines,
and so the angle at the center of the earth, one line going out to Cyene and the other
line going out to Alexandria, must also be a 7.2 degree angle, you see, because they're
parallel angles, they're corresponding angles.
But then here is the computation.
He said, well, if 7.2 degrees, well, what fraction of, that must be 7.2 degrees relative
to 360 degrees of all the entire circumference of the earth.
In other words, it's an angle at the center of the earth of 7.2 degrees, so the fraction
of the whole circle of the earth is 7.2 over 360.
That's the fraction of the earth it is.
But on the other hand, he measured that that was 5,000 stadia, remember the distance from
Cyene to Alexandria, so he concluded that 7.2 over 360, that fraction of the circumference
was the same as 5,000 divided by the circumference of the entire earth.
Well, then just doing the multiplication, he got a value of about 250,000 stadia, and
he concluded that that was the circumference of the earth.
And so we can ask the question, well, how close was Eratosthenes' value to the actual
circumference of the earth?
Well, we really don't know for sure, but it certainly is reasonably close to modern values,
and we can't quite be sure how close, because we don't really know the units that he was
using to great precision.
Apparently there were two versions of a stadion in use at that time.
One was the Attic stadion, which was about 185 meters, and if that was the unit, then
Eratosthenes' computation would yield a result that was about 1.6 too big, bigger than the
actual earth.
However, if he had been using the Egyptian stadion, which was about 157.5 meters, then
his estimate would be within 1% of the true value.
But either way, that value is a very respectable approximation of the size of the earth, and
I think quite remarkable for having been developed in 240 BCE.
Well, from ancient time to the present, scholars, of course, have sought to understand the shape
of the world and the whole universe.
People thought the universe was spherical, and that the stars were affixed to a large
sphere centered at the earth.
And there's a terrific allure to circles and spheres, and that's because they are so extraordinarily
symmetrical.
They're completely symmetric, and it's very hard for people to give up on things that
seem so natural to them.
This is the way, if you were going to create the universe, boy, that's the way I'd do it.
I'd make it spherical and circular and so on.
But this kind of bias has misled people for thousands of years.
One of the ways in which it misled people was in the shape of planetary motion, and
it required people to break away from this enticing perfection of the circle and admit
the possibility of a different shape.
Well, as you know, the orbits of the planets go around the sun in elliptical orbits.
They form ellipses, and the sun is basically at the focus of one of these ellipses.
However, it turns out that the shapes of the orbits, if you actually look in textbooks
in order to demonstrate that they're elliptical, often the ellipses look very wide like this.
And what's interesting to me is that, in fact, the orbit of the earth, for example, looks
quite different if you just draw it.
So I want to actually demonstrate this for you.
And it turns out that the earth, when it goes around the sun, is at its farthest point from
the sun, it's 152 million kilometers, roughly, from the sun.
And at its closest point to the sun, it's about 147 million kilometers.
So in other words, the difference is only 5 million kilometers.
So what I'm going to do is draw a picture of the orbit here.
And I'm putting these pins in this piece of paper.
One pin is the position of the sun, and the other pin is in the position of the other
focus of the ellipse.
Now I have carefully measured this string.
This is a precision operation, and I've extremely carefully measured the length of this string
so that the ellipse that I'm going to draw will be precisely, precisely in proportion
to the actual values of the earth going around the sun.
Because these distances are exactly 15.2 centimeters from the longest point and 14.7 at the shortest
point.
Now here is the elliptical orbit of the earth in reality.
So here it is.
Remember that this is the way to draw an ellipse.
And here we go.
Here it is.
That is the elliptical orbit of the earth in proportion.
And of course, the point is that that looks pretty darn much like a circle, as you can
see.
Well, another place that conic sections arise, as I mentioned before, is in describing shapes
that come up in baseball.
So this is a very important one.
If a batter hits a baseball into the field, the path that it takes is actually the path
of a parabola.
So it's a different one of the conic sections that comes up in physics.
Well, okay, so let's move on to a very basic question, which is a grander question.
So you can see that we're moving from the more mundane, the ant in a room, to the earth,
to the solar system, and now we're going to talk about the universe.
We're getting bigger.
So let's ask the question.
What's the geometry of the whole universe?
That question remains an open question to this day.
But we can make some progress on it by analyzing certain things, and one of them happened in
the 19th century when Heinrich Wilhelm Albers used geometry to deduce something about the
universe.
Namely, he argued that the universe can't be structured in a way that you might intuitively
think would be a logical way for the universe to be.
What he showed is that the universe cannot be infinitely expansive, be infinitely old,
and be isotropic.
That's to say, having roughly the same density of stars everywhere in this infinite universe.
You can't have all those things.
And in fact, by the way, the same observation was made 200 years earlier when Kepler also
noted the same paradox, and in fact, others did too, I should say.
But Olber's paradox, by the way, it's sometimes called the dark night sky paradox because
of the question that I'll ask in a minute.
And this paradox was published in 1826, by the way.
But here is a basic question.
Why is it dark at night?
Well, this is a silly sounding question, but it turns out that it leads to a basic insight
about the structure of the whole universe.
Because think about this.
Suppose the universe were, in fact, infinite.
Suppose it had been around forever, and that there were roughly an equal density of stars
everywhere in that infinite universe.
Let's see what would happen at night.
Well, let's think of it this way.
We take the Earth, and then around the Earth, we put a shell of space and a big shell.
You can think of it as many, many light years, a huge shell around the Earth.
And then think about taking a bigger shell, and a bigger shell, and a bigger shell.
And of course, these shells would go along forever if the universe were infinite.
Now it turns out that the volumes of the shells would increase in such a way that the amount
of light that would come to us from the stars in that shell would be the same as from any
other shell.
In other words, every single shell would contribute the same amount of light to us.
And I want to actually do the computation so that you can understand what I'm saying
here.
So let's consider that we have some unit of measure, that's some number of light years
that we're thinking about as the widths of these different shells.
Then every shell, I'm thinking of it as a sphere, it's the volume that lies between
a sphere of radius n plus 1 of these units and radius n units.
Well, so what would that shell's volume be, that difference between the two shells?
Well, it would be the volume of the outer sphere minus the volume of the inner sphere.
Well we know the formula for the volume of a sphere, it's four-thirds pi r cubed, right?
Well so that means that in the outer sphere, the volume is going to be exactly four-thirds
pi times n plus 1 cubed.
And the volume of the inner sphere is four-thirds pi times n cubed.
Now we can do the multiplication, that is just expand the n plus 1 cubed and when we
expand it out, we see that some things cancel and we see that approximately after we get
rid of the lower order terms, we see that the volume of that sphere is of the order
four pi n, whatever n is, that's some distance.
But it tells us it's now a unit of volume, four pi n squared, four pi n squared.
That's the volume within that shell, between the n plus first shell and the, between distance
n plus 1 and distance n from the earth, okay?
So its volume is four pi n squared, as you see in this computation.
Well, if you shine a light, like a star shines light, it goes out in all directions and so
the, the amount of light that reaches a point at a certain distance diminishes as the square
of the distance, because you see it's spreading out as the, in, if you think of a light bulb
here, the light is spread out over the surface of a sphere at its various distances, which
is diminishing as the square of the distance.
So what that means is that if we divide by the square of the distance from that shell
to the earth, we'll see roughly how much it'll be proportional to how much light we're going
to be getting from that particular contribution of the shell, okay?
From that, from that shell, from the stars in that shell.
Well, the, the answer is, if we divide by n squared, you see we get a constant number,
four pi, but that's just a, that's a constant that shows us that the amount of light we
get from every shell is precisely the same as from every other shell.
Well the effect of that, if that were the case, if that were reality, then it would
be not only light at night, but we'd be burned to a crisp, because there'd be infinite amount
of light that are, that's hitting us.
But in particular, it would be, it would be very light at night.
Well this, this paradox has to be resolved.
And there are different ways to think about it.
For example, it might be that you could, you could imagine that, well maybe the stars get
in the way, so that the light from outside gets, gets stopped on the way.
Or there might be dust that absorbs the light or something like that.
But in fact those kinds of things can't really help you much, because if they're, the, the
dust would, if it absorbed energy, it would have to expend it sometime, so it doesn't
really help.
But what it does do, is it causes us to reject this rather naive image of the entire universe,
and we have to think of it differently.
And that's a helpful, helpful thing.
And certainly modern views of the universe don't include that possibility that Ober's
Paradox has, has caused us to reject.
Well I wanted to tell you, moving to, to even more abstract ideas is, is a geometric argument
about Einstein's special theory of relativity.
So Einstein's special theory of relativity states that time and distance appear different
from the points of view of two observers who are moving relative to one another.
So according to Einstein's special theory of relativity, if we see someone moving by
us on say an imaginary fast train, we would think that that person's watch was going slower
than our watch was going.
And the, and the amount of slowing is related by the, the relative speed of the person moving
by.
How fast is moving, if it's moving closer to the speed of light, than the slowing is
more pronounced.
And the amount of that slowing is, is measured by something called the Lorenz transformations.
Well of course it's very counterintuitive.
This whole concept of special relativity is very counterintuitive because, first of all,
in our ordinary everyday lives, we're not confronting things that are moving at any
fraction, any appreciable fraction of the speed of light.
And so we don't really worry about it too much, but in fact it, it actually has come
up in actual practical applications recently.
Both special and general relativity are used in, in the GPS navigation systems to find
out where we are.
So it actually turns out to be a practical value, but, but I wanted to just give you
a, an intuitive sense of why it is that this particular Lorenz transformation is involved
in how much time slows down for a moving object.
So here's the, here's the simple argument.
Suppose I'm standing next to a railroad track and a train is coming at me at a fixed velocity
V. And right when the train comes to me, we shine, when it's right next to me, we shine
a light out into, into space.
And the light goes out and propagates out at the speed of light.
Let's say C, which is 186,000 miles per second.
Now the, the, the fact that Einstein used was a fact of nature that's very counterintuitive,
which is that the speed of light is measured the same in any inertial frame of reference.
Meaning that, that even if, if the person on this moving train shines a light at us,
instead of going at the speed of light plus the speed of the train, we measure it as going
at exactly the same rate.
Now this is sort of amazing, but it's true in nature.
Well, so when the train goes by, we shine off this light, it goes up into, in, in all
directions at the rate of the speed of light.
And after one second, the train has moved down the track by V, the distance.
If it's going V miles per second, then it's gone V miles down the track.
If we imagine that the person in the train has a mirror that's way above the train and
he just sees that light going up to the mirror and, and coming back to him.
And at the time after we, the observer on the outside, see the train having gone one
second, the train will be one second down the path, down the track, V miles down the
track, and, and that mirror that is up in the, in the sky, let's put that mirror at
exactly the square root of C squared minus V squared height above the train.
And at that point by the Pythagorean theorem, we see that this side, the hypotenuse of the,
of the light travel is C. The, the train has gone V and the vertical height is the square
root of C squared minus V squared.
Well the person in the train knows that when light has gone the square root of C squared
minus V squared, then the amount of seconds that has taken is that fraction of C. So dividing
by C, we see that the square root of C squared minus V squared over C is exactly equal to
just the square root of one minus V squared over C squared.
Which is the Lorentz transformation that tells us to how much the time seems to be going
slower for that moving object from the position of the person standing by the train tracks.
So I just thought it was interesting that the Pythagorean theorem can play a role in
this deep consequence about, about the Einstein special theory of relativity.
Well understanding the shape and nature of the universe has been one of human beings'
perennial quests.
In this lecture we've seen how geometrical ideas have helped us to understand our physical
world and we, we saw for example how Eratosthenes measured the circumference of the Earth.
We discussed the nearly circular but in fact elliptical orbits of the planets.
We saw the implications of the dark night sky paradox and we saw how the Pythagorean
theorem can help us to understand Einstein's special theory of relativity.
In the next lecture we'll explore questions about the possible shapes of the universe.
And in that lecture we're going to visit, visit the question of whether our universe
might best be described as having an elliptic, a Euclidean, or a hyperbolic geometry.
I'll see you then.
