Welcome back.
What is the shape of the universe?
Well, the correct answer is that we don't know for certain today, but ideas from geometry
really can help us describe the possibilities and show us what kinds of observations about
the universe we'll be able to distinguish among those choices.
We can ask whether the universe is best modeled by a spherical geometry or a Euclidean geometry
or that very wiggly hyperbolic geometry.
And then we can ask whether the universe closes up on itself or whether it extends forever.
Answering these questions involves using ideas about both Euclidean geometry and non-Euclidean
geometries that we've met before, and also some new ideas about how we can describe geometrical
spaces that we actually create by starting with a sphere or Euclidean space or hyperbolic space.
Before we begin to consider the question of what is the shape of the universe, we need
to understand what the question actually means.
First of all, no one imagines that the universe just goes a certain distance out and then
it just sort of stops.
What does it mean for empty space to stop?
It doesn't make any sense.
It's perfectly sensible to ask why there's any question here.
In other words, how could the universe be anything other than a three-dimensional Euclidean space
that extends forever in every direction?
Well, first of all, we saw in the last lecture that the Dark Night Sky Paradox tells us that
the universe can't be something.
It can't be a flat Euclidean space that extends forever and was always just like that and
has an even distribution of stars in it that were always that way forever.
It can't be that way.
But we might still imagine that somehow the universe extends off forever while stars and
energy just end at some point.
Well, until the advent of non-Euclidean geometries, the question of what is the shape of the universe
couldn't have meant what it does today.
In fact, the question of the shape of the universe doesn't really make sense until we
can give some examples of what we might consider to be reasonable possibilities beyond the idea
that it's just like this room but extends forever in every direction.
So let's start asking the same question about the Earth because we know the correct answer
about the Earth.
And so if we can figure out how we can describe the shape of the Earth, it's going to bring
up some issues that will help us understand the question about the universe.
Well, the Earth is basically spherical, but the Earth has mountains and valleys in it.
And it wouldn't be accurate to say that every point on the surface of the Earth is well
modeled by a patch such as you'd find on a large sphere.
So describing the Earth as a sphere means that we're ignoring local distortions like
mountains and valleys because globally the Earth looks like a sphere or maybe it's a
slightly distorted sphere.
But let's ignore that part and just remember that the Earth is basically like a sphere.
Well, in the same way, to describe the shape of the universe, we've got to look at various
ranges of sizes in order to smooth out these local bumps.
The universe has local geometric distortions, but what we're trying to describe the overall
shape of the universe.
Einstein's theories tell us that the shortest paths between points are influenced by the
presence of mass.
In other words, if a massive body is nearby, light is bent by the gravitational field.
When light travels in a straight line, that's our definition of a straight line is the way
light goes.
So our concept of a straight line is going to be influenced locally by the presence of
matter.
For example, during an eclipse, we can see the light from the stars that are right near
the edge of the sun.
And those stars appear in a slightly different place from where they would appear without
the influence of the sun's gravitation because the gravitational force bends the light from
that star.
In fact, by the way, sometimes we can see the same object in two different directions
because the light is bent on either side of some massive object, maybe a galaxy, creating
what's called a gravitational lens.
But that kind of distortion in the concept of a straight line is owing to the presence
of some sort of nearby star or galaxy.
But those kinds of distortions around those kinds of stars or galaxies or other massive
bodies, they are the mountains and the valleys of the universe.
We want to more or less ignore those in describing the overall shape of the universe.
So what do we mean by the overall shape of the universe?
Well, our world appears to be three-dimensional around us, like this room.
It looks three-dimensional.
But to answer the question about the overall shape of the universe, let's start by concentrating
on what the possibilities would be for the shape of the universe if instead of this room
looking three-dimensional, it looked just two-dimensional.
In other words, suppose that we were asking the analogous question if we were just two-dimensional
beings instead.
And we'll see that we get answers that help us in the three-dimensional case of their analogous.
So let's assume that we couldn't see off of the surface of our existence.
We're two-dimensional creatures, light rays just travel on this surface.
And we'd have no awareness of even the possibility of any part of a universe that's outside the
surface.
The surface is all there is.
And in fact, we talked about that kind of a model when we were considering spherical
geometry.
And remember, we imagined that light rays traveled along great circles.
Well, later, we'll see just as there are two-dimensional surfaces that are spherical, Euclidean, or
hyperbolic, there are the same kinds of three-dimensional geometries.
So now, in some sense, our descriptions of non-Euclidean geometries give us the answer
to the question of what we would mean by the overall shape of the universe.
We saw that knowing how a geometrical space looks locally, namely more or less like a
tabletop, does not determine what it looks like in the large.
We saw that like spherical geometry and hyperbolic geometry, that very wiggly thing, remember
our cloth model, they both look very much like this, like the tabletop.
But they're the same as Euclidean geometry locally, not exactly the same, but almost
the same.
And yet, in the big picture, spherical geometry and hyperbolic geometry have, of course, quite
a different character to it in the large.
So what we're really asking is that we're asking for descriptions of the possible global
shape of the whole universe, given that the universe looks as it does right around us at
every single point.
So let's be a little bit more technical, and then I'll explain the technical term.
We want to know the overall possible shape of the universe, assuming that it has constant
curvature and looks the same as this room at every place.
Well, curvature is the word that's used to discriminate among the spherical, Euclidean,
and hyperbolic geometries.
A space that bends like a sphere has positive curvature, we call that positive curvature.
And one way to detect that you're living in a space with positive curvature is if the
circumference of a circle of radius r is less than what you'd expect relative to a circle
in the plane.
That is to say, the circumference of a circle, like to say the northern polar cap, if you
take a circle of radius r from the north pole, the distance around is less than 2 pi r.
Well, or another characteristic of a space of constant positive curvature is that triangles
have angle sums that are greater than 180 degrees.
Now a sphere has constant positive curvature, and we saw that the sum of angles on a sphere
were greater than 180 degrees.
OK, well a space has constant zero curvature if circles of radius r have circumferences
that are exactly equal to 2 pi r, which was remember what we saw about a regular circle
in Euclidean space.
And also the sum of angles of each triangle is exactly 180 degrees.
So the Euclidean plane, of course, is the model for constant zero curvature.
Well, finally, a space has constant negative curvature if, remember like the case of a
saddle, if the circumference of a circle of radius r is greater than 2 pi r, you see
how if you go out r on a saddle, you sort of go down and up and down so that distance
around the circumference is greater than 2 pi r.
Or, equivalently, if the sum of the angles of every triangle is less than 180 degrees.
And the hyperbolic plane has constant negative curvature.
Well, the final technical question that we need to confront is what are we going to call
a straight line?
And the answer is that we'll use the idea of a geodesic instead of a straight line.
And a geodesic is basically the shortest path between two points, but there's a bit of a
caveat here that I need to deal with, namely, a geodesic is the shortest path between two
points that are close to each other.
But if you have two points that are far apart, there may be several different ways to go
between those two points that are both geodesics.
For example, if you take a sphere, the north pole and the south pole can be connected together
with several many, infinitely many different, longitude lines.
And each longitude is a geodesic.
So a geodesic is a line in which the shortest path, it's the shortest path between pairs
of nearby points along that path.
Okay, now we've had a little bit of an excursion, so let's remember what we're doing here.
We're trying to describe the possibilities for a universe that has constant curvature
and it looks like this room at every point.
And remember our strategy was that before we consider looking like this room at every
point, we're first going to consider the possible shapes of the universe if we were
just two-dimensional creatures and our entire universe were just a surface rather than having
three-dimensionality to it.
Okay, so our two-dimensional universe then could have constant positive curvature, like
a sphere, zero curvature, like the Euclidean plane, or constant negative curvature, like
the hyperbolic plane.
In each case, we need to investigate whether the space might be closed or maybe it extends
indefinitely forever.
And so let's start with the Euclidean plane.
Our two-dimensional universe could be the Euclidean plane itself for two-dimensional
creatures.
It has constant zero curvature, it's unbounded, and it extends forever.
But surprisingly, we could have a universe that has constant zero curvature but it's
closed in on itself.
And let me show you an example of such a thing.
Let's look at this sort of donut shape.
This is called a torus.
A torus is like the boundary of a donut, just the surface of this shape.
And if we see it in real life, like this one right here, it does not have constant curvature
because you see for the points inside, the points inside here, it looks like a saddle.
It curves this way here and this way here.
So it has negative curvature at these points locally.
And then at points on the outside, it's sort of like a sphere.
It curves down in both directions, so it has positive curvature at these points.
So this is not a surface with constant zero curvature, but we can have a different interpretation
of distance on this surface to make it the surface of zero, constant zero curvature.
And I'll show you why.
So here's how we do it.
You see this torus here has the property that we can cut it open and lay it down to make
a rectangle or a square out of it.
And here's how we do it.
We first just think about cutting along one of these curves around the torus like this.
We cut it around and if we did so, we could open it up to become a cylinder.
And then we could slit across the top of that cylinder and fold it down and we would get
a, let's say a square, probably a rectangle, but let's make it into a square.
And notice that where we've cut, we've really cut along a curve this way and a curve this
way and all four corners of that unfolded square come together at that one point.
Well, now let's imagine that we just unfold it onto an entire, we unfold it to a square
and that square represents the torus in the sense that if we folded it up, we would get
a torus.
And if we imagine that our entire universe were the surface of this torus, then that
square would, every single point of the universe would be a point in that square.
You see?
And when we roll it up, we'd get the, we'd get the donut.
Well, of course, when we do it this way, we'd have to do some crinkling and stretching or
shrinking in order to get a square to become a donut, but we can put a different measure
of distance on a torus in which it makes the torus have constant zero curvature.
And this is the way we do it.
Since we've unfolded it to a square, we can imagine putting other copies of that square
all around our square, like putting eight copies around it, and then putting more copies
around them, and in fact, filling up the entire plane with squares.
And so the idea is that each of those squares represents the entire universe, but if we
wanted to measure the distance between one point and another, that same point occurs
in each of those squares.
And if we just draw a straight line in the plane between those two points, that line
in the plane gets folded into this torus.
And so we can talk about those lines as the geodesics on the torus.
Those are the straight lines on the torus.
So this idea of thinking of the, of the torus as being a square rolled up and then unrolling
it and making lots of copies to fill up the whole plane gives us a way to define distances
and straight lines on the torus that make it a flat metric.
Because if, if straight lines on the torus that are actually curved lines on the torus,
when we unroll them, they become straight in the plane, then notice that, for example,
if we have a triangle in the plane, it rolls up to a triangle on the torus and the angles
will add up to 180 degrees.
By the way, I wanted to tell you that this idea of thinking of a torus as a square is
something that many of you are actually familiar with in a way that you may not recognize,
which is this, that back in the old days, there was a, the, that one of the very first
computer games that involved shooting things or something was on your TV set.
And when something went off the right-hand edge of the screen, it appeared on the left-hand
edge and just kept going.
And then when it went off the top edge, it appeared at the bottom and just kept going.
That that square, your TV screen, was really representing playing the game on a torus.
You see?
Because when you went around off one edge of the screen, it was like going to one of
these places where you made a cut and unfolded it.
Well the point is that when you look at the torus in this way, as unfolded and unfolded
and unfolded and unrolled so that it's, it's infinitely covered by these squares of the
plane.
You see, you fold, every single square folds up and you put another copy next to it so
that that copy is the, the next copy that would fold on top of it.
I hope that this is clear.
In any case, the point is that every square represents the entire universe.
So if you were sitting in one of the, in one square, you'd also be sitting in each of the
other squares and if you looked out, you would see yourself in many different directions.
And that's one of the characteristics of a closed universe is that if you look in a
certain direction, you could see the back of your head or in, or say a galaxy, you'd
see the galaxy from two different directions or if you looked in a different way, you'd
see it yet again.
So the same thing would be visible in many different directions.
Well, and, and by the way, notice that the Taurus, when we give it this property, it will
also have this concept of parallelism associated with the Euclidean plane.
Namely, if you have a geodesic and you have a point not on it, there's going to be one
and only one other geodesic through that other point parallel to the given geodesic and the,
the way is just always unroll it to the picture on the plane.
Okay.
So if the universe were a Taurus, then we could give it a distance measure that actually
makes it a constantly flat.
So it has constant curvature, which is zero like the plane at every point.
And this is a surprise because we might think that if it were to have a flat metric, it
had to extend forever.
But no, this actually creates a closed universe that has a flat metric.
Well, so now let's, let's think about the same idea, but associated with having a negative
curvature, constant negative curvature.
In other words, would it be possible to have constant negative curvature in a space that
does not extend forever in every direction?
You see the hyperbolic plane, remember the hyperbolic plane that was this, it was modeled
by this, this kind of very wiggly cloth.
Remember that?
That it has the property that it had constant negative curvature but goes on forever.
We can use the same technique as we did in creating a, seeing that the Taurus has a constant
zero curvature metric to it, that is concept of straight lines.
We can do the same thing with a two-hole Taurus and make it to have a constant negative
curvature and here's how we do it.
Suppose we have a two-hole Taurus, like a double, double donut kind of thing, two-hole
Taurus and that's the surface.
What we can do is we can cut along curves, four curves that all meet at a single point
along that, that surface and cut it open and unfold it to create an octagon.
And this octagon is the entire two-hole Taurus in the sense that if we glued pairs of edges
together the way they came from the way that we cut them and unfolded it, we can view this
octagon as having basically our entire universe in it.
Well, the octagon doesn't fit together to fill up the plane.
You see it doesn't fit together because there aren't corners where you see at this point
where we cut, there are really eight lines that come out from this point and at the corners
of the square, when we took the Taurus, we had a corner of a square, there were four
copies of the square around it.
So when we have this octagon, what we can do though in the hyperbolic plane is something
very, very clever.
Namely, remember how in the hyperbolic plane angles become shorter when they get closer
to the boundary in the in the Pancre disc model of the hyperbolic plane?
Well, what we can do is just stretch out our octagon so that the angles are exactly 45
degrees each.
45 degrees is chosen because that's an eighth of 360.
And so if we make this octagon where every single angle is 45 degrees, we can actually
put octagons around there so that eight of them meet at every vertex and we can just
continue this and fill up the entire hyperbolic plane.
So if we had this kind of a cloth model that extended forever, we would have exactly the
same size and shape models of this octagon that we could see, we could fit around and
completely cover the plane by exactly physically identical sized octagons.
This is amazing that we can do this, but we can and therefore we can define the distances
on this double torus to be the straight lines on the hyperbolic plane and then just see
what they get folded to under this folding process.
Well, so what that says is that there is a constant negative curvature concept of distance
on this double torus, so that could be a model of the universe.
And by the way, some of MC Escher's circle limit drawings actually depict the ways that
you can cover the hyperbolic plane with identically sized and shaped figures.
And they don't appear the same size or shape because remember as you get close to the boundary
of this Pongray disk model, the distances increase without bound, so little tiny things
near the boundary are as large as much larger copies near the center.
So the point is that what we've done here then is shown that we can have a double torus
surface that has a concept of distance and has a constant negative curvature.
It looks like a saddle at every single point and it's closed up.
So we can have a model of the universe that is a closed surface that has constant negative
curvature.
And by the way, we can do the same process for a triple torus or quadruple torus and
so on in the hyperbolic plane.
So every one of those gives us a possible universe with constant negative curvature.
Well, it's also possible to have a universe with constant positive curvature and that
is just a sphere.
A sphere has constant positive curvature.
But surfaces that have constant positive curvature always close up.
So you can't have a two-dimensional universe that has constant positive curvature and yet
is unbounded.
Any surface with constant positive curvature closes up.
So what we've seen are the possibilities for a two-dimensional universe and the possibilities
for a three-dimensional universe, which is what we're really interested in, are similar.
And we really want to describe those possible universes that locally look just like this
room, that is, they look three-dimensional.
And the possibilities follow the same pattern that we've just seen, namely, the curvature
could be zero, it could be negative, or it could be positive.
And if the curvature is zero or if the curvature is negative, then the universe could either
extend forever or it could be closed up.
Whereas if the curvature is positive, then the universe definitely closes up.
Well, Euclidean three-dimensional space would have constant zero curvature and it would
extend forever in every direction.
We can get a closed Euclidean three-dimensional space by imagine filling up all of Euclidean
three-space with cubes, just like we filled up the plane with squares.
And then we can imagine identifying the opposite sides of these cubes to each other so that
when you go through one side of the cube, you come in to the backside.
So one cube represents the whole universe copied over and over again.
Well, the result of this kind of identification of opposite sides of the cube gives us something
that's called a three-torus and it has a Euclidean geometry because it inherits the geometry
from regular three-dimensional space.
And if we live there, we can see many copies of the whole space by looking in many different
directions.
We'd say the same object from many different places.
Well, this kind of symmetrical filling of Euclidean three-space by identical cubes could
model the reality of our actual universe.
And if we looked at it in one direction, we might see stars that are behind us.
And we might see the same star looking in many different directions.
In this model, triangles would have angle sums that are exactly equal to 180 degrees.
We can do the same analogous thing for a three-dimensional version of the hyperbolic plane and we can just
as cubes filled up three-dimensional Euclidean space, we can fill up hyperbolic three-dimensional
space just like we used octagons to fill up the hyperbolic plane.
We can use other shapes to fill up hyperbolic three-space to get us a closed universe that's
locally like this room except that it has constant negative curvature.
And in that kind of space, triangles would have angles that add up to less than 180 degrees.
Remember how they're sort of pinched?
But that space could be closed rather than going on forever.
Okay, so how can we tell whether we live in a closed space or an open universe?
Well, one method is to look into the night sky and see whether we see the same things
in more than one direction.
It sounds like an easy job except that it has some challenges to it.
First of all, since the distance around the universe is likely to be quite large, maybe
a billion light years, then we wouldn't be seeing the galaxies at the same time.
In fact, we'd be seeing the galaxies that appear at a different age by, say, a billion
years or more than a billion years.
The problem with that is that the galaxies change over time.
So how will we know if we're looking at an aged version of the same galaxy or we're looking
at a different galaxy?
Hard to tell.
But by the way, there is a way to tell this that people are actually looking for, which
is we're looking for some circles of variation in the microwave background radiation and
finding pairs of circles that might actually be the same that we see in two different directions.
So people are actually trying this method.
Well, how can we detect if our actual universe has positive, negative, or zero curvature?
Emanuel Kant believed that the human mind was constructed to understand only Euclidean
geometry.
That was his method.
But that type of intuition, it's appealing, but it's been proved wrong repeatedly.
Over the history of science, biases about how the universe must be consistently have
been shown to be just that, namely biases.
Things like elliptical orbits seem counterintuitive, but in fact, that's the way the universe is.
So being biased is not a good strategy.
And human beings' intuitions can be adjusted to accommodate to new ideas.
We can absolutely embrace spherical or hyperbolic geometry and have it as appealing and as intuitive
as Euclidean geometry after we study them for a while.
Well the famous mathematician Gauss actually investigated the question of the curvature
of the universe in the 1800s, and here's the method he used.
He went to three distant mountain peaks and had people light fires at night and actually
look and measure the distances, the angles, I mean, between, you know, from one fire to
the other two fires.
And he added up those angles to see if they would be bigger than, less than, or equal
to 180 degrees.
But of course, in such a small sampling of space, there was no measurable difference,
and that sounds very primitive to us these days, but similar experiments are actually
being basically tried to this day.
Well, in fact, it turns out that there's an equation that could theoretically allow
us to detect what geometry underlies the universe.
And it refers to the relationship between the average density of matter and some other
constant.
And if the density is larger than that critical value, then the universe has positive curvature.
If it's equal, then it's zero curvature, and if it's smaller, it's negative.
And we can measure these things.
And for a while, scientists were excited because this criterion seemed to definitely
indicate that the universe had negative curvature.
But later, it turned out that because of these things like dark, dark energy and dark matter,
it turned out that now the best guess is that it's very close to being a flat universe.
But it's slightly on the side of indicating it may be a positive curvature universe.
And in fact, if you have to bet for what the shape of the universe is, here's what I would
recommend you bet on.
It's a space that's created like we identified the sides of a square or the sides of a cube,
but instead you take a dodecahedron and you identify the top of the dodecahedron to the
bottom of the dodecahedron with a little twist to make them fit together.
And you fill up all of it a, in fact, it's a three-sphere with these dodecahedra, and
that may be the model for the actual universe.
It's called the Poincaré dodecahedral space.
So if you're a betting person, you might bet on this.
And it would be great if the universe actually were this way because Play-Doh associated
the dodecahedron with the quintessential element.
So wouldn't it be delightful if the dodecahedron played a role in the shape of the universe
as we know it now?
Well, in this lecture, we confronted some of the geometrical issues entailed in trying
to describe our universe.
And two fundamental issues are, does the universe have positive, negative, or zero curvature?
And is the universe closed up on itself, or does it extend infinitely out?
And the geometrical ideas point to possible models of the universe.
And they help us understand what kinds of observations may let us determine which model best describes
the real universe.
And we may soon know what the shape of the universe is.
Who knows?
Well, in the next lecture, we'll discuss the fourth dimension.
I'll see you then.
