Welcome back.
One of the most fundamental features of decorative designs is symmetry.
We see repeated patterns and floor tiling and carpets and wall covers.
We see them on decorative designs, on buildings, computer screens, paintings.
One of the most potent mathematical strategies for understanding the world is to take a familiar
experience, in this case symmetrical patterns, and try to identify their essential features.
In the case of symmetrical patterns on freezes, floor tiling, or wallpaper, we notice that
different patterns can have different ways in which the pattern repeats.
For some patterns, you can only shift it or translate the pattern in order to return the
pattern to fit perfectly over itself.
Some patterns also allow other kinds of motions, such as rotations or reflections across a
line.
Well, for each pattern, we can describe specifically the collection of those translations or rotations
or reflections or combinations of those that are symmetrical moves that take the pattern
back to itself.
And although the number of possible patterns is infinite, the possible collections of symmetrical
moves are actually limited.
Well, to understand the world, often it comes down to discovering some sort of order or
pattern in what we see around us.
And the order and beauty and art or in design frequently comes when we see symmetry.
For example, the bilateral symmetry of biological features of the natural world, you've got
two eyes, two ears, two hands, two feet, probably that bilateral symmetry lies at the root of
our innate attraction towards things that are symmetrical.
Well, what makes artistic works alluring, and the answer in short is symmetry.
We're drawn toward the symmetric.
Symmetry allows us to organize complex images and make sense of that complexity.
People have been using symmetrical designs for all of recorded history.
Certainly, the most classical idea of geometric elegance and beauty is the idea of symmetry.
In fact, there was a psychologist from the University of Texas at Austin actually performed
a fascinating experiment regarding a human perception of beauty that relates to symmetry.
And here's what she did.
She took a bunch of pictures of people and sort of averaged their features, and thereby
created an artificial looking person, but there was extremely symmetrical, of course, because
it was an average of things.
And she discovered that people rated as unusually beautiful those images that had extremely
symmetrical features.
Well, what we're going to do is try to use mathematics to move from a sort of general
intuitive idea of symmetry to a more precise description of it.
One of the really delightful features of this topic is the wealth of examples of artistic
and decorative patterns that have appeared around the world and throughout history.
We'll see examples from ancient times to the present and from around the world.
Moorish designs on the Alhambra and Granada in Spain are particularly rich in having
wonderfully intricate and interesting patterns to them.
Well, we find repeating patterns every day in floor and wall coverings or on the arrangement
of bricks that we see on the sides of buildings or on tablecloths or carpets or on quilts
or on shirts or cloths.
Certainly repeating patterns has to be among the most fundamental feature of decoration.
Okay, so now what we're going to do is use this mathematical technique of pinning down
essential features of what we're trying to investigate.
And in this case, we have the impression of repeated patterns.
So we sense symmetry, but let's try now to be specific about what gives these patterns
that sense of symmetry.
Well, the most fundamental observation is that what makes a pattern symmetrical is that
we could pick it up, move it somewhere, and put it down in a different position, but after
we put it down, it looks identical to what it looked like to start with.
So really, instead of talking about symmetry, let's focus on the essential feature which
is that the movement from one position to another that then puts the pattern back exactly
on itself.
So a specific movement of a pattern that returns the pattern to its original position is called
a symmetry.
So in other words, we've shifted from talking about symmetry to talking about asymmetry.
Okay, well, one way to explore an idea is to look at a specific case in order to gain
experience and to solidify our understanding of some basics.
So in this case, we have the new idea of asymmetry, a motion that takes the pattern back to itself.
So let's look at that in a case of a simple pattern, namely the covering of the plane
by equilateral triangle.
So here I have an example of a very symmetrical kind of a pattern.
These are all equilateral triangles, and you can imagine that it could extend on forever
in every direction.
Well, let's look at some symmetries of this pattern.
First of all, and now what I actually have here, it looks like just one pattern, but
I actually have two things.
I have a pattern and then I've copied the pattern onto this transparency, you see, that exactly
fits over it so that I can illustrate moving the pattern to come back to the original position.
So first kind of symmetry is just translational symmetry.
In other words, I can just move this pattern to a different location.
You see how I moved it and now it comes back and it looks exactly the same.
In other words, you can't tell that there's a transparency on top of the pattern.
Here's the pattern here.
Here's the transparency on top of it.
Now I'll return it to the beginning and let's look at a different symmetry of this pattern.
Well, another kind of symmetry that we could have is a reflection.
In other words, for example, let's look at this line right here down the middle.
That line, we could just take the entire pattern and turn it over and put that, I don't remember
what line I put it, but if I remember, I can put it down and it exactly fits and the pattern
returns to itself.
So that's called a line of reflection.
And by the way, this pattern has many different lines of reflection through it.
For example, we could also reflect right through the centers of where these vertices cross.
This vertical line is another line of reflection.
I can turn it over and it becomes exactly back on itself.
So these are examples of symmetries of this pattern.
Now another symmetry of this pattern is to take a point and just rotate the pattern about
that point.
So for example, I could take this center point here and I can just rotate the pattern through
60 degrees and it comes a sixth of a circle and notice that the pattern once again comes
back exactly on top of itself.
So what we have illustrated is the concept of symmetries, where a symmetry is a motion
of the pattern.
And by the way, I consider it very unfortunate that the word asymmetrical, which means not
symmetrical where the A is attached to the word symmetry, and asymmetry are very difficult
to distinguish when you're hearing them.
So I'll try to be careful to say this.
But in this lecture, by the way, we're almost always just talking about symmetry, so I'm
not going to be talking about asymmetry.
Okay.
Now, one thing to notice, it has to do with rotations of a pattern.
Suppose that you have two lines of reflection that cross in our pattern.
In other words, two lines where if you flip the pattern over, the pattern comes back to
itself and you have two such lines that cross.
Notice what happens if you sequentially first flip across one line of reflection and then
you flip across the next line of reflection.
If you do it in that order, the effect is the same as taking the pattern and rotating
the pattern through an angle that's twice the angle between those two lines of reflection.
And one way to see that this is the case is this, that if you think about turning something
over when you reflect, then if you turned it over again when you reflect again, the pattern
first of all comes right side up again.
And if you take a point that lies on the first line of reflection, then when you reflect
the first time over that first line of reflection, that point doesn't move.
But then when you reflect over the second line, it moves to the other side of that second
reflecting line.
And by the way, the point where those two reflecting lines cross, of course, is fixed.
So you can see that that point that was on the first reflecting line gets moved at an
equal distance, equally on the other side of the other reflecting line, which happens
all along it, which means that it has been rotated by twice the angle, as I said.
Well, the theorem that we're going to aim for is to prove that every repeating pattern
in the plane, although there are infinitely many of them, every pattern it has shifts
and it has different kinds of rotations and so on, but there's a restricted collection
of symmetries that that pattern can have.
And to get you in the spirit of that, let's first notice that there's a restriction on
the rotations of any pattern that repeats in the Euclidean plane.
In other words, and what I'm going to show you right now is that if you have a pattern
that you can shift and bring back to itself, so it does have some sort of shifting motions
that bring the pattern back to itself, then the rotations that it can have, it can only
have a very restricted number, namely a two-fold rotation, meaning that if you do the rotation
twice, you get back to the beginning, or a three-fold rotation, or a four-fold rotation,
or a six-fold rotation.
And that's the only kind of rotations you can have.
You cannot have, for example, a five-fold rotation in a pattern that has a translation.
Well, why?
Let's see why.
Suppose that we had a five-fold rotation in the middle of our pattern.
Well, then here's what we do.
Let's take the two nearest points about which we think we have a five-fold rotation.
Since the pattern repeats, we know that if there's a rotation of five around one point,
then when we shift it, there's another one that has a five-fold rotation.
So we know there are at least two.
And so find the two that are closest together, and of course there will be many copies of
those two all around the pattern, but we find the two that are closest together and call
them A and B.
So these are points about which there is a five-fold rotation by five-fold, meaning
that it's 72 degrees, five into 360 degrees, five-fold rotation.
Now, so here's the proof that you can't have such a thing in a pattern that repeats, and
here's why.
Suppose A and B are the closest points.
Then you know that when we shift by 72 degrees counterclockwise at A, we'll get another point
that has a five-fold rotation, because you see the rotation is, if we take the distance
to B, which has a five-fold rotation by assumption, and we rotate around A by 72 degrees, we get
a new point, let's call it C, where there's also a five-fold rotation.
But likewise, if we start at B and we draw the line to A and we rotate it by 72 degrees
clockwise, then we get another point, D, at which there must be a five-fold rotation,
because the whole pattern is repeating.
And therefore C and D, though, look at them.
They're closer together than A and B were.
And if A and B were the closest pair there were, then this is a contradiction.
Therefore there cannot be a five-fold rotation.
You see?
So this is a restriction on the kinds of motions that a repeating pattern can have.
So that's rather interesting.
And by the way, this same basic argument also proves that we can't have a rotation other
than two, three, four, or six-fold.
In other words, 180 degrees, 120 degrees, 90 degrees, or 60 degrees.
And for example, why can you have a six-fold rotation?
Because that's 60 degrees.
So if you did the same argument with A and B and you pushed up, you would see these points
would exactly coincide.
And so that it would be an equilateral triangle.
Well, a lot of the intrigue that we see in patterns in floors and walls can be extended
indefinitely over the entire plane, and those are the ones we're going to be talking about.
But we were going to look in a systematic way at trying to analyze these patterns that
repeat over the whole plane.
Well, they can be extended indefinitely in all different directions, but let's instead
to start with an easier case, which is always a good strategy in mathematics.
Let's just look at patterns that just are in a strip.
And so these are called freeze patterns, because they are like a freeze at the top of a building.
So they're a decorative band, and you see them all the time, the edge of a carpet or
the edge of a cloth or the edge of a building.
And so we'll learn some techniques about identifying symmetries in this simpler setting, and then
we'll use it in the more general setting.
Well, now, by the way, we're always thinking in the abstract, a real freeze like on a building,
of course it stops at the end of the building.
But we're thinking that we're considering these symmetries that go and have indefinitely
extended freezes.
And they're, by the way, beautiful examples of these freezes.
They adorn buildings, walls, floors, carpets, and they come from all over the world and
all different historical eras.
And in fact, there are infinitely many different freeze patterns that you can have, but we're
going to find that there are only a finite number of motions, collections of motions
that bring these patterns back to themselves.
So we're going to identify the collection of symmetries for these various patterns.
So in fact, we'll find that there are only seven different collections of symmetries
for freeze patterns.
That means that every single freeze, no matter how complicated or different it is, it has
specific symmetries and every freeze has a pattern of symmetries that fall into one
of these seven groups of symmetries.
And so let's look at what sets of translations, flips, and rotations bring these freeze patterns
back to look the same.
Well, of course, some border patterns don't repeat at all, but we're just looking at the
ones that definitely do have at least one shift that takes the pattern back to itself,
and therefore you can shift it over and over again.
So that's the category of freezes that we're looking at.
Well, the mathematician John Conway gave clever names and distinctive footprint patterns
that demonstrate these seven freeze groups of symmetries.
And so for each of these seven freeze groups, we'll look at Conway's footprints.
So the first kind of pattern is called a hop.
And it's just one row of left footprints, and the only thing you can do is shift to
the right.
A second pattern is a jump.
And you see that it adds not only does it have a shift, but it has a horizontal reflection
through that center line.
A third pattern, Conway calls it a sidle, and it consists of pairs of footprints that
are repeated, and it has vertical lines through which the pattern can be reflected.
The fourth pattern is called a dizzy hop, and it consists of all left feet.
So we know that there are no reflections, because remember a reflection would change
a left foot to a right foot.
Well, but these are arranged up and down so that the pattern can be rotated 180 degrees
and returned to itself.
And of course, it also has a translation, because all of them have translations.
A step in Conway's terms is a freeze pattern that you can translate, but you can also do
a symmetry that's called a glide reflection.
And that is you take the center line, you can turn it over, but it doesn't quite fit,
but then if you then shift it, it fits.
So that combination move is a symmetry of this particular footprint pattern.
The sixth group is called a dizzy jump, consisting of a line of pairs alternately forward and
backward, and this pattern has both vertical and horizontal reflections, and it has rotations.
And the seventh and final pattern is called a dizzy sidle, which has a glide reflection
and a rotation.
Okay, well, the point is that these, you've got many different freeze patterns, but they
all are going to have one of these seven, they're going to fall into one of these seven
collections of symmetries that they can have.
And so we can look at different patterns that have the same collection of symmetries.
And so what we're saying is that if you look at any freeze, you should be able to classify
it into one of those seven categories.
And so I'm going to give you a challenge right now.
So here on your screen are four freeze patterns.
And the patterns are of course all different.
However, two of these patterns have the same collection of symmetries, and your challenges,
can you find which two are related in this way?
Okay, so I'll give you just a second to look at them, try to find two of them are the same
in the sense of having the same collection of symmetries and the rest are different.
Okay, well, let's look at them.
This first one has only translational symmetries.
You can't rotate it or reflect it or glide reflection, nothing else will return the pattern
to itself.
It's what Conway called a hop.
Okay, now the second one can be reflected across the middle horizontal line.
Okay, so it was called a jump, and it has that other kind of reflection symmetry.
This third one has both vertical and horizontal reflections, and it also has a 180 degree rotation.
So it's a dizzy jump.
Well the fourth one, again, can be reflected across the middle horizontal line, and that's
it, and then also translated.
So it has the same collection of symmetries as the second pattern.
So we found that the second and fourth have the same collection of symmetries.
Well, and let me say, by the way, and particularly when we get to patterns, which we're going
to get to of the whole plane, it's hard to find these sets of symmetries.
So you shouldn't be disappointed if you can't instantly see what the collection of symmetries
are.
Well, we've discussed freezes so far, and we did them first because they're simpler
than an analysis of the whole plane because they only have one direction of translational
symmetry.
So now what we're going to do is extend our picture to wallpaper groups, that is, patterns
that fill the whole wall or the whole floor, like that pattern we saw of the triangles.
And once again, we'll consider patterns that could, and these are always going to be theoretically
indefinitely extended to cover the entire Euclidean plane.
And recall that these patterns came up, by the way, when we were talking about the possible
geometries of the universe.
Remember when we talked about the squared pattern that could fill the entire plane?
It arose in the context of creating a torus as a possible look at the universe.
Well, these wallpaper patterns have been used extensively in art and architecture throughout
history.
And here are a bunch of examples of flooring patterns, wall decorations, and other decorative
patterns.
When we try to describe all possible symmetries of a pattern, you can see distinctions and
commonalities among them.
Well, recently, the mathematician John Conway again saw a pattern among these patterns that
encompasses a repeating pattern with a method that not only involves the Euclidean plane
patterns, but also patterns of the sphere and in the hyperbolic plane.
And so here's what we do.
When we see a pattern, the first thing we check is that the pattern has two independent
directions in which it can be translated.
You see, if it only has one direction of translation, then it's really, morally speaking, a freeze
pattern.
And if it has no directions of translation, then it's just not what we're talking about.
We're talking about those that do have repeating patterns.
The strategy of looking for symmetries is to identify features of the patterns in a sort
of specific algorithmic way that leads to a classification scheme that includes patterns
in all three of these different kinds of geometries.
And what we're going to look for is reflection lines, glide reflections, and rotations.
Well, the miraculous theorem of Conway is that we can give some point values to each
reflection, rotation, and glide reflection.
And then any symmetrical pattern of the Euclidean plane will have a sum of these features.
We give them point values, and we add them up, and they add up to exactly two.
It seems like magic.
But of course, in fact, it has a firm mathematical grounding that's based on something called
the Euler characteristic, which we'll touch on in a future lecture.
But let me give you some examples to get you in the spirit of this.
First of all, if you have one that just has two translations, then there's nothing more
to be said about it.
So let's move on to talking about ones that have reflections.
So suppose that you have a pattern that has many lines of reflection in it.
And for example, the one that we're looking at now has a lot of lines of reflection.
And by the way, we're going to call a line the same as some other line if you could shift
it and get to another line.
So a line is different if you can't shift it to become to a different line of reflection.
So if you look at the point at which six lines of reflection all meet, and then you see here's
another point at which three lines of reflection meet, and here this third point is a point
where two lines of reflection meet.
And this is the way Conway's classification scheme goes.
He first gives one point for the fact that it has any reflection at all.
So that's one point.
And then the values of the points where the reflection lines intersect, you compute them
as follows.
So if there are six reflection lines that cross at one point, we count that as 5-6 times
a half.
OK?
5-6, and then where three lines cross, it's 2-thirds times a half.
And where two lines cross, it's 1-half times a half.
And then if we add those numbers up, 1 plus 5-12s plus 4-12s plus 3-12s, it equals 2.
OK, well, anyway, this is a way to see it.
But we're going to count rotations in a different way.
So this pattern has three rotations at different points, each of degree 3.
Now a rotation that's not created by crossing lines of reflection is counted as just n minus
1 over n.
So that is when we have a rotation of degree 3, it counts as 2-thirds.
So 2-thirds plus 2-thirds plus 2-thirds, that's equal to 2.
But remember, these are rotations that don't come about because of intersecting reflection
lines.
Now, this next one has three lines of reflection that meet, and then yet another point that
has a three-fold rotation.
So it has a reflection, so therefore you get the one for being a reflection.
And where reflecting lines cross, there were three of them that crossed, so that counts
as 2-thirds times a half.
And then it has one point that's a three-fold rotation, but it's a point that doesn't, it's
not created by crossing lines of reflection, so it counts for 2-thirds.
And notice that 1 plus 1-third plus 2-thirds equals 2.
OK, well, anyway, this is sort of just magic, but notice that in all cases with this algorithm,
they add up to 2.
And by the way, there are a couple of other cases that we haven't done, but they are all
related and they maintain the sum of 2.
And the great thing is that we can tell when we've counted all the symmetries, or over-counted
them, by checking the algorithm.
And the algorithm, it turns out, has its roots in topology, in particular the creation of
objects that are called orbifolds, actually, which are the way we created the torus that
we got by putting the edges of the torus together.
And we'll talk more about topology in lecture 23.
Well, the beauty of Conway's scheme is that any repeating pattern, even of the hyperbolic
plane, we can use the same evaluation of the various symmetries, and for the hyperbolic
plane, it's going to add up to a number greater than 2.
Well, if you do the same thing for patterns on the sphere, and you classify them in exactly
the same way, you give them the same point values, you always get a number less than
2.
So in this way, his classification scheme succeeds in showing us a common thread that
ties together all of the symmetry groups of patterns, not only in the Euclidean plane,
but also in the hyperbolic plane and on the sphere.
And since this method of in the Euclidean plane, since the fractions have to add up
to exactly 2, we can just list all the combinations of allowable fractions that add up to 2.
And then by analyzing which combinations of fractions can add up to 2, we can tell that
there are only 17 possible collections of symmetries for patterns in the plane.
So in other words, any pattern in the plane, no matter how big, it all falls into one of
17 collections of symmetries.
And so just for fun, what I want to do is actually to show you some designs that illustrate
some of these 17 different possible groups of symmetries.
So I'm just going to show them as I talk in general about them.
And by the way, I should say that the decorations of the Alhambra in Granada in Spain actually
have 13 of these 17 possible collections of symmetries in them, which is rather interesting.
And these designs come from all over the world, and they've appeared throughout history.
And I think you'll have to agree with me that the artists who created these beautiful designs
were taking full advantage of the collection of symmetries that a pattern offers.
And then I think maybe somehow that the collection of symmetries resonates with us to create
different impressions from the different patterns.
Well, by the way, in contrast to the Euclidean plane, the hyperbolic plane can have an unlimited
number of different collections of repeating patterns.
M.C. Escher's circle limit designs are really symmetrical patterns in the hyperbolic plane.
That is, if we think of his drawings as drawing in, remember, the Poincare disk model of the
hyperbolic plane, then all of those similar looking objects are really of exactly equal
size in the geometry of the hyperbolic plane.
These patterns, they're not only of artistic interest, but as we saw in the last lecture,
these repeating symmetries of the hyperbolic plane allow us to imagine a universe that
has a hyperbolic geometry that is a negative curvature geometry and yet closes up on itself
rather than extending indefinitely.
Well, patterns on spheres also fit into the scheme.
If you look at, for example, a tennis ball or other athletic balls, a volleyball, you
can look at these decorated spheres and they have symmetries that have various rotations
or reflections across a line.
And once again, you can add up these values and you always get a value that is less than
two.
Well, so we've concluded that there are only seven freeze groups, only seven ways that
you can, for any pattern of a freeze that has a translation, there are only seven collections
of symmetries of it and there are only 17 wallpaper groups for patterns in the Euclidean
plane.
So when we see a pattern, we can think about the underlying collection of symmetries that
take that pattern back to itself.
And we can look for all the lines of reflection for the pattern and the points around which
we can rotate the pattern and perhaps the pattern of patterns really does in some way
contribute to how we respond aesthetically to such a design.
Well, in this lecture, we started with our visual experience of seeing patterns on floors,
walls, carpets, many other places and we sought to understand the symmetries of those patterns.
And we found that each pattern had a particular collection of symmetries.
So although there are infinitely many patterns for freezes and for the Euclidean plane, there
are only finitely many collections of symmetries into which each pattern must fall.
Conway's classification scheme not only organizes the symmetries of the Euclidean plane, but
it also presents us with a means for including symmetries of the sphere and the hyperbolic
plane into the same analysis.
In the next lecture, we're going to investigate a modern development of chaotic order when
we discuss aperiodic tiling.
I'll see you then.
