Welcome back.
One collection of mathematical images has made its way into the popular mind because
of its complexity, its symmetry, and self-similarity.
We see calendars, posters, and screensavers that often display fractals, with their characteristic
swirls that are colored with sort of rainbow hues, and they have spiky features that stick
out.
Well, these images all are created using infinitely repeated, but simple processes.
One imaginative motion of points in the plane leads to fractals that are called the Julia
sets.
These mathematical ideas were developed in the early part of the 20th century.
However, the beauty and the complexity of these figures became accessible and visible
to us only after we developed the computational power that allowed them to be rendered graphically
during the last maybe 30 years.
Well, the Mandelbrot set that we'll see in this lecture may be the most famous fractal
of all.
And it arises from looking at features of these Julia sets that we'll be describing.
The pictures of the Julia sets and of the Mandelbrot set not only surprised and excited
people around the world, but they led to a whole new branch of mathematical inquiry.
So in this lecture, what we're going to do is a complex dance in the plane whose fractal
fantasies have created artistic works that grace our calendars and delight the eye.
Well, one thing, by the way, as we're moving into this concept of fractals is the question
of are we still doing geometry?
Are the things that we've looked at in the last few lectures, symmetry, the fourth dimension
and fractals, is this geometry?
Well the answer is yes, of course, because geometry comprises those collections of ideas
that arise from looking at the visual experience that we have of the world.
And what we're doing is extending that visual experience to include certain kinds of abstractions,
including the fourth dimension, and including, as in this lecture, the idea of images that
have literally infinite complexity.
Well in fact, let's begin this lecture by just looking at some of these wonderful fractal
images.
These images have the property that unlike artistic figures and beautiful paintings or
any kinds of decoration you have ever seen in your life, these images are actually literally
infinitely detailed.
That means to say that as we look at them with increasing magnification, their complexity
is just as great as it looks to begin with.
Fractals, first of all, are images.
They have this infinite complexity, but what does it mean for an object to have infinite
complexity when we know that we can't actually create infinitely tiny things that we see?
What it means is that fractals are defined in a mathematical way so that we know where
each point is theoretically, and yet we can only actually display it to the limits of
the resolution of whatever medium we're using to display it.
So these fractals, and just looking at these fractals, they literally have infinite complexity
and they have this self-similarity property.
And by the way, what does self-similarity mean?
What does it mean?
It means that if we take an object, one of these fractals, and we look at just a little
part of it, but we magnify it, and then we magnify it some more, and we magnify it some
more, what we'll find is those little parts that are magnified tremendously actually look
the same as the original picture of the whole fractal.
And in some cases, it literally is absolutely identical.
Like a similar triangle was the same except at a different size, that's what happens with
a fractal.
Just a part of it is actually exactly the same as the whole thing.
Well, the wonderful thing about these fractals and the way that we're going to be able to
see them using computer technology and using the ability to actually determine which points
will be at fractals even at unimaginable magnification, far bigger than is actually physically possible,
then we can actually draw what it would look like at that tremendous magnification.
But what we're going to do in this lecture is to see how these fractals come about.
They're interesting to look at, but what in the world caused them?
I mean, how are they defined?
So the way we're going to get to that is we're going to begin by looking at a complex,
iterative dance in the plane that later is going to lead to these really elegant fractals.
And so what we're going to do is we'll describe a method of locating a sequence of different
points in the plane, and the process that we're going to describe really comes from
using things that are called complex numbers.
And so I'm going to talk just a few minutes about complex numbers, but in fact, to understand
the rest of the lecture, it's not really necessary to understand it as a representation of complex
numbers.
But that's where these fractals came from, and that's why I wanted to tell you what complex
numbers are.
Well, complex numbers arise to create numbers that are solutions to equations such as x
squared plus one equals zero.
Now notice if you tried to solve that equation, you'd have x squared equals minus one, and
then you'd say, well, the answer to that must be a number, which when I multiply it by itself
gives minus one.
The answer is the square root of minus one.
Well, that, of course, is not a real number.
There's no real number which, when multiplied by itself, gives a negative number, because
if you take any real number and you multiply it by itself, you get a positive number.
So we invent a number called the square root of minus one, and it's always denoted by the
letter I for imaginary.
It's an imaginary number, and we just say that is a number whose square is minus one.
Well, a complex number, then, is just written in the form a plus bi, where i is the square
root of minus one, and we can represent it by a point in the plane, namely at the point
a comma b.
So the point in the plane a comma b represents the number a plus b times the square root
of minus one, or a plus bi.
Well, the way we can extend our regular arithmetic with regular numbers by extending it to these
complex numbers, first of all, addition and subtraction are just done coordinate-wise.
In other words, if you have a plus bi and c plus di, you just add the a and the c, and
you add the b plus d times i.
And multiplication is also done as usual in the sense of using the distributive law,
if you remember the distributive law, but let me just give you an illustration.
Let's do just one example of squaring a complex number, multiplying a complex number by itself.
So let's look at the number one plus two times i, that's one plus two times the square root
of minus one, and we'll square that complex number.
While squaring it, we just multiply it as though those were just two regular numbers.
We just use the distributive law and we see that that's one times one plus one times two
times the square root of minus one plus two times the square root of minus one times one
plus two times the square root of minus one times two times the square root of minus one.
And that's equal to 1 plus 4 times the square root of minus 1 plus 4 times, now, look what
we have here.
We had the square root of minus 1 times the square root of minus 1, which is minus 1.
So combining those, we get the number negative 3 plus 4 times the square root of minus 1.
Well, I want you to notice something about this squaring of this complex number because
it illustrates a geometric interpretation of doing arithmetic with complex numbers.
And that's what we're actually going to use.
Well, first of all, notice that the distance from the origin, 0, 0, to the point 1, 2, that
is the point on the plane that represents 1 plus 2 times 2i, 2 times the square root
of minus 1, is that distance from 0, 0 to 1, 2 is the square root of 5 by the Pythagorean
theorem.
You see, it's 1 in this direction and 2 up and down.
So by the Pythagorean theorem, the hypotenuse is the square root of 5.
Now look at the number that is the square of that complex number.
Remember the answer we got was negative 3 plus 4i.
Well, that point on the plane is negative 3 comma 4, and what's its distance to the
origin?
Well, once again, the Pythagorean theorem shows us that this is a 3, 4, and 5 right
triangle.
In other words, the hypotenuse is the square root of 3 squared plus 4 squared, which is
25, square root of 25 is 5.
So what that means is that we have, in order to square a number, what happened is that
the angle from, if we drew the line from the origin to the number that we were squaring,
that is the point in the plane, 1 comma 2, if we took that angle, the result of squaring
it just doubles the angle starting from the x-axis measuring up to that line.
It just doubles it to get to the answer, and the distance is just the square of the distance
from the origin of what we started.
In other words, the distance from 0, 0 to 1, 2 was the square root of 5, and the distance
to the square of it was 5.
So we double the angle and square the distance from the origin, and in general, multiplication
of complex numbers adds the angles from the positive x-axis to the one number and the
positive x-axis to the number that you're multiplying together.
It adds those distances and then takes the distances to the two points and multiplies
them together.
So squaring complex numbers doubles the angle and squares the distance to the origin.
So if we take any point in the plane and we move to a new point by doubling the angle
from the x-axis and then squaring the distance to the origin, what we're really doing in
terms of complex numbers is we're doing the square of those complex numbers.
Well, but we don't have to worry about the fact that complex numbers come into this.
We'll concentrate on the role of complex numbers in this whole thing.
That connection isn't necessary for what we're going to do.
It just speaks to the history and the significance of this particular process that I'm going
to describe.
So let's look at some examples and do this process of doubling the angle and squaring
the distance and see what happens.
Suppose that we start with a point, we just pick a point at random in the plane, and we
do this process of doubling the angle and squaring the distance.
Well, we can follow the future locations of that moving point indefinitely.
In other words, we do it once, double the angle, square the distance, and then we start
there, double the angle, square the distance.
And by the way, if we ever get an angle that goes more than halfway around more than 180
degrees from the x-axis, well, we go ahead and double it.
We just circle around backwards.
It's fine to go more than 360 degrees.
So we just double the angle and square the distance, and we get a sequence of points.
So starting at one point, we can draw all the points that we get to by repeatedly doing
this process of doubling the angle and squaring the distance.
And that sequence of points is called the orbit of the point.
It's telling where that point goes under that sequence of repeatedly applied operations.
Well, so let's notice something about different starting places.
Different starting places yield orbits that some of them go off to infinity, while some
other starting points yield orbits that are always contained in a circle around the origin.
In other words, they don't go off to infinity.
So let's remember what we're doing.
It's this process of doubling the angle and squaring the distance from the origin.
And notice that any point that starts distance less than one from the origin, when we repeat
this process, that point is going to get closer and closer and closer to the origin.
You see, because if it's less than one, when you square a number that's less than one,
the distance, you get a number that is even smaller.
And so it gets smaller and smaller and smaller, so it gets closer to the origin.
On the other hand, if we take a point whose distance began being bigger than distance one
from the origin, if you take some number that's larger than one and you double the angle, but
in this case, it doesn't really matter about the doubling the angle, it's just the distance
from the origin, if you start more than one from the origin and you square it, and then
you square that again when you do the process again, you're going to march out to infinity.
In other words, the orbit of any point that begins more than one unit from the origin is
going to have an orbit that's unbounded that goes to infinity.
Now, points that start exactly on the unit circle will simply stay distance one from
the origin.
They'll go around the unit circle by squaring the angle, but their distance to the origin
is exactly one, and when you double one, you just keep going around that on the unit circle.
Well, so what we've described is a process of taking a point and then following where
it goes under repeated applications of a process, namely in this case, doubling the angle, squaring
the distance.
Well, to get the interesting fractals that we're going to be talking about, that we're
seeking, is that we're going to add a tiny change to this motion.
I mean, so far our motion was quite simple, but we're going to just take one small addition
to this motion, and then we're going to investigate which points go off to infinity, in other
words, have orbits under this new process, repeated process, versus which ones stay bounded.
So that's what we're going to do, and so we're going to consider the following method of
generating a sequence of points in the plane.
So it's very similar to what we had before.
Here's what we do.
We start with a point, we double the angle and square the distance, just as we did before.
However, this time we add a shift after we've doubled and squared.
In other words, what we're really doing is adding one fixed complex number each time.
So let me just give an example rather than explaining it more in general.
I'll just explain it with a particular example.
Suppose that we take as our adjustment just moving the point to the left one unit after
we have doubled the angle and squared the distance.
So here's what we do.
We take a point in the plane, we double the angle and square the distance, and then move
horizontally to the left one unit.
And that becomes our next point.
And then we start there and do the same process again.
In other words, we double the angle and square the distance.
But then we shift to the left one point.
We use one unit.
We always do the same shift, in this case, one unit directly to the left.
Now let's look at some starting points to see what their orbits are under this new process.
Okay, so let's start with the origin, 0 plus 0, 0i, the origin, 0, 0 in the plane.
What happens if we do the process of squaring the distance to the origin, well that's 0,
and doubling the angle, well there's no angle.
So in other words, you just sit there and then we shift by minus one to the left.
Well that gives us the point minus one, zero, minus one plus zero, i, if we're thinking
in terms of complex numbers, or minus one comma zero, if we're just thinking of the
point in the plane, that's the second point in the orbit of the point, zero, zero.
Now let's do the same thing.
We'll double the angle.
Well the angle in this case is 180 degrees, because you see from the positive x-axis you
go 180 degrees to get to that point.
So you double the angle, that brings the point out in the positive x-axis direction.
So what is the distance out?
That you go when you square that number, when you square the distance.
Well you square the distance one, you get one.
So doubling the angle and squaring the distance gives us the point now one, zero.
But then we shift to the left by minus one.
So that gets us back to the point zero, zero.
So that means the second point in the orbit has returned us to the point zero, zero.
And therefore if we then take the third point, we're going to get back to the point minus
one, zero, and then we're going to double the angle, square the distance, and shift
by minus one, get back to zero, zero.
You see?
So this orbit is bounded.
It doesn't go off to infinity.
It stays bounded, because in fact it just flip-flops between those two points.
Well, now let's start with a different number in the plane, but do the same process of squaring
the distance and doubling the angle and shifting by minus one to the left, and seeing what
happens to that point.
Okay, let's start with the point two plus three i.
Well if we take two plus three i and we square it, and then we add minus one plus zero i,
in other words we shift to the left, we get the point minus five plus twelve i, that's
the square of two plus three i, and you can either just multiply it out or take my word
for it, and then you shift minus one, just shift to the left, and you get negative six
plus twelve i.
Now you take, that's our second point in the orbit of the point two plus three i.
We started at two plus three i, we did this process, and we got negative six plus twelve
i.
We got a point in the plane.
Now, that point we do the same thing again.
We square it to get the distance away from the origin for the next point, and we double
the angle, and then we shift by minus one.
Well, doing that process, we end up at the point negative 109 minus 144 i.
Well, it's way far away from the origin.
You notice that?
So when we do this process again that involves squaring the distance from the origin, it's
going to get huger and huger and huger, and it's clear that that process is going to have
the orbit of that point is going to go off to infinity.
So we've seen two points.
One point, one starting point, had an orbit that was bounded, it just oscillated between
two points, and another point had an orbit that went off to infinity, and that is going
to be the interesting feature that we're going to look at in defining what are going to be
called the Julia sets.
The set of points whose orbits are bounded creates what is called the filled-in Julia
set for the number minus one plus zero i.
In other words, the shift minus one plus zero i doing this dance of the points tells us
some of the points have bounded orbits under that process, and some of them have unbounded
orbits, and those points that have bounded orbits, it are the points that are called
the filled-in Julia set.
Well, now notice that the filled-in Julia set is a, for the shift minus one is a very
complicated looking thing, so look at this image here.
This image here is the set of points for which the orbit of those points is bounded, whereas
if you look at the points that are outside of that set, that those are the points whose
orbits are unbounded under the process of doing the double the angle, square the distance,
and shift by minus one to the left.
So this then is giving us a set, and by the way, why do I say filled-in Julia set?
It turns out that the Julia set is the interface between those points whose orbits are bounded
versus those points whose orbits go off to infinity, and so the Julia set is actually
the boundary of that thing, and then the inside is the filled-in Julia set.
Well notice that when we were just talking about the circle, the process where we added
zero after the shift, we didn't add anything after the shift, we just started in a circle,
and we said we just square the distance, square the distance, and double the angle, and we
then didn't shift it, we didn't add anything, or we could think of it as adding zero plus
zero i, so it's the shift that didn't do anything, then the Julia set for that, the filled-in
Julia set, was the unit disk, but when we just shifted by minus one, we got this complicated
looking Julia set, so this is very interesting.
Now every complex number, a plus b i, has a Julia set, namely the filled-in Julia set
for that number, a plus b i, is all those starting points whose iterations are bounded,
in other words whose orbits, when we do it infinitely often, stay bounded, that's the
Julia set. Now what's the amazing thing about these Julia sets is how complicated they look.
Remember for the one where we didn't do any shifting, we just got the circle, and yet
when we just shift by minus one after doing this, doubling the angle and squaring the
distance, shifting by minus one gave us this very complicated set, and now let's look at
a bunch of these pictures of these Julia sets for different numbers of shifts. The colors
are associated with how quickly the points go off to infinity, for example, here's one,
if after doubling the angle and squaring the distance, we always shift by negative point
three one plus point oh four i, this is the set of points whose iterated image is bounded.
Now here's another one, and by the way, notice that we have lots of, in these images, sometimes
we have lots of decimal points involved in these images, for example this one, negative
point one nine four plus zero point six five five seven i. We need all those decimal points
because it turns out that a little tiny change in decimal points gives a totally different
character to the set of points that stay bounded. That's the interesting thing about
the Julia sets. They're so complicated when it seems like such a simple idea, which points
go off to infinity and which don't. You might think they'd be all sort of clustered together
and like a circle, but it's not the case. Look at all of these things and you can see
the numbers that are the shift numbers that are associated with that Julia set. So some
Julia sets give all sorts of complicated things. Now let me, in fact, just observing,
let's look at some of these Julia sets. Some of the Julia sets have the property that they're
completely disconnected from each other. They're just made of little pieces and they're none
of them that hang together. For example, this one, it's just broken up. And by the way,
I'll just tell you that it turns out that the actual geometry of the thing or topology
of the thing is called a canter set. So when they're broken up, when a Julia set is broken
up, it's really like a canter set, but I'll talk a little about that in a future lecture.
But here's an example of a Julia set. If we look at that little tiny red square and magnify
that little square so that we're looking at it more closely, what we see is that in fact
the picture looks essentially identical. And in fact, in some cases, exactly identical
to what it looked like before. Well, we saw that some Julia sets are connected
and some are not connected. And every point in the complex plane is associated with a
Julia set. Well, a mathematician by the name of Gaston Julia, I should tell you a little
about him. Gaston Julia was a French mathematician. He lived in the early part of the 20th century.
And by the way, one interesting feature of him, he got his nose blown off during World
War I and had to wear an artificial nose. But anyway, his mathematical exploration of
complex numbers led him to define and investigate these Julia sets in the 1920s. And he died
in 1978. So I don't know if he ever saw the beauty of those sets that have his name, but
he certainly didn't see them with the detail that we can view them now. But it wasn't until
Benoit Mandelbrot got to look at these that it became even more interesting. Benoit Mandelbrot
is really the father of fractals. He invented the word fractal. He based it on the Latin
fractus, meaning broken or irregular. And there are all sorts of fractals different
from these Julia sets. And we talked about some of them in the in our joy of thinking
teaching company course. But but Mandelbrot decided to consider all the points whose Julia
sets are connected. You know, some of the Julia sets associated with the shift, some
of them gave a connected set and some not connected. Well, looking at the set of all
of those points, whose corresponding Julia sets are connected is called the Mandelbrot
set. And it may be the most famous fractal of all. It's got infinite complexity. And we
can see in here for here's the picture of the Mandelbrot set. And we can see by looking
at little parts of it that we magnify that that even with these millions and millions
of times magnification, that we just see more and more interesting structure to this Mandelbrot
set. It's just amazing. And and you can talk about these things, they're different bulbs
and different fingers that stick out in different numbers. So this is the Mandelbrot set. And
so let me point out what it means. If we take a point that's inside the Mandelbrot set, then
the Julia set associated with it is connected. You can see that. Whereas if you take a point
that's just outside the Mandelbrot set, you can see that the Julia set associated with
it is not connected. So so that is the basic definition of the Mandelbrot set. Well, there
the Mandelbrot set is still the an object of very interesting mathematical study.
One thing that's known about the Mandelbrot set is that it's connected,
meaning that it doesn't fall into pieces. But nobody knows to this day, it's an unsolved problem
about whether or not the Mandelbrot set has a feature called local connectivity is it locally
connected. That is, and locally connected just means that if you have two nearby points in the
Mandelbrot set, can you get from one to the other of them by a small by a small relatively small
arc? Or do you have to somehow sometimes go a long way to get to very two very close points?
Well, the dance that we described in the plane and the study of Julia sets are geometric issues
found within the area called dynamical systems in the complex plane. In this lecture, we saw how
infinitely intricate images arise naturally from repeating a rather simple process, but
repeating it infinitely many times. Julia sets record those points that do not fly off to infinity
under this repeated process. The Mandelbrot set records which Julia sets are connected.
The study of these complex fractals is an area of active investigation both in mathematics,
but it's also used in art. Well, in the next lecture, we'll see how a puzzle about walking
over bridges led to a whole branch of mathematics called graph theory. I'll see you then.
