Welcome back.
One of the most potent sources of deep mathematical ideas arises when mathematicians have tackled
specific problems.
Depending on one problem, new ideas arise that lead to whole areas of study.
One such problem was the famous Königsberg bridge problem that Linnard Euler solved and
published in 1736.
His solution and the associated analysis introduced the subject that we now know as
graph theory.
Well, a graph, by the way, is simply a collection of points called vertices and edges that connect
some pairs of those vertices, and we'll talk more about that later.
Euler's solution to the Königsberg bridge problem led to a complete characterization
of when the edges of a graph can be traced without covering the same edge twice.
It turns out that other apparently similar kinds of questions about graphs remain tantalizingly
out of reach to this day.
One of the richest sources for developing mathematical ideas is to start with a specific
problem, as I say, and somehow pare it down to its essentials.
Well, so let me tell you about the Königsberg bridge problem.
Königsberg was a city in Prussia that was nestled on an island and the surrounding
banks where two rivers converged.
So there were seven bridges that span the rivers and the riverbanks.
The problem was, is it possible to walk over all seven of those bridges without crossing
over the same bridge twice and ending up where we started?
That question became known as the Königsberg bridge problem.
Well, Leonard Euler solved the Königsberg bridge problem in 1736, and his, as I said,
his solution led to graph theory.
Well, here's what he did, and this is a strategy for mathematical development that's been
used many times, namely what you do is you take a situation and call out the essential
ingredients.
You forget all the distractions, and then once you've called out the essential ingredients,
you abstract those to create a mathematical idea.
Well, the features that are pertinent to the Königsberg bridge problem are what landmasses
are connected by what bridges.
So it doesn't matter, for example, how big the island is or how big the shoreline is.
You could put a single point to represent each landmass and then draw edges that just
connect those points to represent the bridges.
So that means that the Königsberg bridge problem can be rephrased as a question about
whether it's possible to traverse the drawing that we've just made that just has these dots
and the connecting lines.
So this is where the mathematical abstraction comes in.
We create a concept of a graph that is illustrated by this Königsberg bridge drawing.
You see, a graph records connections.
That was the important thing about the Königsberg bridge problem.
So a graph in its essence and the definition of a graph is that a graph is simply a collection
of points and a collection of edges that connect pairs of those points.
Well, at this level of abstraction, a graph could model many things, many kinds of connections.
For example, a graph could model roads going between cities, that if there's a road between
two cities, you could put a vertex at each city, and if there's a road between them,
you could draw a line between them.
Graphs could capture the important ideas of wiring diagrams on a circuit board.
In fact, the idea of a graph, once you have the idea, it can model connections even that
are not geometrical.
For example, you could use a graph to model a family tree where a person and an offspring
are connected by a line segment.
A graph, then, let me repeat, is simply a collection of vertices and edges.
And by the way, the word graph here, it's not really related to the idea of a graph
that you might see in a newspaper or the graph of a function.
These are different ideas, and it just occurred to me we're using the same word in different
ways, and that's typical in mathematics.
Well, so the Königsberg bridge graph, the graph that we get by abstracting the Königsberg
bridge problem by just putting dots and connecting lines, we can, by doing that, we can now restate
the Königsberg bridge problem in terms of a graph, namely saying, can we trace that
related graph without going over the same edge more than once?
So it's the connectivity that's important, whereas such things as the length of the lines,
that doesn't matter, or even whether we draw them as curved or wiggly, it doesn't matter.
It's just what is connected to what.
So let's notice a feature of a graph that we can trace without going over the same
edge twice, and that is important, and then this will allow us to solve the Königsberg
bridge problem.
So suppose that we had some graph, and so for the moment put aside the Königsberg bridge
graph and just think of some other graph.
Okay, suppose that you had a graph that you could trace in the following way.
That is, you started a point and you could trace over the whole graph going over every
edge exactly once and finally returning back to where you started.
Suppose you had such a graph.
Let's notice something about every vertex in the graph.
Every time you come into a vertex, you must leave that vertex afterwards on a different
edge.
So you come into a vertex and you leave a vertex.
Then since you come back to where you started and you started leaving and then you may even
have come back there several times in and out, in and out, but eventually you come back
to the beginning, it means that every single vertex in the whole graph has the property
that you visited it an even number of times.
In other words, you went in and went out, in and out.
So they came in pairs.
So that means that every vertex has an even number of edges coming from it.
And by the way, there's a little technicality, so let me just say it, which is that you might
have an edge that's actually a loop that comes back to the same point.
And we want to count that as two different edge ends that come into the graph because
you see you could go around that loop and continue on.
So we're really looking at how many edge ends come into each vertex.
And they're an even number from each one if we can trace the graph.
Now the Königsberg bridge graph then, now we go back and look at that graph and we notice
that it has four odd order vertices.
That is to say the order of a vertex is just how many of those edges or edge ends are coming
out from that vertex.
And since each one, in fact, of the four vertices that are representing the land masses have
an odd number of things coming out, we see that it can't be traced because if we could
trace that graph, every vertex would have to have an even number of things coming out.
Well, as always, when we answer one question in mathematics, we raise others.
In this case, suppose that we have a graph where it doesn't fail because of this issue.
In other words, we have a graph where every vertex has an even number of things coming
out from it.
Can we trace it?
Well, the answer is yes.
In Euler, when he settled the Königsberg bridge problem, he also characterized those graphs
that could be traced without duplicating edges.
And so here is his theorem.
It's the Euler circuit theorem that a graph with only even degree vertices can be traced
without duplicating edges starting it and ending at any vertex of the graph.
And by the way, I have to say I've used a word degree of a vertex and I didn't define
it.
The degree of the vertex just says how many of these edges are coming out, or more specifically
ends of edges come out from each vertex.
That's the degree of a vertex.
If we have a circuit on a graph that starts at a point, goes over every edge in the whole
graph exactly once, and then returns to where we started, that's called an Euler circuit.
Well, so we're trying to prove the theorem that if every vertex has an even degree,
then we can traverse the graph.
Here's the way we prove it.
Just start anywhere.
And head off on an edge and walk as far as you can, whenever you get to another vertex,
you say, is there another edge that I haven't used yet?
And if so, head out on that edge.
You don't even think about which edge you're going to take, don't look at it and try to
be efficient or anything, just go randomly.
Well, let's notice something about that path.
If you have a graph where every vertex has even degree, notice that that path has to
come back to where you started.
And the reason for that is this.
As you head out on an edge, you get to another vertex.
But then, because you've come into that vertex, only one edge has been used.
So there must be some other edge that exits, because remember, even number of edges coming
out from that vertex.
So you can go in, and therefore there's a place to go out.
And at every vertex you end, you get to, when you come in, you have to be able to go out.
You might visit the same vertex again, coming in, going out, always in twos.
The only time you can get stuck is if you get back to where you started.
Because where you started, you left, and it has a total of an even number of edges coming
in, and therefore it might complete all those edges when you come back.
So if you have a graph, all of whose vertices have even degree, if you start someplace and
just continue, you definitely will return back to where you started.
Well, suppose that you started with our graph and you did this, traversal, but you may not
have covered every single edge.
So how do we get a circuit that has more edges in it?
Well, it's very simple.
We say, as we were traversing this circuit, we get to some vertex at which there are unused
edges.
And then we just go to that place where there are unused edges, and instead of continuing
on the way we did before, we first just head out on an unused edge.
And we continue going on unused edges as far as possible.
Well, that path, that one on the new unused edges, must return back to where we started
there, for the same reason as before.
And therefore, we can splice in that new circuit into the old circuit that we had before to
create a longer circuit that uses more edges in the graph.
And then if we still don't have all of the edges in the graph, we do the same thing again.
Well, this can't go on forever.
Pretty soon we have all the edges in the graph.
So that is a proof that if of the Euler circuit theorem, that if you have a graph in which
every vertex has an even number of edges coming out, that is even degree, then you can start
anywhere and draw a circuit that covers every single edge and comes back to where we started.
Now by the way, if you have a graph that has exactly two odd degree vertices, then you
can trace that graph by starting at one of the odd degree points and coming to the other
one.
And the strategy of proof ending at the other odd degree vertex.
And this is the reason for the proof.
It's the same proof, so I won't go through it in detail, but it's exactly the same argument.
Namely, you just start at one point, which has an odd degree, and just keep going over
it as long as you can until you can't go any further.
Well, the only place that you can end up if you can't go any further is at the other odd
degree vertex.
You may not have completed the covering of the whole graph that way, but if there are
any unused edges, you just go to a vertex that has an unused edge and splice in another
circuit just as we did before.
Okay.
So that proves, and by the way, that's called an Euler path.
It's an Euler path if you can start at one vertex, go over every edge exactly once, and
then end up at another point.
Well there's a related question about graphs, which is instead of covering every single edge,
suppose we ask the question, is it possible to visit every vertex exactly once?
Not go over every edge, but just go through every vertex once.
But such a path on a graph is called a Hamiltonian circuit.
It sounds like it might be just as easy to prove as an Euler circuit that is to characterize
which ones you can and which graphs you can and which graphs you cannot visit every vertex
without going through the same vertex more than once.
But it turns out that finding the Hamiltonian circuits is a very difficult problem, and
basically nobody knows any efficient way to decide whether a graph has such a Hamiltonian
circuit.
In fact, you can always do it by trial and error kinds of things.
You could just try to go all as often as you can, and then by trying all possible paths
you could just see whether or not one of them is Hamiltonian.
But that is a long and laborious process.
In fact, nobody can either prove that you can find an efficient algorithm for finding
such a Hamiltonian path or not find an efficient algorithm.
In fact, in a sense, this is related to a famous million-dollar prize problem that is
called the P equals NP problem, which the P stands for polynomial and the NP stands
for non-deterministic polynomial problem, which asks the question of whether or not
you can find an efficient algorithm for determining whether or not such a thing as this, there's
a Hamiltonian circuit or not.
Well, you get a million-dollar prize for solving that problem, but people have been working
on it for many, many years, and basically I would recommend a different strategy for
earning a million dollars because this one is a really difficult one.
Okay, so let's turn to a different graph theory problem, and that comes about when we consider
the map maker's problem, the cartographer's problem, of picking colors for the countries
or states on a map.
Now suppose that we have a map, and we want to color it, we're a map maker, and we have
the constraint that we want countries that share a common border to have different colors,
of course, because if they have the same color, you can't tell where the border is very well.
So the question is, what is the minimum number of colors that will always suffice to color
any potential world map?
Well, in 1852, Francis Guthrie made a conjecture that became very famous, and it was known
as the four-color problem.
Namely, he conjectured that four colors would suffice for any map, but he was not able to
prove it.
And because the question is, it's easy to state, and it also has some erroneous proofs
that are relatively easy to discover and easy to be fooled by, by the way, the general public
embraced the four-color problem, and it was perhaps the most famous unsolved problem in
mathematics for a century.
And many amateur mathematicians worked very hard on this conjecture, and they often would
find one of these subtly flawed proofs, and they think they had the proof.
Well, it wasn't until 1976 that mathematicians Kenneth Appel and Wolfgang Hocken at the University
of Illinois finally proved the four-color theorem, and the result was celebrated on
the covers of newspapers and the front pages of newspapers and magazines, and it was celebrated
with the slogan, four colors suffice, appearing on many places, including on postage stamp
cancellation marks, if you got a letter from the University of Illinois.
Well, the proof involved the extensive use of computer checking, of thousands of cases
that were involved, and this role of computer verification was a new idea, and it was rather
controversial aspect of this particular mathematical proof.
Well, so let me review the question.
The four-color problem asks whether every map in which each country is connected, by the
way, you don't allow countries like the United States, has a basic part in Hawaii and Alaska.
You can't count that as one country.
If every country is connected, the question is, can you color the country so that any
two countries that share a border are not the same color, they have different colors?
Well, first of all, let me clarify what it means to share a border.
It's okay to share a point.
For example, at the four corners, the states that are called the four corners point in
the United States, where you have four states that all meet at a single point, it would
be okay to color diametrically opposite states the same color because they just share a point.
They don't share an actual part of the boundary.
But the question is, can you draw a, can you color a map so that any two countries that
actually share a non-zero length of their border actually have different colors?
Well, the strategy for working on this problem is to take the dual of a map.
The dual of a map is created when we associate a graph with the map in the following way.
For every country or state in the map that we're trying to color, just put a single vertex.
You just put a dot.
Now, after you put the dot in this vertex in each country, then if you have two countries
or states that are bordering each other, you can connect them with an arc, with an edge.
You see, you connect them with an edge.
So what you've done is you've taken your map and created a dual problem.
The dual problem is that you've drawn a graph on the, either the sphere or the piece of
paper, and the vertices then are the things that you want to color.
In particular, your goal now is to say, can you color the vertices in such a way that
if you have two vertices that are connected by an edge, that those two vertices have a
different color?
Well, one of the techniques used in proving the four-color theorem was to use a theorem
of Euler that's called the Euler characteristic theorem.
And this is a very famous theorem and very useful for many, many theorems in mathematics,
but in particular for the four-color theorem.
And what it says is the following, that if you draw any connected graph in the plane,
or in fact on the two sphere, if you count the number of vertices, subtract the number
of edges, and add the number of faces, you always get two.
So let's just look at this example here that you see and confirm that the vertices minus
the number of edges plus the number of f is the number of regions.
And by the way, the outside area counts as one of the regions.
So we count that outside area, and then the answer is that we always get two.
Well, to prove this Euler characteristic theorem, let's go ahead and think and do the
following method, which by the way illustrates one of the most powerful methods of proving
theorems in mathematics.
It's actually a proof by induction, but I will just show you that it just means a step-by-step
process by which you can prove a theorem such as this.
So we're going to prove that for every connected graph, the number of vertices minus the number
of edges plus the number of faces is always equal to two.
The step-by-step process is this.
We simply start with a single edge.
So we've drawn an edge, and by the way, notice that I can draw these edges curved.
They don't have to be straight.
That's one of the features of graph theory.
It's just the connections.
It doesn't have to do with whether they're straight or anything like that.
So if we just look at this very simplest graph, this is a graph, it's got two vertices and
one edge.
Notice that it has, since it has two vertices, v is two, it has one edge, one.
It has one face because all the exterior of it is one connected face, so that's one.
And we see that two minus one plus one is in fact equal to two.
So we verified this theorem for that one case of a single arc.
So we can build up any connected graphs by adding one edge at a time and seeing what
the consequences are of adding an edge.
Suppose that we add an edge from one of the existing vertices, and we just add that edge
to and create another vertex sticking like that.
Well then we've added one more edge and one more vertex, you see?
But those cancel out, and therefore we still have the relationship that v minus e plus
f equals two.
Well we could add another edge with a vertex, and once again we still maintain the property
that v minus e plus f equals two.
Well we might also add an edge that connects two existing vertices, two vertices that we've
already drawn.
For example here, I could connect that vertex to that vertex.
What's the effect of connecting two existing vertices?
Well, we don't add another vertex, but we do add another edge, and since we connected
two vertices that were already there, we broke up a region into two parts, and therefore
we add one more region.
So we added one more edge and one more region, and so we still maintain the property that
v minus e plus f equals two.
We could just continue this process to construct any graph even with a million edges in the
plane, and so that's the proof by induction that v minus e plus f always equals two.
Well one consequence of this Euler characteristic theorem is the fact that is very important
in the four color theorem, which is that if you have any graph in the plane, then it must
have a vertex that has five or fewer edges coming out.
You can't have every vertex have six or more edges coming out.
And let's see why this is true.
Suppose that you imagined you could have a graph in the plane so that every vertex has
six or more edges coming out.
Then the number of edges e would be greater than or equal to six v, because at every vertex
six things are coming out divided by two, because we're counting each end of an edge
and therefore we have to divide by two.
So the number of edges e would be greater than or equal to three v, or just doing the
little arithmetic, the number of vertices is less than or equal to e over three.
Well likewise, if we think about each face, we can take each face and add more edges to
the face to divide up that face into triangles, that is to three-sided regions.
So suppose you had a four-sided region.
For example, suppose you had a four-sided region here, and we're imagining that every
vertex still has six or more things.
We could just add another edge in like this, and it's increasing the number of edges that
come from each vertex, but we've divided those regions into regions that have only three edges
on their boundary.
So once we've augmented our original supposed counter example, that is to a graph with the
property that every vertex has six edges coming out or more, we see that three times that
number of faces over two is equal to the number of edges.
The reason for that is that every face has three edges to it, but each edge would be
counted twice because it's in two faces.
And so we have the formula f equals two-thirds e.
Well then, v minus e plus f would be less than or equal to e over three minus e plus
two-thirds e, but that equals zero.
But that contradicts the fact that v minus e plus f equals two.
So every map has to have a country with five or fewer neighbors.
That's interesting in itself.
If you take any map on the globe or on a piece of paper, there's got to be at least one country
that has five or fewer neighbors.
Well this fact follows from looking at a map and then we drew the dual graph and we realized
that the dual graph must have a vertex of degree five or less, and therefore the corresponding
country has five or fewer bordering neighbors.
And by the way, if you remember stereographic projection way back in a previous lecture,
the same holds for the sphere because there's a one-to-one correspondence between the sphere
minus the north pole and the points in the plane.
Now the fact about these countries and having a country with five or fewer neighbors gives
us the idea of a set of unavoidable configurations.
It's a set of patterns of countries such that at least one of those configurations must exist
in every planar map.
So we know that the following is an unavoidable set of unavoidable configurations, namely the
set of having a country with one neighbor, having a country with two neighbors, having
a country with three neighbors, having a country with four neighbors, or having a country with
five neighbors.
One of those configurations must be true for every single map that you can draw.
Now it turns out that there are other collections of unavoidable configurations.
They don't have to just be those group.
You could say instead of saying that there has to be at least one of those, you can augment
our collection of unavoidable configurations to much, much greater.
But let me prove why the four-color theorem, the strategy for proving the four-color theorem,
which is suppose that you had a map that could not be colored with four colors.
Could it have a country that is surrounded by only three other countries?
Well the answer is no, because if you took that map that you thought was a counter-example
to the four-color theorem, but it was minimal in the sense that it had the fewest countries
that you couldn't color with four colors, you could just erase one of the borders with
a neighboring country from that one that's surrounded by three, and then color the whole
map with four colors.
Well then what you could do is put the border back in, and then only three colors surround
that one country, so use the fourth color right there.
Well that would be a proof that you can't have a, and a minimal counter-example to the
four-color theorem, you can't have any country that has just three neighbors.
Well there are other sets of unavoidable configurations that are more specific, so instead of saying
that there's at least one country with either one, two, three, four, or five neighbors, we
could say that there's at least one country that has one, two, three, or four neighbors,
or there's a country that has five neighbors that's next to another country with five neighbors,
or there's a country with five neighbors next to one with six neighbors, there's a longer
list.
And one strategy approving the four-color theorem is to take a smallest counter-example and
show that it can't have any of unavoidable configurations.
Kenneth Appel and Wolfgang Hocken proved that four colors suffice in 1976, and here's how
they did it.
They established a set of unavoidable configurations that contained nearly 2,000 sub-configurations.
And then for each of those configurations, they showed that arguments must allow the
inductive coloring outside each configuration to imply the ability to adjust the outside
coloring to extend it over the inside of the configuration.
In other words, they showed that you couldn't have this little configuration and be part
of a counter-example that's minimal to the four-color theorem.
And I wanted to show you this.
I found this in my file drawers.
This is an actual photocopy of the paper by Appel and Hocken that was produced in 1976.
And first of all, notice how long it is.
But I thought that what was most interesting about it is the fact that this section right
here lists all of these 2,000 unavoidable set of unavoidable configurations.
Each one is coded in this clever way.
And look at this, 2,000 all hand-drawn, and each one was then shown using a computer to
exhaustively go through and show that you couldn't have a minimal counter-example that
had this particular configuration.
And so this was an amazing piece of work from 1976.
Well, the four-color theorem had a colorful history.
And people have made mistakes in the past, and people still work on simplifying the proof.
And in fact, newer proofs are much shorter than Appel and Hocken's original proof.
However, no proof has yet been found that can be practically carried out without computer
assistance.
Well, graph theory introduced the mathematical ideas that are geometrical without being associated
with specific shapes or sizes.
And that perspective led to topology, which we will introduce in the next lecture.
I'll see you then.
