Welcome back.
Most objects in our everyday world are more or less rigid, cars, buildings, tables.
They have a fixed size and a fixed shape.
Consequently, the common building blocks that we use to describe the shapes in our world
include the sort of firm templates of things like a straight line, a triangle, a circle, a sphere.
These kinds of ideas and shapes are the bedrock of classical geometry.
However, some objects in our world don't bend or do bend or stretch or they distort.
Like, for example, rubber bands do, water beds do, other things bend and stretch.
And I don't know if our waistlines would be an example of this.
But in our mind's eye, we can imagine that rigid objects of our world could be viewed as stretchable and amorphic.
It is in the abstract.
And that image gives us a whole new potential reality to explore.
In such an unreasonably contortable universe, we can discover things that surprise us and amuse us.
And we'll begin our exploration of the contortable space through some examples that may surprise you.
Well, one of the best ways to create new ideas is to imagine that some feature of our world is altered in some way
and then explore the consequences of that new reality.
And so here's what we're going to see when we give up rigidity of objects.
So what we want to do is discover the classification of objects, that is, which objects would be the same as each other
if the concept of being the same is based on this looser sense of geometric equivalence.
So what we want to do is develop a concept of this kind of a rubbery world.
And let's first of all look at some examples.
Now, in a rubbery world, a circle, such as this rubber band, is exactly the same thing as a triangle.
You see, because you can take a rubber band and just change it into the shape of a triangle.
So we'd want to call those two things the same.
If we were in this rubbery world, we'd say circle, triangle, same thing, or a square, it's the same thing.
Or in this kind of a rubbery kind of a world, we'd say that a sphere is the same as a football.
And shape, because you could stretch a sphere and just make it look like a football.
Well, by the way, there's a sort of a humorous definition of a topologist.
And by the way, I am a topologist, so I'm not sure I appreciate this very much.
But anyway, the humorous definition of a topologist, which is the subject that we're studying in this lecture, topology,
a topologist is a person who can't tell the difference between a donut and a coffee cup.
So here I have a donut and a coffee cup.
Now, it's not obvious that a donut and a coffee cup can be stretched into one another.
So what we need to do in order to understand that those in fact are equivalent to each other in this distortible world
is to think about how we could take something that is in the shape of this donut
and stretch it into something that's in the shape of this coffee cup.
Well, okay, so now we need to revert to sort of a moving picture view of distortion.
So suppose that we start with a donut and then we stretched part of the donut out
to make it sort of having a thin part of the donut here and then we just expanded part of the donut.
So it's a big, fat, flat piece over on this side and then just a small donut part on this side.
Then what we could do is take our hand and just punch a hole into that side of the, not a hole,
but an indentation into that side of the donut and you can see that what we see is a transformation
that stretched this donut-shaped thing into this coffee cup-shaped thing.
So that's why a topologist is a person who can't tell the difference between a coffee cup and a donut
because they can be stretched one into the other.
Well, okay, now a rubber band, as we saw, can be stretched to resemble a circle or a square or a triangle
and in fact it can be distorted into any polygonal shape whatsoever.
It could be a five-sided figure, six-sided figure.
And so from this rubber sheet geometry point of view, all those shapes are equivalent
because you can deform one into the other.
But no matter how hard we try, we couldn't take something that looks like a ping-pong ball
and make it look like a hollow inner tube.
But we need to develop our sense or intuition about what's allowed and what's not allowed
in order to really pin down why that is the case.
But the goal here is to realize that this rubber sheet geometry gives us an idea of geometric equivalence
that's more flexible than Euclidean geometry and yet it does capture some of the geometric character of objects.
And the inequivalence of shapes, such as we'll see in a little while that a sphere is not the same as a donut,
even in the stretchable world, it gives us some conceptual models that we can test against our universe
and that it actually helps us to potentially describe reality.
In fact, we were talking about the shape of the universe in a previous lecture
and remember there were two kinds of questions that we considered.
One was the question of the curvature of the universe.
Well, curvature is an idea that is not a topological idea.
In other words, if you were in a rubber sheet world, you can easily take a flat disk and stretch it to look like a saddle, no problem.
Or you can take something like a saddle and stretch it to look like the boundary of a sphere, no problem.
So the concept of curvature is not a topological issue, it's a geometrical issue.
So the difference between rigid geometry and topology is that things like curvature and exact shape go out the window when we're talking about topology.
But the different configurations of space, such as we talked about whether the universe might be modeled by a torus shape,
where you go around it one way and go around it another, you see different things in different directions, that is a topological question.
So whether the universe is like in the shape of a torus or in the shape of the Poincare d'Odecahedral space, remember that one,
that all of those are referring to the topology of the space.
Well, so let's get back here now to topology.
I'm introducing this concept of equivalence in geometric objects, but that's based on distortability.
Can we distort one object to look like another?
And so what I want to do is start by just first looking at some examples so that we can get some flavor of how to look at objects and see which ones are equivalent.
So let's go ahead and look at some objects, and I'm going to just draw some objects and ask you to think about the question,
could you stretch one to make it look like another?
So for example, and just to be grounded, what I'm going to do is use some letters of the alphabet.
So here's the O is the letter of the alphabet.
Could you take the letter O and stretch it to look like, say, the letter E?
Well, the answer is no, you couldn't stretch it, because in order to get from an O to an E, you'd have to either cut things out or glue things together and you're not allowed to cut or glue.
In other words, there are some features of the E that no matter what stretching you do couldn't become an O.
One of those features is the endpoints at the end of the E.
You see, if you were a creature whose entire universe were this E, if you went to this point right at the end of the top of the E, you'd have only one way to go from that point.
Whereas every single point on the O, you'd have two different directions to go, even if you took the O and you stretched it around and made it a different shape.
So an O is equivalent to a triangle or a square under this deformable map, but notice that every time you take a point on a triangle, there are two different directions you can go.
OK, so here's an E. Here's another letter of the alphabet, a T.
Now, let's ask ourselves the question, is an E equivalent to a T under this kind of deformation?
Well, the answer is yes, it is.
You see, because here's what you could do with, you know, what we're allowed to do is we're allowed to stretch or shrink.
We're allowed to bend things, but what we're not allowed to do is glue any two points together that aren't glued together before, or we're not allowed to break any things apart.
A good sort of physical way to think about this equivalence that we're developing is the idea that if you imagine our objects made of molecules that are hanging on to nearby molecules, you're not allowed to break the bonds between one molecule and the nearby ones, but you are allowed to stretch or shrink them.
So in the case of, for example, this E and the T, how would we get from one to the other?
Well, here's one way we could do it. We could take the T and first just stretch out the top of the T and shrink the bottom of the T, the vertical line a little bit to get to this figure, and then what we could do is just fold those two parts inward.
And so when we fold them inward, you see, we just fold them inward and now turn it over and we have our E.
You see, so an E is equivalent to a T under this kind of stretching deformation. We didn't have to glue any points together or tear any points apart.
Well, one, let's just do, just for fun, let's do another example of a space. And by the way, it's very important in drawing these letters to draw them exactly.
In other words, if I put serifs, you know, these little lines on the tops or bottoms, well, that changes the topology of the letter.
So I'm carefully drawing a letter without serifs, for example.
So, so here's an L. Is that or is that not equivalent to the letter N?
Well, the answer is it is equivalent because we could just stretch the N out and make it into the shape of an L.
Could you take an L and make it look like an E?
Well, no, you couldn't because an E or a T, because they're equivalent, has one point, that point right there, at which there are three exits from the point.
And no matter how you stretch an E, that point will always have three different directions you could go.
If your universe were that E, no matter how you stretch it, at that point, there'd be three exits.
And yet on the L, every single point in the middle of the L has two points, two directions to go, and at the end you just have one point at the ends.
Okay, so that's the kind of feature that we look for in order to distinguish whether one space is like another.
Well, let's look at a different kind of an example to see what kinds of distinctions we can make among spaces.
So, for example, suppose that we take a sphere.
Now, a sphere, this means the boundary of a ball, as we've seen many times before.
Let's consider the relationship between a sphere and a torus.
Remember, the torus is the boundary of a donut.
So, here we have a sphere and here we have a torus.
Now, here's a question.
Can we decide whether or not the torus and the sphere are topologically different?
And what we're describing is topologically different, meaning can you distort one to make it look like the other?
Well, at first you might say, well, it's obvious you can't make one look like the other because there's a hole in the torus.
But we'll see, particularly later in the lecture, that that kind of intuition can often be misleading.
So, we have to be very careful.
But there is a feature of the torus that definitely we can use to show that it's different from a sphere, no matter how we stretch it.
And here's how we do it.
Look at this curve, J, right here, this curve where we would cut along the torus, along this band of the torus.
And notice something about that curve.
In fact, we actually talked about that curve in a previous lecture when we're talking about the universe,
that if we cut along that curve, we get something that's equivalent to a cylinder, right?
If you cut along that curve, you'd have something that was still connected.
You see, it would still be one piece because you just unfold it as a cylinder.
Well, suppose miraculously that it were possible to take a torus and just deform it and make it look like a sphere.
What would happen to this curve, J?
Well, under that deformation, that curve J would become some sort of a curve here on, I'll call it J' on the surface of the sphere.
You see, because if you took the whole torus and made it look like a sphere, that curve J has got to go somewhere.
But on a sphere, if you take any curve and you just cut along a closed curve that comes back to itself on a sphere,
and you cut it with scissors, what happens?
It breaks into two parts.
You see, every curve on the sphere, when you cut it out, will break the sphere into two pieces.
And so somehow, if you could distort one into the other, you'd have this curve J that doesn't separate the torus.
It would have to go to some curve, but every curve separates the sphere.
So that's a good argument for why, in fact, it's not possible to take a sphere and make it look like a torus or vice versa under this stretching kind of equivalence.
So this shows us at least not everything is equivalent, and we've seen some examples of things that are equivalent or non-equivalent.
Now, what I'd like to do now is to ask you to look at a picture and guess whether or not you can distort one of these pictures to look like the other.
Okay, so in this picture, what I've shown you here in the picture that you're looking at now is you're seeing a double donut in two different configurations.
So one configuration has the two holes of the donut linked together.
They're linked up to each other.
And then the other configuration, these holes are spread apart.
So if you see it, watch for a minute with my hands here.
Here, if I am sort of the center of the donut, and here are the two holes, here I have them linked together, and then I sort of, could I just stretch myself and somehow have them come apart without going through each other and without cutting, so on.
So that's the question.
Could you stretch one and make it look like the other?
Well, so this is a question.
I'm going to give you a second to guess.
Could you stretch?
And this is completely something that I'm asking a question about, something that you could at least theoretically make out of a rubbery substance.
You literally could hold these objects, and I'm asking, could you, if they were sufficiently stretchy, stretch one to make it look like the other?
Take this and make it look like the other.
Well, of course, any reasonable person would say, no, you cannot do that.
So the reason that we feel that you can't do that is because look at these curves that go around each other.
One curve goes around this hole, and one curve goes around this hole, and those two curves are linked together.
And there's no way to take two linking curves and unlink them unless, of course, we go to the fourth dimension, which is we're not allowing in this lecture.
Okay, so if you have these two linking curves, it looks like you couldn't possibly do it.
But here's the surprise, and it's one of many surprises in topology.
In fact, watch, you actually can deform one into the other without any tricks.
There are no gimmicks.
It's just a question of elasticity.
And then we'll have to talk about why it is that our intuition about these linking curves somehow doesn't work.
You know, what's wrong with that?
Okay, so we start with our link double torus.
Now the first thing that we can notice is that we could stretch the holes a little bit.
And when we stretch the holes, you can see that they're just larger, but they still link one another.
You see?
So that's no problem.
I think you'll all agree that that next picture could be gotten from the first picture by just stretching.
Now we continue to stretch, and we stretch a little bit more.
And at this stage, the holes are sort of coming up, and they're linked together,
but they both sort of come down to a region at the bottom that looks like a tube coming out from it
and attaching in two different places.
Do you see how they're attached?
Now I want to tell you something about how to think about visualizing pictures.
And this is something that I've noticed, and it's sort of miraculous, but what it is is this.
When you're trying to visualize something, it's important to think big.
In other words, even in your own mind, you can think about having a small thing that's like this,
or you can think about a huge thing.
And it just turns out, I think, that if you just imagine that you're thinking of a huge thing,
you can see more details more easily, because in your own head, they're not small.
So what I'm asking you to do is, in this case, think of this picture as very, very large,
so that this bottom part that you see down here, think about having a big tube that comes down and into it,
not just a little thin thing, a big tube that comes down.
And you can see how these arms are sort of linked,
but think of a big tube like this that comes across, and you've got these two things coming and hitting on the top.
Now what we can do is just slide, just pick up that thing.
Imagine this whole big thing is made of rubber, and we can just slide it forward a little bit, you see?
So it appears to come out of the front before it makes its way around.
You see that?
Now, after we've done that, it allows us to do some other sliding.
We can just slide it across the front, you see?
And it compresses the material in front of that place where that is attached, and it stretches the stuff behind.
So we're not actually moving it to a different place, we're just stretching the material.
And then when we do that stretching of the material, then we can move it back up to the top.
Now, in fact, we can continue, we can move it all the way back and stretch it around the back, and then stretch it up to the front.
And you see what we've done?
We've miraculously unlinked those curves.
So following these steps, every single step, you see, it was a little step, it was just stretching something.
And what it shows is that we can actually take this apparently linked double torus, and just by stretching, no tricks, no fourth dimension or anything like that,
we stretch it to make it look like something that's unlinked.
Well, we've got to ask ourselves, what happened?
What happened to our argument that said, if you have two linking circles, you can't possibly just by stretching unlink those circles.
Well, here's what happens.
And there's got to be a solution to this, you see, because that's a good argument.
They can't be unlinked.
So what's the argument?
Here's what we do.
Let's just go ahead and follow those two circles by drawing them on every step of our transformation.
In other words, we look at these first two circles, there's a red one and a blue one, and those two curves link each other.
They link each other.
We can follow what happens to those circles as during the distortion that we just described.
As we stretch them, they're always going to be remained linked, but watch what happens.
They're staying linked, but one of them gets stretched over, and the other one is stretched this way.
You see how they're stretched?
And so when we get to the final picture, those two curves, the red curve and the blue curve, are still linked.
But they don't go around the ends of the two holes of the donut, as we thought that they should.
They are now stretched over, and they link each other by going through the opposite holes.
So there is no contradiction.
The world is safe for consistency, and we're all happy again.
Well, so certainly this topological perspective extends the concept of geometry, and it includes geometrical features that don't depend on size and shape.
But I want to show you one other example of this amazing topological idea of this topological perspective of stretchability.
And this example is perhaps even more counterintuitive than the first one I just showed you.
Okay, so let's do this next example.
Suppose that we have a sheet that consists of just a flat rubber, of course, elastic sheet, that has two holes in it.
And we have a ring that goes through both the holes.
And by the way, in this one, the ring itself need not be stretched at all.
It's just the sheet that gets stretched.
So we could think of this ring as just an actual bronze solid ring.
And then we have these two, it's a sheet with two holes that's rubberized.
Okay, now I'm going to show you another picture, which is the same bronze ring, but this time the rubber sheet just has the ring going through one hole.
Now, question, could you take one picture and just by stretching the sheet make it look like the other picture?
Well, of course, at first you say to yourself, well, that's ridiculous.
Of course, you can't do that because that ring goes through both holes in that first picture and it only goes through one hole in the second picture.
How is it even possible to think that such a transformation could be done?
Well, here's how we do it.
The only way to show that it can be done is to actually perform the steps of the transformation.
So let's go ahead and see them.
And so this is where you can win bets off of this one.
So how do you do it?
Well, let's begin with the ring going through both holes and we'll start to stretch.
So here's how we stretch.
Let's take one of those holes and make it bigger.
Well, there's nothing wrong with making it bigger.
It's all elastic.
So we can just make that a little bigger.
And then we can stretch it and make it yet bigger.
And we can stretch it and make it yet bigger.
And notice that at this point when we've stretched it to make it so big that it appears to go out and thinly come back.
Now things begin to look a little more plausible that this could happen because look, we've got our ring now.
And we can take this thin object that comes around and we can fold it back over.
And now look, our ring just goes through one hole.
But notice there are two little creases here that we've created by this folding.
And then by just turning them over, we can actually create the exact picture that we wanted,
which was a ring that just goes through one of those holes instead of two.
Isn't that amazing?
Isn't that amazing?
Well, I wanted to tell you a story.
So first of all, these use no tricks whatsoever.
This is literally just what you get with a stretchy universe.
I wanted to tell you a little bit of a story about a famous mathematician by the name of Michael Atia,
where that is pertinent to one of these examples.
In fact, it was the double torus example.
One of the issues that mathematicians sometimes discuss is whether or not it's necessary to prove obvious things.
Sometimes it's a little tedious.
You take something that's obvious and then you have to go through a lot of details in order to prove it,
and people will say, well, is it really necessary to go through all of that trouble?
And in a discussion, Michael Atia was a famous mathematician, one of the world's best mathematicians,
and he was saying, well, you don't really have to prove everything that's obvious, you know, it's just obvious.
And so the person who was debating with him said, well, okay, let me give you an example.
Suppose that you have this double torus that's linked together at the top,
and then you have another double torus that's not linked.
Do you think you'd need to write down a laborious proof to prove that you can't get from one to the other?
And so this famous mathematician said, well, no, you wouldn't have to prove.
That's so obvious you wouldn't need to prove it.
And yet we've seen in this lecture that in fact it is possible to get from one to the other.
So we always have to be a little bit careful in using our intuition.
Okay, so I wanted to just say one other thing about the concept of topology that's of importance,
particularly in things like the description of the universe,
which has to do with the local character of geometric object compared to the global character.
If we look at this sphere and we look at this torus,
they have the property that at every point they are locally the same.
In other words, if you take a point on a sphere and you cut out just a little tiny neighborhood of that point,
then what you would get is a little disk that could be stretched and it looks very much like the plane.
And if you took, if you lived on the torus on the other hand and you took a point and you took a little neighborhood of that point,
and remember this is a topological issue, so curvature has no pertinence to it.
If you cut out a little point, you could stretch it down to look like the plane.
So we say that these two objects, the sphere and the torus, they share something.
We saw that they weren't exactly the same as each other, but they're locally the same.
And in fact, something that they're locally exactly like the plane.
They could be stretched to look like a little patch in the plane.
And that kind of a space, one that can be stretched, where every point has a neighborhood that can be stretched to look like the plane,
is called a two manifold, where the two refers to the local dimension of what Euclidean space it's equal to.
If we're trying to describe our universe, we would be trying to describe a space that looks like three-dimensional world at every point.
And things like the three torus that we saw in our lecture about the universe, where we took a cube and identified every opposite face of the cube together,
that is locally like our room, and therefore it is a three manifold.
Those are an important class of topological spaces, or these manifolds, which are studied extensively.
Well, I am really delighted to have introduced you to this geometrical concept that extends our concept of geometry,
to allow us to think about distortions and therefore not depend on size and shape.
In the final lecture, what we'll see is that the evolution of geometrical thinking has continued from ancient times to now, including topology,
and that there are themes that definitely lie ahead. I look forward to seeing you then.
