Welcome back.
The study of the mathematics that arises from our visual experience of the world has attracted
the attention of mathematicians, of educators, and of artists for literally thousands of
years.
Real ideas developed and continue to develop by taking the real experiences that we see
in the world and abstracting features to create idealized reflections and extensions of reality.
Humans have created a wealth of insights and strategies that spring from that enterprise.
Every result that we've seen during these lectures is representative of a rich collection
of related results.
The mathematical study that springs from our visual experience has changed and grown
over the centuries.
Whole new realms of geometric inquiry will continue to arise by imagining extensions
or variations on classical geometrical themes.
But in addition, geometrical insights help us to understand areas of the real and the
mathematical worlds that don't seem geometrical at all.
Geometry naturally explains and explores the visual world.
Of course, that's where it comes from.
But geometry also presents us with insights and explanations of ideas in other branches
of mathematics.
Often algebraic identities become crystal clear when we see a geometric picture that
demonstrates their truth.
So the strategy is that we start with, for example, an algebraic formula, and then we
create some sort of geometrical representation that captures the meaning of the formula.
And many such algebraic results become almost instantly obvious when we see the correct
geometric analysis.
So when we see a connection between a picture and some algebraic or arithmetic relationship,
we experience a sort of gleeful aha moment.
I love those moments.
So let's start by seeing how we can do multiplication using geometry.
So this is something.
I got an email from an acquaintance that showed me this Mayan, that claimed to be a Mayan
method for multiplication.
And they asked me to explain why it works.
And so let me describe this method of multiplying numbers.
So suppose that we wanted to multiply the two numbers 31 by 23.
So this was the method.
All you do is draw some parallel lines.
So we have three lines next to each other that represent the 30 part of 31, and then
one line that's somewhat separated from it that represents the 1.
And then in a crossing pattern, we put two lines next to each other that represent the
2 in the 23, and then three lines that represent with a gap that represent the 1's digit of
the 23.
And then this is the way that we multiply.
You count how many points there are of intersection between these three parallel lines and these
two.
Well, there are six points of intersection.
And then you count the points of intersection of this line.
So in this line, there are 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Down here, there are two more.
And then this intersection has one line intersecting with three lines.
So that's a total of three.
And so then the answer to this multiplication problem is that this three is the 1's digit.
These two numbers combined, the 9 plus the 2, gives us the middle digit.
Well, since it's 11, we have to carry one.
And then this number here represents the 100's digit, but plus 1 to give 713.
And so that's the multiplication process.
Well, and why does this work?
Because if you draw a number of parallel lines, then the number of intersections, for example,
this three lines with these two, is just three times two.
So you can see that you're multiplying the 10's digit by the 10's digit, and so that's
going to give 6 in the 100's place.
And then likewise, this intersection of the three that comes from the 10's digit with
the three here that comes from the 1's digit, gives us places in the 10's position, and
so on.
So that this method does, in fact, give a method for multiplying numbers.
Now, I don't know if the Mayans really did it this way, but it is a method using geometry
to do some arithmetic.
Well, let's turn to some algebra, I think some, there's some algebraic identities that
just become completely transparent when we represent them geometrically.
So let's do one.
Consider the algebraic formula for the square of a sum of two numbers.
And you may have remembered memorizing this in school.
This is the kind of thing students memorize, and they think, oh, it's terrible.
So you have a plus b all squared.
Well, the way that we do that, in fact, as we saw in our lecture about the Julia sets,
is that we use the distributive law.
But let's just represent it geometrically, and we can see that it becomes completely
obvious what the answer is.
So let's just make a square whose sides are both a plus b.
So we have length a followed by length b.
And vertically, same thing, a followed by b.
Let's just take that, that area of that actual physical square is a plus b squared.
Well, just notice that it can be broken up into pieces, a squared, b squared in the corner,
and then these two rectangles, each of which is a times b.
And therefore, a plus b squared is equal to a squared plus b squared plus 2 a times b.
And so once you see that, it's no longer a matter of difficult memorizing to see that
the formula for the square of a sum is what it is.
Okay.
Now, next, let's look at a geometrical insight that involves numbers that are perfect squares.
Okay?
Well, it shouldn't come as a surprise that if we're going to talk about perfect squares,
it would be useful to have a square.
So here is a fact about perfect squares.
Now, let me remind you what a perfect square is.
The number one is one times one, so it's a perfect square.
Two times two is four, so that's a perfect square.
Three times three is nine, so that's a perfect square.
Four times four is 16, perfect square, and so on.
So here is the fact.
If you add up the first K odd numbers, one plus three plus five, you add up some number
of odd numbers.
The sum is a perfect square.
Okay.
So if we add up odd numbers, one plus three plus five, well, let's do a couple of them.
So one plus three plus five is one plus three is four plus five is nine.
Nine is a perfect square.
If we add one plus three plus five plus seven, then that adds up to 16, perfect square.
Let's see the pattern by looking geometrically at this question.
So let's just start with a unit square.
Now the unit square, of course, is one by one.
What do we need to add to a unit square to get a two by two square?
Well, we need to add the three squares that surround, that are to the right and on top
of that unit square.
So adding three more squares gives us a two by two square.
So it is the number of squares, unit squares in a two by two square is one plus three.
Now, how many squares do we need to add to get a three by three square?
Well, we add five, one, two, three, four, five.
So that means that a three by three square is equal to three, a three by three square
is equal to one plus three plus five.
And you can see the pattern continuing in this fashion.
We see that the sum of the first k odd numbers is equal to a square.
And in fact, it's equal to a square of side k.
And so the sum of the first k odd numbers is equal to k squared.
So that's something where it's a formula, it's true, and it becomes obvious when you
look at it geometrically.
Well, but this one is even better.
Let's think about an infinite series.
An infinite series.
Now, this is an idea that may be a little bit challenging to think about.
What an infinite series is, is really an infinite addition problem.
And let me give you an example.
Suppose that we look at the infinite addition problem, one half plus one quarter plus one
eighth plus one sixteenth, in other words, one half plus one over two squared, which
is one quarter, plus one over two to the third power, which is one eighth, plus one over
two to the fourth power, which is one sixteenth.
And suppose that we add them up forever.
Now what does it mean to add them up forever?
Because that doesn't really make any sense.
But what it means is that we just add up a certain finite number of them, and then we
add up a bigger finite number of them, and a bigger finite number of them, and those
numbers are getting closer and closer to a particular fixed number.
Well, in this case, we can see geometrically that the sum of all of these numbers, a half
plus a quarter plus an eighth plus a sixteenth, and so on forever, is exactly equal to one.
Because geometrically, if we take a unit segment, and we look at the first half of it, that
has length of half, and then the next quarter, that is a length segment of length of quarter,
takes us to three quarters, and then an eighth takes us half of the remaining way, and so
on, and so it's really filling up the entire interval except for that last point.
Okay, so that is a geometric way to look at it.
But here is a really interesting infinite series that we can describe using geometry.
And this one, I think this is a beautiful one.
Suppose that we're posed the question, suppose that you take the sum of the powers of a quarter.
In other words, you take one quarter plus one quarter squared plus one quarter to the
third power, plus one quarter to the fourth power, and so on.
And we want to know what happens when you add up all those numbers.
What number do you get?
Well, at first it's not obvious what the answer would be, and certainly how would you prove
such a thing?
It's complicated.
But here is the visual description that makes this clear, what the answer is and why.
So start with an equilateral triangle.
And take this equilateral triangle, and as we've done many times before, we will divide
it into four exactly congruent sub-triangles, just by connecting the midpoints of each of
the three sides.
So we have four sub-triangles, each that has area one quarter of the original triangle.
So let's just assume that the original triangle has a unit size, unit one.
And one of these triangles, the sub-triangles, will have size one quarter.
In particular, this one that looks upside down has size one quarter.
Well, now let's look up at the triangle at the top, at the apex of this original equilateral
triangle.
Its area is a quarter.
If we do the same process inside that triangle, we'll see that the upside down triangle is
a quarter of that quarter of the original.
Remember the top one is a quarter of the original, and so if we break it into fours, it's a quarter
of a quarter.
So the area of that triangle is one quarter squared.
We continue the process.
We'll take that little triangle at the top, break it up into four pieces, and we get another
little triangle whose area is one quarter cubed.
And we could continue, one quarter of the fourth power, and so on.
Now look at this beautiful picture.
Look at that beautiful picture of those triangles going up there.
Let's analyze it.
Every stripe across this picture, if we look at a horizontal band, we have three identical
triangles of which one is colored in.
So at the bottom band, this represents one third of the area of the triangle that's in
that band.
But now let's look at the next band.
That next band has three triangles identical to each other, and one of them is the one
that's filled in.
And so it's one third of that band is the one quarter squared.
And then the next band, it's one third of that, is the colored in one, one third, one
third, one third, and therefore we can see that the sum of those triangles is exactly
one third of the entire area of the big triangle.
And therefore, the sum of one over four plus one over four squared plus one over four cubed,
that infinite series is exactly equal to one third.
Well what a great result.
What a neat thing.
And we see it visually, and it just comes to life.
Well I want to show you one other example.
So let's look at an example in number theory.
It's really wonderful to see some number theory results that can be proved by geometry.
So what I'd like to talk about now is that a number is rational if it can be written
as a fraction of two whole numbers, or actually integers to be precise.
So for example, a number two thirds is a fraction, I mean is a rational number.
Or the number five sevenths is a rational number.
But there are some numbers that are irrational.
And this was, it's surprising, but you can't write them as a ratio of two whole numbers.
Well, let's prove that the square root of two is irrational.
That is, it cannot be written as a fraction.
Now here's the way we do the proof.
And we're going to use geometry, and this is a wonderful use of geometry to prove something
about numbers.
Suppose that the square root of two were rational.
You see, if it were rational then it would be equal to a fraction of two integers.
Let's say m over n.
Well we can make a triangle, we know how to get a length that's equal to the square root
of two using the Pythagorean theorem.
All we do is we create a triangle, a right triangle, whose sides are one and one, so
it's a 45 degree right triangle, and the opposite side by the Pythagorean theorem is the square
root of one squared plus one squared is the square root of two.
Well, if we then take this triangle and expand it by multiplying all the sides by n, in other
words we take a similar right triangle but just n times is big, then we'll have a right
triangle where each of the sides is n and the hypotenuse is m.
You see, so we would have a right triangle with 45 degree angles so that the sides are
all integer length.
And what we're going to do is we're going to arrive at a contradiction and say, no,
that can't possibly be, and therefore conclude that the square root of two could not possibly
be a fraction, could be equal to a fraction of two whole numbers.
Okay, so here's what we do.
Along the hypotenuse we measure a distance n, remember n is the length of the side, and
make a mark, and then on the vertical side we extend it to be length m, okay?
Now what we're going to do is connect that point on the hypotenuse with that extended
point down at the bottom and notice that we have created two congruent triangles.
So here we can actually use our theorem about congruence of triangles that we saw way back
in lecture two about congruence of triangles, the side angle side theorem for congruence
of triangles because notice that the original triangle had side n angle 45 degrees side
m.
But now starting at that point on the hypotenuse we have length n 45 degrees and m.
So we have two congruent triangles.
What that means is that there's a right angle at the point on the hypotenuse.
Well, it's a right angle and we therefore have created some right angle triangles that
we can analyze.
So for example, notice that this triangle down at the bottom here, it's a right triangle
and it has a 45 degree angle because it shares the angle with the original triangle.
So that means that this length of that side of that small triangle which is m minus n
an integer is also the length of this side m minus n, you see that?
But likewise this other triangle down here is also a 45 degree right triangle and its
length is also m minus n and m minus n, see it's also a 45 degree right triangle.
But that means that this length here is m minus n and remember the whole side is n and
therefore the length of this part of the base of that triangle is going to be equal to n,
the whole length minus m minus n which is equal to 2n minus m.
Well the point is that we've now labeled the hypotenuse of that smaller triangle, that
smaller 45 degree right triangle that we've created.
But that means that we've created a smaller 45 degree right triangle that also has integer
lengths to it, right?
The integer lengths are m minus n and then now the hypotenuse is 2n minus m.
So what this means is that we took a right triangle, a 45 degree right triangle that
had integer sides and just because of its existence we created a smaller right triangle
that also had integer sides.
Well what that means is that we can do that again.
We could start with that smaller triangle and do the same process again to get a yet
smaller right triangle with 45 degree angles that have integer sides.
Well you can't do this forever, you see because the integer, you can't keep getting integers
that are smaller and smaller and smaller.
So at some point you're stuck, you've got the smallest sides that you can, you can't
go down further and yet we've just proved that you can always go down further.
If the square root of 2 were equal to a fraction of integers then you could continue this process
and keep getting smaller and smaller integer lengthed 45 degree right triangles.
That contradiction then shows us that it's impossible to have these positive integers
that are equal to the square root of 2.
So the square root of 2 cannot be equal to m over n.
Well we saw in the proofs of non-constructibility theorems how insights of algebra, remember
non-constructibility theorems like you can't trisect an angle and you can't construct
the cube root of 2.
We saw how insights in algebra helped to resolve those geometrical questions and but here now
we've seen that geometrical insights can often help us understand algebraic questions and
so that's sort of a neat interplay between geometry and algebra.
Well to conclude the course then what I'd like to do for a few minutes here is to step
back and see the big picture of the various geometrical questions that we've considered
during these lectures.
The way that geometrical ideas have developed over these thousands of years it seems to
me to be a model for how concepts spring from one another.
If we had started the course with say fractals or with topology or the fourth dimension you
might get the impression that just weird abstract ideas just magically appear.
When we see that the step by step development of ideas we come to realize that new ideas
don't deviate far from the previously known ideas.
Distant and complex ideas are merely a long chain of small steps and each step is a triumph
of insight and I think that many times the challenge is to somehow shrug off the biases
that so strongly tend to keep us focused on old perspectives and we keep looking in
the same ways of things while in fact new ways of looking at the world are right around
the corner ready to be explored.
Mathematics proceeds by making some progress, gaining some insight and then realizing that
every advance takes us to the top of a new hill over which we see vast reaches of unexplored
territory.
Each new vista reveals new questions that challenge us to consider new ideas and think
in new ways.
Every theorem and every type of theorem and every theme that we've seen in this course
has many further extensions variations and connections.
Emanuel Kant as we saw said that the world must be Euclidean because that's the way the
mind works but we've seen that Euclidean geometry although it's glorious it's just
the tip of the iceberg.
We saw several theorems about triangle centers but further exploration of triangle centers
would lead us to whole new concepts of centrality.
We saw the circle both culturally and mathematically but further extensions of those themes reveal
connections with subjects that we didn't investigate until much later in the course.
For example, remember we developed the idea of non-Euclidean geometry in the Poincaré
disk model for hyperbolic geometry?
Well that disk involved circles which represented lines so that was another perspective on the
circle.
The ideas of perspective itself by the way lead to whole worlds of other mathematics
including projective geometry and we just touched on that for a moment but that allows
us to get a new perspective on how to think about our familiar world in unexpected ways
and in fact in projective geometry it entails the idea of duality between points and lines
that we there's a sort of a dual nature between points and lines that are emphasized in particularly
in projective geometry but that we can see that same concept of duality came in when
we looked at maps and remember we constructed a dual graph to the map to capture the collection
of adjacencies that the map makers created.
So ideas from one realm are used in another realm.
We saw that rich outcomes of looking in the third dimension to understand the plane.
We saw how there's a connection between the third dimension and the plane and that we
saw that extending our view to the fourth dimension and even to higher dimensional geometry.
That's a rich domain and it encourages us to expand our vision from what we can see
to worlds that we can only imagine.
Looking at higher dimensions it certainly stretches our minds in one way but then we
saw how the concept of fractals and infinitely detailed pictures stretch our minds in a different
direction.
The study of fractals arose from considering geometrical shapes of infinite detail and
among the most beautiful of these remember were the Mandelbrot set and the Julia set
and they came from doing this sort of fancy dance in the plane that was really based on
complex numbers and these fractals we can enjoy them for their aesthetic beauty but
they also contain mathematical insights and mysteries that we're still investigating today.
Other methods of iterative thinking like the process that came to give us fractals lead
to other kinds of fractals including the very first fractal which is the canner set which
we mentioned related to Julia sets.
Well one of the richest directions in which we can stretch geometry is to the mathematical
area of topology and since I am a topologist I'm particularly interested in the many sides
of this subject.
Well topology is an important modern extension of geometry.
Evidence by the way of the significance and centrality of topology to mathematics is that
it's very common that students who are pursuing their PhD degrees in pure mathematics will
take one of their preliminary examinations in topology.
One of the sources for creating topology to begin with arose from an attempt to axiomatize
other areas of mathematics such as calculus in the same way that Euclid had axiomatized
geometry more than two millennia earlier and following Euclid's template of writing axioms
from which the results of geometry flow the field of topology originated with the identical
impulse to ground many areas of mathematics on an axiomatic foundation.
Topology is one of several branches of mathematics that carry on and extend the historical and
continuing centrality of the geometric perspective.
Well topology is one of the fundamental areas of pure mathematics and unfortunately topology
generally isn't presented in a manner that makes it accessible to anyone who's not advanced
in mathematics but it doesn't need to be the case.
Many ideas of topology are both intriguing and accessible.
It saddens me frankly that I don't have time to tell you about many of these results in
topology.
One example of a result in topology is the fact that on the earth if you take two diametric
opposite points then there must be two diametrically opposite points at every moment of time such
that they have exactly the same temperature and the same pressure.
Now that kind of meteorological insight actually comes from a topological theorem called the
Borsig-Ulam theorem and that's just one example.
There are other examples.
For example if you just take a disc and you crumple it up and you put it on top of itself
where it came from, you crumple it up, put it on top of itself then there must be some
point that's exactly above where you started.
So these kinds of insights I think are neat and I have to admit it does sadden me as I
say to have to give just a few seconds to a subject that could easily justify a whole
course or more.
In fact I'm actually teaching a topology course this semester.
Well mathematicians, artists, and educated people everywhere have been observing the world
for thousands of years and studying what they see.
It's not surprising that observations that people have found over this vast stretch of
time are rich and deep.
However, it may be surprising how much subtlety and richness we found in even the simplest
figures such as a triangle or a circle and it may be surprising that new perspectives
on geometry have blossomed over time.
Non-Euclidean geometries, fractals, graph theory, topology, all these spring from starting
with the Euclidean plane and letting our creative imaginations work.
And no doubt the greatest part of geometry hasn't yet been imagined and awaits the imagination
of future generations to discover.
Geometry is everywhere.
It's tied to art and architecture.
It's central to scientific descriptions of our universe.
It helps us understand other mathematical topics.
It's been central to education for millennia.
It's thriving today.
It's beautiful and the best is no doubt yet to come.
Thank you.
