You know, Silicon Valley has these boom and bust cycles, and Silicon Valley has these
boom and bust cycles. But now everyone's coming back. And it turns out that this area
in Hayes Valley, which is just sort of in the center of the San Francisco area, is being
a magnet for all this AI activity. It feels like people are talking again, they're meeting
again, they're having parties again. It's happening in person. And that really changes
things for people in terms of how fast they think, how they learn about KPIs, and that
sort of old magic that we had before seems to be coming back.
We have about 100 people out here today, after hours, after work hours, meeting up at Salesforce
Park here, talking about the ChadGBT-4 usage that's not accessible through the ChadGBT-plus
subscription and some amplification with the research.
It's a San Francisco party, the attack just drops and we go for it.
Right now in the last six months while we've been watching this is the founders have jumped
on this new powerful engine. It's like someone gave them an internal combustion engine, and
they thought, now what can I do with this? And they've thought of cars, they've thought
of buses, they've thought of trucks, but everybody's thought of cars and buses. Everyone's come
up with the same ideas looking at these LLMs. Every month we get these things together because
we want you guys to become friends. And you're all here in the middle of it. So it's your
time to focus on your business ideas and to move as fast as you can and not to let up.
People ask me how big is this? And the context I like to look at it is that between 94 and
2020, we went through what we're calling the connecting, where we got the world connected
up on the internet, mobile phones, all these devices everywhere. And so now we've got 4 billion
people connected and eventually it'll be everybody on the planet. But that main 20 year, 25 year
period was when we connected the world and we were here for that. And now we're entering the
phase. What we're thinking of is the transition where we're going to be adding sort of silicon
based life to this planet. So we're carbon based life and this stuff is going to be thinking in,
I don't know, 80 years, 100 years, but this is the beginning of that phase where we actually see
software and silicon starting to do a lot of the cognitive work that humans have done in the past.
And that's now beginning. We can see it. We've been talking about it for 80 years,
but we can now see it. And this is when it just started. So it's a big deal. We're here for it.
And now it's up to us to be the first people who start to get to build things with it.
And vision a world where people could just build shit
and not have to worry about anything else. And hackathons give that to you for a weekend. And
it's like, it's so good, but it's just a weekend and then it's over. And so I was constantly
trying to find like the next hackathon, the next hackathon, the next, and there weren't that many
back then. I started going to hackathons in like 2011. The vision that whole time was like
this world where you can just build and not have to worry about anything else. And that was the
birth of HF0. So the idea is that we create something where people never actually have to
leave or think about anything else. But when people are in this container and it's like they're
surrounded by other people who are pushing the limits of how fast you can move and what's possible
to build, like we just see founders move at a pace I've never seen before.
Or there are three floors here across the basement. We have like 16 founders here and then we also
have three guest rooms. We call them visiting hackers. So they come for three nights. They're
typically also founders building in the AI space or anything else.
We both have a background in productizing cutting edge papers and tech. So if you ask us this
question in a month or so, we might give you a slightly different answer. But right now a drip
is a pipeline that allows you to generate stylized videos just from your phone. So
with a few taps and prompt input, you can make yourself a pirate or recast your room
as an outer space, things like that. You can see the majority of the innovation happening on the
image space are actually happening all over the place. Sure, Google might publish a paper opening.
I might have a model, but everyone else can't do that too. There's stuff coming out of Berkeley,
Stanford, all the time. You know, I thought that a lot of things were going to take years.
Like I thought multimodal input that GPT-4 just showed off would maybe be another year out. But
so I, maybe, maybe I just shouldn't make these. All right. And now I think our recording. There
are people that worry that's going to take their jobs. I don't think it's going to take people's
jobs for a long, long time. I don't know how many decades, but all it's going to do right now is
augment our jobs. There's just going to be more and better of everything, more and better art,
more and better text, more and better analysis. And it's just going to accelerate the pace of
everything. It's going to be a companion to us in our scientific research in 10 or 15 or 20 years
that's going to allow science to move forward faster, to have scientists to do more
and expand into more areas. So I would just drop everything and focus on what you can do
newly with generative AI. We are, we've created our Hack Week and everyone in our company is
tasked with bringing AI into their job. And you should do that with your company and whatever
company you've got going or you're thinking of building. Have that mindset because now is a time
you only get this every 14 years, take advantage of it.
In the 1987 book from Apple, they say when you're doing an interface, you should make it
such that it's like people can play with it. It's a playful interface because the way users
learn how to use your product, it's the same way we all learn to do anything.
Yeah, maybe I can do it from here.
The thing that we do love is like what? We are heavy users of this amazing technology. It helps us
be way more productive, especially at 3 a.m.
I think that one of the main things that are going to change with generative AI is the way
how we interact with technology and the interactions are going to become way deeper
and they are going to resemble more how we interact with a human than how we interact with
an object. In our case, since we are interested in creativity and we are building a creative tool,
a good analogy to look at is in 87, Photoshop started to appear too and at that moment we
created like a certain interface to paint with pixels. We have like some sort of digital paper,
how do we paint here? What is it going to be the interface? That UX didn't change in 30 or 40
years. If you look at the evolution of Photoshop, it's kind of the same thing. So we kind of found
the UX for painting with a digital brush. So that is kind of our vision to find the right UX
for creative people to interact with AI effectively. This is the first product that we were talking about
before. It's a Prom Search engine. All of these images that you see here have been generated
with AI. But as we got into HFZ, we started to realize that was not the way to create a startup
because for a startup, you need to have a user. You need to have a customer. You need to think
about the problem that you're solving and someone needs to pay you. So what we found out is that
that this thing that we had, it was like extremely powerful but just for like a extremely small group
of people that were super interested in this technology. That's how the first product came.
The new thing is the Kria canvas, which is the product that we've been working on for the past
four months. It's a collaborative whiteboard that is focused on using artificial intelligence for
prototyping visual ideas. I'm working with both like Erwan and Diego.
All of these are different artificial intelligence models. Each one is focused on a specific style.
It makes it really easy to create mood boards. Yeah, with the images that you generate.
ChatGPT was not like any crazy breakthrough. It was just like a chatbot, something that everybody
knows how to use. You use WhatsApp, you use Telegram. Instead of talking with another human,
you're talking with an AI. Even my mom can access the state of the art of artificial
intelligence in 2023. It really shows how important it is to make these tools accessible
because they can do amazing things, but people need to have tools to use them.
I think it was like canvas, get active object, and then for each object, clone it,
and then I can do like objects that clone this thing, grab the clone, and then it's like,
okay, what do you want to do with the clone? There you go. I now spend my time thinking instead of typing.
Hi, nice to meet you. Come in.
Yeah, so right now we are launching this, the new product with Generate API to help
brands create marketing images with just simple descriptions and simple scene builders.
Me and my co-founder were both from Ukraine. The team was distributed after the COVID hit.
We started hiring remotely because before that we had all the team in Kiev. Everybody got
distributed. I moved here, so that is very exciting. Right now with the new Generate API,
a lot of the output and the quality of generated image actually lies on the user,
on the quality of what they write there. We were testing a lot of hypothesis on how we can explain
to user what to do, how we can give this perfect instruction, how we can help brands
tell their stories better with EI. EI is the new electricity because it will power everything,
business processes, data. It requires some effort to keep up with the space which is
challenging, but also focus on your users and not get distracted by the noise.
What eventually what matters is if you build the product that people want or not,
and that requires some concentration and calm mind and just focus on your customer.
It's a little bit of a challenge to move to a new country, but San Francisco is very welcoming to
people from different backgrounds, so I don't feel, I feel very included here. It takes some time
to build a network for sure. It was a little bit of a challenge, but right now we have like
10 events per week. Everybody's excited and everybody's very open.
What if you decided that you have 400,000 data analysts in a warehouse, air conditioned
warehouse, ready to do work for you right now? How would things change? How would that be different?
What would be possible? This will be the greatest technology humanity has yet developed.
The world is new again for the first time in 14 years and there's so much opportunities. You
have to be able to throw out what was old and you have to be able to think big and you have to
realize that there's going to be different mental patterns and feel comfortable with those different
mental patterns and that's where you're going to get your visionary founders. It has come out of
decades of research into the algorithms to manage data, but now we've just reached a point where
the processing storage and the processing speed and all that has allowed us to put these large
language models together to do things that are really amazing in the same way that the
smartphone was amazing in the same way that the internet itself was amazing and it's just going
to touch every industry.
