We have been considering how natural selection and other evolutionary forces work on established
animal populations.
What we will be doing in this lecture is to solidify our understanding of these micro-level
processes such as natural selection, but we will also be moving to a different level
what we might call the macro-level of evolutionary change.
And here we want to consider slightly different questions.
How can evolution produce the diversity of life forms we see on earth today?
How do new species arise in the first place?
Ever since the idea of fixity of species was rejected back in the 19th century, this
has been a major question.
So in some ways lecture four is a transition lecture.
We move from the micro to the macro level and we finish up our exploration of the theoretical
basis of evolution and we move into concrete understanding of the evolution of the primates.
Let's start though with the process of speciation.
Speciation is the term for the process by which new species are formed from earlier
species.
And the result of course then is the diversity of life we see on earth today.
A key requirement for this process is something called reproductive isolation.
So we're back to reproduction again.
Two populations must be effectively separated from each other in some way so that gradually
over time it becomes impossible for mating to occur between them.
Now reproductive isolation may occur through the occurrence of a geographic barrier.
Let's think here in slow geologic time periods, long gradual development of some change between
two populations.
An example might be the geological occurrence of the rising up of a mountain chain.
We know in geologic history we can date the time period when the continents resting on
their tectonic plates shifted, one crashed into another and the result was the formation
of the Himalayas, the mountains in Asia.
These were thrown up if you will by a crash of plates and of course this happened very
slowly but such an action as this can have major effects on populations and separate
them.
The expansion of a desert to a larger area than previously where it existed can occur.
A river can change course or expand.
Any number of geographic barriers can essentially cut off two populations, one from the other.
Alternatively two populations may become isolated for behavioral reasons.
To give an example here we'll return to monkeys in the forest.
Let's say you have populations of monkeys that are active during the day and eating the
same types of food in the forest but there is some kind of ecological crisis and the
food resources become decreased.
There is a lot of competition then between members of these populations.
Slowly over time one population may become more and more active at dusk and at evening
and eventually over time again become a nocturnal species so that it sleeps during the day and
is active at night.
Well what happens is that it encounters all kinds of different variables than it did previously.
Not in the same exact place where it always was but the cast of predators that comes out
at night is very different.
The prey species available is different.
There may be temperature differences.
All kinds of micro variables add up and this illustrates an important principle that is
true for either type of isolation, geographic or behavioral.
Slightly different selection pressures begin to operate on the two populations that are
now separated.
Environmental pressures we're talking about.
Slightly different food sources, different predators, different temperatures, possibly
even different diseases for example through different types of parasites that occur.
Again thinking gradually over time what happens is that the process of speciation becomes complete.
The two populations change so much one from the other that they can be considered two
different species.
Now the acid test of this would be to take a member from each new species and try to
bring them back together because if they do not belong to the same species they will not
be able to interbreed and produce fertile offspring.
This is not a test that we can often do in real life.
We certainly can't go back in evolutionary history and perform this test but it would
be the way to tell for sure.
However many times the change just becomes visible or obvious over time or even through
the fossil record that the process of speciation has occurred.
When a variety of new forms including related species, closely related species adapts to
and fills new niches, new habitats, new areas we can say that a related process has occurred.
This process is called adaptive radiation.
The speciation is the basic process of populations splitting apart and forming new species but
then if there is a time period in evolutionary history where there is opening up of a new
habitat or a blossoming or filling out of a new area through an abundant sort of emergence
of new species we give that a different name, adaptive radiation.
Adaptive radiations have occurred multiple times in evolutionary history.
In other words it's a repeated process that happens over and over again at different places
and different times.
The adaptive radiation most relevant to our own human evolutionary history is surely
that of the primates and I will discuss that with you in this lecture.
But before I do that I want to illustrate a little bit more about speciation and adaptive
radiation with a non-human example and again I am going to turn to a classic case of adaptive
radiation for you.
The principles of adaptive radiation are most clearly illustrated by looking at what Charles
Darwin learned on his voyage of the Beagle in the 1800s when he went to study the finches,
small birds of the Galapagos Islands.
Now you will recall Darwin was a British naturalist, he is on this five year voyage.
The ship stops 600 miles off the coast of Ecuador in South America at the Galapagos Islands
and Darwin and others spend a fair amount of time there taking data, observing, taking
notes.
One thing that Darwin noticed with his keen eye for nature was the existence of 13 different
varieties of finches.
He noticed also that the variety could be clearly categorized, the birds differed most
in the size and shape of their beak.
He found in fact that there was a different finch form for each of the islands in the
Galapagos.
As it happens there are 13 islands in the chain and there are 13 different types of
bird visible in their beak in terms of differences.
Now Darwin started to think about this.
He also met during his time on the islands a governor, an official, an administrative
official who mentioned to Darwin that if a person brought him a turtle from one of
the 13 islands but didn't say which one it came from, the governor could identify its
population, its island.
The turtles differed according to their shells, again interestingly one for each island and
this is something that the governor had come to realize, Darwin came to realize and kind
of took all of these notes and filed away this fact as he continued on his voyage when
he left the Galapagos.
He slowly began to realize that in fact there must have been a process where there was a
common ancestor and on the mainland of South America most likely an initial form from which
there had been both speciation and adaptive radiation.
Now he didn't fully work this out until he had returned to England and he was working
out his theory of natural selection, this did not occur to him immediately so it was
something of a long process.
But here's what he realized.
Each finch form had adapted to very specific local conditions or local selection pressures
in their particular island during a process of adaptive radiation from the mainland and
by the way the same thing happened, different pathway but same outcome with the turtles.
That of course was the fundamental question for Darwin is what could have caused these
differences?
After all the islands are so close together they're right there, how could speciation
have occurred so that you get birds that can't even mate with each other and of course this
is what brings us back to natural selection.
The idea that you're getting these environmental pressures that although slight cause some individuals
to be better adapted to the local conditions than others.
So this is how he began to work out the mechanism of evolutionary change that he wrote about
so importantly as natural selection.
Now quite recently a husband and wife team, two biologists have returned to the Galapagos
Islands to study specifically the finch population.
This is very interesting because their work has been quite ground breaking within biology.
The biologists I'm speaking of are Peter and Rosemary Grant.
They began their work several decades ago and they returned year after year for field
seasons in the Galapagos.
They really deserve a medal, they would pitch a tent for long time periods on rocky volcanic
soil on a hundred acre island out in the middle of the ocean in the Galapagos to study these
birds.
So they essentially had an evolutionary laboratory set up for themselves a natural one and the
grants research has ended up confirming many of Darwin's insights and more than that has
shown us evolution in action.
Now of course the grants went to the Galapagos armed with things that Darwin did not have
the concept of natural selection for one and many other fundamental advances in evolutionary
science but still what they were able to do is quite remarkable.
The grants have showed specifically that recent environmental changes cause new evolution
in the Galapagos finch population.
So what I'm about to describe for you is best thought of as natural selection in the modern
world in action just as we talked about in the opening lecture with natural selection
affecting human populations through emerging diseases such as AIDS or as through the reason
why sickle cell anemia is still with us.
That explanation that I gave you before.
Alright in 1977 on the Galapagos there was a severe drought and seeds became scarce.
Seeds are a staple food for these finches.
The small and soft seeds particularly became depleted early.
These are the seeds that the birds prefer which makes sense.
The alternative are large tough seeds that are much harder to open.
So the birds ate all the small seeds the soft ones as quickly as they could and then they
had to go to their second choices.
They had to work on the large tough and much less desirable seeds with their beaks and eat
them as best they could.
What this means in evolutionary terms then is that the larger birds with stronger beaks
were favored by environmental conditions.
What is really wonderful in revealing about the data that comes out of the grants project
is the fact that the very next generation of birds shows this evolutionary favoring.
In other words in the next generation there was a shift in the gene pool so that larger
birds with stronger deeper beaks were born.
This is exactly what we've been talking about that happened over the short term that is
visible and quantifiable in the short term so that the drought was so bad it caused something
that was quite remarkable.
And there's a coda to the story I mentioned to you that the grants returned year after
year for many field seasons.
In the year of 1985 the opposite environmental event happened.
Not a drought but severe rain, unusually large amounts of rainfall.
Well exactly the opposite process happened.
The small soft seeds were very very abundant and in this case the next generation of birds
had the smaller beaks were smaller in size and didn't need the large beaks so you had
a reversal within a decade of the trends that were occurring because of environmental shifts
and that affected the gene pool.
Now what this example shows is first of all that there's initial variation in the populations
that selection pressure from the environment can cause short term change that there's definitely
differential reproductive success going on and that you get systematic change in the
gene pool.
In other words we've just described evolution.
So it is interesting to trace this continuity over time from Darwin's observations through
the grants observations and what we're talking about is really a major adaptive radiation
through the Galapagos.
Now adaptive radiations are also important in our own evolutionary history, the evolution
of the primates.
We have been talking about in this course so far the idea the fact of an old earth.
We've mentioned a five hundred million year old vertebrate eye.
We've talked about other ancient ages.
Well when did speciation occur and start producing primates?
The best way to think of this for the first step is to think of earth at seventy million
years ago.
This is the end now of the dominance of the age of dinosaurs.
There are mammals certainly in the world, different types of mammals but there is nothing
like a primate yet.
Certainly no humans or human ancestors but even more than that no monkeys or apes or
anything similar.
So this is our starting point.
Perhaps about sixty five million years ago some ancestral mammalian populations began
to undergo new selection pressures.
Scientists think that this mammalian population was essentially rodent like.
You might think of something akin to a squirrel in a general sense.
Something that is fairly small, that is tree living and so forth.
Through the process of speciation right around this time period primates begin to appear.
We know this from the fossil record and again what we want to do is the same thing
that we just went through with the finches.
To bring together different concepts that we have been equipped now to work with of
reproductive isolation, differential reproductive success, environmental change, natural selection.
What we would dearly like to know is what was the environmental shift that essentially
acted as a push factor to cause populations of these ancestral mammals to split and start
going in different directions so that the primates emerged.
Now it's much much harder to do this when we're going back sixty five million years
ago and trying to figure out what environmental shifts might have occurred.
There's been a long debate in the literature among primate evolutionists about what kind
of selection pressure from the environment might have set this speciation event on its
path.
The best suggestion so far in my view has been what is called the visual predation hypothesis
and this should be credited to Matt Cartnell who was an anthropologist at Duke University.
He has suggested that some environmental shift sixty five million years ago opened up a new
feeding niche.
That there were all kinds of animals up in the trees already, perhaps feeding competition,
but that very specifically a niche opened up that can be described as insects living
in the lower canopies of trees.
In other words, the existing mammals would not be particularly well adapted for hunting
this particular food source, but that due to variation, reproductive isolation and initial
speciation a population might have butted off or emerged that would have been good at
such hunting.
Now the idea is that you've got an arboreal species that is going to be able to use its
eyesight and probably its hands to actually grasp and catch these insects giving this
new emerging form of food source that nobody else has.
Now I'm going to explain for you how all of this theorizing hooks up with what we actually
know about the anatomy of the emerging forms in just a minute, but I want to say first
that this visual predation on insects is hunting hypothesis, if you will, has been a great
improvement on earlier ideas.
Many of the earliest theorists talked only about arboreal life in general in very vague
ways saying well primates are arboreal tree living in their initial existence.
There must have been something about tree living itself that pushed us down the primate
pathway, but if you think about this even for a minute, it's easy to do this in hindsight,
there's not much sense to this theory because all of the original mammalian populations
were already tree living and they weren't changing in any direction.
Sometimes I'll have my first year students do what is called the squirrel homework assignment.
I send them out of the classroom to stand beneath trees on campus and look at squirrels.
Squirrels are a really good modern exemplar of what an original mammal ancestor might
have looked like.
Not exactly, squirrel biologists are probably gasping and hurried that I would generalize,
but just basically we've got squirrels up there who are perfectly well adapted to life
in the trees.
They have claws, they have eyes on the side of their heads, they're scurrying around up
their eating and they're doing fine, but something pushed primates onto a different pathway.
So for the moment, for the sake of argument, we're going to accept this visual predation
hypothesis and that the insects in the lower canopies were the push factor.
So the question becomes now, how does this hook up with what we can find out from the
fossil record about what early primates look like?
Well, there are traits that still characterize living primates today that we can trace back
to this time period, developing interestingly enough between 65 and about 55 million years
ago.
Of course, this is a gradual process.
I will go through for you five key traits that today distinguish the primates from other
mammals and that we are quite sure did distinguish primates quite early on evolutionarily from
other mammals.
The first trait is the grasping hand.
The idea here is that primates are able to do two interesting things, one to take their
hand and simply reach out and grasp a branch, grasp mother's fur if you're an infant, grasp
a tool, grasp any kind of object as a way of getting around in the trees, a way of holding
on.
However, the second factor is equally important that digits, fingers can be moved independently,
one from the other.
So that, for example, primates are capable of plucking food off of branches with their
hands and eating them with peeling, let's say, skin off of fruit.
Now the relevant comparison that might help you as you think of these traits is to compare
what I'm describing that a monkey, ape or human can do with what a cat or a dog or a
horse can do.
You don't see a cat walk up to a food source and pluck it and eat it with its fingers.
Faces are face fingers and other differences will emerge that I think will be helpful to
keep this comparison in mind.
Now the grasping hand, both the general sort of reach and the independent movement of the
fingers is underwritten, if you will, by the existence of nails on primate hands.
Unlike squirrels and arboreal mammals, there are no claws but rather nails.
So this is all one package, trait number one.
Number two, primates have, and evolutionarily had, depth perception.
The eyes are forward facing so that the field of vision overlaps from one eye to the other
and it is possible to see in depth in 3D, if you will.
So up in the trees, this becomes very useful for judging distances, scampering quickly
across branches or from tree to tree in the canopy, something that a squirrel would lack
for example.
And this is probably coupled fairly early on, also with color vision.
So just as the first trait was a kind of package centered around the hand, the second trait
is a package centered around vision.
Third, a large complex brain allows primates to learn about the world socially, including
from their social companions.
Now learning may take place in many ways.
It is possible to learn individually on one's own through trial and error mistake making.
We do see that learning in primates.
We also see a great deal of social learning and this refers back to something I mentioned
earlier that the primate brain is designed to absorb information from social partners,
from social companions.
The primate brain is larger relative to primate body size than we would expect based on a
extrapolation from the typical mammal.
Specifically, the brains of primates are twice as heavy as what they would be if they were
a typical mammal.
So this is telling us something that there is a special adaptation of the primate brain
and social learning is a critical process and a critical type of adaptation for primates.
Point number four is closely linked to number three.
primate mothers routinely give birth to single infants one at a time.
Occasionally there may be twinning but there is a rarity of that and there never are litters
when for example cats or dogs give birth.
We know that there are multiple babies born at once, not so with primates.
Single births are followed by a prolonged period of dependency on the mother.
There is no other bond as intense as that between mother and infant and in fact prolonged
really doesn't do it justice.
So let me explain a little bit more.
Ape infants for example may be dependent on their mothers for between four and six and
even in some cases eight years.
That's a very long time.
If you're speaking against the backdrop of a basic mammalian context, of course that
trend is even more elaborated in humans than it is in non-human primates.
Lastly point number five primates are highly social.
They are characterized by intense social bonds.
The mother infant bond that I just mentioned for you is a good example but there are many
others between siblings, brothers and sisters who are raised together or even between non-relatives.
There often can be what we might call friends, close associates who back each other up in
certain situations.
In other words the collection of animals that we have in a primate group are not just there
at random because they need other warm bodies to keep them safe.
They're there and develop social bonds and they're there partly because of a deep need,
a primate ingrained need for sociality.
Let's consider two great apes for just a minute.
The chimpanzee, the best studied, best known great ape studied by Jane Goodall and others
is what I would call evidently and obviously social.
You walk into a group of chimps and they're screaming and hugging and embracing each other
and squeaking and greeting and grooming and just everything is social and I've exaggerated
just a little but not much.
In the wild they may have quiet time certainly but they're a socially adapted animal.
Obviously you will hear that the orangutan, the large red ape of Asia is considered to
be solitary but this is really not a good description of the orangutan.
If you put the chimp and the orang on a continuum of sociality you will find that they are at
different ends.
You don't find orangutans routinely going around in a group, grooming each other and
hugging and kissing but it isn't correct either to call them solitary.
For example the mother and infant bond is very strong.
Obviously males and females come together to mate and they don't just mate and then go
apart from each other immediately, they may stay together for days.
Even more than this though, in Sumatra one area of Asia in which they live we routinely
do find social groupings.
Now these groupings may come up or emerge because of fruit trees, an abundant source of food
but at this location real sociality will exist.
So it is rare, not unheard of but rare, for there to be primate species that are more
solitary than social.
So what we have then is a collection of traits, five sets of traits that we can call the primate
pattern that characterizes approximately 200 species of primates today and that we can
trace back in the evolutionary record.
So this gives us a pretty good clue as to how natural selection might really have worked
to separate out the emerging primates from other mammals and this is why if you think
about how these characteristics might come into play those animals with better grasping
hands or depth perception in order to hunt insects in the lower canopy might well have
been better at reproducing and surviving.
Now I've called this the primate pattern.
I do want to emphasize that when we talk about the primate pattern we should expect
exceptions or what we might even call a tweaking of the pattern.
After all the whole idea of evolution as we now know is adaptation to local circumstances
that environments affect how evolution proceeds.
So while we can use these fundamental and important five characteristics as a base
we should look for and expect deviations.
Let me give you an example.
Let's take the two non-human primate species that are first the smallest of all and second
biggest of all.
The smallest non-human primate is called a mouse lemur.
It lives on the island of Madagascar.
It is about five inches long in its adult body size and you can add five more inches
for the tail, total of ten inches if you count the tail, it's about a fifth of a pound.
It is a mostly solitary forager, solitary feeder.
It does a lot of scent marking in other words it marks its territory with urine and it's
nocturnal.
It's living at night.
Not a great deal of sociality.
At the other end of the scale the gorilla, the animal that I now study at the National
Zoo.
The females are routinely upwards of three hundred pounds.
Females may be half that size.
They're social.
They're not solitary foragers.
They live during the day.
They have high dependence on vision rather than scent and in between the two if you will
they're all kinds of arrays of non-human primates, a great deal of diversity all essentially
based on the primate pattern.
Now we have concluded our explicit discussion of evolution.
Certainly evolution will be the fundamental layer throughout all of the lectures.
But what we are going to do now is to move into introducing the primates and distinguishing
the primates one group from the other more directly.
We will start that process by looking at prosimians, monkeys and apes in lecture five.
