With this lecture, we move squarely into the realm of paleoanthropology.
Our topic for the whole next section of the course will be the hominids.
So let's start by defining exactly what we mean by the hominids.
Hominids are all of the human ancestors, broadly speaking, that lived after the time
of divergence from an ancestor that they shared with African apes until the time of modern
human beings.
Now, this is important.
The African ape focus that we're going to have in this lecture is a key one, and we're
going to return to that fact and explain it a little more in detail in a few minutes.
First we want to give some facts about hominids so we can get a better understanding of the
types of creatures that we are talking about.
The absolute hallmark of the hominids is bipedalism.
More than any other factor, walking upright distinguishes what a hominid is from what
a great ape is.
As far as we know now, all hominids were capable of some form of bipedalism, so this is key.
All of the earliest hominids that we have found live in Africa.
The real focus of the search for hominids has been in East Africa, particularly the very
geologically active area of the Great Rift Valley.
An extremely recent find in Central Africa, in the country of Chad, tells us that we might
need to shift some of our searching to include Central Africa as well.
But certainly we can say that the early time period of hominids is centered on the continent
of Africa, and later on I will tell you when you get first migrations out of Africa to
other continents.
Now the early hominids did not evolve directly from the great apes.
This is a key point.
In fact, hominids in African great apes share a common ancestor, and the common ancestor
is one of those concepts that we need to really work with in this lecture.
One of those key things that we need to understand.
Another way of saying this is that it is a myth.
It is inaccurate to say that hominids descended from the apes, as if it were a linear process.
If you remember back to one of the first lectures, I talked about presenting my students with
that phone ad, an ad in the newspaper, where there was a linear progression from a stooped
over early hominid to a fully upright modern human, and the very, very first creature on
that line marching towards the future was an ape, as if a hominid came right after an
ape.
That is not true.
What we have is a splitting process where two lineages diverge from a common form that
is at the base, if you will.
Now we'd love to know what this common ancestor was like.
We don't know a great deal about it.
The form of the common ancestor was quite likely generalized.
Let's take locomotion as an example.
If we want to figure out how this common ancestor might have moved, what can we predict about
it?
Well, we would predict that it was generalized enough to produce both a lineage that brachyates
with powerful upper bodies, these are the apes of course, and a lineage that walked
bipedally with much stronger lower part of the body.
This indicates to evolutionary theorists that it would be very unlikely for the common ancestor
itself to be bipedal.
It's not impossible, but consider the implications of having a bipedal common ancestor that gave
rise to the great ape lineage.
There would have to have been bipedality that was then lost in the great apes, and
they would have essentially reverted to brachiation.
So this seems like it's probably not what happened.
The timing of the hominid divergence going one way, and the great apes going another
way from the common ancestor is hotly debated.
Now there's some facts about timing that I want to talk to you about.
A key fact is how much we've learned very recently.
As recently as 30 years ago, biological anthropologists were quite confident that the oldest hominids
were about 3 million years old.
And here we refer to the very famous find that was made in 1974 of Lucy, the 3 million
year old skeleton that was discovered in Ethiopia.
In 1974, this was revolutionary news, and Lucy became, at that time, without a doubt,
the oldest hominid, the base of this lineage that we are talking about.
However, since then, much has changed.
The date for the earliest hominid has essentially been pushed back to 6 or 7 million years ago.
That is doubled or maybe even more since what we knew about Lucy.
Now I say 6 or 7 million years ago.
And that is because quite recently in the summer of 2002, a very exciting new fossil
find was announced.
And the date for this fossil find, which is quite probably the earliest hominid, is very
close to 7 million years ago.
We'll talk about this fossil form specifically a little bit later on.
But this means then that there's a huge range of time for hominid evolution, more than we
thought.
And I say huge and maybe I shouldn't use that term, but when I went to college, it happened
to be in 1974, the same year that Lucy was discovered.
And from college I went on to graduate school, and throughout all those years, we just assumed
3 million years ago was it, was the sort of basis of our whole lineage.
And to have discovered, you know, even though time has gone on and new discoveries have
emerged, it's still hard for some of us to comprehend these changes because they're
quite stunning.
And I hope to give you a sense of just how important they are as we go along.
Now getting back to the common ancestor, if we know that we have early hominids at 6
or 7 million years ago, we must logically assume that the divergence of hominids from
the great apes must have occurred at least slightly before that point, before 6 or 7
million years ago.
Now obviously you must be thinking, well, isn't there a fossil of the common ancestor
that has been discovered that we can look at and know about its locomotion, that we
can date as we date any other fossil?
This is what I might even call the holy grail now of paleoanthropology, to find something
that looks like it could be the generalized common ancestor of both lineages.
We have not found it yet.
I'm saying yet because I'm optimistic.
It has not been found, although we are discovering increasingly ape-like hominids, in other words
these older hominids at 6 or 7 million years ago, look more like apes than the hominids
did earlier, generally speaking, not always, but generally speaking.
And even though we're finding fossil ancestors of apes, we're not finding the common ancestor.
So how can we even talk more about a common ancestor if we don't have a fossil?
Something does come to our rescue here, and this is one of the sub-areas of biological
anthropology that I introduced to you early on, molecular anthropology or anthropological
genetics, can give us additional source of information.
Now what happens here is that molecules, specifically proteins of living species, are
brought into the laboratory and compared.
How comparable are they to each other and to human proteins and molecules?
So you can bring in DNA from the African great apes, the chimpanzee, binobo, and gorilla,
and modern living humans, and literally line up the comparability of the components of these
molecules and find out how similar or different they are.
Now what we can derive from this is not a date, of course, but a relative type of relationship
among different species.
If the protein molecules of one species appears to be more like that of what we find in humans,
we can purport then that there's a closer relationship between those two species than
between other species.
Well, the results that we get are quite interesting.
We get essentially an order of speciation that occurred.
Remember back to the concept of speciation, what happens when you get reproductive isolation,
natural selection working with a push factor to send populations in different directions.
In fact, the results tell us that orangutans speciated first after we have this common ancestor
alive.
Now you'll recall also that orangutans live in Asia, they're the Asian great ape.
And this is why I'm going to be referring in this lecture mostly to the African great
apes, because the fact that they speciated after the orangutan tells us immediately from
the molecules that they are more closely related to us than the Asian form.
Okay, so confining ourselves now to African great apes and humans, we know also from the
molecular evidence that gorillas speciated next, they are less like us than chimpanzees
and bonobos who speciated last, except of course for the hominids.
Now we have a relative ranking of the species so that you can draw a type of family tree,
if you will, with chimpanzees and bonobos speciating last, gorillas in the middle, orangutans
speciating first.
But how can we use that to actually put an absolute date on the timing of all these divergences?
And here we get into a more complicated type of process.
Being a behaviorist, a person who specializes in behavior, what it is best for me to do
is to give you an outline of the technique that anthropological geneticists use.
In other words, I should not go into detail, because this is highly technical and it's
not my area of expertise.
What I can tell you that's needed is a so-called calibration date from another lineage, another
lineage of animals that has evolved.
What we really need is some kind of a mammal that is well known from the fossil record,
exactly what we don't have for the common ancestor.
In fact, at about 90 million years ago, there was a key change in the mammalian evolution
lineage.
And you can date creatures, you can find them, uncover them in the fossil record and see
them tangibly and date them to 90 million years ago.
Then if you pick the right creature and you can tell the amount of mutation that would
have to have occurred in that lineage to get from the form all those millions of years
ago to the modern day present form, you have what you need for the calibration.
And here's why.
If you've got the number of years it took for this animal to evolve to present day,
plus you've got the amount of mutation that it would take to produce the modern creature,
you can derive a rate of mutation.
And that is really the linchpin of this whole method.
When you derive a rate of mutation, that's called the molecular clock, because quite
a few scientists believe that you can then impose that rate of mutation right upon, right
on top of the relative speciation events that we had previously derived.
So in other words, you take a mutation rate and you map it on top of the orangutan speciation
point, the gorilla speciation point, the chimpanzee and bonobo speciation point, and
you can figure out when these things happened and trace back to the time of a common ancestor.
Interestingly enough, the result of this technique comes out to suggest that the common ancestor
lived at about six or seven million years ago.
Now, I should tell you that this is a controversial area.
There are some scientists who are highly skeptical of the so-called molecular clock technique.
For one thing, what is assumed in the molecular clock technique is a constant clock-like rate
of mutation, like a ticking of a clock.
Every million years, you get certain mutations.
And that would have been true according to the method 90 million years ago or five million
years ago.
Well, some scientists say that doesn't make sense.
It's possible that the so-called clock would have speeded up in some lineages, slowed down
in others.
So there's too many assumptions for the comfort of some.
Some scientists additionally point out that we are pushing back almost every year the
timing for the earliest hominids.
I had just finished telling you that we have hominids themselves that date to six or seven
million years ago.
So that's uncomfortably close to the time of the supposed common ancestor.
So there's not a perfect fit here.
The questions remain.
Is there something wrong with the molecular technique?
Are there other problems with the methods that we're using?
These are unanswered questions at the moment.
So there's a fair amount of, I wouldn't say mystery, but uncertainty is a good word, surrounding
this issue of the common ancestor.
And what we really need is the fossil evidence that we don't have.
All right, unlike the situation with the common ancestor, scientists have uncovered really
fascinating bits of information about the very earliest hominids.
So let's talk about that for a while.
What happens with this process in paleoanthropology is that interdisciplinary research teams
must go out, look for fossils, and when they find something, they have to figure out whether
or even how their finds fit into existing family tree schemes.
So I had mentioned before that there tends to be a focus on East Africa.
We have the Great Rift Valley that runs through, say, the Tanzania area and Kenya area.
And this is the geologically active area that gives us all of these layers and layers of
fossils that I have mentioned before.
This is a prime location to be a fossil hunter, but wherever scientists go, they go and enter
disciplinary teams and they look for skeletal remains.
As we know from before, biological anthropologists are key members of such teams.
And I really want to emphasize how big and diverse these research teams are.
The most recent report of this earliest hominid that probably dates to seven million years
ago has people from a number of countries, United States, France, Chad in Africa, Switzerland,
and so on.
So it is a big enterprise, mounting an expedition takes a lot of time, resources, and effort.
When you actually uncover something, then, there's still a great deal of work to be done.
Finding whether the skeletal material that has been unearthed represents an already known
species, but just a different example, or something completely different is a very tricky business.
There are a lot of decisions that must be made to do this.
Now the whole question turns on what is a species?
Because the decision process is, well, do I have a new species that I've just found,
or is it an existing species?
All that two animals, two human ancestors or two of anything, can be designated as belonging
to two different species only if they cannot interbreed and produce fertile offspring.
Now how do you apply that test to fossils?
Clearly you cannot.
I'll give you a real-life example of a decision that has been made by most paleoanthropologists.
Think of a fairly early hominid that has a broad face, heavy jaws, basically pretty
heavy bones, and big back teeth, big molars, and this form lives in South Africa.
There's another form living in about the same time, but in East Africa.
It has a broader face, heavier bones, larger back teeth, larger molars, but essentially
is the same otherwise.
Well, many scientists have designated two different species here, and I'm skeptical
of that actually.
I'm skeptical that this type of difference that I've described for you would be enough
to prevent breeding and producing fertile offspring.
Lots of other paleoanthropologists and biological anthropologists are skeptical too.
So this is one way in which the field tends to get divided, and this is a real-life example
that I've given you, and this problem will follow us throughout the next few lectures.
We'll talk about how some scientists think that there are two species in a given context.
Others will insist there's only one, and there's a lot of debate.
Whatever final decision is made when something is unearthed, there has to be a Latin scientific
name applied to it, whether it's an existing one or a new one.
Let's use the Latin binomial system for naming commonates, as we do for any animal species.
We modern humans are called Homo sapiens.
That is our Latin binomial name.
What we can learn from this is usually some scrap of information about the organism.
Sapiens means wise.
We are called wise human beings, and the first term, Homo, in our case, is the genus, the
larger grouping.
Sapiens is the species grouping, the smaller of the two.
So we will find out that there are other Homo examples.
Homo erectus is one.
Now when the name is written out in the written material, you will see this, if you look at
a textbook you will see this, and the binomial name is either underlined or italicized.
It's set off from the surrounding words because it is a foreign term.
So to give you one more example, the newest hominid that I've been hinting at that goes
probably back to 7 million years ago takes the name Sahelanthropus cedensis.
Now why would it be called that?
What can we learn from that?
Well the anthropus indicates that it's on the human lineage.
The anthroananthropology tells us that the Sahel part refers to a desert in Africa, which
is where this was found, and of course the species name cedensis refers to the country
of Chad, so the names are and should be chosen with care to reflect some information.
Now there's a lot of interest, as you might imagine, if you're a paleoanthropologist in
finding something new, not only an existing example, in other words it's great to find
a new example of something, it's great to find a new example of Australopithecus afarensis
for example, that's the Latin binomial for Lucy.
But the real glory is to find a new species and even better a new genus.
Now the Sahelanthropus that I just told you is a completely new genus that no one had
ever heard of before this year, so there are factors that come into play in this decision
making process that mostly relate to science, but in some other cases relate to what kind
of big splash you want to make, it's really particularly wonderful to come up with something
that is very new and very career enhancing too, I might add.
Now we are prepared already from the lecture about modeling, using great apes to model
early hominids, to know that most of the data from this early time period that we have involves
anatomical adaptations, you've already heard that we know quite little about the behavior
of hominids at the early time periods that we've been discussing.
In terms of anatomy, as I've already told you, the key thing is to understand bipedalism
and there's a lot of theorizing in biological anthropology centered around why bipedalism
would have originated, why did this become such a distinguishing factor or marker of
the hominid lineage and I think it would be helpful to mention at least a few of these
ideas.
It's good to keep in mind, we've mentioned this before, that natural selection always
operates from an existing starting point of variation within a population, so we want
to remember that we're not going from a dog-like monkey that walks on top of branches to a
bipedal creature, rather we're going from a great ape-like type of adaptation, remember
we said that the common ancestor from which hominids derive is likely quite generalized,
probably did have some ability for brachiation because from brachiation it's relatively
simple to derive bipedalism.
It's not coming from a quadrupedal monkey type of walker, so we can get changes relatively
rapidly from a generalized common ancestor, most people think.
So what about the theorizing about the why or what happened to cause bipedalism?
This has been going on as I mentioned for well over 100 years, Charles Darwin in fact
had clear ideas about why bipedalism originated, he suggested that it was particularly useful
for freeing the hands, in other words for carrying things, that the ancestors who could
stand upright would be able to carry tools or food or other supplies for long distances
in ways that he thought at that time that great apes could not.
Well we since know that great apes, even though they don't walk bipedally for long distances,
they can't, do manage to carry tools and do manage to carry things, Darwin may be partly
right in that bipedalism makes it a lot easier however, in fact there have been so many variables
that have been suggested, we probably need to take many of them into account, freeing
the hands is one variable, the idea has also been floated that standing upright gives you
better visual access to predators, if you're living particularly in a bushy or grass filled
area then you might want to stand up to see what's coming at you, to eat you essentially.
Many other ideas, I'm going to focus on two in particular.
Some anthropologists have been focusing on climate change as the key factor leading to
the habitual bipedalism that characterizes hominids.
Now the suggestion here is that at a certain point in early hominid evolution there was
essentially a drying out and an opening up of the African landscape, specifically rainfall
at this time would have become more seasonal.
Now there's data to suggest a lot of information about world wide climate change in prehistory,
this is an area that people do study that we have information about.
So the fact that rainfall apparently became more seasonal at a certain point means that
in the opposite seasons, the non-rainy seasons, there would have been a lot of drying, in
other words patches opening up between trees so that the old way of getting around, if
in fact were correct about theorizing that the common ancestor would have retained generalized
locomotion including brachiation, that would not have worked anymore.
So there might have been a push factor towards the ability to sustain upright walking.
So here's a time when you can call on your knowledge of the forces of evolution to begin
to think about variation and how it's possible that some individuals who had perhaps just
to be hypothetical a slightly straighter knee and longer time that they could walk upright
would do better in an increasingly open environment and natural selection would then work over
time to shift the gene pool in a particular direction aided most likely by mutation and
so forth.
Now one outstanding question here is that this process of climate change and opening
up of the landscape would have to have occurred really early in hominid evolution.
After all as we push back the timing of the first hominid so too do we push back the timing
of the origins for bipedalism and we're not so sure that these fit together.
In other words the cooling and drying seems to be perhaps a little too late to be the
original factor for bipedalism.
So really there are tremendous implications every time we find a yet older hominid because
it sends ripples and waves throughout our theorizing about many things including bipedalism.
So it's likely that climate played a role it is not certain how much of an original
factor that was.
Other anthropologists look instead at dietary selection pressures.
When we've talked before about non-human primates we've talked about the great importance of
being able to find and ingest good nutrition, good food and certainly anything that would
have helped attain good food sources could be a kind of selection pressure for bipedalism.
There's a specific hypothesis suggesting that the ability to stand upright would have aided
early hominids in selecting certain seeds and berries from low branches of trees.
Not bushes now which of course are low to the ground but trees and again it takes some
ecological knowledge to really understand this apparently certain seeds and berries
are located at a height at which bipedalism would have been quite favorable and certainly
when you're brachiating you're heavy you're not able and eighth for example would not
be able to get way out to the ends of the lower branches.
So there may have been a dietary push factor as well.
Most likely there were multiple pressures towards bipedalism.
All of the factors or at least a good number of them that I have mentioned may have played
a role.
What we call single factor hypotheses tend to be not considered the best.
We don't want to put all our eggs in one basket and assume it happened a certain way.
Now it is interesting that the modern bipedal gate that is how hominids walked probably
did not come about for a long time.
By that I mean to say the way we walk now probably emerged later in human evolution.
The modern way that you walk down the street or you can watch people walking every day
did not come about with the earliest bipedalism we think but rather that evolved only gradually.
It is possible given the idea of punctuated equilibrium possible that the first bipedalism
would have meant modern walking with completely modern look to how the hominids locomotive
but I think it is very unlikely.
And I will tell you in subsequent lectures why I think that in short the anatomy of the
early hominids suggests that although they were definitely bipedal that they did retain
some adaptations for climbing and using the trees so that you probably had emergence of
bipedalism but in a slightly different way than we walk now.
Alright so we have talked about the fact that we now envision a seven million year period
of hominid evolution.
This is in my perspective you know a pretty long time period for hominids.
If you think in terms of evolution or geologically of course it is not so long.
But what we want to do next is just what we did with the non-human primates.
We want to select the really key significant hominids and discuss them and their adaptations
specifically and we will do that starting in lecture 10.
