We will resume examination of the hominids by moving our focus now to South Africa for
the first part of this lecture.
Exactly 50 years before Lucy was discovered, the South African anatomist Raymond Dart uncovered
the very first fossil to be categorized as an Australopithecine, in other words a hominid
in the genus Australopithecus.
Of course we know already that this hominid could not have been as old as Lucy.
It was over two million years old though and still quite ancient for the time.
Now Raymond Dart had been born in 1893 in Australia, educated in England and moved to
Johannesburg, South Africa to accept a professorship of anatomy there.
He was very interested in all aspects of anatomy and at one point he was given a box of skulls
from a limestone quarry at a place called Tongue that was not too far from Johannesburg.
He was told in fact that he was given the skull of a baboon that was embedded in limestone
matrix.
Well Dart was interested in primates, he looked at it, he was suspicious though that it might
not be a baboon.
In fact when he got a good clear look at the skull he knew right away that this individual
head walked bipedally could not therefore have been a baboon and was likely a fossil
ancestor of humans.
Now I say that he knew this but it in fact took him 73 painstaking days of chiseling
away at the limestone matrix encasing the skull before he could get a clear look at
it.
And after that even it took years of more work to for example separate the lower and
upper jaws.
But when he got his first clear look he checked out what's called the foreman magnum on the
bottom of the skull.
If you turn a skull over you will see a large hole there.
The foreman magnum means large hole.
This is the hole through which the spinal cord passes on its way to the brain.
The placement of the foreman magnum is a key indicator of bipedality.
We of course as bipedal creatures have our heads balanced atop the spinal column that
is what a bipedal creature does versus a great ape or a monkey and the placement of the foreman
magnum did suggest bipedality.
He continued to work with the skull and eventually named it Australopithecus africanus.
So here he is the person coining the genus Australopithecus southern ape man.
The africanus indicated Africa.
We know that the fossil form was over two million years old and it was of a child.
This was clear to dart pretty early on.
Tongue was very small and had childlike features.
So it became known as the find called the Tongue baby.
Dart wrote up his finding and submitted it to the journal Nature.
This is interesting historically because even now the journal of choice for publishing
new hominid finds is Nature.
It's where the seven million year old the philanthropist was recently announced.
Well dart found out what it was like to announce a new find to the British scientific establishment
because he was met with a lot of skepticism.
Many people looked at the skull and his description of it and concluded instead that it was an
aberrant atypical type of ape.
Of course he was proven right but it took some time.
Dart was an interesting person.
He is also known to science as the originator of the idea that Australopithecines were blood
thirsty killers, savage hunters and killers.
This idea was popularized later by Robert Ardrey who wrote books about this concept
but it started out with Raymond Dart but he was right about a lot of things.
Now Australopithecus africanus is an example of what we can call a grassal hominid.
Grassal simply means that the hominid in question is relatively slender and light boned and
does not have a lot of specializations of the skeleton.
We can call Australopithecus afarensis grassal also and it will be easier to understand this
when we contrast it in a minute with another term.
We now have hundreds of specimens of Australopithecus africanus so we know that the anatomy is based
on a clear foundation.
This is again an ape sized hominid, I'm sorry, a hominid with an ape sized brain and that
has not changed from Australopithecus afarensis.
We still are coming up with new examples of this particular species.
In 1998 in South Africa again a person called Ron Clark found a stunningly complete Australopithecus
africanus.
It is very difficult to date hominids from South Africa compared to those from the east.
We know that in East Africa Lucy and other fossils were embedded in volcanic ash and
it is therefore possible to date the ash quite specifically.
You get a good idea of when the fossil lived.
In South Africa the situation with the Tongue baby was quite typical.
Many fossils are found embedded in rock for example limestone that is not easily dateable.
So we often come up with a range of dates rather than a specific targeted one.
The 1998 africanus find by Clark for example has been dated to between 3.6 and 2.5 million
years ago, it's a pretty wide range.
Now what about this contrast to grassal hominids that I mentioned?
We know of other hominids in the same genus Australopithecus that look quite different and
we give them the term robust.
So here we have the distinction grassal versus robust.
Examples of robust hominids are Australopithecus robustus in South Africa and Australopithecus
boisei in East Africa.
These hominids are heavier and heavier boned than the grassal ones.
And not very different from grassal hominids in overall body size it's more the heaviness
that we're talking about.
But the main difference is situated in the skull of hominids from the two lineages.
For example the face is very broad in robust hominids with heavy bones, big molars, big
back teeth.
So Australopithecus robustus for example can be characterized this way.
There's also what's called a sagittal crest running along the top of the skull.
This is a ridge of bone right along the top of the head that is an anchoring place for
muscles.
The sagittal crest is a place where the temporal muscle attaches.
That muscle moves the jaw.
So we know that the jaws of robust forms are big.
What you then can end up with is what we can think of as a crushing or grinding complex.
The jaws and the skull together are so big and strong that we have a crushing grinding
complex for eating.
By the way the Australopithecus boisei form from East Africa is what we can call hyper
robust.
Everything we've said about the robustus from South Africa just exaggerate.
Bigger molars, heavier bones, broader face and so forth.
Two lines of evidence taken together suggest that the robust hominids ate a different diet
than did the grassal ones.
The view is that robust hominids focused on tough foods.
After all we have a grinding complex.
Foods that might have been eaten with this complex of muscles and bones would have been
hard foods like seeds and nuts, things that were tough and that took force to actually
process and crush.
By contrast, grassal hominids are thought to have eaten much softer foods.
Soft fruits, perhaps meat as well.
Now the two lines of evidence that come together here are first the skeletal and muscular differences.
We've already described the crushing complex.
That fits very clearly with eating hard foods as I've mentioned.
But the second line of evidence is particularly interesting.
Comparative microscopic evaluation of the teeth between the two lineages points to the same
conclusion.
It is possible to take teeth and subject them to analysis under a high powered microscope.
What we would look for in this case are wear patterns on the teeth.
Different foods leave what we can think of as signatures on the surface of the teeth.
Soft foods tend to leave shallow linear grooves, whereas hard tough foods leave pits and gouges.
And the teeth of the grassal hominids do have linear shallow grooves for soft foods.
The teeth of robust hominids have pits and gouges that are quite consistent with tough,
gritty foods.
And by the way, it's possible to key this out if you will by using modern mammals.
Now you can watch what a modern mammal eats and then, when it dies, take its teeth and
look at it under the microscope so you can get a very good relationship between wear
patterns and diet and use that back into the past.
So all our evidence points to the fact that we have two lineages with different diets.
Interestingly then, we can think of the robust forms as being pretty specialized.
Our anatomy seems to have been adapted over the years for a particular food source.
And in fact, this is likely a reason why the robust Australopithecines went extinct.
They had a very long reign on the earth for over a million years, well over a million
years.
By about one million years ago, however, they die out and they are not on the direct human
line.
They are definitely hominids, they are broadly speaking our ancestors, but they are not directly
leading to the genus Homo, of which we are a part.
It is quite risky to be so specialized.
We know that animals living today that specialize on only one type of food often have problems
when the environment shifts or the environment changes or when there may be some kind of
drought or other thing that affects that one single food source.
So apparently even though this specialization worked for a long time for robust Australopithecines,
at some point it didn't work anymore.
So they co-existed with Australopithecus africanus.
But the robust Australopithecines before extinction also co-existed with another form, and it
is to this hominid that I want to turn now the first hominid in our lineage, Homo habilis.
This will be an interesting comparison between robust hominids and Homo habilis.
Homo habilis appears in the fossil record at about 2.4 million years ago.
There's lots to learn from it and we'll devote the rest of our lecture to it.
What are the implications of saying that we have Homo now, our own genus?
What we see are major advances in two areas.
First of all, brain size.
Finally now we have expansion of the size of the brain outside the realm of apes.
Remember that the previous hominids had apes sized brains.
Now we get significantly enlarged brains.
Secondly we have a behavioral advance.
Homo habilis was found associated with modified stone tools.
We've not seen that with any hominid before.
Remember that the grassal hominids and the robust hominids might well have been using
organic tools in a way akin to what a chimpanzee may do, but they simply do not fossilize
so we have no way of knowing.
Homo habilis was discovered by the Leakeys.
Again we're right back to this famous paleoanthropology family.
Louis Leakey had been working in Aldevae Gorge in Tanzania since 1931.
This is again part of the African Rift Valley, geologically active.
This is a 25 mile long gash in the earth that some have described as the mini grand canyon
and it is rich with hominid fossils layer after layer.
In the very early 1960s Louis Leakey and his associates discovered Homo habilis and he
named it this because of the two factors that I've mentioned for you.
He could see the brain size was enlarged, he could see the association with modified
stone tools.
Homo habilis means handyman, an apt name for this creature.
Some scientists nowadays split Homo habilis into two species and refer to it by two different
names citing some anatomical differences.
I reject the splitter taxonomy and refer to Homo habilis as a single species and that's
what we will do in these lectures.
Many other biological anthropologists do this as well.
I think that the range of modern human variation, we look at societies around the world today,
we see that there's a lot of variation anatomically but we are a single species.
So in other words what I'm saying is that the variation that we see in Homo habilis
is perfectly okay for one single species and not surprising to me at least.
Now the inventor of the modified stone tools that we're talking about may or may not be
Homo habilis.
This is a fine point that deserves mention.
The first stone tools, they're called Uldowan after Uldawai Gorge, were found dated to 2.4,
2.5 million years ago in Ethiopia and not found in association with any hominids at
all.
The tools are there in the fossil record and there's no associated human creature, human
ancestor with them.
So that is something of an unanswered question but we do know of the association between
Homo habilis and Uldawai tools.
These stone tools represent fairly simple technology in one sense.
They are made out of materials such as quartz and shirt and basalt and the apparent process
involved was to pick up a rock with one hand, have a rock in the other and simply hit the
two rocks together so that a flake is sliced off one rock.
You end up then with a flake taken off and a core tool left behind.
All the Uldawai tools, the things that resulted, were likely all purpose in nature.
They probably aided Homo habilis in foraging, that is, in feeding behaviors, possibly with
cutting a carcass or digging for different types of foods.
Recent paleoanthropological analysis has really focused on the flakes as the key tools much
more so than the cores.
Archaeologists and others can do experiments in modern day where let's say an antelope
from a zoo dies or even an elephant, they can get hold of the carcass, they can make,
using their own skills, Uldawai-like tools, and then take a flake and see if it is capable
of cutting through the skin and disarticulating the carcass.
And in fact, this experiment has proven that, yes, flakes can cut through carcasses.
The cores are de-emphasized in current analysis with emphasis put on the flakes, it is still
possible that the cores were used as tools as well.
Now these Uldawai tools deserve our reflection for a moment.
Let's stop and think because this really is an important milestone in human evolution.
We certainly have continuity with what chimpanzees do because we know that chimpanzees use stone
hammers to open hard-shelled nuts, but keep in mind that to our knowledge no population
of chimpanzees has ever modified a stone tool.
So this is quite new.
For the first time you have a process by which a flake is taken off, happening over and over
again in a patterned way, and then the use, we presume, of these flakes to solve problems.
So we shouldn't think of this as just rock bashing.
This is fairly, fairly precise type of work, although what results is an all-purpose toolkit.
Now beyond the manufacture of Uldawai tools, what else do we know about Homo habilis?
This in fact has been a point of contention for 25 years now.
The archaeologist Glenn Isaac published in the year 1978 a highly influential model of
Homo habilis behavior based on his own work in East Africa.
This article that he published was extremely influential for many years.
I happened to enter graduate school the year after it was published, and it was absolutely
accepted, discussed frequently and the fine points debated, but this is the way that it
was, and it influenced, I don't think I'm exaggerating to say, a generation of anthropologists.
Glenn Isaac worked at a site in Kenya called Lake Turkana, and he found evidence of two
million-year-old Homo habilis there, and he said that he could see the behavioral signature
of Homo habilis in the archaeological remains, specifically he wanted to argue for food sharing
and a semi-permanent base camp at which Homo habilis was living.
He said that this base camp was the first time in human evolutionary history that people,
commoners, had a place of safety to live and sleep every night.
They would reuse the same spot night after night, unlike any creature that came before
that, like non-human primates, presumably just keep moving and sleeping in different
places.
Well, we are going to get in just a minute to his evidence for this.
He was a little more specific with talking about the social behavior, though.
He focused in on three key characteristics of modern humans that he could project back
in time to two million years ago, and he needed help to do this.
He needed, in fact, a referential model, the very same type of model that we have talked
about that can be used for great apes in hominids.
But in this case, of course, he wanted to model humanness, so he couldn't use great
apes.
He chose, instead, modern human forager peoples, what anthropologists call hunter-gatherers,
people who live without any domesticated animals, without any agriculture, but live off the
land hunting and gathering.
He studied modern works of anthropologists about hunter-gatherers, and he noticed that
they have what we can call postponed consumption, that is, they don't eat on the spot, but they
bring things back to share.
Secondly, food sharing.
When the food is collected, it is shared.
And third, the food sharing occurs at a locus, a home base, a campsite.
All of these things Isaac wanted to convince readers, other anthropologists, that he could
find at Lake Turkana.
A particularly important type of site that he discussed was what he called type C sites.
It was just his term for this.
A mix of Aldewan tools, clearly modified by hominids, found at lots of different locations,
but with multiple animal species that had died and been processed.
So a type C site is a jumble together, Aldewan tools, multiple animal bones.
You might have hippopotamus, elephant, giraffe, all mixed together.
Before Isaac, this was the evidence to suggest that people lived in a particular place, brought
their food in, and shared it at this place.
Other archaeologists listened, paid attention, absorbed this for a while, but eventually
became skeptical.
Starting in the early to mid 1980s, naturally, response came from other anthropologists.
Notably, Richard Potts of the Smithsonian became a major critic of this whole scenario.
Potts was skeptical.
He said, well, we've got homo habilis here that is a very defenseless, vulnerable kind
of hominid living out in the African landscape.
What sense does it make that they would have dragged bloody carcasses across the landscape
back to this place of safety?
Where Isaac had even said that the children would be kept, really emphasizing that this
is the home of the hominids.
Potts essentially said, look, the hominids would have been making a bloody trail for
predators to follow them right back to the place that was supposed to be safe.
We know, in fact, that from ecosystem analysis, that there are a lot of predators, big cats
and others, living right alongside homo habilis at this time period.
So there's something that doesn't quite fit about this picture.
Essentially what Potts was doing was suggesting that Isaac was romanticizing and overhumanizing
homo habilis, that the referential model had skewed his thinking.
If you can think back a couple of lectures, this is just what the detractors of referential
modeling say, that if you get into a referential model, get locked into a certain way of thinking
about what is visible, and you import that back into the past in some ways inappropriately
or potentially inappropriately.
Potts went further and said, let's look at these type C sites.
He certainly agreed that there were, at Lake Turkana and other places too, clumps together
of Aldewan tools and mixed worked animal bones.
But he said there are other alternative hypotheses rather than food sharing and a home base to
explain this.
He suggested that in fact Aldewan tools had been placed strategically across the landscape
in what we might call tool caches.
So that hominids had planned to put the tools in, we might think of them as piles, in areas
around where they lived, and then would bring to those piles animal carcasses for disarticulating.
This is a much more focused and simple model.
It does imply cognition and planning.
It gives homo habilis the ability to plan out where it would make sense to leave pre-prepared
tools.
But it minimizes according to Potts the danger factor.
In other words, these areas which we can think of as butchering or dismemberment sites would
have been places at which hominids minimized their time and they would have disarticulated
and either eaten or done whatever they wanted to do with the meat there and then gone on.
Nothing is said then about where homo habilis lived.
Nothing is implied about food sharing or places of safety.
Potts says that Isaac was going well beyond the evidence in making those claims.
Then some Potts views have tended to prevail over the intervening years.
It's not necessarily that everybody agrees with the tool cache reinterpretation specifically,
but rather most people now say that Isaac really did exceed his data with his interpretation.
Now homo habilis had larger brains and I do think it is quite likely that they were able
to cognitively plan.
Now I see no problem with what Potts did in the tool cache hypothesis.
It is a scenario that seems likely with nothing perhaps major to contradict it.
But we are in still a relatively early period for discussing social behavior.
So there's going to be some uncertainty here.
Now without a doubt, there's been a controversy about homo habilis.
But equally without a doubt, we can say that homo habilis is responsible for some new cultural
behaviors on the hominid horizon.
These individuals processed animal bones and brought together animal bones in worked stone
tools in a way that we did not see before in evolutionary time.
And the enlarged human brain, hominid brain is a better term, is clearly important in
this process.
So the way that I like to think of this is that we have evidence now with the genus homo
of a new ability to begin to alter the surrounding landscape.
We have at one and the same time evidence of continuity with other primates and evidence
of discontinuity.
And remember that that's what biological anthropology really wants to get at.
How we or other hominids are similar to and different from what came before.
I'm suggesting then that these all the wand tools that were made are pretty important
both for the actual product that resulted, the flakes primarily, and also for what they
represent.
There was a mobile creature at work here.
And I don't just mean that in the sense that they were able to locomote.
We obviously have animals moving all the time, but I'm talking about a type of strategic
mobility.
The homo habilis was able to look over its landscape and bring together elements of the
landscape that it had modified in new ways so that the animals that were out there clearly
were processed by homo habilis.
And as we'll talk about more in the next lecture, we're making no assumption of hunting here.
We're simply assuming processing and ingestion of meat.
But it's how that happened that's the interesting process with strategic placement of tools apparently
with effective foraging that has been underwritten by this ability to create and to shape stone.
There's a reason in other words why even back in the 1960s without knowing all that's
come since Louis Leakey determined that it was worthy to put homo habilis in a new genus.
So what we're building up is a picture that really emphasizes a kind of a shift we had
for many years Australopithecines and earlier species about which we can only speculate
socially and culturally.
Now we're getting into the real record of artifact use of technology.
And because of that we feel more comfortable talking about the idea of material culture,
the origins of human material culture.
What we are doing is we're setting up a foundation here for what comes next.
There is ahead of us a very big shift point.
We think that homo habilis was one of those creatures that did lead to other ancestors
in the human lineage.
That is unlike the robust Australopithecines that were not using tools as far as we know
although perhaps organic ones and that went extinct, homo habilis did not go extinct but
rather as far as we can tell led to homo erectus.
With homo erectus in the next lecture we will talk about some major behavioral innovations.
So homo habilis is the starting point of culture but things really start to get moving with
homo erectus.
And I'm going to outline for you some changes that homo erectus brings to the human evolutionary
story when we return.
