In this penultimate lecture, we return to a micro-level focus.
By this I mean we return to a consideration of the gene.
We'll be contrasting the anthropological tendency
to take a bio-cultural look at modern behavior and health
with the very popular tendency to give power to the gene
and suggest that the gene can determine health and behavior.
In the words of Evelyn Fox Keller, who's a prominent philosopher of science,
never in the history of the term gene has that word had more prominence.
I always recommend Keller's books.
She is a philosopher of science at MIT.
In the written material for this course,
I have suggested reading her century of the gene.
And some of what I say in this lecture will be taken from her book.
It is not an overstatement to say that we live in an era that looks to the gene
as both an explanatory factor in health and behavior
and as a possible vehicle to fixing problems.
I refer here to problems such as with diseases, with health,
also with emotions and things like anxiety and shyness.
I have noticed a great simplifying tendency in the media
in talking about this topic that I think raises public expectations
in the ways that I've just talked about.
For example, the trailer for a TV documentary
or the headline of an article is often reductionistic and quite sensationalistic
and tends to focus on gene power,
even if the documentary itself or the article itself ends up talking
in much more subtle terms and more interactive terms
about how a gene may interact with the environment.
Further, I find that the media tends to consider quite sexy
these so-called power of the gene topics.
For example, genetic counseling, possible genetic therapy for diseases,
the human genome work that's been going on that we'll talk about in a little while,
and certainly cloning. Cloning has been very much in the news.
In many of these presentations, there is a certain power that's afforded to the gene
that stands in stark contrast to the perspective that we've been developing.
The perspective we've talked about has always been one of balance
in talking about biology and culture
and in also talking about the gene itself as part of a larger system.
So we are going to work on contrasting these perspectives in this lecture
to remind you of some of the things that we mentioned way back in lecture two
an accurate scientific picture of the gene
reminds us that only very rarely is there a one-to-one relationship
between a gene and some behavioral outcome.
It is even true to say that there's not often a one-to-one relationship
between the work of a specific single gene
and the production of a specific single protein.
We know that multiple genes may work together to produce an effect.
We know also that single gene can be affected in many ways by the environment
and we know that there are whole areas on the human genome, on the chromosomes,
on the genes that don't work to produce proteins that are in so-called non-coding regions.
So it is with this information that we look back to lecture two for
that we want to import here in lecture 23.
A good place to start our consideration of these topics is with a phenomenon of pet cloning.
Among the animals that now have been successfully cloned is the domestic cat.
In December 2001, headlines told us that there was a new kitten produced in the world
from a genetic donor, cloning.
Cloning of course is genetic duplication.
We know that in natural biological processes, twins may result in humans
as in any other species and twins are genetic clones of each other,
genetic clones that were produced naturally with identical DNA.
When we talk about cloning, we're talking about the parallel process
that is carried out artificially in the laboratory.
And this is what happened with the production of the kitten named CeCe.
It was produced from the genetic donor called Rainbow.
The correct term here when we talk about the adult cat Rainbow is genetic donor.
It's not that she was really the mother of CeCe in the traditional biological sense
in terms of having been impregnated and giving birth to CeCe,
but rather donated to the laboratory, her DNA, with the production of CeCe.
Before this, of course, other species had been cloned successfully.
Many of us will remember Dolly the sheep, the first example of an animal cloned.
And since then, cows, mice, goats, and pigs have been cloned as well.
But there's something I think particularly intriguing and worth analyzing
about the cloning of a domestic cat, since many of us in this country are pet owners
and these issues come very close to our lives.
In fact, I wanted to do some research on the internet about pet cloning
and I found an unexpected aspect of this whole issue that I want to dwell on for a little while.
And it is the fact that biotechnology companies are now advertising the possibility
of widespread commercial cloning of pets in the relatively near future.
I want to emphasize that this is not going on yet,
but it is being advertised as coming down the pike within a few years.
So if you go on the internet, or you can find this out other ways as well,
I just happen to use the internet, you can find that there's a prediction
in a few years, not specified how many,
a regular person will be able to clone a pet for approximately $20,000.
And there are even instructions available to you and I now about what to do
to freeze tissue samples of pets that may die now
so that the technology that is coming and will be widely available
can be used in a few years.
For example, I was told that if I wanted to clone a cat that had recently died,
the first thing I need to do is to keep the body cool, not to freeze it,
that's not a good thing to do, but to keep it cool,
to get it as soon as possible to the vet so that the vet may take tissue samples
and then to put two tissue samples in sterile saliva
and send them to this particular biotechnology company
at an undisclosed location, I won't tell you where, in the United States.
So there are people presumably, I don't know, responding to this ad and doing this.
Now there's a lot of information that goes along with these instructions
and included is the admittance that there may be so-called slight differences
between the genetic donor, which is of course the dead animal,
and the resultant clone.
And I refer to these as the fine print.
These are not made a big deal of in these advertisements, but they are there
and it's fair of me to say that they are there.
So it even says at one point there might be a difference in coat color
when this animal is cloned, there may be other differences as well.
However, my reading of these advertisements is that the real selling point
is the ability for a person to be reunited with a lost pet.
Let's say you're fluffy, some animal that you've lived with for 15 years has died
and you really miss fluffy and you are to think ahead of the possibility
of being reunited with a clone of fluffy.
Now this strikes very close to some of us.
I have had cats, I've lived with cats my whole life.
My husband and I in the last couple of years lost two cats to cancer
and we miss them very much.
So I think that there is a sort of emotional tug when we hear about the possibility
that there could be this type of cloning.
Well, to anyone who might consider this, I would recommend trying to find photographs
of CC and Rainbow and putting them side by side.
This is possible with an internet search.
When you put the photos side by side, you'll be struck, I believe,
by the really big differences in physical appearance between the two.
Even though this is cloning and genetic duplication, the two cats,
even over and above the fact that one's a kitten, look different.
Their coat patterns are different.
Their coat color is different.
Many people do not really expect this.
This goes to show that genes do not directly control expression
of even something as physical and concrete as coat color.
And what about what else makes a cat special?
Certainly, we become attached to our pets for reasons other than coat color.
There may be specific playing games that happen between you and your cat,
specific affectionate routines that you might have.
And of course, these are not under genetic control
and that you don't end up with a cat that is just like the cat that you lost.
So in point of fact, there are assumptions behind cloning that are seriously flawed.
There are assumptions that cloning is going to end up with either a duplicate
or a near duplicate creature.
And the point that I'm making here is that this is not true with appearance
and it is not true with personality and temperament either.
When I was doing all of this reading, I decided to consult the HSUS,
the Humane Society of the United States.
This is a group of people I admire.
They're a kind of animal protection league.
They're very interested in helping animals around the country
and helping people help animals.
They have a specific response to the entire possibility
of widespread commercial pet cloning posted on an internet site
and they mail this out as well to people who are interested.
They make three points that I think dovetail very nicely with what I am saying as well.
First, they point out that medical complications seem to go along with cloning.
From the other animals that we know about, the sheep and the cows and the pigs and so on,
there is what I can call a trend or at least a red flag
that there may be health problems and weakness, medical problems associated with cloning.
Cloning is very new.
We don't have many animals around who have lived a long life
and have themselves reproduced successfully, healthily.
So there is this possibility that we need to keep an eye on.
We don't know how cloned animals will do.
Secondly, the HSUS underscores the fact that the unique features of an animal cannot be cloned,
something we have already reviewed.
And thirdly, a very important point, I think, which speaks to people's choices,
is why not go to a shelter and help out the overpopulation problem with cats and dogs rather than cloning?
That is more of a social point, but one that I think is worth mentioning.
So pet cloning concerns me.
How do the lessons of pet cloning, though, apply to humans more directly?
So if you've listened to the news at all in the last year or two,
certainly you've encountered multiple stories about the possibility of human cloning.
But the way I want to approach this topic is to talk about the human genome project
instead of human cloning directly.
In the year 2000, the human genome project succeeded in sequencing the DNA
in one so-called typical human cell.
This was a breakthrough that was widely heralded by scientists across the world
and certainly widely reported in the media.
The so-called cracking of the human genome was said to be an equivalent breakthrough
as landing a man on the moon.
This is a project that took 10 years to complete.
It was started with specific goals in the year 1990, and it was completed in the year 2000.
And by the way, it cost $3 billion along the way.
The anthropologist John Marx has pointed out that it is really not correct to refer to the human genome,
specifically because there's more than one.
There's genetic diversity in humans.
We have talked about this when we've talked about race,
and we've talked about how the genetic diversity that we see tends to occur within rather than between populations.
But in any case, there certainly is genetic diversity to be accounted for,
and so taking one human cell gives us a map or a sequence of some of the diversity of the human genome.
So that's an important clarification right at the start.
More significantly, I would suggest that, yes, it's a big breakthrough to get the map of the human genome,
but it should be considered a starting point.
It is not the prize in itself.
We can learn nothing about the function of genes by simply mapping the genes.
And this gets back to the underlying theme that I bring up whenever I talk about genes,
that genes do not act singly in simplistic ways, but rather in complex ways as part of the system.
So absolutely the cracking of the human genome is an exciting first step, but it is that.
Genetics research may hold out real hope for helping with human health problems.
This is an area that should have optimism associated with it, should have hope,
but I also fear, I worry, that that optimism tends to be exaggerated in the media
or is applied uncritically rather than on a case-by-case basis.
In fact, the effects of some terrible and tragic diseases may be ameliorated
if we understand better the genetic role in them.
Diseases such as cystic fibrosis and Tay-Sachs come to mind here
because we know that single genes play an important role in the expression of these diseases.
Let's talk about Tay-Sachs.
Tay-Sachs is a genetic disease that is fatal.
It progressively destroys the central nervous system and it does so in children
so that it is very rare for a child with Tay-Sachs to survive beyond the fifth year.
This disease occurs in higher incidences in certain populations,
for example among certain populations of European Jews.
Now this is caused by an absence of a particular enzyme
that is in turn controlled by a specific gene.
Researchers know the exact location of this gene.
It happens to be on human chromosome number 15 out of all our chromosomes.
If a child inherits a single gene from a parent that has this particular feature,
that child will be a carrier.
In other words, will not have the symptoms or the disease itself,
but will be able to pass on that gene that has the tendency embedded in it.
If a child gets a double dose, two genes, one from each parent,
that child will unfortunately express Tay-Sachs.
The vast majority of diseases, however, are not like this.
With Tay-Sachs, we may look in the future to genetic counseling
to be able to identify which parents have the gene,
which parents are carriers.
You don't know that unless there's a medical history that has made you very aware of it,
but you wouldn't know necessarily if you were a carrier or not.
There's a possibility further in the future of using genetic therapy
in some way to help children who do have a double dose of this gene.
But in the vast majority of the diseases that Americans cope with
and people around the world cope with and die from,
we cannot trace a single gene and link it to the disease.
Think of heart disease, diabetes,
even something that has an emotional basis, such as depression.
These diseases come about for complicated reasons,
both biological reasons and social reasons, interactive reasons,
as I've stressed so many times.
Diet makes a difference, family makes a difference,
some of that is genetic and some of it is social.
Stress levels make a difference and so on.
This persistent tendency that I have described that is in the media and elsewhere
to think in one-to-one terms, gene-specific outcome,
may in fact lead to correlations that get suggested between genes and personality traits.
How many times have you been flipping channels on TV
and heard a claim for gene for risk-taking?
Do you have the gene for risk-taking? Do you like to bungee jump?
There may be in the grocery store, those tabloid newspapers saying gene for shyness,
gene for chocolate, I've always heard that one as well.
And these are tendencies that get reported that also cause me concern.
And as usual, I want to focus on a particular example,
an example that I'll use has to do with anxiety.
This is based on a scientific report made in the journal Science just recently, the year 2002.
And I want to describe for you first what study was done
and then tell you a little bit about how it was reported.
There will be two parts to this analysis.
28 people, volunteers, were used in this study.
And first, their brains were scanned in the laboratory.
They were scanned when these people were in a particular testing condition.
They were looking at images of scary, frightening faces.
And the specific area of the brain that was scanned is called the amygdala.
The amygdala is the part of the brain that processes fear and highly emotional stimuli.
After the brain scan part of the experiment, the volunteers donated DNA.
And the DNA was analyzed and it was found out whether the people had either variant one or variant two
of a particular gene in the body.
This is the gene responsible for transport of a certain brain chemical.
It's a chemical in the brain that sends messages in the brain.
It's called serotonin.
And the result of the study was quite interesting.
People with one particular variant of this gene tended to have higher brain activation
when watching these scary figures.
In other words, their brain, their amygdala, responded at a higher rate
when they looked at these scary pictures.
And the conclusion was then that there might be a biological basis for this brain activation,
a genetic basis for the way that the brain responds to emotional stimuli.
Now, that's the report of what happened.
I want to add two things that are my own commentary.
These are not things that the scientists themselves are unaware of.
The scientists remark upon them too, but I really want to highlight them.
First of all, 28 volunteers is a fairly small number to be basing big conclusions on.
And secondly, what was measured was only brain activity.
There is no measurement of behavior.
There's been no measurement of emotional expression.
Now, in other words, the experiment stopped after the brain activity was measured.
These people were not asked in any way to report emotion or behavior, to react, to respond.
So there was no such component of the test.
Now, we want to look at how this was reported.
And I'm going to go back to my earlier suggestion that often there's a sensationalistic reporting in the media
and sometimes a reductionistic one, by which I mean focus on genes and giving genes power.
The article that I choose to read was actually quite good if you read the whole thing
in terms of including information about what was and what was not done in the test.
And it concludes with a strong quote from a scientist talking about the fact that actual emotional expression,
how one might deal with fearful stimuli, is complex.
That it takes genes and it takes environment, it takes the whole context into account.
But what was the headline of this particular article?
Worried? Afraid? Could be genetic.
And what was the first line of the article or the lead?
Prone to anxiety? It may be in the genes.
So you have to read the whole thing.
This is kind of equivalent to that fine print I was talking about on the internet cat cloning sites.
Yes, the information is there, but it tends to be presented very simplistically.
And I'm suggesting just as with cat cloning that the public's expectations tend to be raised
in inaccurate and unrealistic ways. Certainly some people read the whole article
and then we'll get the whole point, but there is this tendency that I don't think is necessarily a good one.
So what I would suggest again is that I have no desire to be dismissive of this research.
It is not that I think we need to avoid doing research on the role of single genes in diseases
or even the role of complex genes in diseases or emotional reactions or mental syndromes
or emotional problems or anything of the sort.
I think that it is possible that we will be able to make breakthroughs based on some of this research
and in certain targeted ways to make a difference to the benefit of human beings.
And of course this is an endeavor that biological anthropologists would endorse.
We wish to be practical and we wish to make a difference in the world,
but I think that the cautionary note that biological anthropology is sounding
is because of the fact that there tends to be not so much care to take things on a case-to-case basis.
So again we're talking about this over-empowering of the gene.
And I have seen this type of analysis applied to many other examples as well.
Now in this part of the lecture I want to return once again to Evelyn Fox Keller
because she has noted that there is a large gap between genetic information and biological meaning.
And here she gets right at what I am trying to say. She's hit the nail on the head.
For example, let's say we decide based on some preliminary research
that it might be possible in the future to fix a problem through intervention at the genetic level.
That can be aided by having a sequence of the genetic string, the human genome.
It can be aided by knowing how genes may have an effect on things like Tay-Sachs or cystic fibrosis.
But what it doesn't tell us is the meaning in a larger sense.
What else does that gene do in the system in which it plays a role?
If we alter what a single gene does by medical intervention,
can we predict what effects that will have on the system as a whole?
I think this question should be kept in mind.
Following Keller, specifically this book that I've been reading, Century of the Gene,
we can say that it's important to think of genes in two very different ways.
First, genes are structural entities. Of course, they get passed along from generation to generation.
And of course, as we've said, they influence physiology and anatomy and behavior.
So we can isolate genes, we can treat them as these single entities in the laboratory,
and we can sometimes find out their effects on particular parts of a system.
But when we map them in sequence, we're at the start of the quest
because we can't always predict how they fit into the bigger system
or what we might alter by changing one part of a big system.
Secondly, and quite differently, we need to remember also that genes are functional entities.
And here they have no straightforward, easy to label identity of their own
because they are so involved in dynamic interaction.
And I just want to remind you of some specific concrete examples that we have pulled up before
to make easily understandable this term of dynamic interaction.
We started out talking about the fact that I'm tall
and that my tallness was affected by the genetic inheritance from my parents, both of whom are tall,
but how that tallness required a certain environment to flower or blossom or to exist,
that good medical care and good nutrition were required.
We talked also early on about the disease of sickle cell anemia.
And what we realized is that the mutation that causes sickle cell anemia,
while so tragic for some, is maintained in the gene pool because in single doses,
that very same mutation affords protection against malaria.
So here we have a gene that is not just one thing that we can pick out and say,
look what it's doing with sickle cell anemia, that's critically important.
Yes, but there's a much wider context in which that particular genetic action occurs.
And we can go on and we can talk about emotional reactions as well.
We need to remember, as I just talked about,
that there's a difference between measuring brain reactivity that can be tied to a gene
that is responsible for chemical messaging rather than the actual expression
or the behavioral response that comes out when people act.
That's much, much harder to study than it is to put somebody in a lab
and measure the waves coming out of their brain.
Therefore, we can conclude by suggesting that improving life and health
is the challenge before both this whole area of genetics and biological anthropology.
Certainly genetic study, genetic therapy, genetic counseling and all the other things
have quite a lot to contribute, but biological anthropology too has something to contribute.
We must remember that the quality of human existence depends on the interaction of many processes.
Some are biological as we've discussed, some are not, some are social and some are cultural.
And it is that window that we need into the social and the cultural
mixed together with the biological that we need from biological anthropology.
So to put it a slightly different way, I believe that biological anthropology
rescues us from simplified gene discourse.
It brings back not only the system in which the gene is embedded,
but the individual human and the population over and over.
We talk about the population as the relevant unit of study.
So I fear in a way that this lesson of biological anthropology will be increasingly needed
as we move ahead into the future, that the 21st century may be the century of gene discourse.
And what I hope is that the biological anthropological discourse is listened to as well.
I just mentioned the future, and what's left now is not only to just wrap up the course in the final lecture,
but to look a little bit about evolution in the future.
One of the questions that I'm asked, the most that I'm asked most frequently by students is,
well, you know something about evolution, how do you predict will evolve in the future?
Where is the human species going?
I'll start off the next lecture by considering that question.
