Hello and welcome to What's in the Box?
My name is Sophie Clark and I'm here at Wessex Archaeology's head office, where I will be
speaking to our in-house specialists about the artefact they find most intriguing.
On today's episode, I am joined by a somewhat familiar face, our residential field work
archaeologist, Phil Harding. Hi, Phil.
Hello. Right.
I am surprised by the size of this box. I thought we were going to be looking at flint
today. Big box for very big flint, Sophie.
Oh, my goodness. Really? Okay.
Now then, grab the box. I will.
Okay, let's go. Now.
Now do you see why I needed a big box?
What is this? Isn't that a beast?
What you're looking at there is probably, no, unquestionably, the largest piece of worked
flint that's ever been found in Wiltshire, probably in the south of England, according
to where you draw the line on the south of England. And the nice thing is, I found it.
Did you? Where did you find it?
Well, it's found at a place called West Canett. West Canett is just a little bit further south
than Avbury. Down in the valley where the river Canett flows through, there are a series
of late Neolithic timber, we call them palisaded enclosures. They were timber structures put
together by very closely fitting timber posts. And several years ago, they decided that they
would stop plowing the field. There's nothing to see in the field, but they stopped plowing
it. But before they went down to permanent pasture, we'd do some field walking.
Okay.
I walked across, putting in a grid, and I got to the fence line and I put a cane in.
I looked over the fence and I saw that. It's a whopper, ain't it? And I think I can explain
why it was found in the hedge. I reckon that that was lying in the ground, and it came
along with a tractor, and he dinked that off with a plow.
Right.
Of course, that is so big, it probably threw the plow out of the furrow or something like
that, it dislocated it. I suspect the plowman said something in the Anglo-Saxon, got down
off his tractor and picked it up and hefted it into the nearest hedge. But because he's
actually been able to remove that big lump of flint, it gives me the chance to just wonder
at the quality of the raw material, and the story gets better because flint of that sows
and that quality does not occur in the Avery area.
So where's this come from then? Exactly. It must have been brought in. And I was talking
quite casually to a good mate of mine who lives in East Anglia. He was a very, very
good flint napper, and I explained to him that I'd got this wonderful T-cozy type core.
Okay.
And he said, oh, he said, we've got loads of those up here. I said, you're having a laugh.
He said, have you ever seen that one from Falsham? It's a place called Falsham. And
he reminded me of this Wackengrate core that used to be in Bereson Edmunds Museum. And
this one here, mine, mine, you know, mine is about 16 kilos in weight. Okay. The Falsham
one is 27 kilos. But it is exactly the same. It's got this T-cozy shape with this beautiful
flaking on all the way round. And I reckon that this one was made in East Anglia, and
that Falsham one's not the only one. There's two or three others, exactly the same as this.
The quality of the flint is very, very East Anglian. And I reckon that this object was
made in Norfolk, or somewhere like that, in East Anglia, and traded down to, to, to the
Avesbury area. And who knows, it might have been set up in a place like that. And, well,
let's be honest, you can't look at that without saying, my goodness. It's impressive. It's
impressive. It's a beast, innit? It is absolutely beast. It's ginormous. Okay. So how, how old
do you think this is likely to be? I reckon, I reckon it's probably about the same day
as the, the, the palisade and enclosures. Those palisade and enclosures were probably
sort of ritual ceremonial sites. So you might expect to get ritual ceremonial objects with
it. And I would reckon that if the, the palisade and enclosures are about, let's say two and
a half thousand BC, I reckon that that core would fit in, in the late Neolithic, maybe
about two and a half thousand BC. So you've got Avesbury and Silbury Hill and the palisaded
enclosures. There's a whole load of things going on around there at the time. And you've
also, by looks of it, got flint there, whether or not that was made in East Anglia and moved
in one hit to Wiltshire, or whether a person in East Anglia moved it two miles down the
road and gave it to somebody else. And he then moved it on and moved it on and it moved
on and gradually ended up, I don't know. I reckon that that object came from East Anglia.
So do you think that this could have ever originally started off as a core? So they would have
ever used it to make tools from? Or do you think this is just for decorative?
I think it's for, I think it's for symbolic purposes. In my opinion, it is not a core as
we would accept the definition of a core. I don't think that they were making flint tools
out of this. They might have made some, if you look at, if we turn it round, we look
at that flake scar there. You could possibly make, let's say, a flint knife out of that.
But that is far too big for a scraper. It's far too big for an arrowhead. It's far too
big for most of the flint tools. What they've done, you can see, they've, they've, you can
see the bits of the outside round here, the cortex. They've basically taken off the top.
And when I talked about this, this object, because I did, I took it up to East Anglia
and, and my, my mate said to me, God, he said, that's a nice piece of flint. He said, he
said up here in East Anglia, they call them ringers.
Ringers.
Because when you tap them, they ring like a bell.
Really?
Oh yeah.
Oh wow.
And, and that's a, that's a sign of a good quality piece of flint.
There's a much darker part of the flint here. And the rest of it, it's quite a light grey.
What causes that?
When that was originally made, it would have been black like that.
Ah, right, okay.
This blue is what we call the patina. It's the, what is the result of this surface of
the flint just drying out. And it's, it's, it's the sort of typical colour that you'd
expect to see in, in a, in a chalky environment. If it's an alkaline chalky environment, then
the flint goes, then the flint goes a sort of bluey white like that. When it's fresh.
So they wouldn't have seen a bluey white object, they would have seen a black one.
This would mean much blacker.
Thank you so much Phil for bringing this in. That's absolutely incredible. I love it.
It's an amazing piece of flintwork.
Thank you for watching. If you'd like to learn more about flint cores, please follow the
link in the description. You can also follow us on our social media channels. And until
next time, bye.
