Calling Gamma Ray.
This is Major Cigar.
Do you read me, Gamma Ray?
Gamma Ray, Gamma, come in!
Gamma Ray, please respond!
Well, his brain is fried.
Pack it up, mission's over.
Do you read me? Do you read me?
Do I need to reach through the TV?
Do I need to reach through the Weegee?
Houston and Meg, I'm too deeny.
I'm too uneasy, I'm out of face, and I'm orange-tanging.
I'm powdered eggs, and my radio's been down for days.
So just stand around and shout out the phrase and go,
Do you read me? Shook up, shoot a beanie.
I'll look for the Moga Fitti.
Deep into some hellhole, come detect this tempo.
I've been feeding back in these headphones,
beating back a profound fear.
Farewell to my breadcrumbs.
Is anybody even out there? Am I out there in that truth?
Tweety, that new piece, do you read me?
You don't read me, I'm barely a thing.
I'm scared to blink, I might shrink some and I shrink more.
Trink past this pink dwarf.
No sign of my bull star, but I'll up here,
but don't mean north.
Deep space and no G4, some more tumble out.
Some death bells, some bleep bleep,
robot voice, some red light, some scent and help.
Straighten me to some ET to come deep-frying.
I'll reap, raise, and re-haul.
Reach out, reap what he sow.
Jesus, do you read me? We don't.
We don't. We don't. We don't.
We don't. We don't. We don't.
We don't. We don't. We don't.
We.
Do you read me camera?
And I play drums on the wheel
where the feeling out of touch
are outgunned in the feels.
Drums on the wheel,
bomb sites in blackouts
and foglights and gas clouds
jockey through vacuums
None of our flaps down, it's shocking.
Shout out, this one small part is
Ain't once chosen to abort shit that we've honed in on our problem
Not stop until you stop and see what kind of quad you're in, you got lost in
Do you read me that option, and y'all's options are exhausted
Been dropped off in this mosh pit instead of locked in at one orbit
Knock knock, fullback of this cockpit, it's my coffin
Bust levels, I'm doomed to repeat, nuke dance, cold do you read me
It involves a beyond the under mantra, once none ping in my transponder
Once you up a copy, y'all blame the cops, you been handed back to y'all
Unresponsive, ten hut and I'm in sync, thrown home but just ring and ring
Asteroids that leave marks in black holes that eat stars
Green cheese and GPS be decked with feed tours
Fuel gauge round the street, my beacons are all blanked out
I might slink up in a junk heap, you can't read and or pin down
Gamma Ray, come in!
And I play drums on the wheel, where the feeling out of touch are outgunned in the fields
Drums on the wheel
And I play drums on the wheel, where the feeling out of touch are outgunned in the fields
Drums on the wheel
And I play drums on the wheel, where the feeling out of touch are outgunned in the fields
And I play drums on the wheel, where the feeling out of touch are outgunned in the fields
