Lecture 1 Why Literature and Medicine
The title of this course is Death and Disease Using Literature to Understand the Human Side
of Medicine. That is a daunting title. My credentials are in literature. I have been
teaching literature for more than a quarter of a century. But I have taught this course
or a variant of it several times and I have team taught it with physicians and have invited
in other people in the biosciences to work with me. Beyond that, and this sets the tone
for this course, my credentials are the following. I have experienced pain. I have seen pain
in other people. I am afraid of dying. And like everybody else, I have some acquaintance
with death in my family. That is the human side of the ledger. That is what the course
is about. It is not a science course. And it is not simply an enrichment course about literary
materials that doctors might want to read. In other words, it is not simply about images
of doctors or of disease in literature, although it is also that. Rather, it is an exploration
of the issues in death and disease, the issues that are at the core of medicine, but that
we can eliminate by using the astonishing testimony of literature. So I hope that I would have
an audience of doctors and non-doctors, of professionals, but also of those countless
amateurs who have to face these issues, who have dealings with doctors, who live with
disease and pain and who will eventually die. And to propose literature or art as source
material here, that is what is new. That is meant to be challenging and you will see occasionally
that it is meant to be strident or impudent. I do want to challenge the way that we think
about medicine and the way that we think about medical education, about what doctors need
to know and about what the rest of us need to know, so that we might end up with a deepened,
heightened and more dimensional sense of what sickness and pain and healing are about. One
does not have to be a wizard to point out that our society today is much taken up with issues
of health care and medicine. Not simply, although most overtly with the economic side of it,
about how to pay for it. But even a casual scrutiny of the economic side of it shows us
that there is a very significant moral underside of it. But that is not the end of it either.
We are concerned with contemporary scourges or plagues in our society such as AIDS. We have
not yet figured out how really to deal with issues such as cancer and heart disease. We
even have the return of diseases that were thought to have been annihilated, such as TB.
More quotidian, less headline grabbing, would be other long-term dilemmas that face us today,
such as how to live well while living longer, the terror of Alzheimer's, the threats of
longevity as well as the boon of longevity, the prospects of decades of slow illness, and
the economic, social, familial, moral dimensions of all of this. To point to all of these
areas is to go beyond the bioscience paradigm that governs most of medical education, and
I want to spend a few moments with that. To be a doctor today in this society means to
have a fundamental background in the sciences, biology, chemistry, and physics in college,
and then later on in medical school the specialties, anatomy, physiology, pharmacology, pathology,
bacteriology, physical diagnosis, and the specialized rotations. This is the standard
curriculum. It dates back in this country really to the efforts of one man, Abraham Flexner,
who essentially pioneered this curriculum with a report that is known as the Flexner
Report in 1911. And what Flexner was doing in American education was saying we need a
curriculum for medical education that is in tune with the most recent developments in European
universities, in particular the German model of the scholarship and the new study of the
sciences and social sciences in German universities. And that is the beginning of the American
medical curriculum. We all know the astonishing success story of this bioscience model, and I
certainly do not want to impugn it or diminish it. The breakthroughs and discoveries in science
and medicine that are really often associated with famous names of Pasteur, the Curies, Jonas
Salk in our century, the story of antibiotics, of immunizations, of surgery, chemotherapy,
the list is long, we all are familiar with it. It is possible because of the very nature of
science as at least an apparent story of progress, it is possible to regard pre-modern medicine as
folkloric, as essentially old wives tales, helpless, given the achievements of modern science.
I would like to start by saying that that is untrue. The oldest medical traditions that go back
some 3,000 years before Christ in China and India and Egypt and as early as 1200 BC in ancient
Greece contain much that remains important and feels as distinct as pharmacology and
surgery. Hippocrates in 5th century BC is already modern in his rejection of the view that disease is
sent by the gods. About epilepsy, which was known and is still in many quarters known as the sacred
disease, Hippocrates said, I quote, it is not any more sacred than other diseases but has a natural
cause and its supposed divine origin is due to man's inexperience. The so-called Hippocratic
oath with its injunctions to do no harm, to refrain from both euthanasia and abortion, this is
obviously with us still today. And yet if we go still further back into the past, we come
inescapably to the realms of magic and religion. Doctors as witch doctors, as shamans, disease as
omen, disease as curse, disease as supernatural, disease as the intervention of the gods in our
lives. The scientific study of disease has in some sense been a systematic effort to free
medicine from magic. The Flexner curriculum in 1911 does not have courses on either primitive or
modern religion in it. But this story of scientific progress, of our increased knowledge of disease and
of the human body, all of this undeniable enlightenment still leaves much in the dark. Medicine cannot be
purged from magic. We still in some obscure sense want our doctors to be shamans, just as we want our
medicines to be magic. Our own beliefs, our wanting, have something to do with our healing. But that's
not all. I use the word belief with all of its religious implications. The doctor today, and I stress
today, is stationed at the border between life and death in a culture like the cultures of the modern
industrialized western societies that are essentially materialist, where the church in many cases plays a much weaker
role than in centuries past. In those societies, the doctor alone presides over issues of mortality. One
adage is health replaces salvation. I refer here anecdotally to an experience that I had a number of years
ago. I was asked to participate in a community health project in Rhode Island. And it was a project
consisting of showing films to people who had particular problems in the community. And then having the
people in the community come in to discuss those films with various people in the academy. And I was
asked to come in on the topic of a very painful topic about the death of children. And the film that had
been seen was Ordinary People, which I suspect some of you know. It's a film about a family that breaks down
because one of the children as a teenager has died and the impossible burdens that are left on both the husband
and the wife and the younger child. And one of the most painful dimensions of this for me was that audience
was filled with people who had in fact lost children. And one thing I learned immediately is that marriages
frequently don't survive the loss of a child. The amount of guilt and recrimination that is left over from
that is hard to survive. But the story I want to tell is not that. It's rather different. Some of you,
if you've seen the film, or were called it, one of the most appealing roles in the film is that of the
psychiatrist played by Judd Hirsch, who fundamentally steps in and helps this very troubled teenager,
Timothy Hutton plays him, get through his own guilt as the surviving son. And I had never thought that there
was anything problematic about that role. I had thought that this is much of the humor of the film, much of the
toughness of the film, much of the wisdom of the film has to do with this figure. Well, in this audience of people
were a number of people who had come from Portugal, who had come, who were very much part of a powerful Catholic
culture. And one elderly man raised his hand and he said, you know, he said, I don't understand what the psychiatrist
is doing in this film. Why don't these people talk to a priest? And I thought to myself, there's no priest far or
wide in this film. This American film doesn't think that the priest either could be or should be brought in to talk about
this problem of a death in the family. And it occurred to me, he made it very clear to me that in earlier times,
that was one of the functions of the church. That's what I meant when I said negotiating between life and death, dealing
with issues of mortality. All the scientific knowledge in the world cannot keep us from dying or from contracting
disease or from hurting. So that if we were to consider medicine, not as a scientific understanding of disease, but as
the humanistic alleviation of suffering, then much changes, much changes about what we expect from doctors. I'm going to cite
you some material written by physicians. This is John Coolehan. Medical educators and students today tend to see the physician
almost exclusively as a biomedical scientist, rather than a healer, a communicator, a person who uses himself or herself
to help others get well. The concept that all suffering from illness is related directly and predictably to underlying disease lies
at the core of medical education. This is the concept, Coolehan says, that we have to challenge. He adds, the doctor's role is to
help, to heal, to alleviate suffering, or to cure. And he adds, and this is shocking. He says, it is not specifically to know.
So sometimes we can help without knowing. Sometimes we help while using incorrect concepts. And most importantly, the knowledge most useful
in clinical medicine is not the knowledge of disease. It's an extremely challenging remark. One of the stories that I'll be looking at later
in these lectures is a very bizarre, potent story by Kafka called A Country Doctor. And the line I would cite from it now, because it sort of
stands as one of the key notions in the story, is to write prescriptions is easy, but to come to an understanding of people is hard.
We know that objective science moves further and further away from the personal experience of the sufferer. We see this in the parlance
and terminology in the hospitals. Not this sad mother who was worried about leaving her family is lying in this room, but the lung cancer
in 102 needs to be seen, that we tend to type the people by the generic disease that they've got. And I want to suggest that literature
helps us to remedy the situation, helps us to recapture something of the human, moral, emotional, spiritual side of illness and suffering.
And I want further to say, you recall I cited Hippocrates as being already modern in 5th century BC saying that there's no such thing as a
sacred disease. Except that how far has our society come today? We only have to consider views expressed about AIDS, for example, to see that the early notion
of disease as a curse meted out by the gods, that notion is still with us in the words of some of our religious leaders and some of our politicians today.
Humanity hasn't changed all that much. Plague has been with people for a long time and it is still today, accompanied by the dynamics of divine punishment
and human scapegoating. Who was responsible for this scourge? We have to quarantine them and in so doing we will somehow free ourselves, cleanse ourselves.
That is the very logic of scapegoating. So medicine needs to be understood as a social, as a moral, as a philosophical, as an existential phenomenon.
Our pain, our fear of dying, our negotiations with body and mortality, this is an enormous field of knowledge and of experience.
Science is not the only avenue. Science may not be the best avenue here. Now in saying that, I'm going to point as well to some fairly well-known predicaments that we face today.
There are very few bridges between humanistic and scientific knowledge. As far back as many decades ago, C.P. Snow wrote this famous study called The Two Cultures.
And we know it, those of us who teach in the Academy today, that very few students in fact are grounded in both the humanities and the sciences.
We also know that they have each their own often jargonistic or arcane vocabularies so that people who are not well trained and either one cannot follow the language or the other.
What I want to stress obviously in this program is that unlike science with its views of empirical knowledge and testable truth, art stresses always the subjective experiential testimony.
I want further to say that in our experiences of illness and in any of our own encounters with physicians, we very frequently run into issues that are in fact closer to literature than they are to science.
For example, the doctor-patient relationship, which is what Coolehan was stressing, says in that relationship his point is, it's not necessarily the scientific knowledge of the disease that is most important.
That you could have the wrong concept and still do good. I think the corollary has to be true as well. You could have the right scientific concept and do harm.
That is to say you may not alleviate the suffering of your patient simply by knowing the etiology of the disease.
But what I want to stress here is the relationship between a doctor and a patient is a verbal relationship. Let me go further.
It's a narrative relationship. The knowledge of short stories, the knowledge of fiction, the knowledge of language could be just as useful and eye-opening for conducting that relationship sanely, wisely, and successfully as the knowledge of biology and chemistry.
It's an affair of talking, listening, hearing, understanding. I'm going to cite another physician. This is Charles Otegaard.
And in this case, he himself cites an article that had appeared in the newspapers called Some Doctors Don't Listen. And it goes like this.
In an age of laser medicine and high technology diagnosis, some modern doctors could profit from the old-fashioned practice of listening to their patients, researchers say.
And this is about a study of some 74 doctor-patient conversations. And what they found is that the doctors were very quick to interrupt patients, describing symptoms, and that the patients were very rarely allowed to explain their ailments.
They videotaped conversations between doctors and patients at the primary care internal medicine department. They found that in these interviews doctors interrupted patients after 18 seconds on average.
Otegaard himself goes on to write,
And so often are ignored by physicians.
One reason that I got involved in this field was a conversation I once had with the former provost of my university, who himself was one of the deans in biology.
And he said fairly drastically, he said,
We are training a generation of medical students who cannot take histories.
By which he meant that we have such skillful access now to electronic information, to computerized studies, to the values that are given in blood tests, to laboratory results,
that the older model of attending to what a person says at a bedside is fairly much quaint, antiquated, discredited,
that we are becoming attuned to getting our information in different formats through different media.
Yet the old clinical adage is, if you let the person tell you what's wrong, they will.
And even today one hears figures such as 90% of the important information about an illness is going to be communicated to you in the patient's history if you are able to let the patient talk.
And above all, if you are able to hear the history, because it's not going to be a straightforward history, you have to be able to see it, to discern it, to listen to it, to assess it.
When people talk about fine clinical skills, that's what they're talking about, about a physician who still knows how to listen, to actually hear the story that's being told.
If all you're going to start with is blood values and where to send people for diagnostic exams, it's like a maze.
You could go in any number of directions. The cues that you need are going to come to you from the patient if you allow that to happen.
Now up to now I'm talking about individual encounter between patient and doctor.
Literature may tell us something as well about the relationship between physicians and their patients within a larger cultural framework too.
I've mentioned that notions such as plagues are still with us today.
What we take to be progress in art is, in fact, or rather in science, is more complex than we often realize.
I'm going to cite you one of the gurus, at least in modern cultural studies, in connection with the development of medicine, and that's Michel Foucault, the French philosopher anthropologist.
He wrote a book called The Birth of the Clinic, which focuses essentially on the changes that took place in the 18th century in France and in England.
Foucault explains that something of a paradigm shift happens in the century of the Enlightenment.
I'll quote him,
How you look at things, how we make things open up to the intelligence which perceives them through the eyes.
This is going to claim to be a crucial moment in the development of modern medicine.
So the old view has been that in the 18th century something magic, as it were, happens.
All of a sudden we step out of the dark ages that the students of the body of physiology and of disease all of a sudden abandon these old superstitious wives tales about what the body is like,
or the tales of the church about what the body is like, and instead they see things in a new way.
Here's what Foucault says, the analysis has to be turned around.
It is the forms of visibility that have changed.
The new medical spirit cannot be ascribed to an act of psychological and epistemological purification.
It is nothing more than a syntactical reorganization of disease in which the limits of the visible and invisible follow a new pattern.
The abyss beneath illness, which was the illness itself, has emerged into the light of language.
It's a very interesting phrase.
The abyss beneath illness, which was the illness itself, has emerged into the light of language.
It used to be that the cough or the lesions or the fever, those were the illness.
Instead we now understand those to be the symptoms of an underlying illness that for the first time has become amenable to scientific investigation and scrutiny.
How does one read disease?
That's really going to be a central issue throughout this course.
How does one read the symptoms of disease?
How does one read it in the sense of what does a culture say about a disease?
One of the books that I'm going to talk more about in detail later, but I'll signal it to you now, is the remarkable collection that Susan Sontag wrote, first called disease and its metaphors and then AIDS and its metaphors.
And in those studies, Sontag talks about three major diseases, tuberculosis in the 19th century, cancer in the 20th century and then AIDS.
And Sontag is particularly keen on how it is we go about labeling these diseases, labeling the people who have them.
What kind of a connection we make between those diseases and their sufferers?
And how we ultimately interpret these diseases as in some sense a judgment on the people.
We make a connection. What kind of person was likely to acquire tuberculosis in the 19th century?
You think of the popular culture here. You think of the Damocameleos or the Magic Mountain, the books that we have about people who acquired TB.
TB was thought to be a disease of great sensitivity. It was a disease of artists, etc.
And that's not something that's said for cancer and likewise about AIDS.
And I'll develop that thesis even further as we move into the course.
But I want even now for you to be aware that disease is never simply understood according to its scientific makeup.
It's always in some sense a cultural script.
And that's with us today. We talk about a cancer personality.
And Heaven knows we talk about an AIDS lifestyle.
So that these matters can rarely be simply understood as a bioscience proposition.
That they take us willy-nilly into the heart of our values, of our culture.
And that, of course, is what's been going on for many, many centuries.
For all of these reasons then, it seems to me, that it is crucial to consult the testimony of the arts.
They're going to widen and deepen the record for us.
They're going to tell us more than we otherwise knew about how disease was seen.
That helps us. It gives us a repertory in some sense.
Makes us realize that we are ourselves seeing it in a constructed way.
That it's not just the eyes that look upon sick people, but that we bring to the disease our own preconceptions, our own moral views.
Art is a very valuable testimony there about the cultural and ideological notions that attend illness, doctors, suffering, and death.
And we're going to see a lot of surprises.
In the next lecture, I'm going to talk to you about Molière, the great 17th century French playwright.
And you'll see that he has views of doctors, which are shockingly different from ours today.
Likewise, we'll look at other texts, the texts by Gail Buchner in the 19th century, where the doctor comes across as a sadist.
These are not things that I think are ordinarily thought of in medical school, but it's useful for us to consider them.
So the array of materials that we'll look at in this course should give us a much broader picture, a more sensitive picture, a more nuanced picture,
perhaps a more shocking, threatening picture than we would have if we just attended to the notions of the doctor that are current today's moment.
Another notion that's going to be central as we proceed throughout the course is the kind of absolutely groundbreaking parallel between the way in which we understand disease
and the way in which we understand literature.
And that sounds like a kind of bogus parallel, but this is where it comes together.
They are both semiotic procedures.
They are both about the interpretation of signs.
We know that's true in medicine.
Medicine is the study of symptoms, the study of signs that this rash means that, this fever means that, this cough means that,
that we are constantly moving from the outward manifestations of disease to the inner causes, to the etiology of the disease.
That is a time-honored procedure for understanding and analysis in medical study.
Well, big surprise.
It's exactly the way we work in literature as well, that we read text and we try to understand what they mean.
Or, I use the word semiotics, we have signs out there and we try to understand what their reference are.
Now, we all know that semiotics is an enormously large model.
We know that a green light means to go, to walk, whereas a red light means to stop.
We know that white and black have been loaded culturally and in religious terms throughout the past.
But it is equally the case that we look at text, those of us in my profession,
read novels and short stories and poems in a comparable way.
We try to see the signs of that text and we make them point to the meanings.
This is not always easy to do.
Now, the parallel between understanding a text and understanding a patient is not without its problems,
because it frequently uses the patient in a kind of generic fashion.
A patient merely is the sign-referent equation, merely the cough in Room 104.
Not that human being with a history and a moral and emotional life who happens also to be coughing,
so that the semiotic model can be a despotic model.
It can be a model that pushes us towards a kind of rigorous analysis of cause and effect.
We see the effects, we want to work backwards to the causes,
but it too may put into the background or onto the side or forget altogether
about the actual details and feelings of that person with the disease.
Literature can help us here.
Literature not merely as a way of understanding the meaning of something,
but literature once again as a broader, more inclusive, capacious picture,
a portrait, a portrayal that always gives us details,
that gives us both the essential and the peripheral,
that inscribes medicine and inscribes suffering always within the life
and even within the death of a person and not just a series of symptoms,
and that even inscribes the individual patient and suffering and life and death
within the society, within the etiology,
so that that larger framework is what comes into vision by looking at art.
Finally, all of the texts that we're going to look at in this course share this as well.
They're about utterance, they're about speaking, they're about saying things,
how the work of art makes its utterance,
and we will see that that can be remarkably varied from the straightforward to the sibling,
from the direct to the arcane,
but not just how art speaks.
The art we will be looking at is about how people who hurt speak.
And to put it that way is absolutely to underscore the difficulty,
if not the impossibility, of this topic.
How do we speak pain?
That's not so easy.
Matter of fact, let's take it even wider.
How do we speak feeling at all?
Can I really describe to you what something feels like, what something tastes like?
We all know that we can approximate that, that we enlist the more articulate we are,
the more sort of nuance we achieve as we try to corner these experiences.
But the question posed by the doctor, how does it feel?
That's not an easy question to answer.
And the people who have done pain studies have run headlong against this.
How do you measure pain?
How do you gauge pain?
How do you know exactly not only what the pain points to, which is the job of the physician,
but how much it really hurts?
We all know that people have different thresholds of pain.
Measuring pain.
How do you speak feeling?
As I said, language itself doesn't seem to be fully amenable to this.
There's like a gap, an abyss between the creatural reality that we're experiencing
that is affective, that may be libidinal, that is physiological,
and then the repertory that's available to us that's verbal.
This too, by the way, is an issue that all artists are reflecting on.
How do you speak the meaning you want to convey?
What choices do you use?
Do you write a poem?
What sort of poem?
Do you write a novel?
Who do you put at the center of it?
These choices about how to express what you're trying to say are very much artistic choices too.
There's something that writers and artists are familiar with.
Frequently they're familiar with the impossibility of it,
that you could never fully say what you wanted to say.
You can only do the best you can with it.
Faulkner used to talk about the sound of the fury that way, that it was an impossible story.
That what he wanted to say, he tried to say four different ways,
feeling that he never quite got it across the right way.
It couldn't be done.
But this is particularly urgent with us, it seems to me, in the issue of pain,
urgent in ways that we need to reflect on.
I'm going to cite something from an author who is really quite remarkable.
It's a woman who teaches at Harvard now, Elaine Scarry.
She wrote a book called The Body in Pain, which is a fairly astounding book.
The Body in Pain, and it's a study of pain, it's also a study of torture.
It's a study of limit situations where the body is subjected to terrible abuse,
whether by nature or by political regimes,
and about what happens to language in these situations,
about how language capsizes, becomes dysfunctional.
But she also tells us about the garden variety of this,
not the torture situation, but the very day-to-day situations
of either being in pain or being with someone in pain,
and what a complicated arrangement that is.
Here's what she writes,
when one hears about another person's physical pain,
the events happening within the interior of that person's body
may seem to have the remote character of some deep, subterranean fact
belonging to an invisible geography
that however portentous has no reality
because it has not yet manifested itself on the visible surface of the earth.
It's a kind of wonderful geographical and geological metaphor
that you speak to me of your pain, and I look at you,
and I can't see your disease.
All I can do is hear your words,
and scary describes that as a kind of occulted landscape.
And geology is good, but you could use seismography,
that something is happening well under the earth
and that we cannot get to it.
Scary also links it to the way we speak about the heavens,
where alternatively it may seem as distant as the interstellar events
referred to by scientists who speak to us mysteriously
of not yet detectable intergalactic screams.
This impinges very directly on the way we deal with people who hurt.
You couldn't have a more immediate issue than that.
Family, loved ones, friends.
What's scary is pointing to is the epistemological abyss
between me and you.
And she puts it in terms that are as elegant as Descartes
would have done it in the 17th century.
Dawson, when one speaks about one's own physical pain
and another person's physical pain,
one might almost appear to be speaking about
two wholly distinct orders of events.
For the person whose pain it is,
it is effortlessly grasped.
It cannot not be grasped.
You cannot be in doubt about your pain.
No fuzziness, no mystery, no uncertainty.
While for the person outside the sufferer's body,
what is effortless is not grasping.
It's so easy, almost inevitable for us to be unaware,
unattuned, not really sensitized
to the affective physical reality of other people,
even with the best of intentions,
even with so-called empathy.
So for the person in pain,
so incontestably and unnegotiably present is it,
that having pain may come to be thought of
as the most vibrant example of what it is to have certainty.
To have pain is to have certainty.
This is a very bedrock of reality.
This is how she rewrites Dick Hart.
He says, I think therefore I am.
Thinking is the bedrock.
She rewrites that.
She says having pain is certainty.
While for the other person,
it is so elusive that hearing about pain
is the primary model of what it is to have doubt.
How can you ever know another's pain?
Thus she says, pain comes unsherably,
unsherably into our midst at once
as that which cannot be denied
and that which cannot be confirmed.
Unstatable, unsherable, undeniable.
Quite different from the models
that the sciences put forth for us.
Now what I want to suggest is that art,
in some ways, gets that job done.
Art, in fact, brings the pain to light
and to language, makes it shareable.
I'm not going to claim that art makes us feel
in all of its intensity the reality of another's suffering.
But art performs nonetheless such a service for us.
And to make that final point,
I'm going to read you a poem
which won't sound to you as if it were about medicine,
but I think you'll see why I'm reading it.
It's a little piece by Strindberg
and it goes like this.
You'll see it's a description of a house.
Could be a haunted house in some ways.
Dark is the hill, dark the house,
but darkest is its cellar,
subterranean, window-less,
and the staircase serves as door and window
and down there, deepest in the darkness,
stands a humming dynamo,
sparks flying around its wheels,
black and horrifying, hidden.
It grinds light for the entire neighborhood.
Here is the very language of art,
a kind of riddle, an enigmatic description
of a house that seems to be enshrouded in darkness,
that where we're going to be taken,
it's almost like the very itinerary of a Hitchcock movie,
we're going to be taken into the darkness inside this house.
We will go down the stairs into this cellar
that has no windows or doors.
Underneath, we are literally, as it were,
entering into the subterrain of the house,
the subconsciousness, the unconscious,
and in the cellar, and this could be the cellar of your body,
the cellar of the human mind,
what do we find but a dynamo?
This is a very perfect image of Freud's view of life,
the id, libidinal energy that is working to make our life
something that is moving, vivid, that has force and energy.
All of that works in the dark.
We have no access to it.
It is not subject to the scrutiny of consciousness.
However, it is the motor force of life.
It is what drives us, gets us out of bed,
gets us to work, gets us through our lives.
Strenberg expresses that as a dynamo
that sits in the darkest cellar of the house,
but you note the final astounding last line of the poem,
it grinds light, it grinds light for the entire neighborhood.
This enshrouded in darkness source of energy makes our light.
It is the way in which light is achieved.
It eliminates the world about us.
It is a public utility in the way that we think of the power
and light as a public utility.
It creates illumination.
And I'd like to suggest that that is a viable model
for what art does.
It is not just a description, it seems to me,
of the id, of the libidinal energy
that is at the core of human beings.
It's also, it seems to me,
a very fetching image of the public service that art renders.
Even dark art, and we're going to be looking at a number of dark texts
that are not just about disease, but are about cruelty
and about suffering that does not seem to be redeemable.
And I want to suggest that we remember the dynamo in Strenberg's poem.
We remember that this too creates its kind of light,
that this too, as private as it may seem,
has its unsuspected public environmental dimensions.
Thank you.
