Lecture 3 Dealing with Patients, Power Game or Humane Care
In this second lecture on the evocation of doctors in literary text, I'd like to focus
more on contemporary materials or at least 20th century materials.
And I'd like as well to bring in to our discussion texts that are not as direct and easily
managed as the ones we've just looked at.
To read Hawthorne or even Buchner or Molière is really not difficult.
You can't really miss the point that the language of art is different from the language of science,
but nonetheless those texts are relatively straightforward and unproblematic.
One knows what they mean when you finish them.
You know what kind of doctor you're dealing with.
I'm going to start with two really extremist texts today and then close with more traditional
materials that are less sort of bristling.
And I want to do this not just because I want to rub your noses and hard stuff.
That's actually fun today too.
But it's also because the extremist texts in some sense are the pure form of art.
That is to say they tell us more about the way art speaks its truths.
That it doesn't give things to us in the kind of direct or transparent fashion that's
what scientific or rational notation does.
This is of course what makes art suspicious to scientists.
When we look for the truth quotient of art, it can be very difficult for us to be comfortable
with it.
And if art is hermetic or puzzling or enigmatic, then it's very easy just to sort of shrug
one's shoulders and say, well, you see, this proves the point.
Why should anybody turn to materials like this to learn something about medicine or
about suffering?
So I'd like to try to tackle that one head on.
I want to look at two texts that are very, I think, challenging, provocative, bizarre,
not straightforward at all, and then ask, what can this dispensation teach us?
Is there a counter-arrival logic here?
Is something being said in this format that in fact could not have been said any other
way?
That's for all of us to decide.
The first text that I'll start with is a much-recognized story, although I don't think people really
know how to talk about it.
It's Kafka's little story called A Country Doctor, which was written in 1917.
And I think it perfectly represents the issues that I'm talking about, about the peculiar
logic, the peculiar packaging, the peculiar presentation of issues to art.
It's a story, as I said, from 1917, and many of its features reflect that period.
It's about a country doctor who still travels by horse and buggy to reach his patients.
He still makes house calls.
Well, you know, one could immediately say, who cares about this story?
In our day of HMOs and shiny medical clinics and hospitals and heaven knows the absence
of health calls in urban settings, this looks like some sepia piece from yesteryear that
has a kind of quaintness that hardly translates over into today.
Well, I want to argue it's just the opposite.
This story is about the absolute heart of medicine, which is to say it's about that encounter
between doctor and patient, which is at the core of the matter, and which remains forbidding
and remains often enigmatic, whether you're in an HMO or whether you're in some bucolic
country setting.
It could be read as a cautionary fable against house calls.
It's about a doctor, it's very brief, it's only five or six pages long, about a doctor
who realizes that he has to attend a sick child who's in a village some 10 miles away
and he has no horses.
That's how it starts, out of luck, no horses.
And he goes to his stable and lo and behold, out come two horses that he did not know
that were there.
And they don't just come out in any kind of stately way.
The verb that is used is they buttock their way out.
And they are followed by this groom, whom he also doesn't know anything about, who squats
out this bestial figure who crawls out behind the horses and here are the magic horses to
take him to his patient.
Lo and behold, they're there.
Now it is also the case that his servant girl is named Rosa.
She has a fabulous line at this point that Dr. Freud could have written.
She says to the doctor, as she watches this parade come out of that stable, which was an
uninhabited pigsty, as the text calls it, she says, you never know what you're going
to find in your own house, I want you just to reflect about the possible implications
of that phrase, you never know what you're going to find in your own house.
Well Rosa is immediately attacked by this groom who sinks his teeth into her cheeks
as a kind of little advance notice of what his particular designs are.
And so in this extremely unexplained way, the doctor realizes a number of things.
He realizes that these horses are there as providence to take him to this patient.
He also realizes that in going to this patient with these horses, he will be abandoning Rosa
to a fate which is absolutely transparent that she is going to be raped by this groom.
And further he seems to know with the logic that is never commented on that these go together,
that one is paid for by the other, it's the condition of his visiting this patient.
That's never explained, it's just there, it's all there is to it.
Well of course as a doctor, he heeds the call, these horses get him to this patient within
two or three minutes, ten miles are covered, again it's pure magic.
They get him there and he comes into this house and he sees this child lying in bed
and he looks at this child and he looks at mom and dad and looks at the sister family
and he very quickly determines that this child is not sick.
He says something to the effect that this child should probably just be sent out of bed,
sent back to school, but that's not his job.
Meanwhile he is understandably thinking about Rosa, what is happening to her back at the
ranch, back home now that he is attending to this patient.
And he starts to fiddle around with his instrument bag and he's really convinced that this is
all a big waste of time, that this is a kind of big waste of time professionally and a
tragic event given what's going to happen to his servant girl.
A servant girl moreover whom he only seems to have discovered, at least to have discovered
her value at the moment that he has to leave her, it's as if the last glimpse of somebody
is the moment when you realize that they are important.
So all of this is packaged together.
Meanwhile, the horses who have gotten him there in record time who are filled with this
pulsating energy stick their big noses into the windows of this overheated house to watch
his performance as a doctor and they are winning and neighing, he's like this audience, okay?
He's convinced there's nothing wrong with this child, he's getting ready to leave more
or less, when he notices that the child's sister is standing in front of the child,
the boy, with a blood-soaked towel, it then occurs to him that perhaps he has missed something.
And at that point, he discovers this wound.
I'm going to read it to you.
It's one of the most interesting wounds in literature.
In his right side, this is this time I discovered the boy was indeed ill.
Now I want you to think how we could have missed this with this description.
In his right side, near the hip, was an open wound as big as the palm of my hand, rose
red in many variations of shade, dark in the hollows, lighter at the edges, softly granulated
with irregular clots of blood, open as a surface mine to the daylight.
That was how it looked from a distance.
But on closer inspection, there was another complication.
I could not help a low whistle of surprise.
Worms as thick and as long as my little finger, themselves rose red and blood-spotted as well,
were wriggling from their fastness in the interior of the wound toward the light with
small white heads and many little legs.
Your boy, you were past helping.
I had discovered your great wound.
This blossom in your side was destroying you.
That's his reaction.
The child only asked, let me die.
Let me die.
That's all the boy wants to do.
Now there are a number of things that I want to begin to question, like what's going on
here?
How can anything that I have just described to you actually happen?
Where do these horses come from?
Where does this wound come from?
Where does this wound come from?
Do you note the insistent pattern here that the doctor is following events rather than
leading them?
There's a kind of urgent thing that's going on here and he's like tugged along.
Everything just happens to him.
He's passive, which one could argue is the largest nightmare of doctors in the first
place, is that doctoring is about being in control.
It's about analyzing.
It's about seeing everything.
Instead, this guy just is pulled from one scene to the next and has no grasp of what
it all is about.
That groom that came out of the barn that is going to rape Rosa, you never know what
you are going to find in your own house.
It would not be impossible to say, once we are willing to say that there is a symbolic
or figurative reach to the story, to say, well, maybe this groom is the animal side of
the doctor.
Maybe this groom is what he has kept locked up in his uninhabited pigsty all these years.
Maybe this groom is now finding his way out to do what the groom or the groom slash doctor
has always wanted to do, which is to rape Rosa.
We don't know.
I can say that.
There's no textual evidence, but we know that's what the groom has in mind, at least the story
sees to tell us that.
You must have noted the odd parallel between the servant girl's name Rosa and the description
of the wound, that the wound is rose red and that the worms are rose red.
In German, they're all the same words.
So that there is a kind of insistent and much disturbing parallel between Rosa's presence.
She's absent from the scene, but she's present in his mind.
I told you, he's thinking back on what's happening back at home, and there he is looking
at this child in whom all of a sudden he discovers this strange wound.
Now why is this wound strange?
Well, strange for all the reasons that I've said, but it's stranger still.
What do you think this wound might be once you're willing to be a little bit symbolic?
It's a hole in the boy's side.
How far is it going to say it could be a displaced vagina?
He's thinking about Rosa being raped.
And then he looks at this child and he sees this wound, which he hadn't seen earlier,
which got this big hole the size of a palm of your hand, and then it's got these worms
in it.
Why are the worms there?
Well, again, once you are willing to say this isn't just a realist description.
This is language that's trying to tell us something else.
You begin to realize this could be his projection onto the boy.
Matter of fact, you begin to realize that's what sight consists of, is that we project
our own mental scenarios on to what we see.
So that the worms could, in fact, represent some kind of unacknowledged sexual disgust
if we're going to think of this as possibly a woman's vagina on this boy, or we're going
to see in this story things get much worse than what I've just told you.
He can do nothing about this wound, so what is it that the family dies?
All the villagers come around on the outside of this house and they sing their favorite
song, which is strip his clothes off.
Then he'll heal us if he doesn't kill him dead.
Only a doctor, only a doctor, and low and behold they take his clothes off and they
put him naked into bed with this child whom he cannot save.
What's going on there?
If this story were narrated to you by someone lying supine on a couch and they were paying
you $250 an hour, I bet you could make sense of this story.
You would say this story has a dream logic to it.
You're telling me something about your dreams.
You're talking about a kind of figurative relationship between things that I can decode.
We're talking about the language of art here as opposed to the language of science.
And that dream logic might go a bit like this.
Now you remember those horses that buttock themselves out of the stable and you don't
know always what you're going to find in your own house?
You remember the Strenberg piece that I cited for you about the dynamo that's in the dark?
Well, this poem as well is about libidinal sexual energy, it seems to me.
Those horses are the sexual energy and they get him there in no time flat and they stick
their phallic noses into the window to watch him.
But at the end of this story, they cannot get him back.
They are emptied, they are depleted, they are spent.
So it's not just the logic of a dream.
You could even call it a specific category of dream, the logic of a wet dream in which
all of the energy has been sort of gathered together imperiously and then released.
Kafka says none of this.
Kafka is writing a story with these enigmatic images about a doctor being probably humiliated
in this experience of being unable to tend to this child with this very strange wound.
And this story is written in terms of a kind of slippage.
Everything becomes everything else.
We know that Kafka himself was very much intrigued with the relations between mind and body.
He wrote the story in 1917 precisely when he learned that he himself was diagnosed with
tuberculosis, for which he was going to die seven years later.
And he thought that there was a connection between this wound and the story.
He even says, I'm not complaining, this is in his diary in 1917, today less than usual.
I even predicted it myself.
Do you remember the blood wound in the country doctor?
He also wrote things like this, sometimes it seems to me if my brain and lungs were joined
in conspiracy without my knowing, it can't go on like this, instead the brain and after
five years the lungs declared themselves ready to help out.
Or what might the origin of disease be, the origin of his own tuberculosis?
Kafka wrote this.
The origin of tuberculosis is no more to be found in the lungs, for example, than the
cause of world war is to be found in the ultimatum.
There is only one sickness, no more, and medicine blindly chases this one sickness like an animal
through endless forests.
This of course makes a mockery of our organ-based view of medicine, where you have a disease
here or you have a disease there.
It's saying that there is only one sickness and it is absolutely impossible to distinguish
it between spirit and body, between mind and flesh.
Well, it's a rough story.
It's rough on doctors.
If we call it a dream script, as you recall the passage that I read to you from Bergman's
Film Wild Strawberries, that dreams frequently are the arenas where we humiliate ourselves,
where all of our insecurity, all of our anxiety, scripts the story that punishes us.
This is again something that art can put front and center.
But why is Kafka particularly intent on punishing his doctor, the doctor figure?
Now, I think this is the kind of story that if I were an intern or a resident, I wouldn't
particularly enjoy reading.
I mean, this is not going to make your day if you are studying the noble pursuit of medicine
and you read a story like this.
As I said, this doctor is systematically humiliated.
That he follows rather than leads events.
Everything goes faster than he can govern.
And at the end, he's left abandoned and the story closes with him abandoned.
You feel that he says he will never get back home.
His practice is gone.
Well, I want to say this about it.
That song, strip his clothes off, then he'll heal us if he doesn't kill him dead, only
a doctor, only a doctor.
There is something tonic as well as punitive in that song.
There's something tonic and wise as well as humiliating in taking the doctor's clothes
off and putting him in bed.
The doctor is stripped of all of his paraphernalia of power.
This scene reminds me of Lear on the Heath.
It reminds me of characters who lose all of their apparent strength and power because
they come term to term, face to face with their own creatural liabilities, with their
own ultimate powerlessness.
Here's what Kafka writes after he's looked at this wound.
That's what people are like in my district, always expecting the impossible from the doctor.
They have lost their ancient beliefs.
This is written in 1917.
This should stand over the entry into any medical school.
They have lost their ancient beliefs.
The parson sits at home and unravels his vestments one after another, but the doctor is supposed
to be omnipotent with his merciful surgeon's hands.
Well, as it pleases them, I have not thrust my services on them.
If they misuse me for sacred ends, I let that happen to me too.
He is being used for sacred ends.
He has medical experience, but he is thrust into a situation that manifestly outruns
the physical in which these monstrous wounds can appear, in which it can be described as
a flower in this child that no person can cure.
He even thinks that this child has been elected by the Lord in some way for this particular
whole in this side.
I've given you a kind of libidinal reading in which we could read this story as the
subconscious of the doctor, as all of the things that he has repressed, the animal side
of his own life.
But that's not the only way to read it.
When I refer to Lear on the Heath, I want you to see that that's not just about humiliation,
that's about wisdom.
It's about a man who is a king coming to terms with the fact that he is only immortal.
He is a bare-forked creature, which is the term Shakespeare uses for him.
So are we all.
And that's what he discovers in his communication with poor Tom on the Heath.
That's what this doctor discovers.
This doctor performs the classic move in Kafka's stories, which is what he called one
of his stories, metamorphosis.
When a doctor takes off his clothes and lies in bed with a patient, the doctor becomes
the patient.
And what Kafka is telling us in a figurative language, a language of metaphor and plot,
never a language of explanation, is that you can't be a doctor unless you also lie down
naked in bed with the patient.
Or let me translate that.
You cannot understand the wound until you have been there in that bed with the patient.
That's good for medical students to know that logic.
That's not just punitive.
There's something rich and mature about that view of the arrogance of medicine and about
the need for a kind of creatural humility, a sense in which the actual dilemmas, the
actual problems, which are problems of mortality, are such that no amount of bioscience training
is going to put you on top of them.
The story is all about those things.
It is a wise story.
It's a story that addresses the insecurities and the anxieties of medicine.
Medicine that is placed at a crossroads, I called it a borderline, a frontier between
life and death, between the somatic and the spiritual.
And all it has is scientific know-how.
It is not equipped to resolve the problems that are thrust upon it.
The biggest story is there to illuminate this larger stage.
And all of the terrible things that happen in this story, it seems to me, are there to
make us more aware of that.
That's an extreme story.
There's nothing more extreme, I think, really in 20th Century literature.
It's also, I think, a beautiful story.
I'm going to turn now to a writer who's a far tamer writer, who appears to be a realist
writer, and it's F. Scott Fitzgerald in his novel Tender is the Night.
And that's a book that is much talked about when people talk about literature and medicine.
It's the story of this man, Dick Diver, who is a very promising psychiatrist, and it's
about his decline.
Now, Fitzgerald is writing about a subject that he knew all too well, which is a man
of great promise, loves a woman who is beautiful and rich and sick.
It leads to ruin.
It's the story of Fitzgerald's own life with Zelda.
It's the story of Gatsby as well, and it seems to me it's exactly what's happening here.
And in so doing, the psychiatrist who marries his disturbed patient, Fitzgerald consciously
breaks one of the cardinal rules of medicine, at least in medical practice.
Do not get involved with your patients.
And the premise put forth there is that cool detachment, cool empathy, is what is required
of medicine, of the relationship between doctor and patient.
And above all, do not marry your patient.
Well, what we see in this story is, of course, the transgression of that rule.
That rule has been much called into question in recent years.
This doctor, John Coolehan, whom I cited earlier, has published an article advocating
what he calls tenderness and steadiness as the most desirable virtues, the most desirable
behavioral traits between doctors and patients.
He claims that tenderness and steadiness will lead to compassion and even to a kind of intellectual
understanding of disease in a way that distance detachment, which has always been celebrated,
as what the doctor is supposed to have, will not.
This story of Dick Diver and Nicole Warren is a brutal story.
Her psychological dysfunction, we learn early on, is brought about by an early event in
her childhood of incest.
Her father has had incest with her, her rich father, she's from one of the richest American
families.
And she raises the question early on when Dick is tending to her at this very fancy
rich clinic in Zurich, whether she can ever expect to have a normal life.
And he says to her, sure you can, not for a year maybe, but sooner or later you can
have a perfectly normal life with a house full of beautiful descendants.
The very fact that you could make a complete comeback at your age proves that the precipitating
factors were pretty near everything.
Young woman, you'll be pulling your weight long after your friends are carried off screaming.
And yet it doesn't happen like that.
He marries her and he finds that she continues to have bouts of mania and distress, bouts
of irrational rage.
And being married to her doesn't make it any easier, it makes it harder for him to deal
with her.
And he finds that his marriage to her has terribly complicated and perhaps compromised
his professional relationship with her.
And he gets annoyed that she continues to have these breakdowns.
And finally he tries to sum it up.
One writes of scars healed a loose parallel to the pathology of skin, but there is no
such thing in the life of an individual.
There are open wounds shrunk sometimes to the size of a pinprick, but wounds still.
The marks of suffering are more comparable to the loss of a finger or the sight of an
eye.
We may not miss them either for one minute in a year, but if we should, there is nothing
to be done about it.
This story, I called it brutal because we soon enough realize that under the guise of
depicting a professional man's relationship with a wounded, sick wife who was his patient,
what Fitzgerald is ultimately doing is anatomizing the doctor and not the patient.
Nicole effectively does heal, but what we see in the course of this rather long book
is the gradual and then precipitous decline of Diver himself.
He starts out in this book as a young scientist of genius, then we see him as a handsome,
affable, seductive man of the world, and then we watch him become dependent on his wife's
money, and then we watch him become an ugly drunk, and finally we watch him reduce to
complete mediocrity.
It is a book about decline.
It operates a kind of clinical gaze on its physician that is something that I think Fitzgerald
again knew all too much about.
This is the death knell for the lost generation and its glamorous, moneyed Americans on the
Riviera.
We see their hubris and their elegance as a form of sickness in the story.
Dick Diver effectively disappears into some small town in New York at the end.
The next text I want to bring up is an extremely unusual text, as unusual as Kafka, but not
as appealing.
Kafka and Fitzgerald are frequently mentioned in the framework that I'm presenting in this
course.
When you talk about literature and medicine, you think of Kafka and Fitzgerald, but you
don't think of the writer who I'm now going to talk about, who is William Burroughs.
William Burroughs wrote a novel called Naked Lunch, which I think offers a lot for us to
learn from about literature and medicine.
Burroughs is the guru, or one of the gurus of the beat generation, along with Kerouac
and Gensburg, and Naked Lunch is among the most brilliant, obscene, surreal, and extreme
statements in our century.
It is an epic of drugs, of hallucinations, of sexual perversions, and of violence of
every possible sort.
It's also a book of great beauty, at least in times, and of great prophecy.
And it also has in it, as one of its players, a doctor whose exploits I want to bring to
your attention.
This is ugly stuff.
Do not expect to cotton to this.
It's brutal.
I'll read some of it to you anyway.
Benway, Dr. Benway, is a manipulator and coordinator of control systems, an expert on all phases
of interrogation, brainwashing, and control.
He's the person who's going to be running the show on the medical experiments that take
place in this novel.
Here's how Benway describes his own work.
Pending more precise knowledge of brain electronics, drugs remain an essential tool of the interrogator
in his salt on the subject's personal identity.
The barbiturates are, of course, virtually useless.
That is, anyone who can be broken down by such means would succumb to the puerile methods
used in an American precinct.
So he's interested in breaking down his patients, getting into control of them, and he is the
director of what the text calls the reconditioning center.
Here's what his background is like.
Doctrine was in my blood, he says, I managed to keep up my habits, performing cut-rate
abortions in subway toilets.
I even descended to hustling pregnant women in the public streets.
It was positively unethical.
Then I met a great guy, Placinta Juan, the afterbirth tycoon.
Made his in slunks during the war.
Slunks are underage calves trailing underbirths and bacteria, generally in an unsanitary and
unfit condition.
A calf may not be sold as food until it reaches a minimum age of six weeks.
Prior to that time, it is classified as a slunk.
Slunk trafficking is subject to a heavy penalty.
Well, when Ito controlled a fleet of cargo boats, he registered under the Abyssinian flag
to avoid bothersome restrictions.
He gives me a job as ship's doctor on the SS Philly Orysis, as filthy a craft as ever
sailed the seas, operating with one hand, beating the rats off of my patient with the
other, and bed bugs and scorpions rained down from the ceiling.
In his reconditioning center, we see scenes such as the following.
They let out all of the loonies in the reconditioning center.
This is how it's described.
From the roof of the RC, we survey a scene of unparalleled horror.
INDs, these are the newly damaged people, stand around in front of the cafe tables, long streamers
of saliva hanging off their chins, stomachs noisily churning.
Passengers ejaculate at the sight of women, lethaz, he creates lethaz, lethaz are people
who are replicas.
They just become sort of parallels of you.
Lethaz imitate the passers-by with monkey-like obscenity.
Junkies have looted the drugstores and fixed on every corner, street corner.
Catatonics decorate the parks.
Agitated schizophrenics rush through the streets with mangled inhuman cries.
It's hard, by the way, to find quotable passages in this book for a program like this.
The book is largely obscene.
It essentially offends most of our rules of decorum.
What Burroughs adduces as the cardinal truth of his vision of reality is called the algebra
of need.
The algebra of need, he suggests that all of human beings are somatic creatures who
can be completely taken over, whose systemic needs and arrangements can be governed and
manipulated by those who have the wit and knowledge to understand it.
That's how he understands a problem that we have still not solved, which is the drug
problem.
Junk is the ideal product, he writes.
The ultimate merchant dies.
No sales talk necessary.
The client will crawl through a sewer and beg to buy.
The junk merchant does not sell his product to the consumer.
He sells the consumer to his product.
Junk is what Burroughs calls the evil virus, the algebra of need.
A dope fiend is a man to need, total need of dope.
Beyond a certain frequency, need knows absolutely no limit or control.
In the words of total need, wouldn't you, yes you would, he says.
You would lie, cheat, inform on your friends, steal, do anything to satisfy total need.
Because you would be in a state of total sickness, total possession, and not in a position to
act in any other way.
Dope fiends are sick people who cannot act other than they do.
A rabid dog cannot choose but bite.
And so we have this picture of the human being as subject to a great virus.
And I want to stress that image.
What Burroughs presents for our inspection, not quite for our pleasure, is a view of the
human subject, both somatically in terms of his or her body, but also mentally, verbally
and spiritually, as an openable, interval construct that other things can get inside
of.
That's why I call it virus.
The story of naked lunch is one story.
The parasite gets into the host and takes it over.
Now think about that.
That is the story of bacteriological infection.
That is the story of viral warfare.
You know you can walk down the streets at this time of the year and you can plug up
your ears and close your eyes and that virus that's going to nail you is going to nail
you.
You can't prevent it from getting inside of you.
The great secret in Burroughs' text is that we are porous.
We are invadible.
By the way, that's the great secret of pollution as well.
The smoke that comes from your cigarette ends up in my lungs.
The smoke that comes from the chimneys ends up in my lungs.
We have an openable self in Burroughs' work and he manages to choreograph the ways in
which the self is constantly entered, constantly abused.
I'm going to quote you in a sort of a list of how it can happen.
He goes on to chart the virtual geometry and geography of such openings.
Here they go.
The syringe penetrates the skin and the junk hits the bloodstream.
The penis or its substitute enters the vagina or the rectum.
The bacteria enter the body to grow.
The scalpel or the rusty tin can cuts open the flesh.
The genes are tampered with and reform and he's got a number of surrealist scenes.
He's got one where a worm enters an egg and this becomes a great delicacy in certain
corrupt places to eat the worm that has the egg, the egg that has the worm in it.
The pregnant woman carries the little stranger that is inside of her.
The cells revoke through cancer and take over the body.
The body's physiology is redesigned by the doctors and the scientists.
The mind is altered by ideological and chemical programming.
The actors may change but the fable remains constant.
The parasite enters the host to control it.
The parasite enters the host to control it.
You realize he is talking about a theory of culture as well as a theory of disease.
He is talking about a theory of language.
My words are entering your minds there in exactly that way.
One of the figures who appears in his book is the ancient mariner.
The ancient mariner who has got wisdom, who is going to unload his story and will enter
the minds of others.
He also is talking about the media, about television, about politics.
We turn on the TV and we hear the political stump speeches, the little bitty bites and
they enter our minds in the same way.
What he is trying to say is that across the spectrum, the human subject is porous and
intrable, can be programmed, can be taken over by others.
Speech, media are just exactly like drugs and sex, the chemical and the sexual entry.
And therefore, Burroughs pays a lot of attention to what I'd like to call the entries and exits
of the human body.
Because he adds to this vision of constant penetration as it were, an equal vision that
the subject likes to be entered.
That mainlining and ejaculation in Burroughs become the same activity.
Everything gets inside of you and you exit in some sense, whether it's the junk or whether
it's sexual penetration.
It's the same story for him.
That people want out, they want to be invaded.
This is one of the most disturbing features of his vision.
There is no protection in this particular scheme.
I think that this kind of text redefines life as traffic.
We are caught in traffic.
Things are moving, things are coming into us, things are coming out of us.
We are permeable.
That's the vision that a visionary text can make available to us life as traffic.
We swim in it.
So this text, I think, has the sort of austerity, really, of the great Greek tragedies.
It shows us something about the limits of the human subject, about the kind of danger
that we caught just by being alive in our bodies and by existing within the mesh of
culture and ideology.
And I think this book helps us to understand AIDS.
It helps us to understand infectious diseases.
It helps us to understand propaganda.
That is what propaganda is, isn't it?
It's when the voices of the media inter you and, in some sense, program your behavior.
It helps us to understand the religious cults.
It helps us to understand advertising.
That's the very premise of advertising.
We can say things that will get inside of people and alter their consumer habits.
Life as traffic, human beings as composed of entries and exits.
Well, Bose and Kafka are strange bedfellows, but they, I think, allow us to see something
of how even the most extreme, virulent, ugly texts have much to teach us if we are prepared
to attend to them, to listen to them, to see what kind of alternate logic there is here
because I think, as you can see, in both Kafka and Burroughs, the kinds of things that
I'm arguing that are being said there could not have been said directly.
They have to be displayed in this figurative fashion that the viral story that Burroughs
wants to tell couldn't be told in a traditional narrative form.
Traditional narrative posits closed contours, I am I, you are you, Burroughs is interested
in all the traffic between me and you, all the ways in which we are bonded without even
knowing.
Well, I promised you I would close on two more civilized texts that are a little more
manageable and a little more, I think, appealing.
One of them is equally ferocious, but it is at least more readable.
It's a story written by the premier doctor-writer, I think, of our century, a man who is dead
now, William Carlos Williams, who was a great modernist poet, as well as, I think, a great
doctor, perhaps a better poet than a doctor.
And he, in his short stories, called the doctor stories, gives us a wonderful record
of a life spent tending the ill in a totally unvarnished, unglamorized way.
He dealt with patients who were poor.
He dealt, his practice was in Patterson, New Jersey, people who came from very, very diverse
ethnic backgrounds.
He doesn't disguise his own contempt for some of these people.
He's a snob occasionally.
Most of them cannot pay him.
And these stories have, I think, the virtue of being unpolished.
He lets it all hang out.
He lets you know what he thinks about these people.
And we see a kind of humanity and a kind of caring that simply goes past the political
incorrectness of his attitudes.
The story I want to allude to is a story called The Use of Force, and it involves one of the
most time-honored and still unpleasant aspects of doctor-patient relationships that everybody
knows.
And that is when they make you open up your mouth and say, ah, and they stick that thing
in there and you gag.
This is an absolute icon for medicine that goes inside.
We make the patient open the mouth and we look inside.
And the person experiences it as violation.
And that's how they can look at our uvula.
And in this story, it's pre-viptheria inoculation time.
He's got a sick little girl who will not allow him to open up her mouth.
And he's getting more and more angry as he's trying to get to her.
And the parents have not forced her to open her mouth.
And she's denied that there's anything wrong with her throat.
Finally he grasps her head with his hand and he tries to get the wooden depressor between
her teeth.
And what does she do?
She bites off the stick.
She clenches her teeth together and the wooden blade is reduced to splinters.
She's already knocked his glasses off.
This little brat will not cooperate and he is getting himself hysterical.
Get me a smooth-handled spoon of some sort.
I told the mother, we're going through with this.
The child's mouth was already bleeding.
Her tongue was caught and she was screaming in wild hysterical shrieks, perhaps I should
have desisted and come back in an hour or more.
No doubt it would have been better, but that's not what he does.
The worst of it was that I too had got beyond reason.
I could have torn the child apart in my own fury and enjoyed it.
It was a pleasure to attack her.
My face was burning with it.
The damn little brat must be protected against her own idiocy, one says to oneself at such
times.
Others must be protected against her.
It is social necessity.
And all these things are true, but a blind fury, a feeling of adult shame, bread of a
longing for muscular release are the operatives.
You see what I'm saying that this is unvarnished?
Just letting you know that he's got lots of pretext that this is in the name of medical
science and protecting the community, but in fact, something virtually muscular is going
on here.
He's going to have the better of this child.
He's not going to let her keep her mouth shut.
And so finally, in a final un-reasoning assault, I overpowered the child's neck and jaws.
I forced the heavy silver spoon back of her teeth and down her throat till she gagged.
And there it was, both tonsils covered with membrane.
She had fought valiantly to keep me from knowing her secret.
She had been hiding that sore throat for three days, at least, and lying to her parents
in order to escape.
Just such an outcome is this.
Here is medicine as violation, but a necessary violation.
Here is the doctor who must open his patient against her will.
And I want you to think of that will as almost emblematic here.
We don't want to be pried open.
I had been talking about this theme in Hawthorne, the prying investigator who checks out his
people without love, wants to get inside of them.
That's what I think Williams is reflecting on in the story, a whole career of making
people show you their secrets when they don't want to, even if it is in their best interest.
The last story that I'm going to allude to is written by the most genial, I think, of
the modern Dr. Reiders, and I'm sure you're familiar with some of his works.
I'm referring to Oliver Sacks, who is the hero, as you may know, of the film Awakenings.
It's about Sacks.
He is a neurologist in New York, and he writes stories of great wisdom and delicacy.
And the volume that I want to allude to, it's the story that's the title story in it, is
called The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat.
You've got to think about that.
How could you mistake your wife for a hat?
Well, Sacks deals with people who have neurological deficits.
That's how he enters into their orbit.
He's called upon to consult.
In this case, this is a professor of music, an extremely cultured man refined who mistakes
his wife for a hat.
He actually tries to put his wife on top of his own head, and she is used to it.
He has all kinds of perceptual problems.
He is not able to know what a flower is.
The doctor hands him a rose and asks what it is.
He says, about six inches in length, a convoluted red form with a linear green attachment.
That's all he knows what it is.
He hands him a pair of gloves.
What is that?
The rose surface, enfolded on itself, it appears to have five outpouchings.
That's all he can see.
He was lost in a world of lifeless abstractions.
This doctor can only perform his chores by singing.
Music is the key to his life.
He's a professor of music.
As he sings, only as he sings, are his perceptions lined up properly.
And so the doctor advises him simply to keep on with the music.
Keep on with the music.
That's what's right about your life.
Music is your life.
Music has been the center.
Now make it the whole of your life.
And this man continues to live until the end with the advance of a massive tumor in his
brain.
And what I want to say there is that what Sax is showing us is the mark of the beast,
that we have bodies that decay, that atrophy.
What Sax is showing us is that the dignity of being human is not incompatible with the
mark of the beast.
That's what life is about.
Yes, the body is going to screw up.
It's going to have its problems.
What Sax finds in all of his patients is the dignity of a life that they live along with
their deficits.
We all have deficits.
There is something quite beautiful in his capacity to see the human shape of his people.
Thank you.
Thank you.
