In this lecture and also in the next one, I'd like to steer a new course in the sense
that I would like to shift from the portrayal of doctors to the representation of disease.
That may sound like we're not moving very far, but in fact, many different things come
into play, not the scientific analysis of disease, obviously the etiology of disease
or the diagnosis or the treatment of disease, so much as the social, or cultural, or moral,
or spiritual dimensions of disease.
And I'm going to spend a good deal of time with two very, very old texts and suggest
that they have a lot to teach us because much of their legacy is still with us.
The oldest model that we know is the view of disease as curse.
This is very much in evidence in the Hebrew Bible, in the depiction of plagues that are
sent by an angry God by Jehovah to decimate entire cities, communities, one thinks of
Sodom and Gomorrah, that Yahweh is very, very easily angered, and a plague will be sent
to straighten out people who have been offending.
God punishes.
Now we know that plagues also have their own empirical reality, and so there is a very,
very important chicken-egg argument here.
People have the plague and are dying, therefore God is angry at us, or God is angry at us,
we can expect plague, which produces what is, in a sense, the divine curse argument,
a kind of desperate effort to rationalize disease.
That's certainly the way the anthropologists tend to look at it.
And the texts that I want to examine, first of all, is the oldest text, which is the book
of Job about that, because many, many interesting questions come here.
If God is punishing us, what can or should we do?
And needless to say, the answer to that question doesn't depend only on whether you are a believer
or not.
It depends on who you are.
If the guy next door has the plague, it means a different thing from if you have it, because
it's much easier to invoke God's curse if it's somebody else, the other guy who has
it.
One is not as likely to feel that oneself is smitten for those reasons.
At least that's the question that the book of Job raises, among other questions.
But it also gets across right now an issue that will stay with us as we look at other
diseases and when we look at death, which is the perspectival issue.
Who's talking?
Whose subjectivity is on the line?
Because the answers will depend a great deal on that.
The book of Job, as I said, is one of the oldest canonical texts on disease as curse,
as punishment.
It's a book that continues to vex its most learned commentators.
People are in by no means any agreement about the meaning of the book of Job or even about
the text itself.
We don't know when it was written.
People, arguments range from 1,100 to 300 BC.
You can see an 800 year space there.
There are some who claim that it was not originally written in Hebrew.
This is a minority argument, but people have claimed that it was probably written first
in Arabic or perhaps in Aramaic.
So it's not, by any means, a kind of clear text that everybody agrees on.
There are major disputes about the text.
It starts, as you probably know, with something of a prose legend, a kind of prologue, and
then a very complex, rich, long poem, and then the legend again.
Now, people have asked, the textual critics have asked, do these belong together?
Is this thing perhaps composed at very different moments over centuries, and then just sort
of cobbled together, and we now have it as the book of Job?
Moreover, there's one speaker who sort of enters this story unbidden, that's Ilahehu,
and people have thought maybe he's a late addition as well.
So it's by no means a kind of wrapped up text.
But the book of Job fascinates our post-Holocaust world, as probably no other text does, because
it asks the question, why me?
What is the meaning of my suffering, the theme of the victim?
Why am I being punished?
And this simple question, it turns out, is not simple.
The prologue is gross, it seems to me.
It's a kind of game played in prose between God and Satan.
And the Job who is referred to in the prologue is the Job of ancient legend, a legend that
precedes the writing of this text.
Job is a man of infinite patience.
That is the old version of Job.
We're going to see that in the poem, Job is an impetuous, fiery man.
He's not a man of infinite patience at all.
Job a good man who is also a prudent man, a man who plays by the rules, and has been
amply rewarded.
God tips Satan, he says, hast thou considered my servant Job?
It's like saying, have you checked him out?
It's the beginning of a disaster, as far as Job is concerned.
Well, Satan does consider Job.
And so they decide to test Job.
And this is what is gross.
It's an offensive notion of a God who seems to feel that it makes sense to test a man
who has lived with virtue.
Job's servants die, his sheep are burned up, and his sons and daughters die.
And Satan comes back for another round, and God says, Behold, he is in thine hand, but
save his life.
In other words, do what you want to him, just don't kill him.
This has offended many critics.
It felt like this.
What kind of view of God can this be?
Well, we watch what happens.
At this point, the sore boils come from the soul of his foot unto his crown.
He is injured in his flesh.
Great physical misery strikes him.
His wife says to him, Curse God and die.
And it's a response that people understand.
It makes sense.
If this has been done to you, there is no way to come to terms with this.
This is an evil world.
Curse God and die.
And then the three, this is still the prologue, the three friends come, and they sit silent
for seven days and seven nights, and then the poem begins.
And their silence for that period of time is an interesting gauge of the severity of
these issues.
It's as if they are humbled and silenced by the magnitude of his suffering and still
more by the magnitude of what it all must mean.
The friends are Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar.
And they speak the traditional view, which is, of course, you are being punished because
you have sinned.
This is what this whole text revolves around.
But the Job in the poem is not, as I said, the Job of infinite patience.
He will not acknowledge that he has sinned.
He claims that he is innocent.
He stands for the great rebel.
And he wishes that he had never been born at all.
Why died I not from the womb?
Why did I not give up the ghost when I came out of the belly?
That the friends will not hear this talk, and a very, very old debate is enjoined here.
Suffering must have a logic, must have a purpose, it must be God's way.
Job, however, proclaims his innocence.
Now think about what this means.
If Job is innocent, then it means that the universe is turned upside down.
How can an innocent man suffer?
This calls into question all of their beliefs, and they won't have it.
So what they tell him over and over is that the innocent do not suffer on this earth.
Behold, happy is the man whom God corrected, therefore despised not the chastening of the
Almighty.
But Job begins to mount his counter-charge.
Not only does he claim that he is innocent and therefore persecuted, but that the guilty
flourish.
The earth is given into the hand of the wicked, he says.
The friends, of course, cannot abide this.
They're furious with this blasphemy.
They say the wicked man travaileth with pain all his days, and the number of years is hidden
to the oppressor.
Of course, Job is just exercising a certain amount of casual empiricism.
He looks around him, and he sees people either flourish or go under, not according to how
good or evil they are.
The ways of the world don't appear to be compatible with the will of God.
Job is relentless.
God hath delivered me to the ungodly and turned me over unto the hands of the wicked.
I was at ease, but he hath broken me asunder.
He hath also taken me by the neck and shaken me to pieces and set me up for his mark.
This is a cruel vindictive God, and he looks around him, and he says, wherefore do the
wicked live become old, yea, or mighty in power?
Their seed is established in their sight, their children flourish, their offspring before
their eyes.
So this debate about the trial of Job quickly becomes the trial of God.
And we sense that the friends and Elohim are desperately affirming the old dogma.
And Job really longs from nothing more than a confrontation with God, and he gets it.
In the latter part of the poem, we see the appearance of the Almighty as a voice from
the whirlwind, and it is some of the richest, noblest poetry of the Hebrew Bible.
Because what it does is it proclaims the total gap, the abyss, between, on the one hand,
the moral questions that Job is asking, and on the other hand, with no connection to it,
the amoral splendor of the creation.
There is no connection.
And so in the wonderful way of the Hebrew Bible through questions, the Lord makes Job
realize that his moral, physical, somatic, even spiritual trial has nothing in common
with the grandeur of the world.
Where was thou when I laid the foundations of the earth?
Who are you to know anything about my work, my rationale?
When the morning stars sang together and all the sons of God shouted for joy, it's a line
that's often cited, the absolute happiness, the lyricism of the creation, which is beyond
good and evil, knows nothing about suffering, it is simply there.
Have the gates of death been opened unto thee?
Where is the way where light dwelleth?
Hath the reign of Father, wonderful sort of family paradigm here talking about the earth?
Or who hath begotten the drops of dew?
Out of whose womb came the ice?
Canst thou send lightnings that they may go and say unto thee, here we are?
The Lord proclaims the sheer might and power, the unfathomable grandeur of the world.
The Lord mentions the animals that hunt and kill and die, the eagle, the vulture, the lion,
the horse, the behemoth, the leviton, the vivon, and we realize that this is totally
incommensurate with any kind of ethical code that Job would like to see affirmed or denied.
At this fireworks, this display of omnipotence, Job repents, and in a logic that recalls the
prologue, he is then rewarded, and his friends, who have shouted the traditional line, you
are being punished because you have sinned, his friends are mildly rebuked.
How is Job rewarded?
Bullocks, rams, brothers, sisters, 14,000 sheep, 6,000 camels, it's quite specific, seven
sons, three daughters, all are given to him, and he lives to the ripe old age of 140 years.
Many people think this is very cheesy, that the way the story ends doesn't begin to resolve
that the prologue and the ending are like some prose folkloric container for a very
rich, almost existential, almost absurdist conflict or contest between man's goals and
ends and the larger cosmic scheme in which he's thrust, where there is no connection,
no relation.
The suffering of the innocent puts God on trial.
As I said, in the legend, Job is endlessly patient, but in the poem that we have, Job
is the rebel, Job calls into question, and that's the reason that I want this text to
be in this course.
It's about the valuation given to suffering, and we may see in this a familiar pattern.
Job falls, much like Oedipus does, from great heights and is indicted by his friends for
sins, is seen to be, or at least accused of being, the source of the evil.
You must be suffering because you have sinned.
There's no other explanation for it.
This can be thought of as the theology of the hidden scapegoat, that by you being evil,
the suffering becomes warranted, justifiable, but that's only half of it.
We are also, in some sense, cleansed by you acknowledging yourself as a sinner.
Sinner, the punishment comes from God.
Job encounters the contempt of his own fellows.
He is urged to accept his guilt, to internalize his guilt.
The friends, their view of the world, is very straightforward.
They see only guilty victims and punished criminals.
Their model, if there is a model, would be the animal world, where an animal who is injured
or hurt, as we know, is going to be attacked and expulsed by the group.
That is the model that they are essentially adapting for human community.
Now what can we learn about this story?
Why is it useful in a program on literature and medicine?
Well, let's be simple here.
Medicine would never have developed if humans had persevered in the belief of the friends,
the traditional view.
Medicine would not have been invented if the sores of Job were understood as God's punishment.
Why should you correct them?
You deserve them.
There is no reason to be healed, because your illness and sickness is warranted, and after
all it comes from a superior force.
With causality and divine punishment, these origins of suffering and disease must be rejected
if science is to establish its own authority.
The court has to be cut.
The court is cut, to some extent, when you move from the Hebrew Bible to the Christian
Bible, from the Old to the New Testament.
The story of Jesus, one of the most novel things about it, is that God, for the first
time, is positioned with the sufferer, the man on the cross.
The person who suffers is considered to be the moral person, not the evil person in the
story of Jesus and the gospels.
And this is the first step towards a shifting view of omnipotence and authority, a different
view of the victim.
Now these issues are by no means, I think, limited to antiquity.
The relation between disease and God's will, as I indicated in one of the earlier lectures,
is with us today, it's with us in the public discussion of AIDS as a kind of divine curse
on sexual and chemical excess and aberration.
But this is the same logic, the logic of the scapegoat is still here.
And I'm going to deal further with that as I talk about AIDS at the end of this lecture.
What I want to do is to shift gears, move from the world of the Hebrews to the world
of the Greeks, and invoke another old text, much less well known than the book of Job,
but equally worthy, I think, of our consideration.
And that's Sophocles' late play, the phylloctetes.
And it's a very, very remarkable, unusual play.
Phylloctetes, it's about the Trojan War, phylloctetes is a man we learn who has been
abandoned on an island of Limnos because he has been bitten on the way to Troy with
the Greek host.
They stopped off at an island and he walked by the shrine of a local deity and was bitten
in the leg by a snake.
And this wound became so hideous, purulent, oozing blood, unhealing, great stench that
the Greeks could not bear his presence and they abandoned him on this island of Limnos.
And that's the way Sophocles tells the story, there are other versions of the story where
the island is inhabited.
But Sophocles has intentionally emphasized the barbarity of these conditions, that this
island is completely devoid of human beings and that's where this man is left.
Now why is he interesting?
Why is he important?
Well, I haven't told you that he possesses a magic bow, a bow that is of human supernatural
power because it cannot miss.
This bow was given to him by Heracles because he aided in Heracles' funeral.
And as a gift, he bequeathed the bow to Philoctetes.
The Trojan War has been going on now for ten years, the Greeks can't seem to bring it to
a close, and then an oracle explains to them, you can only complete this war successfully
if you go back to Limnos and bring Philoctetes with his magic bow to Troy.
He has to kill Paris, the surviving son of Priam because Hector has already been slain
by Achilles.
If you can't do that, this war will never be finished.
There's a very powerful realpolitik dimension to this play.
The army needs him, they've got to get him.
We have to have this guy.
Well now put yourself in his place.
He's not very anxious to re-enlist.
He hates the Greeks.
The only ones that he loves are the ones who are dead.
He worshiped Achilles.
He thinks of Nestor who is now an old man without power.
He thinks of the great Ajax who's also dead.
There's a very powerful, elegiac feeling to this poem, this play that all of the grand
people of Greek mythology are dead and we're now in the seedy second generation and they're
not amounting too much.
And that's what the play is about because it is the son of Achilles who is enlisted
by the Greeks to try to get him off the island and to bring him back.
That son's name is Neoptolomus and the play starts where he arrives at Lemnos with the
caniast, shrewdest, cleverest of all the Greeks, Odysseus.
Odysseus really gets a bum rap in this play.
He's an absolute cynic.
He has no values except pragmatism.
He's willing to lie whenever necessary.
And so he tells the boy, you're going to see this guy here, he's the one who tells
him the story about what's happened.
All that counts is that we get him back and we get that bow because otherwise we can't
win this war.
And any sense of compromise you may have about it, forget it because we are serving your
greater good by bringing him back.
What happens in the play is that the boy meets Philoctetes and it's really a kind of rites
of passage story.
This young man, the son of a dead hero, has to choose between Odysseus, should he obey
him, or should he obey this wounded person, Philoctetes?
How is he supposed to choose?
Well, the boy is too idealistic and noble to do what Odysseus wants.
He will not deceive Philoctetes because they're going to do it slowly and dance to get him
onto the boat.
They're going to tell him they're going to take him home and then take him back to Troy.
And Odysseus is willing finally to say, just leave him.
Let's just get the bow.
Forget about him.
Philoctetes will not do that and Philoctetes will not agree to go.
The boy keeps saying, won't you do your duty?
Forget it.
Look at the way they've treated me.
I'm not going back there.
He only wants to go home.
It's a complete impasse, a total impasse.
The boy has the bow because Philoctetes, in ways that I'm going to explain in a minute,
has been hurt so much that he hands over the bow.
But the boy realizes until you could bring Philoctetes himself, you can't win this situation.
It looks like it's never going to be resolved, and it is resolved in the cheapest kind of
way by Sophocles.
It is the Deus ex machina, the God Heracles returns from the underworld and speaks the
voice of the God who says to Philoctetes, it is the will of the world.
Go with them.
And with that flourish, happy ending, it's all taken care of.
This play has none of the favor that the Oedipus trilogy has with Antigone and Oedipus
the colonus, and yet it is a play that is quite astounding.
One of the most interesting essays written on it is by the now dead, very great American
critic, Edmund Wilson, called The Wound and the Bow.
That's the title of the essay, The Wound and the Bow.
And what Wilson says is that the only way to understand this play is to see the connection
between Philoctetes' wound and his magic bow, a bow that cannot miss and a wound that
cannot heal.
Our inclination is to say these are disparate, separate issues.
Wilson says no, you must see them together.
And what Wilson claims is that the idea that genius and disease like strength and mutilation
may be inextricably bound up together.
And Wilson also has a social theme.
I should interpret the fable, Wilson says as follows, the victim of a malodorous disease
which renders him abhorrent to society and periodically degrades him and makes him helpless
is also the master of a superhuman art which everyone has to respect and which the normal
man finds that he needs.
I hope you can see how much power the Wilson interpretation has because this is the theory
of the artist as diseased.
This is the theory that says the person who is wounded, marginalized, at the periphery
of culture, flawed, hurt, that person has something that you need to attend to.
The artist fills the category very nicely.
That's the person who has a special gift.
Sophocles has put that together in the very shaping of Philoctetes.
The play is about coming to terms with that.
Now I want you to think about how much of a legacy we have of that view of the artist
as a flawed person.
This is the romantic view of the artist.
Edvard Munch once said, sickness, insanity, and death were the black angels that guarded
my cradle.
We think of the paintings of Van Gogh.
We think of mental aberration, of great suffering as a crucible from which art is born.
In Proust's great novel, we have the view put forth that all of art comes from neurotics
from people who are unable to fit into society.
We have the same thing in Thomas Mann's work.
He retells the story of Faustus and he makes his Faustus, the man who makes a pact with
the devil.
He calls him Levercune and he's a figure for Arnold Schoenberg.
The man who reinvented a new music, who changed the structure of music and in so doing had
to give up his soul.
The way that Mann presents it is that he can track syphilis in order to be able to create
this new music and that in itself is a veiled form of what Nietzsche did.
The Nietzsche was a visionary who also was dying of syphilis.
All of this says that these two things go together.
This is a very burned by genius as the title of a recent book that's been out, showing
the amount of neurosis and sometimes psychosis that we always identify with writers and artists.
They're always at the margins.
They don't behave according to normal rules.
We are saturated with that view.
Now the reason that I have brought these two early texts in is that I want us to reflect
a bit on this and what I want to say is that you will not find easily a celebration of madness
before 1800.
If you look at Shakespeare, there's nothing to be celebrated when Lear goes mad.
And when Handlet plays it being mad, he drives Ophelia mad.
You can't watch people that are mad.
She sees the undoing of a noble mind and it drives her to suicide.
Shakespeare doesn't have a romantic view of madness.
And if you go to Hogarth, for example, in the 18th century in his wonderful series about
the rake's progress, the last scene of a young man who takes the secular route to perdition
and spends more and more money and becomes more and more corrupt.
The last scene is this man has lost all of his clothes.
He is naked in an insane asylum, which they call Bedlam.
It was short for Bethlehem.
And this place is filled with lunatics.
Some person thinks he has reinvented astronomy.
Another person thinks he is the pope.
All of these strange creatures who are chained and locked up in various costumes or naked,
some of them are defecating on themselves, some of them are urinating on themselves,
they're all there in this place.
And then the rake himself has gone mad and he's in a Pieta position that clearly Hogarth
is modeling on Jesus and Mary.
And then you notice, after you've seen all of this, these two elegant, dressed society
ladies who are there and they're beautiful gowns and they are looking at the lunes because
that's what people did in the 18th century.
They have come from London to Bedlam to check out the crazies because it's a form of social
pastime and there's nothing happy in it.
They represent the kind of secular scheme that has led the rake to this position.
It's a deeply bitter painting.
But there's no celebration that madness is a higher form of wisdom in the 18th century
or in the 17th century or in the Middle Ages.
So it's in that light that I want to return for a moment to the Philoctetes and try to
suggest to you that Sophocles is saying something quite different.
Wilson misleads this as well as eliminates things.
When he focuses on the bow, I want to focus on the wound because that is a different matter,
the wound.
The wound in this text is given to us as having a kind of power and agency all of its own.
Ten years of dying of hunger and wretchedness to keep alive this glutton pain.
It's as if the wound is a mouth that can never be still.
It's a hunger that can't be gratified.
It's a hole inside of us that somehow is stronger than we are and it speaks.
And this play is absolutely a kind of humbling experience.
This is about the mark of the snake which is thought to be the mark of the God, the
God whom he has offended Philoctetes by walking by her shrine, but we should see it as exactly
what it is.
It is the mark of the beast.
You recall what I said about Oliver Sacks.
He deals with the neurological deficits of his people and shows their constant grappling
with these deficits in order to retain their human form to try to stay in a life of dignity
and composure even though the body is failing.
That's what this play is about.
This play is punctuated by scenes in which Philoctetes has these intolerable bouts of
pain and falls.
Falls on the ground, cannot retain his consciousness, cannot retain his speech, there's no way to
express it.
And Sophocles goes over it, over and over, all the time showing us this play, unlike
most of Sophocles plays, is filled with stage directions where he collapses to the ground,
his talk is completely stopped.
Now his inability to stand is almost the most perfect form of the mark of the beast.
That's exactly the way Levi-Strauss, the great cultural anthropologist, interpreted the
adipus, that the story of adipus is a story of the difficulty of being able to walk straight.
You may remember that's the riddle of the Sphinx.
The Sphinx asks adipus, what is it that in the morning stands on four legs, at midday
stands on two, and in the evening stands on three, and then we realize adipus says man,
and it's a parable about the stages of man, infancy, adulthood, and then old age with
a crutch, or in this case his child is going to have to leave him out, he's talking about
his own life.
Well, what Levi-Strauss' point is, man is the only species that stands on two legs,
the animals don't.
This play is about a person who cannot stand on two legs, who has been bitten by the beast,
whose body fails over and over, who experiences a kind of pain that is simply resistant to
any kind of moral interpretation.
The spectacle of pain is unbearable.
Notice what I said, not only the pain is unbearable, the spectacle of pain is unbearable.
That is why the Greeks abandoned him.
Sophocles is telling us something very bitter here that we need to know, which is we can't
bear to be around people who hurt.
The wound wounds us.
There is something deeply antisocial about suffering, and that is precisely the way this
story is written.
This man is abandoned on an island, an island that is described as severe, raw, nothing
nostalgic or lyrical here, nothing like Wordsworth here, this beautiful sense of living in the
elements.
He lives a life of utter poverty, of deprivation.
He lives like an animal, living in the woods in the Middle Ages, living in the woods in
antiquity, nothing happy about it.
We're way before Thoreau and Rousseau and those types.
We're talking about a time that this reduces you to animal status.
That's what he has done.
He lives there, he's obliged to use his magic bow to kill animals in order to live.
It's the most deprived form of life imaginable.
He lives in utter solitude, and this against the backdrop of the Greek's great value of
human society, of the reality of the hearth, of the host code in which you had to bring
people into your house if they were wandering through the wilderness.
Not in this play.
This man lives alone like an animal among animals, and I think that is the way Sophocles
is telling us that's what pain is.
Pain is exile.
Pain is a world unto itself.
Pain is a world in which you lose the society of your fellows, and that is the essential
metaphor of this play.
Illness makes you an outsider.
This play is almost about autism.
It's about leaving the human race.
It's about misanthropy.
And that's why Philoctetes won't go back to join the Greeks.
He doesn't want to.
He's had it.
He just wants to get out and die.
So I'm stressing this interpretation of the play as against Wilson's splendid romantic
reading because art in general tempts us into dignifying or glorifying sickness, pain, suffering
as something higher, as something visionary, as something too fine for the ordinary world
to understand.
And I want to say that you've got to be good and careful before you do that.
But to read Sophocles is to understand that pain is pain before it is enlightenment, that
it hurts before it opens your eyes, that he wants you to understand the creatural reality
of it, that this story may be the parable of the artist, but that Philoctetes himself
is a bitter, broken, diseased man who happens to have a magic bow.
So I think that we need to remember these things when we think about this romantic
legacy that we have about art.
I want to use the rest of this lecture to talk about the most preeminent texts that
I know about the ways in which the society interprets disease, because that's really
what I've been talking about, about whether disease is a curse and then about how one's
fellows see the disease.
That's what I think is happening both in the story of Job and in the story of Philoctetes.
And the text that I want to refer to is really a joint text.
It's two brief books written by Susan Sontag, the first illness is metaphor, and then its
sequel AIDS and its metaphors.
Sontag wrote illness as metaphor when she was recovering from cancer.
She wrote it as a victim, she wrote it as a woman who was very angry at the way she
felt herself being typed by the culture at large, and she wrote it as a way of exposing
the damage that is done by the labels that the culture places on disease.
How could she do that?
She herself had cancer, had had chemotherapy, was recovering and was given a fairly poor
prognosis.
How could she write this story?
It's the way smart people operate.
She said, you know, she doesn't say this openly, but it's what she has to have done.
I will simply step back in time and write about tuberculosis as a first story in order
to position the story of cancer that I'm living.
And so what does she say about tuberculosis?
Tuberculosis is the great 19th century romantic disease.
It was considered the disease of the sensitive, the disease of the soul, the disease of artists
it was glorified, romanticized.
It's an elegant disease.
It's considered a disease of people with great passion.
Now there are so many ironies in this.
Some talk believed when she was writing this that tuberculosis was a myth of the past.
Her job was to show that once people understood the etiology of tuberculosis, they would stop
using these trashy metaphors.
Once you realize that antibiotics could get rid of tuberculosis or that vaccines could
do it, then you would stop labeling it as the disease of the soul or of the passions
or of the artist.
Little did she know when she wrote it that tuberculosis would make its terrible return
today, that we now have drug-resistant forms of tuberculosis that are very much worrying
the medical community.
But be that as it may, she chose it as a disease that would make her point, which is that we
only metaphorize a disease that we do not understand, that scientific ignorance goes
hand in hand with our cultural tags.
Theories that diseases are caused by mental states and can be cured by willpower are
always an index of how much is not understood about the physical terrain of a disease.
She claims over and over in the study that once we understand better cancer, we will
then stop foisting these myths about the cancer personality.
She is very eloquent about what the cancer personality is termed to be because she has
experienced in her own life this label.
The cancer personality is the person who is told that they have not indulged in their
passions, that they have lived a life of repression, that they have lived wrong.
You are all familiar with this.
This is the flip side of Bernie Siegel's work of a lot of the very interesting work
that says you could go into remission, you could cure yourself by the way you live.
Part of this says as well, you've got the disease because of the way you lived.
It's connected to the way you live.
This whole lecture is about whether there is a personal connection between your disease
and you.
How entitled are we to use these personal pronouns, your disease?
Sontag is saying there is no connection.
But she says that the two metaphors are very different.
Nobody says that cancer is a disease of the passions.
On the contrary, it's a disease of repression.
Nobody says that cancer is a disease that you flaunt, a disease of the artist, of the
grand soul.
Instead, cancer is a disease that you hide and you hide it because it strikes you in
the places that you can't show, the breasts, the colon, the rectum, the genitals.
Cancer is a disease that people are ashamed of.
It's totally opposite from the romanticizing that happened in the 19th century treatment
of tuberculosis.
And cancer creates guilt in people.
Psychological theories of illness are powerful means of placing the blame on the ill.
Those who are instructed that they have unwittingly caused their disease are also being made
to feel that they have deserved it.
Do you hear Job all over again?
You've got this because you deserved it.
You've lived the wrong way.
This is a brilliant study, it seems to me.
And it's a brilliant study because it is so attuned to the way that the culture speaks
of diseases.
The controlling metaphors and descriptions of cancer are drawn not from economics but
from warfare.
Every physician and attentive patient is familiar with, if perhaps in Newark to this military
terminology.
Here are some examples.
Thus, cancer cells do not simply multiply, they are invasive.
Malignant tumors invade even when they grow very slowly, as one textbook puts it.
Cancer cells colonize, she's got that in quotes, from the original tumor to far sites in the
body.
Bringing up first tiny outposts, micro-metastases, whose presence is assumed, although they cannot
be detected.
Rarely are the body's defenses, here's the military terminology again, thought to be
strong enough to obliterate a tumor that has established its own blood supply.
We are the war on cancer, just like the war on drugs.
Bombardment is how we describe chemotherapy, to bombard those cells with our own counteractivity.
She suggests that these metaphors speak volumes, if we know how to think about them.
They don't do anyone a service, she's saying.
They turn it into a holy war.
They in fact import a whole slew of unwanted moral distinctions into this.
Well, it was fairly evident that eventually this woman would have to write a book on AIDS.
When she wrote the book about cancer, she was angry, she was writing about her own experience.
Writing about AIDS, she's much cooler, she doesn't have AIDS.
And she can see that the same activity is operative in the way the culture defines and
makes sense of AIDS.
The same notion of warfare, but also she sees in it a notion of a society's suspicion of
others, and we're getting back to the theory of the scapegoat.
She talks about AIDS in terms of the lingering power of the notion of plague.
One feature of the usual script for plague, the disease invariably comes from somewhere
else.
Listen to this.
The names for syphilis, when it began its epidemic sweep through Europe in the last
decade of the 15th century, are an exemplary illustration of the need to make a dreaded
disease foreign syphilis.
It was the French pox to the English, the Morbus Germanicus, the German disease, to the Parisians,
the Naples sickness to the Florentes, and the Chinese disease to the Japanese.
What may seem like a joke about the inevitability of chauvinism reveals a more important truth,
that there is a link between imagining disease and imagining foreignness.
It's a very suggestive notion.
All you have to do is think about the colonies of people who are thought to be the danger
zones for AIDS.
They're the ones who have aberrant social modes of behavior.
And they're the ones that many would like, in fact, to quarantine.
It's also equally interesting about where AIDS comes from.
It is understood as a tropical disease, another infestation from the so-called third world
where most people in the world live.
However, she goes on to add this.
In Zaire and other countries in Central Africa where AIDS is killing tens of thousands, the
counter-reaction has begun.
Many doctors, academics, journalists, government officials, and other educated people believe
that the virus was sent to Africa from the United States.
An act of bacteriological warfare whose aim was to decrease the African birth rate, which
got out of hand and has returned to afflict its perpetrators.
A common African version of this belief about the disease's provenance has the virus fabricated
in a CIA Army laboratory in Maryland, just around the corner, sent from there to Africa
and brought back to its country of origin by American homosexual missionaries returning
from Africa to Maryland.
This is all coming out of research that she's done.
So what I think Suntag helps us to do and what science alone in its discourse on disease
cannot do is to provide that broader historical framework, that context, which allows us to
give disease its fuller valuation.
What it really means for the human beings who have it or who live next to someone who
has it, that perspectival reality, and to warn us about how easy it is to get sucked in to
very evil games that are political in nature that have little to do with disease or with
science, but have a lot to do with scapegoats and with power and with superstition that
goes as far back as the book of Job.
Thank you.
