Lecture 9, The Feeling of Death, Art as Experience
In calling this lecture the feeling of death, art, as experience, I want to signal once
again the perspectival dimension of this subject, which is to say moving from the various distanced
vantage points from the earlier lecture, bystander to son who loses a father, the kind of empathy
and the issues of mourning that were raised in the earlier text, now moving more closely
to the central business at hand, which is the actual experience of dying, the dyer's
perspective, not the survivor's perspective. The feeling of death, art as experience, I
think that in the interest of some kind of honesty, I have to say that is a really loaded
title, can art possibly give us the experience of dying? Can it give us experience at all?
I wouldn't be a teacher of literature if I didn't believe that art doesn't offer experiences,
it does. But we also know that it's not the same as the experiences that it offers. We
experience books and paintings and films and music, we know that. But that doesn't
mean that a painting about madness or a story about madness or a poem about death is the
same thing as madness or death. One of the phrases that I have used before in this course
is that art enables us to imagine a reality we cannot afford to experience, by which I
want to say that art enables us a take on things, a vicarious grasp of things that in
reality we are likely only to encounter once if there are limit situations such as death,
or that in reality are so damaging and untying such as madness or sickness or suffering,
surely there has to be something said for the virtue of reading about suffering as opposed
to actual suffering. And certainly we have to acknowledge that reading about these things
schools us, it lessens us, it educates our feelings, it gives us something of a paler
sense of these matters, and I have been claiming obviously all along, that it gives us this
experiential view of things, modified though it is, in a way that science cannot and doesn't
choose to. Still, I am uncomfortable with art as experience because I am so aware of
how easy it is to overstate the issue, that empathy can be such a cheap virtue, I know
how you feel, that sort of phrase, I have been there. We hear it all the time and we
discount it very often because it doesn't seem to have the kind of depth and the kind
of integrity that we know we are experiencing when we are in pain. Likewise, I am aware
that reading poems about pain and death and suffering are not the same, can't be confused
with the actual experiences.
In closing my remarks on Ivan Ilyich or Tolstoy, I said that he screams for three days. And
I also pointed out that that is when he achieves a kind of forgiveness and a kind of humility.
Tolstoy adds a very interesting detail, he says that he actually sees a light, he approaches
a kind of light, and that this light is transformative, that when he sees this light, you know, it's
like that old cartoon or the light bulb that goes on and then the idea arrives. Needless
to say, the most obvious interpretation of this light is religious, that he sees the
light, he sees what is now a kind of vision of another world, of an afterlife or something
like that, the reality of the spirit and of the soul. That's probably what Tolstoy intended.
A student who had studied neurology in one of my courses says that, you know, I think
that you could argue that that light is something that in fact the brain does offer people
at the moment of death, and it's probably nothing but a kind of chemical neurological
response, which makes it sounds like a terrible fraud, that at the moment of death you have
this light going on and it has no spiritual meaning at all. I don't really know the answer
since none of us is there at the moment. I'd like to use the light, however, that Ilyich
experiences, whatever its meaning in terms of Tolstoy's intentions, as an entry into
what I want to say about some of my writers today. Let's think of this light not as the
entry into the Promised Land, and not as a kind of neurological accident, but rather
as the light that can be shown on events. Art as experience or the feeling of death
takes us into texts and into territory where the writer tries to keep the beam of light
of consciousness, of thought, of feeling focused on the limit experience. Rather than saying
it's now time to turn off the light because we are entering the last final phase of things,
it's as if the artists were to say, I will take the torch with me right to and through
the bitter end. There's a kind of heroism here and a kind of futility probably, but
I would like to regard some of these final texts as texts that are really noble in this
regard that they are trying to show us the actual experience to offer their report on
what it is to die. Now, we all know that we have very little documentary material on
death from the point of view of the person dying. That we can say grammatically things
such as I will die, I may die, I might die, but we cannot say with any credibility I have
died that when everybody who hears that knows that there's something figurative at work
there, that you couldn't literally mean it unless the world changes in ways that we
haven't yet seen. But for the most part, it would be hard to say I have died or when
I died, like when I died, then I saw X and I encountered Y and Paradise had this particular
color of brick. We don't really trust statements like that. However, you're going to see a
number of texts that do in fact make those claims to go beyond the position of onlooker,
beyond the kinds of defenses that even Iliac puts forth. Iliac's story is one about not
at all facing or entering the precincts of dying, keeping it at bay. What we have in
this writing is a plunge into death. The first author that I want to evoke here is a very
wonderful and much acclaimed 19th century poet, probably our greatest woman poet of
all, Emily Dickinson. Death for her, as it was for so many late 19th century figures,
particularly women, was a commonplace reality. Death was part of women's work. Women tended
the sick, they tended the dying. Death was not something that was hush-hop, it didn't
happen in nursery homes, it didn't happen in hospitals. It happened in people's bedrooms
that the dying people would die for quite a while. They would have the final last illness,
it ended up being the last one, and usually women were tending them. So it's a kind of
commonplace, quotidian, domestic reality for Dickinson. But that doesn't alter its great
mystery and grandeur as well, that she regards it as a kind of moment of truth, as a moment
of clarification, and as a moment of transfiguration. And I'd like to look at a couple of her poems
There are many, many poems about death. She was obsessed with the subject. I'm going to
look at a few of the most famous, and I think they're all the ones that I have chosen are
different from each other, and we'll try to get some sense of the range of what Dickinson
does with the death topic. This one I'm sure you all know, because I could not stop for
death, he kindly stopped for me. I mean this poem is just astonishingly rich and witty
and ironic, because I could not stop for death. It's like no one puts that on their calendar.
Appointment at 6.15 tomorrow with death. We don't do that. It usually comes as a surprise.
It is not something that figures in to our plans. She knows that, because I could not
stop for death, he kindly stopped for me, that splendid adverb, kindly. So act of generosity,
solicitude. I couldn't make the rendezvous, he did it instead. The carriage held, but
we suggest ourselves an immortality, a kind of social caller, a kind of civilized, decorous
event. Death comes calling, comes knocking. We enter the carriage, and we move together.
We slowly drove. He knew no haste, and I had put away my labor and my leisure too for
his civility. Once again, the emphasis placed on decorum, on death as being refined, death
as maybe the very apex of civilization, of culture. I put away my labor and my leisure.
This is where Tolstoy's story of Iliac just simply turned upside down. Iliac's life was
one of labor. Iliac's life was one of secular effort, work, achievement, and agenda. And
Dickinson's poem is quite the opposite. It's the recognition that the great space of life
is filled up by death. All of the rush, the hustle, the bustle, including all of the pleasure
and the leisure, all of that is now properly put aside for the real event. And then it
becomes the carriage trip to the grave. We pass the school where the children strove at
recess in the ring. We pass the fields of gazing grain. We pass the setting sun, that
very, very simple economic sort of evocation of the phases of life, the children, the grain,
the setting sun. We see the morning and the noon and the evening of human life. Towards
the end, we pause before a house that seemed a swelling on the ground. The roof was scarcely
visible, the cornice in the ground. We now move towards the grave, which is also domesticated.
Not a piece of earth, but a house, the final house that you will live in, a place for social,
decorous experience. And then we realize at the end, the astounding perspective of this
poem, since then, we have no idea that she's commenting on this experience from the vantage
point of eternity. Since then, to centuries, and yet feel shorter than the day I first
surmised the horse's heads were toward eternity. The voice speaking from the grave, how I got
there, evoking for us the rather elegant journey to the grave. Well, that is a voice that,
as I say, speaks a story that most of us in any kind of logical framework cannot understand.
Not credit. We don't know how to tell this story. Most of us have not gone that route
and then come back to talk about it, or have been able to speak from the grave. Dickinson
doesn't always achieve that leisurely refined tone. Some of her poems are more violent.
This one is. I felt a funeral in my brain, and mourners, too, and fro, kept treading
treading till it seemed that sense was breaking through. And here we have death invoked, I
think in an explicitly figurative way. I felt a funeral in my brain. It's a way of saying
I was feeling an emotion that I can best describe to you as the emotion of dying and of being
buried. And when they all were seated, a service like a drum kept beating, beating, till I
thought my mind was going numb, treading, treading, beating, beating. It's the kind
of thumping, metronomic sound and experience of the heart that beats, of the throbbing head
that hurts, of the pain as the blood goes through the body that hurts, that comes back
with a terrible kind of dooms like irregularity. That's what's happening in this poem. And
yet, once again, it is decorous, elegant. It's a service. People are seated. Then I
heard them lift a box and creak across my soul with those same boots of lead. Again,
then space began to toll. We know who is in the box. It's her own coffin. She's being
carried away. His boots of lead suggest the kind of pain she's experiencing, the abuse
that they are stepping on her through her. There's a sense in which she becomes the
perceiver and the perceived. She becomes the locus of her funeral as well as the thing
that is contained in the box. And then the poem just goes crazy. Then space began to
toll. And we move into the cosmos. We simply fall out of the existing framework of someone
experiencing something like a funeral. It's as if the sort of structures that hold the
world together give and one falls out of the creation. As all the heavens were a bell
and being but an ear, and I and silence some strange race wrecked solitary here, and then
a plank in reason broke, and I dropped down and down and hit a world at every plunge
and finished knowing then. It really seems like a kind of galactic event, a kind of cosmic
experience, a plank in reason no one knew that reason had plank. She invents her own
landscape. Metaphor is becoming a kind of new reality here. All of this is a way of
saying dying, saying dying as a way of leaving the world of gravity, the world of flesh,
the world of uprights, the world of horizontals, all of the things that in fact frame up the
way a carpenter frames up a room, that sort of space time operation that we call the world.
This is a poem about all of that capsizing, coming apart. All of those uprights collapse
and out she goes. It's like the rules of gravity have changed and she is out. And finished
knowing then. This poem seems to have an epistemological urgency to it, that its purpose is to come
to knowledge of dying, and yet we still don't know what she has seen. As if dying, you'll
recall what I've said about Iliac and the light. Shine the light right on to the end
and what do you see? And all we're really getting is the report of going there. Can you actually
tell us what death is? One of the most arresting pieces she wrote about the knowledge game
is this brief piece. I heard a fly buzz when I died, again a line that is unrightable ordinarily.
The stillness in the room was like the stillness in the air between the heaves of storm. The
eyes around had rung them dry and breaths were gathering firm for that last onset when
the king be witnessed in the room. Here is a very recognizable Dickinson motif, that
death will be the moment of truth, the moment of encounter. The king being the Lord will
finally become visible, will be manifest to us at last. That is what death leads to,
the culmination of life. And a lot of this poem is focused on that particular trauma,
the curtain finally going up, vision finally being achieved. I will my keepsakes, signed
away what portion of me be assignable, wonderful sense of stripping down, getting rid of all
the accoutrements, all of the paraphernalia that bother you in life and that you spend
your time ridiculously on. Now you are at the essentials. Everything is geared up for
a kind of grand triumphant climax here, but as the first line tells us, it ain't going
to happen that way. And then it was, there interposed a fly with blue, uncertain, stumbling
buzz between the light and me, and then the windows failed, and then I could not see to
see. This poem is about the failure of vision. It is about the final curtain not going up.
It is about not having the grand transfiguration that you anticipate. The king is not witnessed
in the room. All we have instead is the fly, the most mundane, petty detail imaginable.
I think that this poem suggests to us through that fly, wonderfully described as uncertain,
stumbling buzz, the very noise and static of the human brain of consciousness. It's
not just the fly itself. It's the very buzzing of the life in the head. And I'd like to
redefine the light that the poet shines on the experience of death as the light of consciousness
the light of thinking. That is the buzz, the uncertain, stumbling buzz. It's the static
of the brain that carries its own reporting paraphernalia right through to the end. She
cannot give us a report of the grand truth with a capital T, but she gives us her truth.
She gives us the truth of consciousness, the truth of buzz, the truth of the mind's own
static as the ultimate final human truth, which has a great dignity of its own. That
is what she is true to. She's true to the job of making her report, the report on what
it means to be alive and what it means to be dying. And in its own way, that has a kind
of grandeur that I think the encounter with the king would not have. Well, that's Dickinson's
way of encountering and dealing with these ultimacies. And I want to say that there is
something imperial about that. Imperial, which is a dirty word in today's culture, imperial,
because it suggests imperialism and all kinds of ugly political arrangements. But I want
to say that this is a colonizing poem. It sets out to colonize and to name places that we
have never been. This is a new world in the sense that the Renaissance discovered a new
world. It is that undiscovered land that Shakespeare writes about. It's a place that is being
named in front of our eyes. That's the report of consciousness. And yet we know that dying
is not exclusively an affair of the brain. It's not just an affair of consciousness,
a cerebral event. It is a total performance in its own way. It's a casheering of all the
equipment, head, but also heart, genitals, arms, legs, toes, the works. All of it goes
out of business when we die. Could you display that? Could you display the entire creatural
exit? I mean, that's a good question. Ordinarily we would think how could you, and I'm going
to suggest that in some strange texts, something very much like that happens. The text I'm
alluding to is one of my favorites. It's a play by the absurdist playwright, Ian Esco,
and it's called Exit the King. The Rois-sur-Mer is the French. And the theater of the Observe
is often thought of as an extremely abstruse esoteric kind of art form, only for graduate
students and professors. And that's completely wrong. This play is about the most basic event
of life, which is dying. And it's about the king dying, exit the king, and it takes the
simplest fact of all, which says that all of us are kings. Every time a human being
dies, that is the death of a monarch. Because our life has been a grand kingdom, and that
death is a scandal. How can it happen that so much disappears and comes to so little?
Ian Esco has a wacky sense of humor about this. His figure, the king, has done all kinds
of grand things. We read, for example, that he extinguished volcanoes and caused new ones
to erupt. He built Rome, New York, Moscow, and Geneva. He founded Paris. He created revolutions,
counter revolutions. This king has got a lot to his particular credit. How can this guy
actually die? Well, the play is about the necessity of him, just like Freud said of
Lear, making friends with death. That no matter how powerful you are, this day of reckoning
will come. And Ian Esco finds an extraordinary language, it seems to me, to show the disappearance
of this great man, to show what it means to be weaned from life. Some of this has a kind
of almost childlike infantile beauty to it about how astonishing life can be. This is
when the king, earlier in the play, is talking to the servant, and she is complaining about
how early she has to get up in the mornings at the sort of pale light. She says, he pale
light. There are all sorts of light, blue and pink and white and green and pale. Now you
think of this, he is dying. He knows he's getting ready to lose all of this, to leave
the world. And she's going to talk about the painful petty, vulgar details of her life.
And he's going to tell us that every one of these is magic. I do all the palace laundry
in the wash house, she complains. It hurts my hands and cracks my skins, the king. And
it hurts, one can feel one's skin. Haven't they bought you a washing machine yet? A
palace and no washing machine? And his wife says, we had to pawn it to pay a state loan.
I empty the chamber pots. I make the beds. The king, she makes the beds. Where we lie
down and go to sleep and then wake up again. Did you ever realize that every day you woke
up to wake up every day? Every morning one comes into the world. It's as if everything
is bathed in wonder. The simplest things now achieve a kind of grandeur and glory that they
never had. I polish the parquet floors and sweep, sweep, sweep. There's no end of it,
she says. He says, there's no end of it, which of course is just what he wants. He's coming
to his end. It gives me the backache. That's right. She has a back. We all have backs and
pains in the kidney. Kidneys too. There's a real sort of inventory going on here. Everything
she can say in terms of her miseries is for him a subject of celebration. Well, this is
what he has to leave. He's going to be weaned from all of this. And that is no easy task.
His wife realizes that it's her job to try to free him from all of the ties that bind
him still. I'll drive it out of him, she says. I'll cut him loose. I'll untie every
knot and rattle out the tangled skein. She will liberate him for dying. Well, how would
you show that? That just sounds rhetorical. How would you actually show it? And I want
to read you what I think is one of the most astounding things in dramatic literature,
which is how UNESCO finds a way to show it. How would you show someone leaving the living
on a stage? You've got a scenic vocabulary at your disposal. Marguerite, there's still
some cords that bind you, which I haven't yet untied, or which I haven't cut. There's
still some hands that cling to you and hold you back. And she moves around the king and
she cuts the space as if she had some invisible scissors in her hand. And he's saying, me,
me, me. And she's saying, this you is not the real you. It's an odd collection of bits
and pieces, horrid things that live on you like parasites. The mistletoe that grows on
the bow is not the bow. The ivy that climbs the wall is not the wall. You're sagging under
the load. Your shoulders are bent. That's what makes you feel so old. And it's that,
now listen to the language here. It's that ball and chain dragging at your feet, which
make it so difficult to walk. And she bends down and she removes an invisible ball and
chain, pulls it away from him, and gets up and looks as if she were making a great effort
to lift the weight. A ton of weight, they must weigh at least a ton, she says. She pretends
to be throwing them at the audience. Then she straightens up. That's better. How did
you manage to trail them around all your life? The king tries to straighten up. And I used
to wonder why you were so round and shouldered. It's because of that sack. And now she pretends
to be taking a sack from his shoulders and she throws that away. And that heavy pack,
and she goes for the same motions for the pack, he's being unloaded. We can't see any of this.
This is all in our inner mind. We imagine this as she removes these burdens from him.
And that spare pair of army boots, he goes, no, don't get so excited. You won't need an
extra pair of boots anymore, or that rifle, or that machine gun, or that toolbox. He seems
quite attached to it. A nasty rusty old saber. She takes it off of him. He tries to stop
her. Leave it all to me and be a good boy. You don't need self-defense anymore. No one
wants to hurt you now. All those thorns and splinters in your cloak, those creepers and
seaweed and slimy wet leaves, how they stick to you. I'll pick them off. I'll pull them
away. What dirty marks they make. And she cleanses him. There you are. I've gotten rid
of all the messy things that worried you. Now your cloak's more beautiful. It's as if he
is attaining his majesty at last by having all of these accoutrements pulled away. But
I want you to think about what I have just read you. That is the Freudian view of the
self, anchored in all of its defenses. Don't we all carry rusty sabers and machine guns
and sacks and boots inside of us, keeping the world at bay, protecting our precious
ego, making sure that the world won't damage us. Freud actually talks about homeostasis
as the way that the brain keeps reality from buffering, from buffeting it, keeps stimuli
out. That's the way the system works. This is a poetic language for finally freeing us
of all of this paraphernalia that we have carried with us all our lives. It is a play,
as I said, that choreographs death, getting clear of the ballast, showing what it really
entails. This kind of art makes us realize, I think, the poverty of our ordinary constructs
and perceptions. There can be no single right take on this. This is just one poet-dramatist
way of getting at it. But there's something splendid in doing a full-length play about
a man leaving the living, because we think of death as a fairly brief thing, even when
we know that people lie dying for months and sometimes years. But this is a full-length
play that watches a man who starts incredulous because he's the king, and he ends up having
finally divested himself of all of these burdens, all of this paraphernalia, all of his attachments
to the living. And you see it. You actually see it, or you see it in your mind's eye as
she removes these things. This is exactly the free space of art to make us see things
that we can't see with our eyes. Another text I wanted to evoke for you is a totally unknown
text written by a contemporary Swedish woman writer, Margareta Ekström, and it's called
Death's Midwives. And it seems, at first, to be a somewhat gruesome text. It's about
a woman who is dying, and she has lost a very great deal. You remember that I began what
the Cystoscope said by talking about how this man's neck was in a horse collar, and you
could see the yoking that was going to kill him. Well, the first line here is written
in a code language that everyone today understands. When she lost her hair, she finally began
to cry. And you know just what's being talked about. This is not premature baldness. This
is the effect of chemotherapy. Everybody knows that. This woman has lost a very great deal
in the story. She's lying alone in a hospital, and Ekström is utterly clear about all the
things that have gone. She thought of her vagina as an empty inkwell forgotten in an
uninhabited summer cottage. And she thinks about her marriage this way. Then after that
total overwhelming effort, there had been a slow downhill slope, a dilution, a growing
indifference, which attacked both of them like a mutual consumption. By then, their son
was 18 years old and they found no reason to pretend. They drifted apart and both forgot
their love. She tried to remember how it had felt, but could only evoke the certainty of
their friendship, possibly respect and their independence from each other, which was just
as complete as if they had been born in different centuries. It wasn't indifference. They kept
in touch. They cared, but it was no longer necessary. I think sometimes the Scandinavians
have a kind of brutal honesty that is harder for us to manage here. That is to me one of
the most chilling descriptions of decent people falling out of love, which is the fate of
so many marriages in the world. They respect each other. It just was no longer necessary.
This is what time does to living people, is it effectively disinherits you from the greatest
things of your life? They die their own death. Your love dies before your body dies. Your
commitments stop being meaningful to you and you're still breathing. The story is about
those kinds of losses, a life together no longer intact. Yet she thinks with most pleasure
about the child she gave birth to. She has given this list of things that were unnecessary
that didn't have to have happened. Her life is one grand extended accident, which is what
most lives are. You're born one day, you do this another day. It's not part of a divine
plan. It doesn't have to happen. But she thinks that maybe giving birth to this child, that
had to happen. To have born him, to have succeeded in getting him out whole, no, that could never
feel unnecessary. There was the limit to her skepticism. And she was a common she-fox,
a natural female bear, an entirely genuine cat mother. The baby was in her belly and
had to come out. The baby had to be licked. The baby needed milk and tenderness and warmth.
The story insistently compares her memories of birthing this child with her experience
now of dying in the hospital. It's called Death's Midwives. And she thinks of the experience
of giving birth to this child as one of those limit situations when she is as close to death
as she has ever been, when the body could go either way, when it reaches its absolute
extremes. And she thinks of that child coming out of the canal of her body as a version
of what she is in now, that she too is in a passage going through a tunnel. And at the
end of this story, in some remarkable way, this woman who has been abandoned by her
body, by her family, even the son is not there, is in some profoundly social way accompanied
by the memory of this infant into death. She thinks about this baby that she had had.
And she has the nurses there who are called queer, knitting women, putting needles into
her. And this, of course, is the paraphernalia of the hospital with the IVs and the needles
and the drugs. And they are also these knitting women, the fates of antiquity, the women that
hold the scissors that cut off our lives as strings. And that is how the ancients have
shown it. And then she has the child. She has the vision of the child. The child learning
to speak. It prattled and babbled, it expounded and explained. She made an effort to stretch
her neck and look up. The sun shone in through the window, the chestnuts on the horizon,
bowed to an imperceptible breeze. The knitting woman had fallen asleep. The light hit the
shiny intravenous bottle, which reflected blindingly. All she saw was the sunshine bouncing against
the nursery window. And his voice babbled on. And when she made an effort to somehow see
his face, the sun, and here is Nordic mythology, the sun struck her with its double-edged axe.
And this is her moment of dying, looking to see the face of her remembered infant or her
remembered child as he's learning to speak. And the sun finally coming to its zenith to
high noon out. Like the whirling of balls of fluff and music on a cotton piano, whispering
and shuffling, moving and covering, she is experiencing the people dismantling the machinery
around her. Tubing disconnected, clothing removed before the stiffness of her own rigor
mortis makes it more difficult. Like a shadow play, this whole thousand-headed hospital,
which is slowly sinking into the darkness of a new day, while a ray of light is laughing
in the window and a child talks and talks about life. It's an absolutely beautiful
piece. I don't think a man could have written it. It's a piece about birth and death being
in some remarkable, not cheesy way, because I've always been resistant to the idea that
you could meaningfully compare death and birth. But I think here with the kind of really relentless
physical realism of this piece, of the kind of degrading experience of dying, of how your
body cheats on you as you become terribly ill and die, all of that seems to me makes
this extraordinary metaphor of birth and death a more beautiful, incredible thing. And the
idea of giving birth as a great miracle that men just cannot share, and that that in some
strange way here in this text is the accompaniment to dying. And of course, it's the oldest
notion alive. There is no death. There is only life, that that child is her future, that
is her continuance. All of that's in this piece. There are countless voices that art
has when it wants to talk about death. I've given you some of them. A story that I would
allude to, I won't talk about it in any detail, is by this same author of Imelda, whom I
mentioned earlier, Richard Seltzer. It's a story called Imagine a Woman, and it's a
pretty astounding piece. It's about a woman dying the way people die today, that is to
say, of AIDS, which she has contracted from her husband. She has one year left to live.
And of course, we know that AIDS is a grisly death. We also know that it's a death very
often in squalid conditions, urban misery. Well, this story is a grand escapist fantasy.
This woman leaves her lover and goes to France. This is a year in Provence, written under
the sign of AIDS. It's the last year of your life in Savoy. And it is radically different
from the kind of actual urban conditions that we know accompany this disease. Instead, we
have this splendid, dazzling, final year of this woman's life. The beautiful fruits
of the earth are in Savoy, the bread, the cheese, the wine. These are the sacraments.
This is as old a language of human goodness and of the goodness of the earth as we know.
The kind, wise country people who know that she is dying, she is also pregnant, know that
she's going to deliver a dead child, which she will do in this year. They minister to
her. They give her these old, wonderful country remedies. Her hands are in terrible shape.
They're becoming numb, her arms, so they put bees on her. And with tiny little stings,
they restore her circulation. They're wise in old, old medicine. An Arcadian life, folk
remedies comforts a life that people who live in cities in our scientific culture dream
about, nostalgically for. And finally, she is brought into the sea by a figure who is
regarded as the Triton, the mythic figure who comes to us from far, far away and who
will accompany her into the elements. It is the exit that people yearn for. He will take
her into the water and she will descend and he will carry her, cradle her in his arms
as he takes her into the water. That's the way the story ends. My students like this
story more than I do because I kept having lived a lot in France. I sense that there
is something deeply escapist and distorting about this. I wonder how much this woman has
paid for her final year in France. I do not think that people who live in the country
are necessarily waiting with bated breath for diseased Americans to come and die among
them. Nonetheless, I think that there is something wonderful about the story that as much of
an escapist fantasy as it is, one has to say, why not? There is something miraculous in
this capacity to transform the brutal facts of dying into the lovely fictions of living.
That's not to be sneezed at. There is nothing wrong with that. Why not help yourself out
in that kind of way?
The Western tradition, as we have inherited it, at least from the earliest Christianity,
treats us to a view of death as utterly binary, utterly the opposite of the life of the body.
I'll cite Paul from Romans, who will deliver me from this body of death. Thanks be to God
through Jesus Christ our Lord, so then I of myself serve the law of God with my mind,
but with my flesh I serve the law of sin, for the law of the spirit of life in Jesus
Christ has set me free from the law of sin and death.
This is the oldest dichotomy of Western religious thinking, spirit versus flesh, that the flesh
is sold into sin and therefore is mortal and will decay and will die, whereas the spirit
can be immortal and will live forever. This motif, this notion, this irreconcilable split
between body and mind, body and soul, is with us, as I said, for the last several thousand
years and much great art has come out of it. I wanted to cite one of Shakespeare's great
sonnets that is entirely based on exactly this, the idea of the soul that wastes its
resources by taking care of the body, spins its resources on the body which is called
a fading mansion, and the poet says, shall worms, inheritors of this excess, eat up thy
charge? We know that the worms will eat the body, should they also eat the soul? Is this
thy body's end? And then Shakespeare says, then soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss.
Let the soul feast on the body instead of the other way around. He says, buy terms divine
in selling hours of dross within be fed without be rich no more, that it is the inner life,
the life of the soul which is to somehow flourish and it is time to now put aside the life of
the body. The last couplet of this poem is very powerful, so shall thou feed on death
that feeds on men and death once dead, there is no dying then. Now I cited this poem and
cited Paul as the origin for this body-mind split, but you must have noticed in this poem
that the victory of the soul is defined exclusively in terms of eating. It's a purely materialist
view of things, that the soul can outwith the body by becoming the parasite that lives
on it. And that's how you kill death, you devour death, you eat it up yourself. This
poem has worried religious critics, they have felt like it's terms of real estate and consuming
and food that somehow Shakespeare simply tries to turn the tables and use those terms on
the side of the soul instead of the body. It's as if we only know the body and we're
trying to find terms to talk about the soul. And I think that Shakespeare, the poem is
a great poem because it gives us pause, it makes us wonder. The last piece that I'll
read to you, it's a very brief piece and it is a piece by a very great poet and it too
is about the vision, a vision that goes beyond this life. It's words were, a slumber did
my spirit seal, I had no human fears, she seemed the thing that could not feel the touch
of earthly years, no motion has she now, no force, she neither hears nor sees, rolled
around an earth's diurnal course with rocks and stones and trees. This is a lovely poem,
when she was living I had no fears, my spirit was asleep, but when she died she now has
entered into the elements, she has entered the creation, she is part of the rocks and
the stones and the trees. We die to enter the creation and yet the poem like all art
won't have it so simply, that while our loved ones live, we sleep, we are not sensitized
to their mortality, we are dulled, but only when they die and they enter the creation do
we then wake up to our anguish. Thank you.
