Lecture 10, What We Have Learned, Applications and Vistas.
It seems time in this last lecture to offer, if not conclusions,
because I don't think this program really can be satisfactorily concluded,
at least some observations on where we have been,
what sorts of vistas we may have achieved, where one might go from here,
what possible value we may find in looking at death and disease through literature,
to put it more crassly, is this just enrichment, or is there more to it than that?
Just enrichment is a lot, I think, that if the only thing that happens
is that we have read more widely about the body in pain, the body in culture,
the reality of disease, of suffering, that is a good thing.
That amplifies, it seems to me, our view of these matters.
It schools our emotions just because of the involvement it requires of us with the text.
It stretches our subjectivity in the sense that it asks us to experience vicariously
the lives that we encounter through art.
All of this means that it converts dry numbers and data into issues that are experiential,
at least to some extent, in character.
And in doing that, it restores something of the human density, urgency, pathos,
but also dignity to our relations with mortality and pain.
Those are all good things. I have no embarrassment or qualms about the course
if it does exactly and only that.
Art and literature demonstrably tell a side of the story
that science does not and does not wish to tell.
Art and literature address human suffering rather than scientific understanding
so that medicine becomes redefined as human experience rather than the study of disease.
The doctor-patient relationship looms large,
not as an exercise in finding the truth, but as an exercise in communication
and, moreover, a kind of meditation about how much relief or alleviation
is created through that communication or not created.
One of the consequences, I think, of a course like this is that it can make us fierce about doctors.
It can make us overly critical and ask, fundamentally, too much for doctors.
And I would remind you of the passage from Kafka, which, as I said,
should be nailed up over the entry into medical school.
That is what people are like in my district, the country doctor says,
always expecting the impossible from the doctor.
They have lost their ancient beliefs.
The parson sits at home and unravels his vestments one after another.
But the doctor is supposed to be omnipotent with his merciful surgeon's hands.
Well, as it pleases them, I have not thrust my services on them.
If they misuse me for sacred ends, I let that happen to me, too.
This is the cultural, historical predicament that doctors, through no fault of their own, have inherited.
In a secular and materialist age, an age largely without sustaining religious beliefs,
the doctor is alone positioned at the frontier between life and death, between body and soul.
And this course, with its insistence on art's testimony,
has shown over and over that those issues, those issues of death, pain, suffering,
the meaning of suffering, totally outrun the precincts of science.
They are not to be answered in scientific textbooks.
They have to do with ethics, emotions, love, fear, spirit,
all kinds of things that no sane person would say are on the medical curriculum.
This also, as I have tried to emphasize in this course,
have to do with history, culture, society, politics, race, class, gender.
If you think back at the text that we've used, Wojcak, the poor person who was the guinea pig,
the yellow wallpaper, the woman who was bullied by her male physician husband.
Indian Camp, the way in which the doctor walks in, treats these Indians, these Native Americans,
disregards the shrieking of the woman, says that I don't hear her cries, they don't matter.
Even the phylloctaties, the way that this man is abused, exploited, manipulated
by the political aims of the Greeks, they're just going to use him to get this war taken care of.
Imelda, the Latin American girl who is seen by the sort of God-like plastic surgeon
who makes his efforts to alter her, to improve her, to restore her to a beauty
that she should have had and the body dies.
All of these stories are absolutely saturated with issues of culture and ideology.
They're not simply stories about either science or only about pain.
They bring the history of the world, the history of religions, the history of cultures.
They bring a whole range of issues onto our plates and we can't ignore it.
So therefore, can we expect the doctor, as Kafka says, with his merciful surgeon's hands
to also address and understand and even resolve this range of issues?
The oncologist has spent long years understanding and then dealing with the biology, the physiology,
the pathology, and the treatment of cancer.
Should we expect this person also to be a priest or a poet?
Can this person also credibly deal with the meaning of the cancer?
I'm not talking about the scientific nature of the disease, but the meaning of the cancer.
Or, to broaden it, with our pain, not our disease, our pain or in others, our death or in others,
should we be expecting this?
And as I said, I think the risk of a course like this is that it seems to say,
yes, these are all the things that doctors should know.
It's too easy to come down hard on doctors.
Why can't their bedside manners be better?
Why can't they speak to us in a language that we understand?
And about the life-and-death issues that truly terrify us,
not simply the particular discomfort that we're experiencing in their office.
But obviously the sheer amount of science that they have to acquire,
not to mention the enormous psychic toll that medicine exacts on its practitioners,
that is enough to fill up and to overload a life.
There's remarkable testimony, by the way, on the part of doctors themselves
about the stresses that are existent and inherent in the field of medicine.
That, as you probably know, the incidence of suicide, the incidence of psychological disorders,
the incidence of divorce is much higher in medicine than in most other professions.
And one doesn't have to be a wizard to figure out why.
That to be on the front line, dealing with people's mortality and pain day after day after day,
and expected to be godlike in it as well,
is something that no human being is equipped to manage very successfully throughout an entire life.
Moreover, doctors have written also about the difficulty within the profession of acknowledging mistakes.
They all know that they make mistakes. Diagnosis, I'm not going to say is a crapshoot,
but diagnosis is always made in the face of contradictory evidence.
It's always the best, most informed, educated guess that you can make.
Doctors will admit that, so that by definition sometimes you're going to get it wrong.
And we know that the doctors who get it wrong, whether or not they go me a culpa, and they publicly confess it,
whether or not they do that, we know that that stays with them.
And that too adds to the stress that medicine carries within it.
And the profession hasn't made it easy on itself in the sense of not creating a forum where this can be openly acknowledged.
There are doctors like Hilfiger and McHugh and others who have written about these matters.
So it seems to me that this opening of our views, this sort of wider look at doctors and doctoring,
I'd like to think would make us more rather than less generous vis-a-vis physicians.
I'd like to think as well that the doctors themselves, and I hope that I have doctors in this audience,
would be made both more humble, but also more proud in looking at this range of materials.
It is true that many times physicians take a beating in the materials of this course.
Molière certainly deflates their balloon, and Buchner, Hawthorne, Gilman, Tolstoy, Kafka, and Burroughs
all in different ways illustrate the potential arrogance and the ultimate limitations of their work.
They are working in vineyards, that is to say, our bodies, that nature governs, no one escapes mortality,
all bodies are destined to die.
They, like we, may have something to learn from the views of art, because the views of art humanize that landscape.
And I'd like to suggest as well that some of these texts, perhaps, will question and challenge some of their own disciplinary assumptions.
Modern medicine is cadaver-based medicine.
The bedrock of our understanding of pathology and disease and infection is fundamentally death-derived.
That is to say, we know what we know because we know what kills us.
We understand what makes organisms sick, how infection kills people, how entropy operates across the time in the body.
I want to read you, once again, from that very Sibylon writer, Foucault, who talks about the place of death in trying to understand medical thinking.
He says that the constitution of pathological anatomy at the period when the clinicians were defining their method is no mere coincidence.
The balance of experience required that the gaze directed upon the individual and the language of description should rest upon the stable,
visible, legible basis of death.
Death is readable.
Death is the bottom line.
Death is what underwrites our knowledge of the human body.
It is when death became the concrete a priori of medical experience that death could detach itself from counter-nature and all of these mythic views of death
and become embodied in the living bodies of individuals.
We carry our death with us.
That's why we are spoken to about cholesterol and blood pressure.
All of those issues have to do with the death that lurks in us that is each day coming closer.
It will no doubt remain a decisive fact about our culture that its first scientific discourse concerning the individual had to pass through this stage of death.
And then Foucault really becomes quite the poet.
He says that the sense perceptible, all the things that our eyes take in, the manifold, un-patterned fullness and plenitude of life that has no rhyme or reason to it that we see when we open our eyes.
He says the sense perceptible which cannot be exhausted by description and which so many centuries have wished to dissipate by throwing sort of formulas and theorems at it finds at last in death the law of its discourse.
This is the explanation of the universe to understand death.
And then in his beautiful image, it is death that fixes the stone that we can touch, the return of time, the fine innocent earth beneath the grass of words.
Foucault also writes very meaningfully, I think, about that gaze, that scientific regard, the penetrating, opening gaze, as we saw embodied in Hawthorne's text, the prying figure who seeks to understand what is inside of people,
or as I alluded to in my comments on Catherine Harrison's exposure, the way in which our secrets are constantly under scrutiny.
Foucault equally describes the gaze as devastating, the gaze as something that can kill as well as preserve.
Nineteenth-century medicine was haunted by that absolute eye that cadaverizes life.
I really like that phrase.
The eye that cadaverizes life that sees in your body the growing disease, the growing tumor, what is finally going to kill it, that cadaverizes life and rediscovers in the corpse the frail, broken, nervier of life.
Foucault points, as I said, to one of the underlying enabling premises of modern science and modern medicine, which is death as the bedrock, death as what makes things explicable, what allows us to create our own patterns of causality.
Death tells us why people die.
Science, therefore, medical science starts from that.
What about the other side of it?
How do we learn about why people live?
Not why people die.
When will medicine begin to examine and explore what keeps us alive?
We all know countless cases of people who break the rules, eat the wrong things, live the wrong way, live in the wrong places, have a hundred million terrible things happen to them, and go on to the age of 80 or 90.
And others who drop off like flies, others who have performed all of the right rituals, who are saluting all of the right flags, who in this culture, which is obsessed with immortality, do just the right things in terms of diet, in terms of exercise, etc.
And they don't live.
We know that there is more to it than the kinds of concepts that we have.
What keeps certain people alive?
What makes people live?
Ivan Ilyich discovers in Tolstoy's story that he hasn't lived right.
And I think Tolstoy invites us to consider the fact that it's the way that he's lived that contributes to this death.
Now, I don't want to go too far down that road because we're getting back to curse and disease as something that you deserve.
And we know that that carries its own terrible problems.
But I also think that there is much to learn about what makes us live.
It's in this light, too, that maybe we have a great deal to learn about alternative traditions that tell us something about death as a continuum of life.
And in this light, I would refer to Rampush's very popular book, a bestseller in this country, called The Tibetan Book of Living and Dying.
It is a massive critique of the West and of the West's views about death.
When I first came to the West, I was shocked by the contrast between the attitudes to death I had been brought up with and those that I now found.
For all its technological achievements, modern Western society has no real understanding of death or what happens in death or after death.
I learned that people today are taught to deny death, taught that it means nothing but annihilation and loss, and that means that most of the world lives either in denial of death or in terror of it.
Even talking about death is considered morbid.
Instead, what Rampush tries to do is to explain to his reader something about this Tibetan philosophy which sees death as part of the continuum of living,
sees death as a separate existence of its own, not as cessation, not as emptiness, not as the stop, the close, but rather as a kind of alternative life, a life that follows the life that we have.
And he says some fairly astounding things.
One would imagine that this text is going to be filled with a kind of Buddhist view of religious values and about being and non-being and all sort of within a kind of metaphysical or religious framework that either one can or cannot buy into.
But what I want to suggest is his text is wise about some of the pragmatic and social dimensions of our views about death.
Consider, for example, this passage.
The master that he's referring to his own Zen master, the master knows that if people believe in a life after this one, their whole outlook on life will be different.
And they will have a distinct sense of personal responsibility and morality.
What the masters must suspect is that there is a danger that people who have no strong belief in a life after this one will create a society fixated on short term results.
We are living in that society.
Without much thought for the consequences of their actions, surely if we had an understanding of death, our views about the environment would be very different because it is a material form of afterlife.
It's the globe that our descendants will live in if we don't destroy it for them first.
Could this be the major reason why we have created a brutal world like the one we are now living in, a world with little real compassion?
So this is not simply a religious or philosophical tract.
It is really also, I think, a very powerful social argument.
It suggests that our priorities, the way we have arranged things, our agendas, the ones that we acknowledge and the ones that we don't acknowledge, are all in some sense queued in a different way from what Foucault said to death.
Like if we don't get it now, we're never going to have it.
And the be all and end all is what I happen to get.
And the rest is sort of interesting and quaint, but it's not quite real.
What Rempoche ultimately argues for is the discovery of an alternate, as I said, reality, or a kind of higher idealism.
And I don't mean idealism in the sense of something that is noble.
I mean it in the philosophical sense of the word idealism, which means the belief in mind, the belief in spirit as opposed to materialism, which is just the belief in matter.
He calls this the deathless and unending nature of mind.
The deathless and unending nature of mind.
It's as if the world, despite its material surface and envelope, has behind it the unending nature of mind or of spirit.
That there is something that outlives or that animates and energizes, makes possible this material scheme that we think is everything.
What a beautiful and what a healing mystery it is that from contemplating continuously and fearlessly the truth of change and impermanence,
we come slowly to find ourselves face to face in gratitude and joy with the truth of the changeless, with the truth of the deathless, unending nature of mind.
Well, we're a far cry in this culture from the views that Ramposh is putting forth, although the fact that this was a bestseller tells me that many people are hungry for alternative answers.
I think particularly the young are, just as they were in the 1960s.
Kafka's point is hard to refute, that the parson sits there unraveling his vestments and everything is asked of the doctor.
The church no longer performs, at least in this culture, its role of spiritual guardian.
I think it's fair to say without being too cynical that we do live in a Humpty Dumpty world and that we cannot rebuild by magic or fiat the institutions that are no longer viable, church, community and family.
But everything that we have read in this course of this larger context of death and disease tells us about the way in which our single mortal individual body is inscribed in something larger,
something larger both in a spatial and in a temporal sense, that our lives touch other lives, other groups.
They do not simply seize a death but are part of an ongoing wave or chain or sequence or history,
whether it's afterlife or whether it's photos or whether it's memories or whether it's a genetic legacy or whether it's the impact of what we have accomplished.
And yet we seem not to be able to build that into our day-to-day view of things.
I think there are things happening in today's medical landscape that do suggest that the individualist scheme, my mortality and my disappearance and the helplessness that I am in vis-a-vis that,
that that scheme is changing.
And what I'm particularly thinking of is the extraordinary growth of organizations such as Hospice and of support groups vis-a-vis all kinds of sickness, all kinds of disability.
What I see in that is a profound recognition that the individual who is either hurting or dying is no longer limited to a one-on-one role with a specialist.
The doctor is no longer being asked to deal with that. The hospital is not where you have to come to terms with death.
Hospice is a way of saying that death is something that happens within a family. It happens among other people.
That is the kindest way to regard death. It's where the most solace can be found.
And surely we have learned in connection with support groups that the best way to get past trauma and injury,
whether we're talking about Vietnam veterans or battered women or people who have cancer,
the best way, or at least one of the best ways to relieve this, to get help and to cure, to heal,
is for people to share these experiences with like-minded people who have experienced something of the same thing.
I think there's something almost of a paradigm shift there.
There's a recognition that there is a deep social ground here that these things can be talked about,
that what we need isn't going to come from a science textbook.
It's going to come from a capacity to share something of this experience with people who know what this experience is,
who've had it themselves, who don't have to have it translated into some sort of language they can follow.
I don't expect that all doctors will agree that this is changing the face of medicine,
but I think that, in fact, the kinds of texts that we've been reading point in this direction.
Likewise, I think that we will see changes in medicine itself.
I don't think that internists will all begin to include meditation and acupuncture in their practices tomorrow,
but they will probably grow increasingly curious about other traditions.
They will recognize more and more, I think, that medicine is old, that other traditions do exist,
that even things that were once written off as folkloric or old wives' tales may have their particular truths.
It is the case that today's hospitals and HMOs allow for precious little, as they say, quality time between patients and doctors,
and yet even that may change.
I'm going to read you a rather phenomenal piece written once again by Richard Seltzer,
and it's a story of Seltzer's encounter with a very strange medical practice.
Seltzer, and I presume he's talking about Yale New Haven Hospital, where he was on the staff.
Seltzer comments about a day that he comes to the hospital and realizes that there is a special visitor that day,
whose name is Yeshi Dandan, and Yeshi Dandan is the physician of the Dalai Lama,
and he is visiting the hospital and all of the doctors are going to go on rounds with him.
And the premise here is that he will visit a student, I mean a sick person,
who has been told that she will be seen by this new, foreign doctor,
but that the doctor will not be told what her condition is, nor will the other doctors walking around.
It's like a mystery game.
This is how Seltzer describes the encounter between Yeshi Dandan and this woman in the hospital.
Yeshi Dandan steps to the bedside while the rest stand apart, watching.
For a long time he gazes at the woman, favoring no part of her body with his eyes,
but seeming to fix his glance at a place just above her supine form.
I too study her. No physical sign nor obvious symptom gives a clue to the nature of her disease.
At last he takes her hand, raising it in both of his own.
Now he bends over the bed in a kind of crouching stance, his head drawn into the collar of his robe.
His eyes are closed as he feels for her pulse.
In a moment he has found the spot, and for the next half hour, you heard the unit of time,
for the next half hour he remains thus, suspended above the patient like some exotic golden bird.
He's wearing this beautiful gown with maroon and gold, and there they all are,
their antiseptic white coats and everything.
Like some exotic golden bird with folded wings, holding the pulse of the woman beneath his fingers,
cradling her hand in his, all the power of the man seems to have been drawn down into this one purpose.
It is palpation of the pulse raised to the state of ritual.
And Seltzer comments that he watches from the foot of the bed,
and it's as if the patient and the doctor have entered into some private, isolated realm.
And that no violation is possible.
After a moment, Seltzer writes, the woman rests her head on the back of the pillow.
Seltzer says, from time to time she raises her head to look at the strange figure above her, then sinks back once more.
I cannot see their hands joined in a correspondence that is exclusive, intimate.
His fingertips receiving the voice of her sick body through the rhythm and throb she offers at her wrist.
All at once I'm envious.
Not of him, not of Yeshe Dundin with his gift of beauty and holiness, but of her.
I want to be held like that, touched so, received,
and I know that I who have palpated a hundred thousand pulses have not felt a single one.
At last, Yeshe Dundin straightens, gently places the woman's hand upon the bed and steps back.
The interpreter produces a small wooden bowl and two sticks.
Yeshe Dundin pours a portion of the urine specimen into the bowl and proceeds to whip the liquid with the two sticks.
This he does for several minutes until a foam is raised.
This is one of the oldest attributes of Chinese medicine.
Then bowing before above the bowl, he inhales the odor three times.
He then sets the bowl down and turns to leave.
The woman has not uttered a word nor has he.
As he is walking to the door, she raises her head and she speaks to him.
Seltzer says in a voice that wants urgent and serene, thank you doctor.
And she touches with her other hand the place that he had held on her wrist.
The soldier recaptured, Seltzer says, what had happened?
He looks at her, he leaves, the doctors then go together into the conference room,
and Yeshe Dundin now begins to speak.
He speaks of course in Tibetan and there is an interpreter translating.
And Seltzer writes, the two voices continuing in tandem, a bilingual fugue,
the one chasing the other, it is like the chanting of monks.
He speaks of winds coursing through the body of the woman,
currents that break against barriers, eddying.
These vortices are in her blood, he says, the last spendings of an imperfect heart.
Between the chambers of her heart, long, long before she was born,
a wind had come and blown open a deep gate that must never be opened.
Through it charged the full waters of her river,
as the mountain stream cascades in the springtime,
battering, knocking loose the land and flooding her breath.
Thus he speaks, after he has finished the speech of waters and mountains.
The doctors say, may we have the diagnosis?
And the specialist who deals with her says,
congenital heart disease, interventricular septal defect with resultant heart failure.
And Seltzer finishes his essay saying that he was in the presence of a priest.
This whole essay is called The Surgeon as Priest.
Well, what does one make of that?
One would want medical students to read this piece.
Well, we want to see that there are other ways of attending people,
there are other ways of finding their ills.
It's not just the rightness of the diagnosis in his own figurative language of mountain springs.
It's what he did for her, the sense in which she knew she was being heard and received.
That is something, it seems to me, that is what is most lacking
in the kind of medical ideology we have today.
And it's thought to be a luxury that no one can afford.
No one has time for that.
Here is a kind of contact between doctor and patients that almost looks idenic.
It looks mythic.
It looks closer to Hippocrates or even to Shamans than it does to us.
I think medicine will change.
It will open itself to new currents and also to old ones that it has not acknowledged
and it will face some of tomorrow's challenges.
Some of those challenges, I think, will change the diagnostic paradigm.
Sherlock Holmes, I think, will go out of business.
And what that means is that the notion of medicine as a great detective story,
the notion of medicine as a kind of challenge to figure out what are you really sick with.
What is the origin of the disease?
The whole semiotic puzzle, you have symptoms A, B and C.
I, who am Sherlock Holmes, will tell you what their meaning is.
This is the paradigm that Foucault has in fact charted.
This is what starts with 18th century medicine.
And I'm going to suggest to you that it may have reached its peak because
what will happen increasingly in medicine and in hospitals will not be the kind of excitement
and adrenaline of a new discovery, even though there will be some,
but they will happen in laboratories.
It will rather be the different view of knowing what your disease is,
but not knowing how to live with it and knowing that you will have to live with it.
Knowing that there is no intellectual breakthrough here,
the people will look you in the eye and say, you know and we know what you have.
Here's the best we can do about it.
It won't kill you.
Another 20 or 30 years are possible for you to live,
but it will require and they will outline the lifestyle changes,
but what they can't outline is the philosophical changes that it will take,
particularly in a culture of increased longevity where we will have to meet those challenges.
Medicine will have to take up that.
That's not a scientific proposition.
That's a philosophical proposition.
It's about the meaning of life.
It is not about the etiology only of disease.
That's why Oliver Saxe's work is so congenial.
He doesn't cure his patients of their neurological deficits.
He can't. They can't be cured.
But what he talks about is how they can learn to live with them
and how beautiful it is that they do live with them,
that the dignity of their life is compatible with the mark of the beast,
that you cannot prevent the beast,
but that you can still manage to live a life of value.
And I think literature and literary texts will contribute to this.
And I'm going to outline a few of the things that have already happened
and are happening in some medical schools
and that people are thinking about in the area of literature and medicine.
One is what I would call first personalizing.
There's a woman particularly at Columbia, Rita Sharon,
who takes her medical students on their rounds
and when they write up their case studies of the patients that they are seeing,
she obliges them to write them in the first person,
not from their point of view, but from the point of view of the patient,
to try to imagine what that patient who presents symptoms A, B, and C,
what that patient's sense of these things is,
what that patient's life is.
This is literature as medicine, medicine as literature.
This person is writing a narrative,
is obliged to imagine the human situation of the person in the room
who suffers the disease.
And it says something about the poverty of the traditional medical way
of keeping records that put that sort of barbaric shorthand
in which disease is noted by each of the physicians or the residents,
which has no human richness at all.
And she's written about what an astounding sort of shift it is
for her medical students when they first have to do this,
how they realize the difficulty of coming to terms with what these people
think their symptoms are,
and it changes their relationship with the patients.
Another version of this is what has been called pathography.
It's one of the oldest notions that we have,
which is patients themselves, not doctors now,
learning to verbalize and write about their illnesses.
The people who have talked about pathography
go all the way back to Augustine and Dante,
that the story of a religious conversion is in some sense
the story of writing down one's life changes,
writing down one's suffering and one's visions,
and that the writing itself can be thought of as properly therapeutic.
It can change things.
It is a form of agency.
It's a way of the sufferer to somehow gain vision
and gain control of the illness.
And certainly we have loads of them,
the people who write about how I got over my cancer,
how it went into remission.
We know that this is a genre that exists now,
and it exists for good reasons.
Another thing that will happen,
I think, that has to do with literature and medicine,
is an improved sense of hearing.
Of hearing what the patient has to say.
It will be an improved sense of taking histories, I think,
a recognition that we have gone too far
in relying entirely on electronic or laboratory tests,
and a greater sense that the patient needs to be re-storied,
that the patient needs to have his or her own human circumstances
to somehow become part of the picture,
both for the physician who attends the patient,
and then ultimately for the patient, him or herself,
to come into command of that.
To see the illness as not the whole life,
but as a piece of a life that is much larger than the illness.
This hearing, this capacity to hear what the patient says,
has a lot to do, it seems to me,
as well with the work of William Carlos Williams.
You recall I alluded to him earlier.
He is the great poet who has written so much
about his encounters with these poor people in Paterson, New Jersey.
And in those doctor stories that I alluded to earlier,
Williams tries to conclude by talking about a career of listening.
He's not a career of writing.
I mean, this is a man who was a very great acknowledged poet.
But what he says he has done in his entire career as a doctor is to listen.
And here's how he describes it.
He talks about listening to what is hidden
in the speech of the people that he tends to every day.
What is hidden in the very words which are going on at our ears,
and from which we must recover underlying meaning
as realistically as we recover metal out of ore.
The poem that each is trying actually to communicate to us lies in the words.
It's a rather dazzling notion that our patients are trying to speak poetry.
They're trying to articulate their poetry if we know how to hear it.
And he says this is the way it has always been,
because they are speaking of their pain, of their suffering, of their humanity.
They're speaking about the things that matter most.
Can we hear the poetry of this?
It is at least the words that make it articulate.
It has always been so. Occasionally that person is born
and he catches a rumor of it, a Homer, a Vio.
This voice that comes from the patients, he claims, is the very pulse of reality.
It is our very life, he writes.
It is we ourselves at our rarest moments,
but in articulate for the most part, except when in the poem
one man every five or six hundred years escapes to formulate a few gifted sentences.
The poem springs from the half-spoken words of such patients
as the physician sees from day to day.
He observes it in the peculiar actual conformations in which his life is hid.
We encounter poetry every day.
Humbly he presents himself before it,
and by long practice he strives as best he can to interpret the manner of its speech.
In that the secret lies.
This makes the doctor the interpreter, the doctor the immanuensis,
the doctor the vehicle for bringing the suffering of human beings to a wider audience.
This in the end comes perhaps to be the occupation of a physician
after a lifetime of careful listening.
It's a very humane, it seems to me,
and a very tender statement by a man who was rather tough,
who was fairly unvarnished in his own dealings with his patients.
You remember the story of the use of force,
where he plies open that child's mouth to get at what he wants to see.
What he says here, it seems to me,
absolutely brings our two fields together of literature and medicine.
It's a way of saying that what we take to be the noise and the banality
of the people around us, and God knows the physician,
has got to have seen this disease, that illness,
and those symptoms a thousand, ten thousand times over a lifetime.
It's the capacity to remain alert to that, awake to that,
to see that each time there may be in this the very poetry of the species and of the race.
And I love the way in which he says,
his job is not to write that down.
That would put all of the emphasis on the doctor poet.
It would be, I have gone through the wards, I have seen the sick,
and here's what I make of it.
Instead what William says is, it is their words that are my poetry.
That's a good way to close, I think.
Thank you.
Thank you.
