The Amazing Story of Quantum Mechanics. A math-free exploration of the science that made our world.
By James Cacalios. Narrated by Peter Birkgrott.
Copyright 2010 by James Cacalios.
This unabridged audiobook is published by James Cacalios, care of William Morris Endeavour Entertainment, LLC,
and was produced in the year 2010 by Tantor Media Incorporated, which holds the copyright there too.
Publishers note, this text will periodically refer to images. To view these images, go online to www.tantor.com,
type the title of this audiobook into the search field, and follow the links to the page for The Amazing Story of Quantum Mechanics.
Introduction. Quantum Physics. You're soaking in it.
Perhaps you share my frustration that well into the 21st century, we still await flying cars, jetpacks, domed underwater cities, and robot personal assistants.
From the 1930s on, science fiction pulp magazines and comic books promised us that by the year 2000, we would be living in a gleaming utopia,
where the everyday drudgery of menial tasks and the tyranny of gravity would be overcome.
Comparing these predictions from more than 50 years ago to the reality of today, one might conclude that, well, we've been totally lied to.
And yet, and yet, in 2010, we are able to communicate with those on the other side of the globe, instantly and wirelessly.
We have more computing power in our laptops than in the room-sized computers that were envisioned in the science fiction pulps.
We can peer inside a person without the slice of a knife, performing medical diagnoses using magnetic resonance imaging.
Touch-activated computer screens, from the local ATM to the iPhone, are everywhere.
And the number of automated devices we deal with in a given day is surprisingly high, though none of them look like Robbie the Robot.
What did all those rosy predictions miss?
Simply put, they expected a revolution in energy, but what we got was a revolution in information.
Implicit in the promise of jet packs and death rays is the availability of lightweight power supplies capable of storing large amounts of energy.
But the ability of batteries to act as reservoirs of electrical energy is limited by the chemical and electrical properties of atoms.
Scientists and engineers are extremely clever in developing novel energy storage systems, but ultimately we can't change the nature of the atoms.
Information, however, requires only a medium to preserve ideas and intelligence to interpret them.
Moreover, information can endure for thousands of years.
Consider the long-term data storage accomplished by the Sumerians, whose cuneiform writing on clay tablets enables us to learn about their accounting systems and read the epic tale of Gilgamesh from 6,000 years ago.
These dried clay tablets, currently held in modern-day Iraq, are fairly bulky, and to share information from them the ancient Sumerians had to transport the actual tablets.
But today you don't have to go to Iraq to read the Sumerian tablets.
You can view them on the internet, or someone could send images of them to you instantly via a cell phone camera.
These advances in content storage and transmission were made possible by the development of semiconductor devices, such as the transistor and the diode.
Back when the science fiction pulp magazines were first published, data manipulation proceeded via bulky vacuum tubes.
The first computers employed thousands of such tubes, along with relay switches consisting of glass tubes filled with liquid mercury.
The replacement of these tubes and mercury switches with semiconductor devices enabled an exponential increase in computing power, accompanied by a similar decrease in the size of the computer.
In 1965, Gordon Moore noted that approximately every two years the number of transistors that could be incorporated onto an integrated circuit doubled.
This trend has held up for the past 40 years and underlies the technological innovations that define our modern life.
From book-sized radios in the 1950s to an MP3 player no larger than a stick of gum in 2005, from a cell phone the size of a brick in the 1970s to one smaller than a deck of cards today.
These advances in miniaturization have come with continued improvements in the ability to preserve and manipulate information.
If energy storage also obeyed Moore's law, experiencing a doubling in capacity every two years, then a battery that could hold its charge for only a single hour in 1970 would, in 2010, last for more than a century.
With no transistors, computers would still require bulky vacuum tubes, each one generating a significant amount of heat as it regulates electrical currents.
A modest laptop computer currently employs approximately 100 million solid state transistors for data storage and processing.
If all of these transistors are replaced with vacuum tubes, each one of which is a few inches long and at least an inch wide, their physical dimensions and the need to space them apart to avoid overheating would yield a vacuum tube computer that was larger than the White House.
Obviously, few institutions aside from the federal government and the largest corporations could afford such a massive computing device.
We would consequently live in a computer-free world.
Without ubiquitous computers, there would be no need to link them together and no need to develop the worldwide web.
Commerce, journalism, entertainment and politics would exist under the same constraints they did in the 1930s.
If we had a revolution in energy storage, like the Pulps predicted, rather than information storage, we could zip to work with jetpacks.
But once we got there, we'd find no cell phones, no DVD or personal video recorders, no printers, not even electric typewriters.
The field of solid state physics, which enabled the development of these and other practical devices, is in turn made possible through quantum mechanics.
While science fiction writers were imagining what the future would look like, scientists at Bell Labs and research universities were busy using the new understanding of the quantum world to create the transistor and the laser.
These basic devices form the foundation of our modern lifestyle and have profoundly transformed not just consumer electronics, but chemistry, biology and medicine as well.
All of our lives would be profoundly different if not for the efforts in the first quarter of the 20th century of a handful of physicists trying to understand how atoms and light interacted.
These pioneers of quantum mechanics recognized that they were changing the face of physics, but they most certainly did not anticipate that they would also change the future.
For a field of physics that has led to applications that have had such a wide-ranging impact on our lives, it is unfortunate that quantum mechanics has such a reputation for weirdness and incomprehensibility.
Okay, maybe it is weird, but it's certainly not impossible to understand.
While the mathematics required to perform calculations in quantum physics is fairly sophisticated, its central principles can be described and understood without resorting to differential equations or matrix algebra.
The title of the book promised this to be a math-free discussion, but I must confess that there will be a little bit of math involved in this presentation of quantum physics.
Certainly, compared to the rigorous mathematics that underlies the foundations of quantum mechanics, the simple equations employed here practically qualify as math-free.
I will make use of simple algebraic equations no more complex than those relating distance travel to speed and time.
That is, if I told you that I drove at a speed of 50 miles per hour for two hours, you would know that I had traveled 100 miles.
By arriving at that conclusion, you have intuitively used the simple equation distance equals speed multiplied by time.
None of the math that I will use here will be more complicated than this.
In this book, I will explain the key concepts underlying quantum mechanics and show how these ideas explain the properties of metals, insulators, and semiconductors, the study of which forms the field of solid-state physics.
I will describe how the magnetic properties of atomic nuclei, intrinsically quantum mechanical phenomena, allow us to see inside the human body using magnetic resonance imaging and store vast libraries of information on computer hard drives.
And we will see how the same quantum phenomena that changed the very nature of technology in the last 50 years will similarly influence the growing field of nanotechnology in the next 50 years.
Quantum mechanics may be unique as a successful scientific description of the world that is at once so useful and so perplexing.
Biologists, for example, may disagree over the mechanisms and dynamics by which natural selection yields speciation, and yet there is no disagreement as to what evolution means.
But as we'll see, quantum mechanics confused even the physicists who discovered it. One of the stranger aspects of quantum mechanics is that one can use it correctly and productively, even if one is confused by it.
By confusion, I do not mean finding the mathematics employed in a quantum description of nature to be obscure or complex. All math is hard if you do not know how to use it, just as every language is opaque if you cannot speak it.
Nor by confusion do I mean the fairly universal experience of finding the mechanisms underlying modern technology such as magnetic resonance imaging or light emitting diodes, which the present volume will attempt to correct, to be mysterious.
All of us at some time have been confounded by some device or machinery.
An anecdote. When a friend of mine was learning how to drive, he initially viewed an automobile as essentially a black box with his understanding of its operation and maintenance beginning and ending with the periodic insertion of gasoline and oil.
While in the fullness of time he acquired a working knowledge of the principles of the internal combustion engine, he never once doubted that other people, such as automotive engineers, understood these concepts and were in agreement as to their application.
The situation is more complex in the case of quantum mechanics, where scientists disagree over such basic questions as to whether the theory describes nature as it is, or merely provides extremely useful and accurate predictions of the results of experiments.
This book does not attempt to provide a definitive answer to the question of the interpretation of quantum theory, sometimes referred to as the measurement problem.
Rather, I invoke a straightforward interpretation employed by most practicing physicists that has the advantage of requiring only a single suspension of disbelief, not unlike the miracle exception from the laws of nature that science fiction stories or superhero comic books often implicitly invoke.
Philosophical meditations of the interpretations of quantum theory are fascinating to be sure, but intellectual stimulation alone does not invent the transistor. Even keeping it simple, questions regarding the fundamental nature of matter are inescapable when considering quantum mechanics.
I discuss fantastical situations, such as when two electrons or atoms are so close to each other that they become entangled and it is actually impossible to tell them apart. I encourage you to put fear out of your mind and not shirk any necessary heavy lifting, but I will endeavor to explain the key concepts using easily understood analogies and examples.
There are many excellent books that describe the historical development of quantum mechanics. I am therefore not concerned with retracing the steps of the pioneering physicists that led the quantum revolution, but rather with explicating the physical principles they discovered.
Certainly, the history behind the key experiments and theoretical proposals that led to the development of the semiconductor age is discussed, but my emphasis is on understanding the key concepts of quantum mechanics and its applications in solid state physics.
The wonders enabled by quantum mechanics are almost too many to name. Devices such as lasers, light emitting diodes, and keychain memory sticks, strange phenomena including superconductivity and Bose-Einstein condensation, and even brighter brights and whiter whites.
Seriously, refer to Chapter 21.
