Chapter 1 Quantum Mechanics in 3 Easy Steps
The future began twice.
On December 14, 1900, and on August 26, 1928.
On the first date at the German Physical Society, Max Planck presented a resolution to something
called the Ultraviolet Catastrophe.
Planck suggested that atoms can lose energy only in discrete jumps, and this new idea
would tip over the first domino in a chain that by the mid-1920s would lead to the development
of a new field of physics, termed quantum mechanics.
On the later date, at the end of the summer of 1928, Buck Rogers first appeared in the
science fiction pulp, Amazing Stories.
With its premiere issue published in 1926, Amazing Stories was the first magazine devoted
exclusively to science fiction stories, or what publisher Hugo Gernsback called, Scientifiction.
The magazine's motto was, Extravagant Fiction Today, Cold Fact Tomorrow.
This breakthrough marked the dawn of a new field of science and is the province of nerds,
while the appearance of Buck Rogers began the future as reckoned by geeks.
I should note that as a physics professor who is also an avid fan of science fiction
and comic books, I am simultaneously a nerd and a geek.
Sorry ladies, but I'm already married.
Given the amazing pace of scientific progress at the beginning of the 20th century, the
invention of the telegraph, telephone, and automobile had radically altered notions of
distance and time, such that, not for the last time, technology had made the world a
somewhat smaller place.
It is perhaps not surprising that readers of Amazing Stories in 1928 would expect the
eventual development of personal flying harnesses and disintegrator rays.
Buck Rogers' first adventure was described in Philip Francis Nolan's novella Armageddon
2419 AD, published in that famous issue of Amazing Stories.
Anthony Rogers, he would not gain the nickname Buck until his appearance in a syndicated
newspaper comic strip one year later, was a citizen of both the 20th and 25th centuries.
Exposure to a gas leak in an abandoned mine near Scranton induced a former Army Air Corps
officer to lapse into a form of suspended animation.
Upon awakening in the future, he rapidly adjusted to this new age.
Nolan's hero, catapulted into the future, was just as resourceful as Twain's Yankee
thrust back into King Arthur's court.
Rogers, armed with the weaponry of tomorrow and a military acumen acquired during his
service in World War I, joins a team of rebels fighting against the evil Hans invaders from
Asia who had conquered America in the early 22nd century.
In fact, many of the stories published in the science fiction pulps of the 1930s and
1940s are distinguished by optimism that in the future there would be continued scientific
progress coupled with pessimism that there would be absolutely no improvement whatsoever
in international or interplanetary relations.
This confidence in scientific advancement history shows was justified, as was the expectation
of continued global strife.
In the pause in hostilities among European nations between the Great War and the next
Great War, a revolution in physics occurred that would lay the foundation for technological
innovations that would seem outlandish in the pages of startling stories.
The first half of the Roaring Twenties would see the development of what would eventually
be known as quantum mechanics, where the tentative guesses and first steps of Planck, Niels Bohr,
Albert Einstein, and others would inspire Irwin Schrodinger and Werner Heisenberg to
separately and independently create a formal rigorous theory of the properties of atoms
and their interactions with light.
Later scientific papers appeared in print the same year that Hugo Gernsback began publishing
amazing stories.
While quantum mechanics is not, to be sure, the last word in our understanding of nature,
it did turn out to be the key missing ingredient that would enable physicists to develop the
field of solid state physics.
When combined with the electromagnetic theory of the 19th century, quantum mechanics provides
the blueprint for our current wireless world of information and communication.
Scientists today, working on 21st century nanotechnology, are still dining off the efforts
of the quantum physicists of the 1920s.
It is plausible that the lull in global antagonisms in the brief time between the two world wars
facilitated these advances in physics.
The collaborations and interactions among scientists from Germany, France, Italy, Britain,
Denmark, Hungary, and the United States spawned an unprecedented fertile period, which came
to a close with the resumption of hostilities in Europe in 1938.
Physics turned out to be an erase against history, and its pace quickened with the discovery
of the structure of the atomic nucleus in the 1930s.
The realization by German and Austrian physicists that it is possible to split certain large
unstable nuclei and thereby release vast amounts of energy such that a pound of uranium would
yield the same destructive force as does 8,000 tons of TNT, came a year before the German
army marched into Poland.
The quantum alliance of scientific cooperation would fracture with the formation of a geopolitical
axis, and the center of gravity of physics would shift from Europe to America in the
1940s.
The development of solid state physics would have to await the end of World War II, and
would be carried out primarily in the United States and Britain.
Unfortunately, the pulp fiction writers were accurate prognosticators when they described
militaristic struggles in the far future or on distant planets, suggesting that human
nature evolves at a much slower pace than does technology.
Just as the hotbed of activity in physics would shift from Europe to America following
World War II, the epicenter of science fiction would undergo a similar transition.
Hugo Gernsback wrote in The Rise of Scientification in the spring 1928 issue of Amazing Stories,
it is a great source of satisfaction to us, and we point to it with pride that 90 percent
of the really good science fiction authors are Americans, the rest being scattered over
the world.
This claim conveniently overlooks the seminal contributions to the genre by Jules Verne,
H. G. Wells and other European pioneers of science fiction.
Verne in particular is considered by many to be the father of science fiction.
He is lauded as much for his accurate descriptions of future technology, heavier than air transport,
long-range submarine travel, lunar travel via rockets, as for his impossibly exotic
locales, hollow centers of the earth and mysterious islands.
Verne's success at prediction stems from his following the same principles that guide
scientific research.
Whether uncovering new scientific principles or creating a new genre of speculative fiction,
one must head out for uncharted terrain.
One will not discover a new continent, after all, if one travels only on paved highways.
As Edward O. Wilson once cautioned, for us mere mortals who are not able to make the dramatic
leaps of a Newton or Einstein, care must be taken to not metaphorically sail too far
from home, in case the world really is flat.
The preferred tack is to make small excursions from the known world, trying always to keep
the shore in sight.
One would frequently make reasonable extrapolations on current scientific developments, and imagine
a mature technology that could exist if a few details, and perhaps a miracle exception
from the laws of nature, were finessed.
A Jules Verne adventure inevitably takes place in the time period that the novel is published,
and a then physically improbable mode of transportation will bring our heroes to an exotic locale.
This was the format of Verne's first successful novel, Five Weeks in a Balloon, in which a
trio of adventurers in 1863 traveled to uncharted Africa, as well as his later novels, Journey
to the Center of the Earth, Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea, From the Earth to the
Moon, The Mysterious Island, and a Robber, the Conqueror.
Yet in the second novel he wrote, though it was the last to be published, Jules Verne
considered the most extraordinary voyage of all, to Paris in the twentieth century.
This novel marks a radical departure for Verne.
Written in 1863, it describes the everyday life and mundane experiences of a young college
graduate in Paris in 1960.
In contrast to the optimistic view of technological wonders one associates with Verne, the novel
despairs for a future world where commerce and mechanical engineering are the highest
values of society, and cultural pursuits such as literature and music are disdained.
So uncommercial did Verne's publisher find this manuscript, decrying the triumph of commerce,
that he convinced Verne to lock it away in a safe.
There it sat, neglected and forgotten, until the late 1990s, when the safe which was believed
to be empty and whose key had long been lost was cut open with a blow torch and the tome
was discovered.
This short fiction certainly could never be mistaken for a typical Verne adventure tale.
The protagonist is a young poet who loses his job at his uncle's bank, fails to find
gainful employment, loses contact with his only friends and his young love, and ends
the novel wandering aimlessly through the streets of Paris during a bitter winter storm, until
he passes out in the snow in a cemetery containing many famous French authors of the 19th century.
And yet there are enough accurate descriptions of life in the next century to clearly place
it among Verne's body of work.
The 1863 novel describes automobiles that drive quietly and efficiently using a form
of the internal combustion engine, 13 years before Nicholas Otto invented the four-stroke
engine and more than 40 years prior to the mass production of automobiles by Henry Ford.
And it is suggested that the energy source involves the burning of hydrogen.
Elevated train tracks are propelled by compressed air.
While the London Underground opened the year this novel was written, Verne's extrapolation
of elevated tracks would not see real construction for another five years.
The city is illuminated at night by electric lights.
Cleveland, Ohio rather than Paris, would earn the title of first city of electric lights
five years later.
And skyscraper apartments are accessible by automatic elevators, again five years before
the construction of the elevator in the eight-story Equitable Life Assurance Building in New
York City.
Verne posited that by 1960 global communication would be an established fact and a worldwide
web of telegraph wires would bring Paris, London, Frankfurt, Amsterdam, Turin, Berlin,
Vienna, St. Petersburg, Constantinople, New York, Valparaiso, Calcutta, Sydney, Peking
and Nukaheva, the largest of the chain of Marquesa's Islands in what was known as French
Polynesia, together.
Furthermore, he described photographic telegraphy to be invented at the end of the 19th century,
which permitted transmission of the facsimile of any form of writing or illustration, whether
manuscript or print, and letters of credit or contracts could be signed at a distance
of 5,000 leagues.
This last will have to await developments in physics more profound than pneumatic trains,
for the modern fax machine is a demonstration of quantum mechanics in action.
Verne also suggested in this novel that mechanical progress would result in a military arms race
that would yield such destructive cannons and equally formidable armor shielding that
the nations of the world would just throw up their hands and abandon war entirely.
Friends of the main character in the novel, bemoaning the loss of the honorable occupation
of professional soldier, note that France, England, Russia and Italy have dismissed their
soldiers.
During the last century, the engines of warfare were perfected to such a degree that the whole
thing had become ridiculous.
France did accurately predict the mutually assured destruction theory of war ushered
in by intercontinental ballistic missiles, but he underestimated the capacity of humans
to find ways to wage wars nevertheless.
There is a deep similarity between the young physicists who developed quantum theory and
the fans of the science fiction pulps of the 1920s and 1930s, namely, they were both able
to make a leap, not of faith, but of reason, to accept the impossible as real and to will
their disbelief into suspension.
Science fiction fans can entertain the possibility of faster than light space travel, of alien
races on other planets, of handheld ray guns capable of shooting beams of pure destruction,
and of flying cars and humanoid robots.
The physicists at the birth of quantum mechanics, trying to make sense of senseless experimental
data, had to embrace even more fantastic ideas, such as the fact that light, which since the
1860s had been conclusively demonstrated both theoretically and experimentally to be a wave
could behave like a particle, while all solid matter has a wave-like aspect to its motion.
It is perhaps a small wonder that, faced with such bizarre proposals concerning the inner
workings of a universe that had heretofore exhibited clockwork predictability, these
scientists sought relaxation, not in fantastic science fiction adventures, but in the conventionality
of dime-store detective novels and American cowboy motion pictures.
In fact, the predictability of these western films led Niels Bohr, one of the founders
of quantum theory, and his colleagues, to construct theories regarding plot development
in westerns, when not grappling with the mysteries of atomic physics.
In one participant's recollection, Bohr proposed a theoretical model for why the hero would
always win his six-shooter duel with the villain, despite the fact that the villain always drew
first.
Having to decide the moment to draw his pistol actually impeded the villain, according to
Bohr's theory, while the hero could rely on reflex and simply grab his weapon as soon
as he saw the villain move.
When some of his students doubted this explanation, they resolved the question as good scientists
via empirical testing, using toy pistols on the hallways of the Copenhagen Institute.
The experimental data confirmed Bohr's hypothesis.
In most discussions of quantum mechanics, at both the popular and technical levels,
one typically begins with a recitation of the experimental findings that challenged
accepted theories, and then proceeds to describe how these data motivated physicists to propose
new concepts to account for these observations.
Let's not do that.
In the spirit of the 1970s television detective show Colombo, I'll begin with the solution
to the mystery of the atom, and only then describe its experimental justification.
That is, our discussion will employ a Quentin Tarantino-esque description of quantum physics,
namely answers first, then questions.
There are three impossible things that we must believe in order to understand quantum
mechanics.
Light is an electromagnetic wave that is actually comprised of discrete packets of energy.
Matter is comprised of discrete particles that exhibit a wave-like nature.
Light and matter has an intrinsic angular momentum, or spin, that can have only discrete
values.
It is reasonable at this stage to ask, why wasn't this brought to our attention sooner?
How is it possible to live a careful and well-observed life and yet never notice the particle nature
of light, the wave nature of matter, and the constant spinning of both?
It turns out that these are all easy to miss in our day-to-day dealings.
While the human eye is physically capable of detecting a single light particle, rarely
do we come across them in ones or twos.
On a sunny day, the light striking one square centimeter, roughly equivalent to the area
of your thumbnail, is comprised of more than a million trillion of these packets of energy
every second, so their graininess is not readily apparent.
The second principle discusses the wave-like nature of matter.
I show in a later chapter that a thrown baseball has a wavelength less than a trillionth the
size of an atomic nucleus.
It is consequently undetectable.
The wavelength of an electron within an atom, in contrast, is about as large as the atom
itself, and thus this wave-like property cannot be ignored as we seek to understand how the
atomic electrons behave.
Those interact with light in minute quantities, and the wave-like nature of the motion of
electrons in the atom turns out to be crucial to determining how it can absorb or lose the
energy contained in light.
Thus, any model of the atom and of light that relies solely on our day-to-day experiences
fails to accurately account for observation.
The influence of the third principle concerning the intrinsic angular momentum, also referred
to as spin, is fairly subtle, and comes into play when two different electrons or two atoms
are so close to each other that their matter waves overlap.
This effect turns out to be rather important, and is the key to understanding solid state
physics, chemistry, and magnetic resonance imaging.
While it is certainly true that these three basic principles of quantum mechanics seem
weird, it is important to note that making counter-intuitive proposals about nature is
not a unique aspect of quantum mechanics.
In fact, putting forth a seemingly weird idea to describe some aspect of the physical world,
developing the logical consequences of this weird idea, experimentally testing these consequences,
and then accepting the reality of the weird idea if it conforms to observations, is pretty
much what we call physics.
Weird ideas have been the hallmark of physics for at least the past 400 years.
Sir Isaac Newton argued in the mid-1600s in his first law of motion that an object in
motion remains in motion unless acted upon by an external force.
In my personal experience, when I am driving in a straight line along a highway at a constant
speed of 55 miles per hour, I must continue to provide a force in order to maintain this
velocity.
If I take my foot off the accelerator, I do not remain in uniform straight-line motion,
even if my tires are properly aligned, but rather slow down and eventually come to rest.
This is, of course, due to the influence of other external forces acting on my automobile,
such as air drag and friction between the road and my tires.
We do not find the effects of friction strange or mysterious, as we have had a few centuries
to accept the concept of dissipative forces.
These forces appear invisible to us, and it required tremendous insight and abstraction
on Newton's part to imagine what an object's motion would be like in their absence.
This strange idea of drag and frictional forces, no less counterintuitive than anything quantum
theorists have suggested, applies to large objects such as people and apples.
The quantum realm is more mysterious, as most of us, aside from superheroes such as the
atom or the incredible shrinking man, do not regularly visit the interior of an atom.
Nevertheless, it took roughly 1600 years for Newton's first law of motion to overturn
Aristotle's proposal that objects slowed down and came to rest not due to friction,
but owing to the fact that they longed to return to their natural state on the ground.
In the century preceding the development of quantum theory, physicists such as Michael
Faraday and James Clerk Maxwell suggested that the forces felt by electric charges and magnets
were due to invisible electric and magnetic fields.
Faraday was the first to suggest that electric charges and magnetic materials create zones
of force, referred to as fields, that could be observed only indirectly through their
influence on other electrical charges or magnets.
Scientists at the time scoffed at such a bizarre idea.
To them, even worse than Faraday's theory was his pedigree.
He was a self-taught experimentalist who had not attended a proper university such as Oxford
or Cambridge.
But Maxwell took Faraday's suggestion seriously and was able to theoretically demonstrate that
visible light consists of an electromagnetic wave of oscillating electric and magnetic fields.
Changing the frequency of oscillation of the varying electric and magnetic fields makes
these electromagnetic waves range from radio waves with wavelengths of up to several feet
to x-rays with a wavelength of less than the diameter of an atom.
Each of these limits of light are outside of our normal limits of detection, but can
be detected with appropriate devices.
The weird ideas of Faraday and Maxwell form the basis of our understanding of all electromagnetic
waves, without which we would lack radio, television, cell phone communication and Wi-Fi.
If the nature of progress in physics involves the introduction and gradual acceptance of
weird ideas, then why does quantum mechanics have a particular reputation for bizarreness?
It can be argued that, in part, the weirdness of the ideas underlying quantum mechanics
is a consequence of their unfamiliarity.
It is no less counterintuitive, in my opinion, to state that electric charges generate fields
in space, and that we are always moving through a sea of invisible electromagnetic waves,
even in a darkened room, than to say that light is composed of discrete packets of energy-termed
photons.
Phrases such as magnetic fields and radio waves are part of the common vernacular, while
wave functions and de Broglie waves are not, at least not yet.
By the time we are done here, such terms will also become part of your everyday conversation,
in which case, at least, you won't have to wonder why you aren't invited to more parties.
