Chapter 4. It's all done with magnets. Everything, light and matter has an intrinsic angular
momentum or spin that can have only discrete values. After years of unsuccessful attempts
to land a newspaper distribution deal for a comic strip featuring their creation, Superman,
Jerry Siegel and Joe Schuster eventually sold their story along with the rights to the
character to the comic book publisher National Periodical for $130, a nice sum in 1938, but
of course a pittance compared to what the character would soon be worth. Debuting in
action comics number one in June 1938, The Man of Tomorrow would soon be selling millions
of comics per month and starring in live action and animated movie shorts, an extremely popular
radio show and a syndicated newspaper comic strip. No doubt, one of the strong appeals of
Siegel and Schuster's comic book creation is the fantasy that mild-mannered Clark Kent, dismissed
and underestimated by all, is in reality the most powerful person on the planet. As Jules
Pfeiffer argued in The Great Superhero Caper, Bruce Wayne must don his Batman costume in order to
become the Caped Crusader, and Lamont Cranston his cloak, slouch hat and red scarf to fight crime
as the shadow, but Superman is who he is. When he wakes up in the morning he is Superman and
Clark Kent is the disguise he elects to wear. In essence, Kent is a representation of how Superman
views us, weak, bumbling, inept. Superman is the iconic role model for those who feel that the
world does not see their true, hidden essence. One of the surprising discoveries of quantum
mechanics described in the principle at the start of this chapter is that electrons, protons,
and neutrons, the building blocks of atoms, also have a secret identity. While physicists in the
1920s knew them to be mild-mannered subatomic particles characterized by their mass and
electrical charge, it turns out that they would soon discover that they possessed a hidden
characteristic, a superpower of you will, that is termed spin. It was proposed in 1925 that every
fundamental particles behaves as if it is a spinning top, rotating about an internal axis,
and this holds not just for matter, but for photons as well. Note, we'll soon see that,
although it is a useful metaphor, we should not take the spinning top picture literally. This
rotation is not associated with the orbital motion of electrons around the nucleus in an atom.
Schrodinger would eventually show that the picture of electrons circling around the positively
charged nucleus, a neat analogy to the planets orbiting the Sun in our solar system, is not
technically accurate. This internal rotation is present even if the subatomic particles are in
free space, not bound in an atom or molecule. This built-in rotation is called spin, for it
is as if the electron is rotating about an axis, passing through the particle itself,
similar to a twirling ballerina. The fact that all subatomic particles have an internal rotation
turns out to be pretty important. Without accounting for the spin of electrons,
we cannot make sense of chemistry and solid state physics. One characteristic of all atomic
particles associated with their internal spin is that electrons, protons, and neutrons all have an
internal magnetic field that has nothing to do with the magnetic field generated by an electrical
current. It is through this magnetic field that this power, that is, spin, first revealed itself
to a breathless world. Science fiction pulps often cited magnetism as the basis for a variety of
technological wonders. Magnets are frequently called upon as a catch-all explanation for levitating
heavier-than-air ships, while reverse magnetism was often invoked for force beams or other offensive
weaponry. Readers of their daily newspaper's comic strip page have known since the mid-1950s
that personal flying devices would someday be a reality thanks to magnetism. Figure 8,
go to www.tantor.com to view, shows a panel from a 1950s Dick Tracy comic strip where Tracy,
in silhouette, and his partner, Detective Sam Katcham, are able to scout for criminals using
magnetized flying garbage cans. Tracy is also carrying on a conversation using a two-way wrist
radio, an early form of the cell phone. Magnetism was expected to usher in the world of tomorrow,
as the panel reproduced in Figure 8 promised. The nation that controls magnetism will control
the universe. Similarly, spinning is also a hallmark of the flying saucers and futuristic weapons,
or sometimes both, as shown on the cover of the April 1930 issue of Air Wonder Stories in Figure 9,
also at www.tantor.com. It would have to wait for the full relativistic form of quantum mechanics
developed by Paul Adrien Maurice Dirac in 1928 to show the fundamental connection between
internal rotation and magnetism. The third quantum principle states that everything,
matter, and photons has an internal rotation about an axis that passes through the object,
like a twirling figure skater. For ordinary matter, there are only two questions about the
rotation, clockwise or counterclockwise. In the previous chapter, we discussed linear momentum
defined as the product of an object mass and velocity. Since the objects in Chapter 3 were
moving in straight lines, we could employ the linguistic shortcut and just refer to it as
momentum, rather than the more accurate term, linear momentum. The greater an object's momentum,
the harder it is to change its motion. A baseball thrown at 100 miles per hour has more momentum
than one thrown at 1 mile per hour. The latter may be arrested safely bare-handed without a
catcher's mitt, while I wouldn't recommend this method for the former. In fact, you'd need to stand
pretty close to the pitcher in order to catch the slower ball before it fell to the ground.
Similarly, angular momentum is the rotational analog of linear momentum. The rotation may be
about an axis passing through the object, as is seen in a spinning top, or about a distant axis,
exemplified by the moon orbiting the Earth. In quantum physics, the spin of electrons or protons
resembles a top or a ballerina more than a dozen orbiting satellite. Moreover, the spinning of the
particles within an atom is not arbitrary, but must correspond to particular values of angular
momentum. This is like saying that the linear momentum of a car can have two values, moving
forward or backward at multiples of a given speed, such as 10 miles per hour. So the car could go
30 miles per hour forward or 30 miles per hour backward, but not say 13 miles per hour in either
direction. It turns out, based on experimental observation, that certain fundamental particles
in the universe have an internal angular momentum that has a value of either zero, a very special
case, or Planck's constant h divided by 2 times pi, or multiples of Planck's constant h divided by 2
times pi, that is 2 times h divided by 2 pi, 3 times h divided by 2 pi, and so on. So h divided
by 2 pi would be the equivalent of the 10 mile per hour increments in the previous example.
Photons are examples of these types of particles and they have an intrinsic angular momentum
of h divided by 2 pi. Other fundamental particles, such as electrons, protons, and neutrons,
can have an internal angular momentum of exactly one half of this value of Planck's constant,
h divided by 2 pi, that is one half times h divided by 2 pi, though other particles can have
an angular momentum that is a multiple of these values, that is 3 halves times h divided by 2 pi,
or 5 halves times h divided by 2 pi. That's it. The smallest angular momenta allowed in the universe
is either a whole number, 0, 1, 2, etc., multiplied by h divided by 2 pi, or an odd number,
1, 3, 5, etc., multiplied by one half times h divided by 2 pi. Whether an object has an internal
angular momentum that is either an integer multiplied by h divided by 2 pi, or a half integer
multiplied by h divided by 2 pi, will have a profound effect on how it interacts with other
identical particles. As 2 pi is just a number, then if h divided by 2 pi is a measure of angular
momentum, then Planck's constant h is a unit of angular momentum. Planck did not realize when he
introduced the constant h as a fudge to account for the spectrum of light emitted by hot glowing
objects that he had hit upon a fundamental constant of the universe. There are a set of basic
numbers that one must specify when setting up a universe, such as the mass of the electron and
the speed of light. Things would look very different if the speed of light, for example,
was a value that a person could achieve while riding a bicycle, such as 17 miles per hour.
One would then have an intimate first-hand intuition about the consequences of the special
theory of relativity. Similarly, if Planck's constant were a much larger number, we would
have to deal with quantum phenomena in our daily lives. In Isaac Asimov's novel Fantastic Voyage
2, Destination Brain, a team of scientists is reduced in size smaller than a single cell
in order to travel within the body of an injured scientist, who has figured out a way to make
miniaturization energy efficient and perform an operation from the inside. Asimov proposes that
the mechanism underlying this shrinking process involves creating a field that reduces the magnitude
of Planck's constant. Considering an atom to be a sphere, Bohr calculated its radius to be a few
times r sub zero, where r sub zero equals h divided by 2p times m sub e times c times a,
and m sub e is the mass of the electron, c is the speed of light, and a is termed the fine
structure constant that involves another collection of fundamental constants, such as h, c, and the
charge of the electron. If one could tune Planck's constant at will, making it larger or smaller,
then one could enlarge or shrink any object by changing the fundamental size of its atoms.
The fact that we cannot do this in reality reflects the fact that fundamental constants are
just that, constant and unchanging. Note, when I described Asimov's suggestion in my 2005 book,
The Physics of Superheroes, it caught the attention of Tony Stark. In Marvel Comics Civil War files,
consisting of background notes dictated by Iron Man's alter ego under an entry listing for Goliath,
one finds my first introduction to Bill Foster, Goliath, Giant Man, Black Goliath,
was his remarkable paper with Jim Cacalios on extra-dimensional manipulations of Planck's constant,
and I quickly had them hired by Stark Enterprises. Upon reading this, I realized that I needed to
update my resume. It was a nerving to physicists when Albert Einstein suggested in 1905 that there
was no velocity faster than light speed, but the universe and its laws indeed ensure that nothing
can move faster than the speed of light in a vacuum. Apparently, with the discovery that subatomic
particles have internal angular momentum, whose value is multiples of either h divided by 2 pi,
or 1 half of h divided by 2 pi, but not any other values, the universe also cares about rotation.
Electrons are the basic unit of negative charge, while protons have an equal charge, but of an
opposite sign. By convention, the proton's charge is termed positive, while the electrons is negative.
It has been known since the middle of the 19th century that moving electrical charges,
that is, an electrical current, creates a magnetic field. This is the basic physical
principle underlying electromagnets and motors. If an electrically charged sphere rotates about
a line passing through its center, like a wheel about its center spoke, then there are certainly
electrical charges in motion, and these currents will generate a magnetic field. If there is an
intrinsic angular momentum, it shouldn't be surprising that as a consequence of this rotation,
every electron and proton has its own internal magnetic field. In fact, the quantized internal
angular momentum aspect was proposed to account for the experimentally observed internal magnetic
fields inside atoms. That is, the observation of the magnetic field came first, and later,
in an attempt to account for it, the argument about intrinsic angular momentum was put forth.
Does the experimentally observed magnetic field of electrons and protons
actually arise from the spinning rotation of elementary particles?
Technically, the answer is no. The simplest reason why not is that neutrons, the other
fundamental particle found within atomic nuclei, which have nearly the same mass as protons but
are electrically uncharged, also possesses an internal magnetic field. If the magnetic field
of the proton arose from the fact that as a charged object, its rotation could be described as a
series of electrical current loops, each of which generates a magnetic field, then the rotation of
an electrically uncharged object should not generate a magnetic field. Note, this argument
still holds, even with the recognition that neutrons and protons are themselves composed
of electrically charged quarks. As explained, the quarks would have to be rotating faster than
light speed to account for the observed magnetic field of these composite particles.
Moreover, even if we did not know that neutrons existed, we still could not explain the magnetic
field of electrons as arising from their rotation about an axis passing through their center.
The magnitude of the measured magnetic field of the electron
is such that it would require that these particles spin at a rate so fast that points
on their surface would be moving faster than the speed of light. What experimental question
does the proposal of intrinsic angular momentum, that is, spin, answer?
In 1923, Otto Stern and Rudolf Gerlach passed beams of atoms through special magnets,
looking for interactions between their laboratory magnet and the internal magnetic field of the
atom. They were trying to probe the magnetic field that would arise from the electron's orbital
motion about the nucleus. For atomic systems where they did not expect to see any orbital motion,
they nevertheless observed an intrinsic magnetic field of elementary particles,
and moreover that this came in two values. It was as if the electron had a built-in magnetic field
with a north pole and a south pole that was allowed to point in only two directions relative to the
magnets used in Stern and Gerlach's experiment. The electron either pointed in the same direction
as the external magnet so that its north pole faced the south pole of the lab magnet or exactly
oppositely aligned so that the electron's north pole faced the lab magnet's north pole.
While Stern and Gerlach's experiment clearly suggested that electrons possessed an intrinsic
magnetic field, spin was actually first proposed to account for features in the absorption and
emission of light by certain elements that indicated that there had to be some internal
magnetism inside the atom. A variety of careful experiments confirmed that this magnetic field
did not arise from the electrons orbiting around the positively charged nucleus but was somehow
coming from the electrons themselves. So why do we say that electrons, protons, and neutrons
have spin that is associated with their internal magnetic fields? The origins of this phrase go
back to, shall we say, a youthful indiscretion. Two graduate students in Berlin, Samuel Good-Smith
and George Eulenbeck, wrote a paper in 1925 suggesting that an internal rotation of the
charged electron generated a magnetic field necessary to account for the atomic light
emission spectra anomalies. They showed their paper to their physics advisor, Paul Ehrenfest,
who pointed out various problems with the electron literally spinning about an internal axis.
Good-Smith and Eulenbeck soon realized that their argument required the electron to rotate
faster than light speed, as mentioned earlier. Neutrons, which would have indicated to them
immediately that the observed magnetic field could not result from a spinning charged particle,
had not yet been discovered. Defeated, they intended to drop the whole matter. They were
surprised when Ehrenfest told them that he had already submitted their paper for publication.
He consoled them, indicating that he had recognized their error,
but thought that there was merit in their suggestion and argued that they were
young enough to allow yourselves some foolishness. On one level, it is unfortunate that Good-Smith
and Eulenbeck employed the term spin for the intrinsic angular momentum and magnetic field
possessed by subatomic particles. The term is so evocative, and the fact that an electron,
for example, can have an intrinsic angular momentum of either positive 1 half h divided by 2p,
or negative 1 half h divided by 2p, but no other values, makes it easy to think of in terms of
clockwise or counterclockwise rotation, that it is difficult to remember that the electron is not
actually spinning like a top. The intrinsic angular momentum of the electron is properly
accounted for in the Dirac equation, a fully relativistic version of quantum theory. Solving
the Dirac equation, one finds that the electron is characterized by an extra quantum number
that corresponds to an internal angular momentum of 1 half h divided by 2p and a magnetic field of
magnitude exactly as observed. In a sense, it is an intrinsic feature of the electron,
just like its mass and its electric charge. Good-Smith and Eulenbeck managed to get the
right answer for the wrong reasons. For this work, they were awarded the Max Planck Medal,
the Lawrence Medal, and the Wolf Prize. Publish in haste, celebrate at leisure.
Note, many physicists, when pressed, would confess that the model of the electron they
carry around in their heads involves a particle with a large arrow protruding from it, pointing
either up or down whenever spin comes up. Thus, if you find the notion of an electron
spinning like a top too compelling to give up, you're just thinking about it the way we professionals
do. I have promised that this internal angular momentum, possessed by electrons, protons,
neutrons, and all other elementary particles, is the key to understanding the periodic table
of the elements, chemistry, and solid state physics. Electrons can spin either clockwise
or counterclockwise, once an axis of rotation has been specified, which indicates that their
intrinsic magnetic fields can point either up or down. All magnets found in nature have both
north and south poles. If we make a magnet in the shape of a cylinder, like a piece of chalk,
then, as shown in figure 10, available at www.tantor.com, there will be a magnetic field
emanating from the north pole that will bend around and be drawn into the cylinder south pole.
The spatial variation of the magnetic field is the same as for an electric field created by
two electrical charges, positive and negative, at either end of a cylinder, figure 10b.
We call such an arrangement of electric charges a dipole, and as the magnetic field
distribution described earlier has the same spatial variation, we refer to it as a magnetic dipole.
The electric dipole field is distinguished from a single positive or negative charge,
which is called a monopole. We have never observed in the universe a single free magnetic pole,
that is, just a north pole or a south pole, despite extensive investigations and theoretical
suggestions that they should exist. They always come in pairs, forming a magnetic dipole.
It must be said, though, that an unsuccessful search does not mean that they do not exist,
simply that we haven't found them yet. A moment's experimentation with small toy magnets
will verify that two magnets, when brought close to each other, will prefer to orient themselves
such that, if the north pole of one magnet points up, then the north pole of the second
magnet will point down. A pair of magnets so aligned will have a negligible net magnetic field.
Think about the chalk analogy, with a positive electric charge on one end and a negative charge
at the other. If the length of the chalk is very short, then the electric field has a very short
distance to travel, bending around the chalk, and the field away from the chalk will be small.
If you are not very close to the cylinder, you will think that there are no electric
charges at all. Inside an atom, the preferred configuration of the protons and neutrons in
the nucleus is such that they orient themselves so that any pair of particles will have their
magnetic fields cancel, and unless one is very close to the pair of nuclear particles,
their joint magnetic field is practically zero. Consequently, unless the nucleus has
an odd number of protons or neutrons, there will be no net magnetic field from all of the
little internal fields from the protons or neutrons. Similarly, the electrons orbiting
the nucleus have internal magnetic fields, but they will also pair up so that only if
there is one last odd unpaired electron will there be a magnetic field that anyone outside
of the atom might detect. However, this field alone is very small. Understanding why some
atoms, such as iron or cobalt, have many electrons that are unpaired, leading to a larger atomic
magnetic field, and why these atoms in a chunk of iron don't orient themselves so that each
pair of atomic magnetic fields don't cancel, requires more quantum mechanics than we have
at our disposal just yet. But I will return to this question at the end of the book.
We need to figure out magnetism if we want to understand how hard drives work. Furthermore,
without appreciating the role that spin plays, chemistry would be a mystery, unlike when most
of us learned it in high school when it was a hopeless mystery. Similarly, absent our understanding
how the spin of electrons governs their interactions in metals, insulators, and semiconductors,
there would be no transistor, and hence no computers, cell phones, MP3 players, or television
remote controls, and humanity would be reduced to a brutal state that would test the imagination
of the writers of the most dystopian science fiction stories.
