6. The equation that made the future. The Schrodinger equation plays the same role in
atomic physics that Newton's laws of motion play in the mechanics of everyday objects.
Those with long memories may recall that back in the 17th century, it was well known that
the application of external forces was required to change the motion of objects. What was
lacking was a method by which one could calculate exactly how the motion of any given object
would change as a consequence of the pushes and pulls of external forces. Newton found
a remarkably elegant expression. The net force is equal to mass multiplied by the acceleration,
or f equals m times a, that despite its surface simplicity could account for a wide range
of complex motions. As any student in an introductory physics class can tell you,
it is not enough to identify the forces acting in a situation. One must be able to show how
these forces will lead to a change in the object's motion. Armed with Newton's law,
one can determine the trajectory of skiers and boaters, of runners and automobiles,
of rockets fired at the moon and of the moon itself, not to mention falling apples. We know
that Newton's law of motion is correct, for comparisons of the theoretically calculated
motion agree exactly with what is experimentally observed. Similarly, in the quantum realm,
it is not enough to say that there is a wave associated with the motion of all matter,
whose wavelength is inversely proportional to its momentum. One also needs a process,
an equation by which, if one knows the external forces acting on the object,
the resulting behavior of its matter wave can be determined. Consider a simple hydrogen atom
with one proton in its nucleus, and one electron attracted to the proton electrostatically,
the symbol that Dr. Manhattan etched into his forehead in the Watchman comic and film. Given
that we know the nature of the electrostatic attractive force between the negatively charged
electron and the positively charged nucleus, and that there is a wave associated with the
motion of the electron in an atom, what we would like is a matter wave equation that enables
us to calculate the properties of the electron in the atom. These calculated properties,
such as the average diameter of the atom, or the electron's average momentum, could then be
compared to experimental measurements in order to test the correctness of the matter wave approach.
Any equation that does not yield testable results is useless from a physics point of view.
Schrodinger found just such an equation, though the procedure for calculating the wave function
involves a formula much more complicated than Newton's f equals m times a. In fact,
one often requires a computer in order to solve Schrodinger's equation, except in a
handful of simple cases. But the fact that the calculations can be difficult does not
invalidate the Schrodinger approach. Applying Newton's law of motion, f equals m times a,
to the motion of the more than trillion trillion air molecules in a room, exceeds the calculating
capability of the largest supercomputer. Even though we can't do the sums, we know that in
principle they could be done. The importance of Schrodinger's equation is that the process by
which one calculates an object's wave function, given the relevant forces acting on it, is known.
The math might be hard, but the path is clear. We will not go into the process involving mathematical
trial and error, physical intuition and a creative use of the principle of conservation of energy
that enabled Schrodinger to develop his equation. It is indeed a fascinating story,
filled with false starts, suspense, and plenty of sex. I'm not kidding. While other pioneers
of quantum theory, such as Werner Heisenberg and Paul Dirac, required extreme solitude in order
to develop their quantum mechanical theories, Schrodinger needed a more stimulating environment.
Historians of science debate to this day the identity of the woman, definitely not his wife,
who kept him company over a long Christmas holiday break at a friend's chalet in the Swiss Alps,
when he successfully constructed the matter-wave equation that now bears his name. As I tell my
students of modern physics, if you are going to learn quantum mechanics, you must remember
one key principle. Don't be a player, Haida. We are interested in how quantum mechanics brought
about our futuristic lifestyle of light-emitting diodes, laptop computers, cell phones, and remote
controls. Consequently, for our purposes, it is not important how the Schrodinger equation was
developed, nor will we try to solve it, even for the simplest case of a single electron moving in
a straight line in empty space, and it doesn't get more plain vanilla than that. Schrodinger's
equation involves the rates of change of the wave function in both space and time. Consequently,
can't be solved without calculus, involves imaginary numbers. The term mathematicians use
when referring to the square root of negative numbers, and thus calls upon considerable imagination
to interpret. What we will do is discuss the significance of the equation and point out how
various solutions lead, in some cases, to semiconductor transistors and, in other situations,
to semiconductor lasers. Enough with the T's. The Schrodinger equation, as it is now universally
known, is most often expressed mathematically as follows. Negative h squared divided by 2m times
delta squared times psi divided by delta x squared plus v times xt times psi equals i times h times
delta times psi divided by delta times t. To see this equation written out, go to www.tantor.com,
search for the amazing story of quantum mechanics, and follow the links.
The equation will be available to view with the other images in this audiobook.
Here, h represents our old friend Planck's constant. The angled bar through the vertical
line in the letter h is a mathematical shorthand that indicates that the value of Planck's constant
here should be divided by 2pi. m is the mass of the object, typically this would be the
electron's mass, whose wave functioning psi, pronounced psi, we are interested in determining.
v is a mathematical expression that represents the external forces acting on the object,
and i is the square root of negative 1. The rate of change of psi in time is represented by delta
psi divided by delta t, while the rate of change of psi in space is represented by delta 2 psi
divided by delta x squared. As messy and as complicated as this equation may seem, I have
taken it easy and written this formula in its simpler one-dimensional form, where the electron
can move only along in a straight line. The version of this equation capable of describing
excursions through three dimensions has a few extra terms, but we won't be solving that equation either.
The Schrödinger equation requires us to know the forces that act on the atomic electrons
in order to figure out where the electrons are likely to be and what their energies are.
The term labeled v in the Schrödinger equation represents the work done on the electron by
external forces, which can change the energy of the atomic electron. For reasons that are
not very important right now, v actually is referred to as the potential acting on the electron,
and hence symbolized by the letter v. Note, we use the letter v for potential as the letter p is
reserved for mathematical descriptions of the momentum. Sometimes it seems like we physicists
deliberately make the equations harder than they need to be. In the most general cases,
these forces can change with distance and time. The fact that these forces are hence the potential
v can be time t and space x dependent is reflected in the notation v times x t in this equation,
which implies that v can take on different values at different points in space x and at
different times t. Sometimes the forces do not change with time, as in the electrical attraction
between the negatively charged electron and the positively charged protons in the atomic nucleus.
In this case, we need only to know how the electrical force varies
with the separation between the two charges to determine the potential v at all points in space.
I've belabored the fact that v can take on different values depending on which point in
space x we are and at what time t we consider, because what is true of v is also true of the
wave function psi. Mathematically, an expression that does not have one single value, but can
take on many possible values depending on where you measure it or when you look, is called a function.
Anyone who has read a topographic map is familiar with the notion of functions,
where different regions of the map, sometimes denoted by different colors,
represent different heights above sea level. This is why psi is called a wave function.
It is the mathematical expression that tells me the value of the matter wave,
depending on where the electron is, its location in space x, and when I measure it, at a time t.
Though as we'll see in the next chapter with Heisenberg, where and when get a little fuzzy
with quantum objects. For an electron near a proton, such as a hydrogen atom, the only force on
the electron is the electrostatic attraction. Since the nature of the electrical attraction
does not change with time, the potential v will depend only on how far apart in space
the two charges are from each other. One can then solve the Schrodinger equation
to see what wave function psi will be consistent with this particular v.
Wave function psi will also be a mathematical function that will take on different values
depending on the point in space. Now here's the weird thing among a large list of weird things
in quantum physics. When Schrodinger first solved this equation for the hydrogen atom,
he incorrectly interpreted what psi represented in his own equation. Schrodinger knew that psi
itself could not be any physical quantity related to the electron inside the atom. This was because
the mathematical function he obtained for psi involved the imaginary number i. Not to beat the
joke into the ground, but any measurement of a real quantity must involve real numbers,
and not the square root of negative 1. But there are mathematical procedures that enable one to
get rid of the imaginary numbers in a mathematical function. Once we know the wave function psi,
if we square it, that is multiply it by itself, so psi times psi equals psi squared, leads to a new
mathematical function termed imaginatively enough psi squared. Why would we want to do that?
What physical interpretation should we give to the mathematical function psi squared?
Note, the notation psi squared is mathematical code that says to change all the terms with
the imaginary number i inside to the opposite of i. As i times i equals negative 1, the opposite of i
times i equals negative 1 times i times i, which equals negative 1 times negative 1, which equals
positive 1. And we will have a positive real function in psi squared. Those who recall their
algebra may note that psi is actually a complex number. Psi equals a plus i times b, where a and b
are regular numbers, so that I should technically use the notation the absolute value of psi squared
instead of psi squared. We'll stick with psi squared, as for us the important point is that
psi squared is a real positive number. Schrodinger noticed that psi squared, for the full three-dimensional
version of the matter wave equation, had the physical units of a number divided by a volume.
The wave function psi itself has units of 1 divided by the square root of volume.
This is what motivated the consideration of psi squared rather than psi. For while there are
physically meaningful quantities that have the units of 1 divided by volume, there is nothing
that can be measured that has units of 1 divided by the square root of volume. He argued that if psi
squared were multiplied by the charge of the electron, then the result would indicate the charge
per volume, also known as the charge density of the electron. Reasonable, but wrong. Psi squared
does indeed have the form of a number density, but Schrodinger himself incorrectly identified the
physical interpretation of solutions to his own equation. A year after Schrodinger published
his development of a matter wave equation, Max Born, who had suggested the Schrodinger take
up the problem, argued that in fact psi squared represented the probability density for the
electron in the atom. That is, the function psi squared tells us the probability per volume
of finding the electron at any given point within the atom. Schrodinger thought this was nuts,
but in fact Born's interpretation is accepted by all physicists as being correct.
What Schrodinger discovered was the quantum analog of Newton's force equals mass times
acceleration. Newton said, in essence, you tell me the net force is acting on an object
and I can tell you where it will be, how the motion will change at some other point in space
and at some later time. Schrodinger's equation asserts that if you know the potential v, which
can be found by identifying the forces acting on the electron, then I can tell you the probability
per volume of finding the electron at some point in space and time, now and in the past and future.
Once I know how likely it is to find an electron throughout space, I can calculate its average
distance from the proton in the nucleus, which we would call the size of the atom. The energy
within the atom, its average momentum and in fact anything I care to mention, can be calculated
using the Schrodinger equation. We know that the Schrodinger equation is a correct approach for
determining the wave function psi for electrons in an atom, for it enables us to calculate
properties of the atom that are in excellent agreement with experimental observations.
This is the only true test of the theory and the only reason why we take seriously notions
of matter waves and wave functions. Schrodinger first applied his equation to the simplest atom,
hydrogen, with a nucleus of a single proton and only one orbiting electron. For the force
acting on the electron, he used the familiar law of electrostatic attraction, extensively
confirmed as the correct description of the pole to opposite charges exert on each other.
With no other assumptions or ad hoc guesses, his equation then yielded a series of possible
solutions, that is, a set of different psi functions that corresponded to the electron
having different probability densities. This is not unlike the set of different possible
wavelengths that a plucked guitar string can assume. For each probability density,
there was a different average radius, and in turn, a different energy. Obviously,
the solitary electron in the hydrogen atom could have only one energy value and only one
average radius at any given time. What Schrodinger found was that there was a collection of possible
energies that the electron could have, not unlike an arrangement of seats in a large lecture hall,
shown schematically in figure 15, online at www.tentor.com. There are some seats close to the
front blackboard, some in the next row a little bit farther away, and so on, all the way to the
seats so far from the front of the room that a student sitting here could easily sneak out of
the class with very little effort. An atom with only one electron is akin to a lecture hall with
only one student attending. If there is a tilt to the hall so that the front of the room is at
a lower level than the rear, as in many auditoriums, then the student would lower his or her energy
by sitting in the front seat in the front row. This would be the lowest energy configuration
for the student in the lecture hall, and similarly, Schrodinger found that a single electron would
have a probability density that corresponded to it having the lowest possible energy value.
This configuration for an atom is termed the ground state. If the electron received additional
energy saved by absorbing light or through a collision with another atom, it could move from
its seat closest to the front of the room to one farther away. With enough energy, it could be promoted
out of the auditorium entirely, and in this case it would be a free electron, leaving behind a
positively charged ionized atom, which for the simple case of hydrogen would be just a single proton.
Schrodinger's equation at once explained why atoms could absorb light only at specific
wavelengths, and why there was a threshold of a minimum energy needed to remove an electron
from an atom, as in the photoelectric effect experiment described in Chapter 2. There are
only certain energies that correspond to valid solutions to the Schrodinger equation for an
electron in an atom pulled toward the positively charged nucleus by electrostatic attraction.
Electrons ordinarily sit in the lowest energy level, the ground state configuration.
Upon absorbing energy from outside the atom, they can move from the row closest to the front of
the hall to another row at a higher level, closer to the exit, provided the seats they move to are
empty. Those who recall their high school chemistry may know that each seat can actually accommodate
two electrons. This is discussed in some detail in Section 4. There is a precise energy difference
between the row where the electron is sitting and the empty seat it will be promoted to.
It must move from seat to seat and cannot reside between rows. Different atoms with different
numbers of protons in their nucleus will have slightly different psi functions, similar to
each string on a guitar having a different fundamental frequency as well as different
overtones. One intriguing consequence of the Schrodinger equation is that it explained that
electrons in an atom could have only certain energy values and that all other electronic
energies were forbidden. Schrodinger's solution has nothing to do with circular or elliptical orbits,
but rather with the different possible probability densities the electron can have.
Another way of stating this is that the probability of an electron having a forbidden
energy is zero and thus will never be observed to occur. Only if the energy supplied to the
atom for example in the form of light is exactly equal to this difference will the electron be
able to move to this empty seat. Too much energy or too little would promote the electron between
rows. Since the electron cannot be at these energy values, the probability of it occurring is zero,
the electron cannot absorb the light of these energies. There will thus be a series of wavelengths
of light that any given atom can absorb or emit when the electron moves from one row to another.
All other light is ignored by the atom. Now for the cool part. When Schrodinger used the
electrostatic attraction between a proton and an electron for a simple hydrogen atom,
he found a set of possible wave functions that corresponded to different probability densities.
When he made sure that psi was normalized, which is a fancy way of saying that if you add up the
probability density of the electron over all space, the total has to be 100%,
then his equation yielded a set of possible energy levels for the electron that exactly
corresponded to the energy transitions experimentally observed in hydrogen.
No assumptions about orbits, no ignoring the fact that electromagnetism requires the electron to
radiate energy in a circular trajectory. All you have to tell the Schrodinger equation
is the nature of the interaction between the negatively charged electron and the positively
charged nucleus in the atom, and it automatically tells you the possible line spectra of light
for emission or absorption. Schrodinger's equation destroyed the notion of a well-defined elliptical
trajectory for the electron and replaced it with a smoothly varying probability of finding the
electron at some point in space. In essence, physics had come full circle. At the start of
the 20th century, scientists thought that the atom consisted of a jelly of positive charges
in which electrons sat like marshmallows in a jello dessert. In this model, the atom emitted
or absorbed light at very particular wavelengths, as these wavelengths corresponded to the fundamental
frequencies of oscillation of the trapped electrons. Rutherford and Soddy demonstrated
that the atom actually had a small positively charged nucleus around which the electrons
orbited, but this model could not explain what kept the electron from spiraling into the nucleus,
nor did it account for the absorption line spectra. With Schrodinger, the small positively
charged nucleus remained, but the negatively charged electrons were like jelly smeared over
the atom in the form of a probability density. The source of the uncertainty in the electron's
location was accounted for by von Heisenberg at nearly the same time that Schrodinger was mixing
business with pleasure in the Swiss Alps.
