Chapter 7 The Uncertainty Principle Made Easy
Just prior to the introduction of the Schrodinger equation, Werner Heisenberg was developing
an alternative approach to atomic physics.
The wave-like nature of matter is also at the heart of the famous Heisenberg Uncertainty
Principle.
Heisenberg took a completely different tack to the question of how de Broglie's matter
waves could account for an atom's optical absorption line spectrum.
As we've discussed, the conventional view that the electron was executing classical
orbits around the nucleus could not be reconciled with the absence of light that should be continuously
emitted by such an electron.
Heisenberg struggled to envision what the electron was doing and where it was located
within the atom, finally convinced him to give up and not bother trying to figure out
where the electron was.
This turned out to be a winning strategy.
Physics is an experimental science, and the development of quantum mechanics was driven
by a need to account for atomic measurements that were in conflict with what was expected
from electromagnetic theory and thermodynamics.
Heisenberg realized that any theory of the atom needed only to agree with measurements,
rather than make predictions that could never be tested.
Who cares where the electron really was inside the atom?
Could you ever definitely measure its location to confirm or disprove this prediction?
If not, then forget about it.
What could be measured?
For one, the wavelengths of the light emitted from an atom in a line spectrum.
Well then, let's construct a theory that describes the energy difference when an atom
makes a transition from one state to another.
Heisenberg's model for the atom consisted of a large array of numbers that characterized
the different states the electron could be in, and rules that governed when the electron
could go from one state to another.
When compared to the observed spectra of light absorbed or emitted from a hydrogen atom,
Heisenberg's approach agreed exactly with measurements.
In 1925, Heisenberg exiled himself to the German island of Helgoland in the southeast
corner of the North Sea as he worked out the details of this approach.
He had known for years that, in contrast to Schrodinger, he did his best work removed
from any distractions.
While the isolation suited his requirements for extended contemplation, his motivation
for decamping to the island was a bit more mundane.
Heisenberg suffered from severe allergies, and it was to escape the pollens of Berlin
that he traveled to the treeless Helgoland.
The Stark island's only recreational option consisted of mountains, of which the hiking
enthusiast Heisenberg availed himself, as he struggled with his theory.
On this island, Heisenberg constructed arrays of values for the different states in which
electrons in an atom could be found, and the rules for how they would make the transition
between states.
When he returned to Berlin and showed his preliminary efforts to Max Born, the older
professor was initially confused.
As he read and re-read Heisenberg's work, trying to understand these transition rules,
he had a strong sense of familiarity.
Eventually, Born and Pasquale Jordan, another physicist at Berlin, recognized that Heisenberg
had independently developed a mathematical notation known as a matrix to describe his
theory.
A notation that had been invented a hundred years earlier by mathematicians interested
in solving series of equations that had many unknown variables.
This branch of mathematics is called linear algebra, or matrix algebra, and Heisenberg
had unknowingly reinvented a wheel that had been rounded years earlier.
This is always happening, by the way.
More often than not, we find in physics that the necessary mathematics to solve a particularly
challenging problem has already been developed, frequently no less than a century earlier.
The mathematicians are just doing what mathematicians do and are not trying to anticipate or solve
any physics problems.
There are two notable exceptions.
Newton had to invent calculus in order to test his predictions of celestial motion against
observations, and modern string theorists are inventing necessary mathematics simultaneously
with the physics.
Heisenberg's approach using matrices is an alternative explanation for the behavior
of electrons in atoms, for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1932.
Heisenberg's theory was published in 1925.
Less than a year later, Schrodinger introduced his matter-wave equation to account for the
interactions of electrons inside the atom.
The two descriptions of the quantum world do not appear to have anything in common, aside
from the fact that they both accurately predict the observed optical line spectra for atoms.
In 1926, Schrodinger was able to mathematically translate one approach into the other, demonstrating
that the two descriptions are in fact equivalent.
Both theories rely on De Broglie's matter-wave hypothesis, though neither takes the suggestion
of elliptical electronic orbits literally.
Both approaches make use of what we now would characterize as the electron's wave function
and have prescriptions for how one can mathematically calculate the average momentum, the average
position, and other properties of an electron in an atom.
For our purposes, we do not have to go too deeply into either theory, as our goal is
to understand how the concepts of quantum mechanics underlie such wonders of the modern
age as the laser and magnetic resonance imaging.
There is one aspect of Heisenberg's theory that has generated way too much blather and
misinformation to be ignored.
That is, the famed Uncertainty Principle.
If you'll bear with me, I'd like to take a brief detour to set the record straight about
what the Uncertainty Principle does and does not mean.
It's actually not too complicated.
That is, once one accepts that there is a wave-like nature to matter.
The Uncertainty Principle posits a relationship between the uncertainty of the location of
a particle and the uncertainty of its momentum.
Heisenberg saw that the product of these two uncertainties must be bigger than a constant
that turns out to be, wait for it, Planck's constant, h divided by 4 times pi.
Why Planck's constant is divided by 4 pi has to do with technical aspects of waves that
need not concern us here.
The fact that h turns up again and again when describing the atomic regime indicates
that Planck's initial guess about the graininess of energy was on target.
And by introducing h, he discovered a new fundamental constant of nature, as important
for understanding how the universe is put together as the value of the speed of light
or the charge of an electron.
Right off the bat, let me emphasize that the Uncertainty Principle does not restrict the
precision with which I can measure the position of a particle nor that of its momentum.
Here does it state that one can never measure the position and momentum of a particle simultaneously,
but it does get to the heart of what such a measurement entails.
Suppose that I can experimentally determine the position of an electron, and at the same
time the momentum of this electron.
I'll describe how in a moment.
I may find that the electron is at a location x equals 2.34528976543901765438 centimeters,
as reckoned from a given point.
And the momentum has a value of p equals 14.2544897653998021 kilograms meter per second.
There are certainly a large number of decimal places in these measurements, but in order
to convince myself that this is indeed the electron's position and momentum, I repeat
the experiment under exactly the same conditions.
If those are in fact the true values of position and momentum, I should be able to reproduce
all of those decimal places.
Performing the experiment a second time, I now find that the electron's position is
x equals 2.3452891120987693790 centimeters, and the momentum is p equals 14.2544100876495832002
kilograms meter per second.
On the one hand, the first few digits in both the x and p measurements agree exactly with
what was found before.
But on the other hand, after a few decimal places, the overlap with the first observation
disappears.
What I find after repeating the experiment many more times is that the average position
of the electron is 2.32428 centimeters, and the average momentum is 14.254 kilograms meter
per second, as illustrated in Figure 16.
That is, the only measurements that one really can trust are of the average position and
momentum.
I can make a plot of the number of times a particular value of the position is observed
against the value of the position.
Such a plot would look after a large number of trials, like the familiar bell-shaped curve
known and feared by students throughout recorded history.
The peak in the curve would represent the value of the position that was observed most
frequently and would also indicate the average location of the electron.
At the highest point, the curve is very narrow.
Halfway down the curve, there is a width that is referred to as the standard deviation.
The standard deviation is an indication of how much we can trust the average value resulting
from this bell-shaped curve.
The bigger the standard deviation, the greater the possible uncertainty in the average value.
It is these standard deviations also referred to in mathematics as uncertainties that are
constrained by the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
As an illustration of standard deviations, consider a class of 100 students taking a
final exam.
If all 100 students receive exactly the same score of 50 points out of 100, then the average
grade will be 50 and the standard deviation will be zero.
That is, if you are told that the average grade is 50 with a standard deviation of zero, then
there is no ambiguity or uncertainty in what any given student scored on the exam.
Now, if 90 students receive a score of 50 points, while 5 students score a 55 and the
remaining 5 receive a grade of 45, the average grade would remain 50.
But now the width of the distribution of grades would be 10.
While the average value is still 50, some students have a score that differs from the
average value.
There is now some small but non-zero question as to whether a student chosen at random will
have a grade equal to the average score of 50 or not.
In an extreme case, all 100 students in the class could receive different grades, from
as low as 1 or 2 through 48, 49, 50 and 51 up to 98, 99 and 100.
The average grade would still be 50, but now the distribution would range from 1 through
100.
Only one student out of 100 would have an actual grade on the final exam that is exactly
equal to the average score of the class, and the large size of the standard deviation would
indicate that the average grade was not a particularly meaningful or insightful indicator
of any given student's performance.
In dealing with large numbers, the two questions one must ask are, what is the average and
what is the standard deviation?
Returning to my simultaneous measurements of an electron's position and momentum, I
found that after repeated trials, there was a bell-shaped curve for the position, which
gave its average location and another bell-shaped curve for the momentum.
It is the standard deviations of these two bell-shaped curves that the Heisenberg uncertainty
principle addresses.
Heisenberg's theory tells us that the standard deviation of the electron's position is connected
to the standard deviation of the electron's momentum, so that changes in one affect the
other.
The widths of the two distributions in Figure 16 are not independent, and efforts to narrow
one will necessarily broaden the other.
Heisenberg calculated that the product of the two standard deviations cannot be smaller
than h divided by 4 pi.
Any experiment that manages to decrease the standard deviation of the momentum, for example,
will necessarily broaden the standard deviation of the position.
Why would the standard deviation of an electron's position be related to the standard deviation
of its momentum?
Because of the de Broglie wave associated with the motion of the electron.
The wavelength of this matter wave is, in a sense, a measure of how precisely we can
say where the electron is, and this wavelength is connected to the electron's momentum by
the relation momentum times wavelength equals h.
Assume that the electron's momentum is precisely known, with absolutely no ambiguity.
Then the average momentum is the momentum, just as in our classroom example, when all
100 students received the same grade on the final of 50.
There is one value for the wavelength of the matter wave for this perfectly known momentum,
as shown in the top sketch in Figure 17.
A pure wave by definition extends forever, from one end of the universe to the other.
Where would we say the location of the electron would be for such a perfect wave?
The average value might be well defined, but its standard deviations would be infinitely
large.
The Heisenberg connection between the standard deviations of the position and momentum results
from the fact that the location of the electron is connected to the wavelength of the matter
wave, which in turn is related to the object's momentum.
In order to shrink the standard deviation of the electron's position, the electron's
matter wave should be zero, except for a small region near the average position.
But in order to construct a wave packet such as this, one needs to add many waves together,
all of slightly different wavelengths, so that they would destructively cancel out beyond
a narrow region around the average position.
Since the wavelength is connected to the momentum through momentum times wavelength equals h,
adding many different wavelengths together is the same as saying that there is a broad
range of momentum values for the localized electron.
The tighter the limits with which we wish to specify the electron's location, that is
the smaller the position's standard deviation, the more different wavelengths we have to
combine, and the greater is the corresponding standard deviation of the momentum.
The two standard deviations are thus joined together.
Through the matter wave relation, momentum times wavelength equals h.
Of course, we can measure an electron's position to any arbitrary precision we wish, as long
as we do not care about its momentum, and vice versa.
The bundle of waves described above and shown in Figure 17 is technically referred to as
a wave packet.
It makes no sense to ask where the electron is located on a smaller scale than the extent
of the wave packet.
How do I measure the momentum of an electron?
One way would be to record its position at two different times.
Knowing how far it moved and how long it took to travel this distance, I can determine its
velocity and multiplying by the mass, assuming I can avoid relativistic corrections, yields
the momentum.
How can I tell where the electron is at the two different times?
It's easy to tell the velocity of an automobile, you just look at where it is at two different
times.
How do I look at an electron?
The same way I look at a car.
By shining light on it, and having the light be reflected to my eye, or some other detector.
Cars are much larger than the wavelength of visible light, but to observe the electron,
I need light with a wavelength smaller than the extent of the electron's wave packet.
The connection between wavelength and frequency for light is given by the simple relationship
– frequency times wavelength equals speed of light.
Since the speed of light is a constant, the smaller the wavelength, the larger the frequency
of the light, and from energy equals h times frequency, the larger the energy of the light
photon.
Thus, to measure the momentum of an electron with a very small wave packet, small uncertainty
and position, I must strike it with a very high energy photon.
When the photon reflects from the electron, the electron's recoil changes its momentum.
When a careful mathematical analysis is performed, one finds that you cannot do better than the
Heisenberg uncertainty relationship.
You may think there might be a clever scheme to get around this limitation of the wavelength
of light to determine the electron's position and momentum, but many have tried and all
have failed.
We might have been spared countless inane pronouncements that quantum mechanics has
proven that everything is uncertain if Heisenberg had simply named his principle something a
little less catchy, such as the principle of complementary standard deviations.
Armed now with an appreciation for the physical content of the famous uncertainty principle,
we now consider the following classic example of nerd humor.
Werner Heisenberg is pulled over for speeding by a highway patrolman.
The police officer walks over to Werner's car, leans over and asks Heisenberg, do you
know how fast you were going?
Heisenberg replies, no, but I know where I am.
An understanding of average values and standard deviations of bell-shaped curves is also relevant
to issues of climate change and explains why scientists are concerned about an increase
in the average global temperature of a few degrees, which admittedly does not sound that
menacing.
Consider a histogram plot of the temperature of North America, where the horizontal axis
lists the average daily temperature and the vertical axis charts the number of days per
year for which that particular average temperature is recorded.
We expect to find, and we do, a roughly bell-shaped curve, just as we have been discussing for
grades in a large class or measurements of an electron's position or momentum.
There will be a large peak in the temperature histogram around the average daily temperature
over the course of a year and small tails at lower and higher temperatures.
What is the effect of the yearly average temperature being raised by a few degrees?
The answer is easiest to see if we briefly return to the classroom analogy.
Suppose we add five extra credit points to every student's final exam paper.
Thus, if the average had been a grade of 50 before, now it will be 55, and the lowest
score will shift from 0 to 5, while the highest possible grade will move from 100 to 105.
A shift in the average grade from 50 to 55 does not seem like much, and for most students
there will be no significant effect.
I am just adding a uniform five points to everyone's grade, so the shape of the curve
does not change.
In addition, I do not adjust the cutoff line for what grade merits an A, what score deserves
a B, and so on.
In this case, I would find that by shifting the grades upward by only five points, the
number of students that are at or above the A cutoff threshold has increased dramatically.
A minor shift in the average, which does not have a large influence on the grade of the
majority of the students, has a big impact on those students that were near but just
below the threshold for a letter grade of A.
A small shift in the average annual global temperature is akin to giving everyone in
the class five extra credit points.
There will thus be more days with higher than normal average temperatures, corresponding
to those students whose exam performance warranted an A, and those are what drive extreme weather
situations.
A shift of the average upward by a few degrees is not a big deal on an average day and is
even welcome in the winter in states such as Minnesota, where we would not have such
extreme cold snaps.
But other parts of the nation in the summer would see a greater number of days where it
is hotter than normal.
It takes a lot of energy to warm up a large mass of water such as the Gulf of Mexico, and
it also takes a long time to cool it back down.
The energy of these hotter than normal days can be viewed as stored in the ocean, and
warmer water temperatures can provide energy for hurricanes, tropical storms, and other
extreme events.
Moreover, the more days with higher temperatures, the more ice will melt in northern regions.
Fresh snow reflects 80 to 90% of all the sunlight shining on it, while liquid water absorbs
and stores 70% of the sunlight.
There is thus a positive feedback mechanism by which higher temperatures lead to additional
warming.
Just as in the case of the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle, it's not the averages that matter
so much as the width of the standard deviations.
Those long tails will get us in the end.
