Chapter 8 Why So Blue, Dr. Manhattan?
In Chapter 5, I stated that at least some of the amazing superpowers displayed by Dr.
Manhattan in the graphic novel and motion picture Watchmen are a consequence of his
having control over his quantum mechanical wave function.
Now that we know a little bit more about wave functions, let's see how that might work.
While it is certainly true that all objects, from electrons, atoms and molecules to baseballs
and research scientists, have a quantum mechanical wave function, one can safely ignore the existence
of a matter wave for anything larger than an atom.
This is because the larger the mass, the larger the momentum, and the bigger the momentum,
the smaller the spatial extent of the wave function.
Being bigger than an atom or a small molecule has such a large mass that its corresponding
de Broglie wavelength is too small to ever be detected.
So right off the bat, we must grant Dr. Manhattan a miracle exception from the laws of nature,
such that he can control his wave function's spatial extent independently of his momentum.
While the de Broglie wavelength for an adult male is typically no larger than a trillionth-trillionth
of the width of an atom, Dr. Manhattan must be able to vary his wave function so that
it extends a great distance from his body, even as far as the distance between the Earth
and Mars.
The quantum mechanical wave function contains all the information about an object.
If we want to know the object's average position, its average speed, its energy, its angular
momentum for rotation about a given axis, and how these quantities will change with
time, we perform various mathematical operations on the wave function, which yield calculated
values for any measured characteristic of the object.
The wave function is so named because it is a mathematical function that has the properties
of an actual wave.
To review, in mathematics, a function describes any situation where providing one input value
leads to the calculation of a related number.
The simple equation relating distance to time spent driving at a constant speed, that is,
distance equals speed multiplied by time, is a mathematical function.
If your speed is 60 miles per hour, then if you tell me the time you spent driving, half
an hour, an hour, three hours, then this simple function enables you to calculate the distance
you have covered, 30 miles, 60 miles, or 180 miles respectively in this example.
Most mathematical functions are more complicated than this, and sometimes they get as involved
as the Schrodinger wave function, but they all relate some input parameter or parameters
to an output value.
For the quantum mechanical wave function of an electron in an atom, if you tell me its
location in three-dimensional space relative to the nucleus, then the solution to the Schrodinger
equation returns the amplitude of the electron's wave function at that point in space and time.
What does it mean to say that the wave function has the properties of a wave, such as a vibrating
string or the series of concentric circles created on the surface of a pond when a rock
is tossed into the water?
Waves are distinguished by having amplitudes that vary periodically in space and time.
Consider the ripples created when a rock is tossed into a pond.
At some points of the wave there are crests where the height of the water wave is large
and positive, that is, the surface of the water is higher than normal.
At some points there are troughs where the height of the water is lower than normal,
and in other regions the amplitude of the wave is zero.
The height of the water's surface is the same as it would be without the rock's disturbance.
The amplitude of the peaks and valleys typically becomes smaller with distance from the source
of the waves.
This is why on the California shore we don't notice if a rock is dropped into the center
of the Pacific Ocean.
Certain large disturbances can create tsunamis that maintain large amplitudes even when traveling
great distances.
Dr. Manhattan, presumably, is able to change the amplitude of his quantum mechanical wave
function so that it can have an appreciable amplitude at some large distance away from
him.
This would be how he teleports, though in quantum mechanics we would say that he is
tunneling.
Schrodinger's equation enables us to calculate the wave function of an object as a function
of the forces acting on it.
If there are no net forces, the electron, for example, can have uniform straight line
motion with a well-defined de Broglie wavelength determined by its momentum.
If this electron strikes a barrier and it lacks sufficient energy to go over the obstacle,
then the electron will be reflected, bouncing off the barrier and returning from where it
came.
We are familiar with such wave phenomena whenever we use a mirror.
Light waves move in straight lines, passing through the glass covering of the mirror until
they reach the silvered backing.
Unable to penetrate the metal, they are reflected back in another straight line trajectory along
a path that makes the same angle with a line perpendicular to the mirror's surface as the
incoming beam.
In fact, one does not need the metal backing to see this reflection effect.
We all know that a single pane of glass can act like a mirror when we look out the window
from a well-lit room at night.
In this case, just the difference in optical media, glass and air can cause light reflection,
particularly when we look at the window at an angle.
The reflection is more noticeable if the direction we are looking relative to the glass surface
is larger than a particular angle that depends on the optical properties of glass and air.
When we place our face against the glass, this reflection effect goes away, for then most
of the light rays that we see from outside travel perpendicular to the surface.
Light travels slower in glass than in air, more on this in a moment, and this difference
in light velocities, characterized by the material's index of refraction for technical
reasons, accounts for the reflection effect.
This can occur during daytime as well, but is less noticeable when more light comes into
the room from the outside than goes out from the interior.
Now, suppose that we are looking at the window at night from the interior of a strongly lit
room.
The glass reflects our image as if it were a conventional mirror.
Now imagine a second sheet of glass placed behind the first, as in a double-pane window.
Only the separation between the two sheets isn't a quarter of an inch, but more like
a millionth of a centimeter.
In this case, even though the light would have been completely reflected without the
second sheet of glass, the presence of the second pane enables some of the light to pass
through both sheets of glass, even though they are not touching each other.
This phenomenon is a hallmark of the wave-like properties of light, so for the sake of argument,
we will ignore for the moment that light is actually comprised of discrete photons.
It turns out that the light wave is not completely reflected at the first glass-air interface,
but a small amount of the oscillating electric and magnetic fields leak out into the air.
This small leakage is limited to a thin region very near the interface and is normally not
important, but when the second sheet of glass is brought very close to the first interface,
some of the protruding light waves extend into the second piece of glass.
In this case, the wave is not reflected, but rather propagates into the second glass.
This leakage effect is not unique to light.
It occurs for any wave, even those associated with matter.
One of the most fantastic aspects of quantum mechanics, and one that provides dramatic
confirmation that there is a wave-like aspect to the motion of matter, is that this leakage
effect is observed for electrons, protons, and neutrons.
Here, instead of light and a sheet of glass, consider an electron in a metal or semiconductor.
Instead of a glass-air interface, there might be a barrier at the surface of the conductor,
either the vacuum of empty space or some other electrical insulator.
The electron would normally not have enough energy to leave the conducting material and
would be reflected at this surface.
If another conductor is placed on the other side of the barrier, and if this barrier is
not too thick compared to the electron's de Broglie wavelength, then there is a probability
that the matter wave can extend through the gap.
Even though the electron does not have sufficient energy to jump or spark across the gap, as
its quantum mechanical wave function leaks through the forbidden barrier into the second
region, it can thus be found in the second conductor.
When matter waves exhibit this leakage effect, it is termed quantum mechanical tunneling.
Even though the electron does not obviously create a tunnel through the insulator or the
vacuum of empty space, recall that the square of the wave function tells us the probability
per volume of finding the electron at some point in space and time.
If the leakage of the wave function through the forbidden region is small, then there
is a low probability of finding the electron in the second region on the other side of
the barrier.
But anything that has a probability larger than zero will happen if one tries enough
times.
If we send an electron moving toward the barrier of a particular height and width, examination
of the wave function may show that there is a very large probability, at least 99.9999%,
that the electron would be reflected at the interface.
This means that there is only one chance in a million that the electron will show up in
the second material.
But if a million electrons approach the barrier, one may get through, and if a trillion electrons
strike the barrier, then a million will pass through via tunneling to the other side.
We don't know which electrons will make it into the second conductor until we send them
out, but based on the properties of the barrier, we can confidently predict how many on average
will get through.
As discussed in a later section, many personal electronics devices employ the tunneling phenomenon
to regulate the current in a circuit, putting this esoteric quantum mechanical effect to
prosaic and reliable use.
What an electron can do, Dr. Manhattan can do as well, at least in the pages of a comic
book or a motion picture with an extensive special effects budget.
Presumably, through his miraculous control of his quantum mechanical wave function, Dr.
Manhattan is able to extend his De Bruyue wavelength not just a few hundred nanometers
as the electron in a tunneling diode does, but over 36 million miles at Mars' closest
point to our planet.
With a large enough amplitude at the remote location, the probability of Dr. Manhattan
suddenly appearing at the new site becomes very large.
He never is actually in the space between his starting point and final destination, but
is simply able to adjust his probability density to be a maximum where he wants to go, which
is certainly a savings in time and money compared to commercial air travel.
Dr. Manhattan is able to change his size at will, as shown in Figure 15, due to the fact
that the Schrodinger equation is linear.
In mathematics, an equation is called linear if it depends only on the key variable.
In the Schrodinger equation, that would be the wave function psi, and not on that variable
squared or cubed or the square root and so on.
Note, a nonlinear equation would be something like psi squared equals psi plus 2, which
is a true statement for psi equals 2 or psi equals negative 1, but not for a psi value
10 times bigger, that is, psi equals 20 or negative 10.
A very simple linear equation is psi equals psi, which is certainly a true statement.
In fact, this equation is so simple that it is always true for any value of psi.
So if psi equals 1, then this equation tells us that 1 equals 1, which we already knew.
In this case, if psi is 10 times larger, then this simple equation tells us that 10 equals
10, which is also a true statement.
Given that the Schrodinger equation is linear, there is no change in the physics of the situation
if we multiply psi by a constant, either a larger or smaller one.
Presumably, Dr. Manhattan is able to shrink himself down as well, though we never see
him utilize this capability in the comics or the motion picture adaptation.
As shown in figures 11 and 19, John Osterman gained a bright blue pallor when he reassembled
himself, following the unfortunate incident in the intrinsic field chamber.
As wave functions have no color, there are at least three possible explanations for his
being blue.
One, always knowing what will happen in the future would take all the joy out of life.
Two, he's depressed because he realizes that nothing ever ends.
Or three, he's emitting Sarenkov radiation.
Dave Gibbons, the artist of Watchman, once stated in a radio interview that he elected
to make Dr. Manhattan blue as a visual signifier in order to constantly remind the readers
of John's transformation.
If Dr. Manhattan were red, he would look like he was on fire, green was too close to
the Hulk, and other colors would look too similar to actual skin tones on the printed
comic page.
Be that as it may, just because the color choice was one of casual necessity does not
mean that we can't obsessively discuss the underlying physics in great detail.
For it turns out that given Dr. Manhattan's origin, if he were to glow in any color of
the spectrum, it would indeed be blue.
When certain elements undergo radioactive decay, they may emit high-speed electrons as
a byproduct of their nuclear reaction.
We'll discuss the mechanism by which this occurs in the next section.
When those electrons, also referred to as beta rays, travel faster than the speed of
light in a material medium, they emit electromagnetic radiation in the blue ultraviolet portion
of the spectrum, which is known as Sarenkov radiation.
This last sentence is no doubt puzzling.
For a central principle of Einstein's special theory of relativity, is that nothing can
travel faster than the speed of light.
But this is in fact not strictly correct.
The more accurate way to state this principle is that nothing can travel faster than the
speed of light in the vacuum of empty space.
Light speed in a vacuum is 300 million meters per second, and is indeed the fastest velocity
in the universe.
However, light travels much slower than this when moving through denser media, such as
water or glass.
And it was noted that a straw and a glass of water appears to be broken at the water-air
interface, as shown in Figure 20, has observed an optical effect that results from light
moving slower in water than in air.
In order to be seen, light must be reflected from the straw and be detected by our eyes.
The change in the speed of light at the water-air surface causes straight line light rays to
bend in a phenomenon termed refraction.
The light that bounces off the portion of the straw protruding from the water, of course,
does not bend and travels in a straight line.
When we observe the light from the straw in the air, and the light that bent upon leaving
the water, we interpret the image as a straw with a sharp discontinuity at the water's
surface.
Why does light travel slower in water and other media?
It is because the electromagnetic waves interact with the electron surrounding each atom in
the material.
When running through a swimming pool, you will move slower if you hold your arms out
away from your body and increase the drag by the water.
Light experiences an electromagnetic drag from the electrons that can slow its motion
down markedly.
The speed of light in water or glass is only 75% of what it is in a vacuum, which is still
pretty fast.
But high-speed electrons can move through these media with fewer interactions, and thus
it is possible for an electron to travel in water faster than light can, in water.
When this happens, the electron, which does interact with the electrons surrounding the
atom in the material, only not as strongly as light, generates an electromagnetic sonic
boom, emitting light in the blue ultraviolet region of the electromagnetic spectrum.
This blue-light shock front is termed Serenkov radiation, after Pavel Serenkov, who discovered
and explained this phenomenon in 1934, for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics
in 1958.
Air is much less dense than water or glass, and light slows down only slightly when moving
through the atmosphere compared to its largest speed in a vacuum.
Nevertheless, for the purposes of explaining the science underlying a fictional character
in a comic book, let's stipulate that it is possible to generate Serenkov radiation
through high-speed electrons jetting through the air.
Let's also suppose that when Dr. Manhattan reassembled himself following the removal
of his intrinsic field, he did so in such a way that he is continually leaking high-speed
electrons, giving him a healthy blue glow.
There are always many electrons from the earth that he can draw upon in order to maintain
his charge neutrality.
If he wanted to darken his view, as he does at one point for the benefit of television
cameras, he could simply change the speed at which the electrons escape.
The reactor piles at the bottom of deep pools of water give off a deep blue glow, and this
Serenkov light indicates that the pile is active and emitting beta rays.
Note, the heat emitted by the reactor causes the water to boil, and the resulting steam
turns turbines in the dynamo that generates electricity.
In Watchman, spoiler alert, a character frames Dr. Manhattan, accusing him of giving his
close friends and an ex-girlfriend cancer.
One way to inflict his associates that would plausibly suggest Osterman is the source of
the disease is to surreptitiously expose these people to nuclear isotopes, such as Strontium-90,
that are known to be carcinogenic and are deadly precisely because of their beta radiation
emissions.
Another striking characteristic of Watchman's Dr. Manhattan is his ability to experience
the past, present, and future simultaneously.
It is specified in the graphic novel that due to the post-intrinsic field removal, John
Osterman is able to see only his own future, and thus would not know of events to come
unless he either directly experiences or participates in them or is told about them.
Again, if Dr. Manhattan did indeed have control over his macroscopic quantum mechanical wave
function, then as the wave function contains all the information about the object's probability
density in space and time, this characteristic is plausible.
The fact that there is no other source of information about the future evolution of an
object than what is contained in its wave function is significant.
If all we have is the wave function, and the wave function can tell us only the probability
per unit volume of finding the object in space and time, then even in a perfect idealized
situation, we must resign ourselves to knowing only the odds of the object's location.
When we deal with probabilities and statistics in other non-quantum situations in physics,
it is simply to make our lives easier.
We know that Newton's laws of motion provide a nearly complete description of the interactions
of the air molecules in the room in which you are reading this right now.
However, to apply these equations to the air would involve solving Newton's laws for all
trillion, trillion molecules simultaneously.
In this and similar situations, it is much more reasonable to describe the average pressure,
for example, or introduce the concept of temperature, which represents the average kinetic energy
per molecule, rather than deal with each molecule separately in turn.
In contrast, in the quantum world, the emphasis on probability density is a matter of necessity,
not convenience.
Even with infinitely fast and infinitely precise observations, we can never know exactly where
the object is, but only its average location.
This inability to do better than knowing the odds is a consequence of the wave-like nature
of matter.
Recall the discussion of the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle from the preceding chapter.
The wavelength of the matter wave associated with the electron, for example, is directly
connected to its momentum.
A pure single wave has only one wavelength, and thus we know exactly what its momentum
is, but at the expense of having any information about where the electron is.
The more we localize the electron, say, by ensuring that it will be found within the
one-third of a nanometer, that is the typical spatial extent of an atom, the less we know
about its momentum.
If we had perfect knowledge of its position, which is what physicists desired in order to
put the probability density aspect to rest, then this would come at the cost of perfect
ignorance about its momentum.
It could, in principle, have any momentum between zero and infinity, and we would thus
have to contend with the probability interpretation of its motion.
As we need to know both positions and momentum to employ a traditional Newton's law description
of a system, probabilities are the best we can ever do.
Of course, knowing the probability that Dr. Manhattan may be in a particular state in
the future, such as living on Mars having a conversation with his girlfriend, is not
a guarantee that he will indeed work out his relationship problems on the red planet.
The only time something is absolutely certain to occur is when the probability is 100%,
just as the only time something will never happen is if the probability is zero.
In most circumstances, the most probable outcome is indeed the one that is observed.
But what about the other probabilities that are not realized?
What do these wave function solutions to the Schrodinger equation correspond to?
One interpretation was provided by Hugh Everett III.
Everett suggested that all of these probabilities describe actual outcomes on other Earths in
an infinite number of parallel universes.
If the probability of a certain event occurring as 10%, then Everett suggested that on 10%
of the possible parallel Earths, this outcome did indeed occur.
The world we live in and experience is one that continually unfolds from this multiverse
of possible Earths.
For everything we experience, there are alternate Earths where different outcomes are realized.
Everett's ideas were considered too unconventional, even by the standards of quantum theory, and
his proposal, described in his physics dissertation at Princeton in 1957, earned him his PhD,
but was otherwise completely ignored by the scientific community.
Disappointed, Everett eventually turned away from pure scientific research and worked for
the military, calculating full-out yields of various nuclear weapons for the Department
of Defense.
He passed away in 1978, but not before his ideas received some measure of recognition
by a small group of theoretical physicists, notably Bryce DeWitt, who actually coined
the term, many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics, to describe Everett's thesis.
Nowadays, the number of physicists who subscribe to the many-worlds picture, while still small,
is growing, as those who are struggling to reconcile quantum mechanics and Einstein's
general theory of relativity, find application for the many-worlds model.
Global universes and alternate Earths are, of course, a common feature in science fiction
stories, both prior to Everett's dissertation and since.
Sometimes these alternate worlds are profoundly different from ours, as in Flatland, Edwin
Abbott's Tale of a Two-Dimensional World published in 1884, or the 1931 short story The Fifth
Dimensional Catapult by Murray Leinster.
In 1896, H. G. Wells told Platner's Story, wherein Gottfried Platner, in an accident
involving a mysterious green powder in a chemistry lab at a boy's boarding school, is hurled
to a parallel world that orbits a green sun and is inhabited by strange alien creatures
with human heads and tadpole-like bodies.
It is difficult to imagine the branching of possible wave functions that could have led
to such an outcome.
In Wells' short story, The Remarkable Case of Davidson's Eyes, Sidney Davidson, through
another laboratory accident, gains the ability to see another world, where a ship docks on
a South Sea island and stocks up on penguin eggs, despite the fact that all the information
from his other senses is consistent with his being in a laboratory in London.
Gradually, Sidney's normal vision returns, and in time he discovers that the ship that
he had seen in this alternate Earth was a real sea vessel that was in fact gathering
penguin eggs on Antipodes Island at the time of Davidson's strange visions.
While a definitive explanation is not presented, it is speculated that when Davidson stooped
between the poles of a powerful electromagnet in the lab, his retina gained the ability
to see through a kink in space, though weather of this world or a parallel one remains open
to interpretation.
A few years after Everett published his novel Solution to the Measurement Problem in Quantum
Mechanics, the DC's Super Speedster, The Flash of the 1960s, vibrated to a parallel Earth
in order to have adventures with The Flash of the 1940s.
Same power, different costume and alter ego.
In the television program Star Trek, broadcast in 1967, a transporter malfunction during
an ion storm leads Captain Kirk, Dr. McCoy, Engineer Scott and Lieutenant Uhura to an
alternate universe Starship Enterprise populated by evil twins of the rest of the crew, distinguished
by goatees naturally.
In this mirror universe, the crew of the Enterprise are violent and ruthless, but one feature
that remains constant in either universe is Captain Kirk's roving eye for the ladies.
In comic books, characters often travel to alternate Earths and parallel universes, and
the implication in the stories is that the world of the comic book reader, the one lacking
in actual superheroes, is the real universe.
However, a photo that I came across in the archives of the American Institute of Physics
suggests that the situation may be more complicated than we might think.
The photo, shown in Figure 21, documents a visit in 1957 to the Princeton University
Physics Department by Niels Bohr, one of the founders of Quantum Mechanics we encountered
in Section 1, as he meets with several physics graduate students.
The student on the immediate right of Bohr is Hugh Everett III.
While the other students are not identified, the individual on the far left appears to
be none other than John Osterman.
All that Osterman received his Ph.D. in physics from Princeton in 1957, and so would have
indeed been included in the select group of students, honored with an audience with one
of the grand old men of physics.
As mind-bending as the concepts introduced by Quantum Mechanics and to modern thought
have been, the suggestion that comic book characters live among us may be a step too
far.
