Chapter 11 Man of the Atom Before there was physicist John Osterman,
there was physicist Philip Soler.
In the 1986 DC comic book Watchman, Osterman was disintegrated by the accidental removal
of his intrinsic field at Heel of Flats and reconstructed himself as the super power Doctor
Manhattan.
In the 1962 gold key comic book series, Solar, Man of the Atom, Philip's solar was exposed
to a lethal dose of radiation in a sabotaged nuclear research experiment at Atom City,
yet survived though he acquired quantum powers.
In issue number two, he is vaporized by an atomic bomb blast, but manages through sheer
force of will to reconstitute himself as, well, Doctor Solar, which was his name after
all.
As a survivor of graduate school myself, I can empathize with Osterman and Soler's inclination
to retain the title associated with their PhDs in the lab or as a super powered hero.
Once you've passed through the crucible of a graduate school candidacy exam, having to
reassemble yourself up from the subatomic level is not as challenging as you might think.
In writer Alan Moore's initial outline of the DC comic book miniseries Watchman, he
intended to use comic book characters created by Charlton, another comic book publisher.
Charlton had declared bankruptcy, and the company had been acquired by DC Comics, home
of Superman and Batman.
Moore's initial outline for Watchman made direct use of the Charlton characters, but
the editors at DC Comics, seeing that some of these characters would not make it out
of the miniseries unscathed, instructed Moore to instead employ alternate versions of the
Charlton heroes.
Dr. Manhattan is the analog of Captain Atom, an Air Force Captain who was, I'm sure you
can see this coming at this stage, disintegrated and through force of will was able to reassemble
himself into a quantum powered super being.
Captain Atom's powers were quantum based, only in that he was able to manipulate energy,
which he employed primarily for flight, super strength and energy blasts.
Dr. Soler, though not a Charlton character, seems to be a closer antecedent for Dr. Manhattan.
As Soler was also able to change size, Dr. Soler No. 10 and No. 11 split himself into
multiple copies of himself, Dr. Soler No. 12, and manipulate matter and energy, although
unlike the blue Dr. Manhattan, Dr. Soler's skin turned green when he used his powers.
There are just enough differences among Captain Atom, Dr. Soler and Dr. Manhattan, that it
is unlikely that they are all the same person on three different versions of Hugh Everett's
many worlds, although further studies appear warranted.
One of the more accurate manifestations of quantum mechanical powers was presented in
Soler's Midas Touch, in 1965's Dr. Soler, Man of the Atom, No. 14.
In this tale, an underwater nuclear reactor pile went critical when one of the control
rods, whose role is to absorb neutrons decreasing the rate of uranium fission, as described in
Chapter 9, broke. Dr. Soler, whose powers are normally energized by exposure to radiation,
went underwater to fix the reactor, but found himself weakened by the reactor's radioactivity,
through a process not clearly explained in the comic. Eventually, he was rescued by a
worker wearing a lead line safety suit, who would have done the job in the first place
if Dr. Soler hadn't attempted to save the day.
The additional radiation he absorbed from the reactor temporarily endowed Soler with a new superpower.
As illustrated in Figure 27, whenever Dr. Soler came into physical contact with an object,
he transmuted it into the next element up the periodic table.
In Figure 26, he transforms gold, with 79 protons, into mercury, with 80 protons.
Earlier, he grasps a copper rod, 29 protons, and converts it into zinc, Atomic No. 30.
And even when flying, he begins to choke when the oxygen, Atomic No. 8, turns into fluorine gas,
with 9 protons. This newfound power of Dr. Soler's appears to be the ability to initiate
beta decay of the neutrons in any object he touches, inducing elemental transmutation
via the weak nuclear force, an aspect of Watchman's intrinsic field that we have not
discussed much yet. We saw in Chapter 9 that neutrons, through the strong force, hold the
nucleus together by binding with protons and other neutrons, and overwhelming the electrostatic
repulsion that would, in their absence, cause the protons to fly out of the nucleus.
Protons also exhibit the strong force, but without neutrons, there is not sufficient
binding energy to hold together a nucleus consisting only of protons. Neutrons themselves
are not stable outside of a nucleus. A neutron sitting alone in the lab will decay into a proton
and an electron with a half-life of about 10 and a half minutes. The electron will be moving very
near the speed of light, and when this process occurs within a nucleus, it is the source of the
beta rays emitted from unstable isotopes. As the total mass and energy of an isolated system
must remain unchanged in any process, a stationary neutron can decay only to fundamental particles
with less mass than the neutrons. A stationary neutron is one that is sitting still, isolated
in space or moving but stationary to us if we moved along in the same speed and direction as
the neutron, called the neutron's rest frame. A neutron will thus decay into a proton,
which has a slightly smaller mass, while a stationary proton could not decay into a heavier
neutron. However, as the neutron is electrically neutral and the proton is positively charged,
the decay must also generate a negatively charged electron in order for the charge to
remain unchanged before and after the decay. We have not needed to invoke this principle before
now, but another conservation principle in physics, comparable to conservation of energy or conservation
of angular momentum, is conservation of charge, in that electrical charge can be neither created
nor destroyed in any process. An electron is nearly 2,000 times lighter than a proton,
less than the mass difference between neutrons and protons, so adding an electron to the decay
is still consistent with mass conservation. While a neutron decaying into a proton and an electron
means that mass and electrical charge are balanced during the decay, examination of the
kinetic energy of the proton and the high-speed electron, that is the beta ray, and comparison
to the rest mass energy of the neutron indicates that some energy went missing in the process,
not a lot, but enough to notice and enough to cause trouble. When physicists in the late 1920s
discovered this phenomenon and realized that it appeared to violate the principle of conservation
of energy, they were faced with two choices. One, either abandon conservation of energy,
at least for neutron decay processes, or two, invent a miracle particle that was undetectable
by instrumentation of the time, but that carried off the missing energy. In 1930, Wolfgang Pauli,
whose exclusion principle I address in the next section, suggested going with option two.
Knowing that this ghost particle had to be electrically neutral and had to have very little
or no mass, Enrico Fermi called it the little neutral one in Italian, or neutrino. For technical
reasons that need not concern us, when neutrons decay, they emit a proton, an electron, and an
anti-neutrino, the antimatter version of a neutrino. As I say, we need not worry about this
particular set of weeds here. Detectors were eventually constructed to observe these particles,
and their existence was confirmed in 1956. These particles not only really exist, they are the most
common particle in the universe. Their interactions with matter are governed by the weak nuclear force,
which is one hundred billion times weaker than electromagnetism, the force by which electrons
interact with matter. Neutrinos consequently barely notice normal matter. It takes more than two
light years of lead, that is a length of more than ten trillion miles, to stop one. If you hold out
your thumb and blink, during that time period, more than seventy thousand neutrinos will pass
through your thumbnail. Dr. Solar, after his radiation overdose, must have gained an uncontrolled
ability to induce beta decay in any object with which he came into contact. If a gold atom,
with 79 protons, 79 electrons, and 118 neutrons, has one of its neutrons spontaneously decay into
a proton and an electron, then it will have 80 protons, 80 electrons, and 117 neutrons.
The lightest stable configuration of mercury has 80 protons, 80 electrons, and 118 neutrons,
so Dr. Solar will have created an unstable isotope of mercury in figure 26.
The half-life of this isotope of mercury with 117 neutrons is roughly two and a half days,
so there will be time for Solar to finish his adventure and try to restore the transmuted
mercury back to its original golden state. While transforming one element into its periodic table
neighbor via neutron beta decay is not quite the alchemist's dream of transmuting lead into gold.
Normal beta decay would convert platinum with 78 protons into gold with 79 protons,
so depending on world exchange prices, you may wind up losing money on the deal.
A process known as reverse beta decay would turn mercury into gold.
While we cannot initiate such a conversion on Earth at will, fortunately this inverse
process occurs constantly in the center of the sun, keeping the sun shining and providing the basis
of all life. The light from the sun, which is transformed by photosynthesis into chemical
energy stored within plants, which in turn provides us with the energy we need to maintain
our metabolisms, originates from nuclear transformations in the star's core. Four protons,
that is hydrogen nuclei, subjected to the extreme pressures and temperatures at the center of the
sun, are fused together to form helium nuclei. But a helium nucleus consists of two protons and
two neutrons, not four protons. Recall that neutrons are necessary as mediators of the strong
nuclear force that holds the nucleus together. Thus, to make helium out of hydrogen, you first
have to combine two protons and then, through reverse beta decay, convert one of the protons
into a neutron. I argued above that a proton cannot convert into a neutron, as the mass of
the proton is less than that of a neutron, and lighter objects cannot decay into heavier products.
If two protons collide, the weak force operates on the protons turning one into a neutron through
reverse beta decay, as illustrated in Figure 28. The proton and neutron, subject to the strong force,
become bound, now a deuterium nucleus, an isotope of hydrogen, and lower their energy
compared to an isolated proton and neutron. This lower energy is reflected in a smaller mass
for the deuterium nucleus, relative to a free proton and neutron. While the mass difference is
very small, through E equals mc squared, the energy difference of the bound deuterium is
significant, and it emits a 2.225 million electron volt gamma ray photon during formation.
In addition to the neutron generated by the weak force, the reaction creating a deuterium nucleus
yields an antimatter electron, which has a positive electrical charge like a proton,
but the mass of an electron, and a neutrino. The weak force extends over a length scale roughly
one thousand times smaller than that of the strong force, which itself acts only over distances less
than the diameter of a nucleus. Two protons, both being positively charged, repel each other,
and the closer they are, the greater the repulsive force. So one must force the two protons very
close together, overcoming their electrical repulsion, in order for there to be an opportunity
for the weak force to transform, through reverse beta decay, one of the protons into a neutron.
The temperatures and pressures in the center of the sun are enormous,
so that there are many opportunities for high velocity collisions between two protons.
However, even at the center of the sun, the proton speeds are not sufficient to overcome
the electrical repulsion when they draw too close. How do they manage to get past this
electrical barrier? Through quantum mechanical tunneling. Just as the alpha particles in radioactive
decay tunnel to escape the strong force barrier around the nucleus that keeps the protons and
neutrons together, the two protons that join together, forming the simplest isotope of hydrogen,
must tunnel to overcome the barrier of their mutual repulsion.
Note, famed astrophysicist Sir Arthur Eddington was one of the first to recognize that the sun's
energy resulted from nuclear reactions. However, prior to the development of quantum mechanics,
many physicists objected that the temperature at the center of the sun
were too low to enable such processes. To this Eddington replied in 1920,
we do not argue with the critic who urges that the stars are not hot enough for this process.
We tell him to go and find a hotter place. The deuterium nucleus created in the center of the
sun is stable and continues to collide with other protons. Combining this deuterium with
another proton forms a nucleus with two protons, that is helium, but only one neutron, making it
helium-3, a lighter isotope of helium. Here again, quantum mechanical tunneling is required to get
the second proton close enough to the deuterium nucleus, overcoming the electrical proton-proton
repulsion for the strong force to hold the second proton in the now larger nucleus.
The lower energy of this bound state results in the release of another gamma-ray photon.
This reaction is much more likely than for two deuterium nuclei to combine to form
normal helium, two protons and two neutrons. There are then many different ways that the
helium-3 or deuterium nuclei can interact to form a stable helium nucleus, all of which
involve quantum mechanical tunneling to get the positively charged nuclei close enough for the
strong force to operate, resulting in the release of a great deal of energy in the form of kinetic
energy of the nuclei, gamma rays and neutrinos. The neutrinos pass right through the sun and head
off in all directions, while the gammas heat up the nuclei and electrons in the center,
accelerating them and causing them to emit electromagnetic radiation at all wavelengths.
The light created in the center of the sun is scattered many, many times before reaching the
surface, where it then takes the brief eight and a half minute journey to Earth. Before reaching
the surface, the average photon spends 40,000 years colliding with the dense nuclear matter in
the sun's interior. The outward energy pressure counteracts the inward gravitational pull and
keeps the diameter of the sun fairly stable. In addition to providing us with energy, this fusion
process is the mechanism by which elements heavier than helium are synthesized. Our sun is actually
a second generation star that formed after a much larger star passed through its life cycle
and went supernova. Our sun converts a great deal of hydrogen as it generates energy,
approximately 600 million tons per second. But eventually, stars exhaust their supply of hydrogen,
and the star collapses until the temperature and pressure rise to the point
where helium nuclei begin to fuse, forming carbon. The process continues, generating nitrogen,
oxygen, silicon and other heavy elements up the periodic table to iron and nickel. However,
the larger the nucleus created, the less energy is released per reactant. And at the iron nickel
point, the outward flow of energy is insufficient to counteract the inward gravitational pull.
At this stage, the star collapses onto itself. In the process, all elements heavier than iron are
created, and there is an explosive outpouring of energy as the star becomes a supernova, releasing
as much energy in a period of several weeks as our sun does over its entire lifetime. It is from
the elements synthesized in a much larger star that lived and underwent a violent demise that the
planets and sun of our solar system formed. The power of the atomic bomb results from breaking
apart a large nuclei, such as uranium or plutonium, in a fission process described in Chapter 9.
Current nuclear power plants, such as the one that went critical injuring Dr.
Solar at the start of this chapter, are fission reactors. They require rare radioactive isotopes
as fuel, and their byproducts are unstable isotopes, which are themselves radioactive and
harmful to people. After the atomic bomb, the hydrogen bomb was developed. This weapon utilizes
a fission reaction to initiate a fusion reaction. The energy of an atomic bomb is employed to force
heavy isotopes of hydrogen and helium to fuse and release even more energy. For more than 50 years,
scientists have been attempting to construct a fusion reactor that could create energy for
electricity production, harnessing the power of the hydrogen bomb and the sun for peaceful,
controlled terrestrial needs. The required fuel for a fusion reactor involves isotopes of hydrogen,
typically deuterium and tritium, which may be harvested from naturally occurring isotopes of
seawater, and the reaction products are non-radioactive. The obstacle is to replicate in a controlled
manner the temperatures and pressures at the center of the sun. While the engineering challenges
have indeed been formidable, a consortium of nations from Europe, Russia, Japan and the United States
are constructing a pilot fusion power plant, the International Thermonuclear Experimental
Reactor, or ITER, to examine the feasibility of using nuclear fusion for electricity generation.
Back in the late 1980s, there was a brief flurry of interest in reports that nuclear fusion had
been achieved in a small tabletop experiment involving the electrolysis of heavy water using
a palladium electrode. This so-called cold fusion process proposed that the deuterium nuclei embedded
within the metal electrode were undergoing fusion and creating helium nuclei with a concurrent release
of excess heat. Whatever was going on in their device, it was not nuclear fusion, and it's a
good thing for the chemists involved in this project that they were not in fact generating fusion
reactions. A byproduct of this particular fusion reaction is high-energy neutrons that would have
killed anyone unlucky enough to be in the lab at the time. Moreover, as discussed earlier, fusion
reactions within the center of the sun at temperatures of millions of degrees
require quantum mechanical tunneling for the protons to overcome their electrical repulsion.
Fusion at room temperature in a palladium electrode is even more dependent on tunneling to
proceed. A well-established feature of quantum mechanics is that the tunneling probability
is very sensitive to the mass of the object involved. The smaller the mass, the lower the
momentum and the longer the de Broglie wavelength, which can extend farther through the forbidden
region, increasing the probability of finding the object on the other side of the barrier.
Yet, the initial investigators of cold fusion found no difference whether they used heavy water
or ordinary tap water, whereas the difference in mass should have had a large effect on the
fusion process. For cold fusion to be a real phenomenon, it would require a suspension or
violation of the principles of quantum mechanics, which underlies our understanding of solid state
physics, lasers, transistors, and all of the personal electronic devices they enable.
Nevertheless, one might be tempted to give these up if we could make cold fusion a physical reality.
After all, a small cylinder capable of generating the power of the sun would make an awesome power
supply for a jet pack.
