Chapter 12 Every man for himself.
The agreement between theoretical predictions of atomic properties using quantum mechanics,
such as the wavelengths of light emitted when an excited hydrogen atom relaxes back to its
ground state, and experimental measurements of these wavelengths is nothing short of amazing.
But if that were all that quantum mechanics could do, it most certainly would not have
made the future.
We would still be living in the vacuum tube age and would not have laptop computers, cell
phones, DVDs, or magnetic resonance imaging devices.
The quantum descriptions of Schrodinger and Heisenberg accurately account for the properties
of a single atom, but very rarely does one encounter an isolated single hydrogen atom
or any type of atom or molecule by itself.
A typical cubic centimeter of a liquid or solid about the size of a sugar cube contains
roughly a trillion trillion atoms.
The power of quantum mechanics is that it also provides an understanding of the properties
of these trillion trillion atoms, and accounts for why some materials are metals, some are
insulators, and others are semiconductors.
Fortunately for us, it turns out that if one understands the behavior when two entities
are brought close enough to each other that they're Schrodinger wave functions overlap,
then this tells us nearly all we need to know to understand the results of a trillion trillion
entities in close quarters.
Up till now, we have made extensive use of the first two quantum principles listed in
section one, that light consists of discrete packets of energy termed photons, and that
there is a wave associated with the motion of all matter.
We have not needed to invoke the third principle, that all matter and light has an internal
rotation that corresponds to discrete values of angular momentum.
We would have needed this principle in order to understand details of how the electronic
energy states in an atom are arranged, but for our purposes there was no call to head
into this set of weeds.
But we cannot avoid a certain amount of weediness now.
Not if we wish to understand the basis for the semiconductor age, and the foundations
of the upcoming nanotechnology revolution.
In chapter four, we discussed the intrinsic angular momentum that all subatomic particles
possessed, termed spin, associated with this internal spin as a magnetic field, so that
every electron, proton, and neutron can also be considered a tiny bar magnet, with a north
and a south pole.
While the concept of spin was introduced to account for experimental observations, indicating
that electrons possessed are built in magnetic field, one cannot ascribe this magnetic field
to a literal physical rotation of the subatomic particles as if they were ballerinas.
It is indeed confusing to imagine an intrinsic angular momentum as integral to the properties
of the electron, and as real as its charge or mass, that is not associated with a physical
rotation.
Nevertheless, spin is the term that has stuck, and we adhere to this nomenclature, as we
are nothing if not slaves to convention.
As mentioned in chapter four, the intrinsic angular momentum of electrons is exactly h
divided by two.
Recall that h is defined as h divided by two pi, measured relative to a particular axis
of rotation.
The spinning electron can have an intrinsic angular momentum of either positive h divided
by two, or negative h divided by two, just as a real spinning ballerina can twirl either
clockwise or counterclockwise.
No other intrinsic angular momentum values are possible for electrons, or protons or
neutrons.
The collective behavior of quantum particles that have a spin of plus or minus h divided
by two was first worked out by Enrico Fermi and Paul Dirac in the 1930s.
In honor of their contribution, physicists refer to all spin h divided by two particles
as obeying Fermi Dirac statistics, or by the shorter nickname of fermions.
Fermi got the sweet part of this deal.
The fact that electrons are spin h divided by two particles, and thus are fermions, has
led to a host of quantities in solid state physics as being labeled with his name.
Fermi energies, Fermi surfaces, and so on, even though he made few direct contributions
to this field of physics.
Here are two fermions, such as electrons.
It really is true that all electrons look alike.
This is not the prejudiced opinion of an antifermite, but a reflection of the fact that all fundamental
particles of a given type are identical.
There is no way to distinguish or differentiate between electrons, for example.
Similarly, all protons are identical, as are all neutrons.
These three subatomic particles have different masses and electrical charges, so they can
be distinguished from one another.
But if we bring two electrons so close to each other that their de Broglie waves overlap,
then no observable property can possibly depend on which electron is which.
If I toss a rock into a pond, a series of concentric circular ripples forms, figure
29a.
When I toss two rocks into the water a small distance apart, each forms its own set of
ripples, and the combined effect is a complicated interference pattern, figure 29b.
At some points, the ripples from each rock add up coherently and create a larger disturbance
on the water's surface than generated by each rock separately.
At other locations, the two ripples are exactly out of phase, so that one ripple is at a peak
while the other stone's wave is at a trough, and the two exactly cancel each other out.
Combined together, the resulting pattern is more than just a doubling of the result
of one stone's concentric ripples.
All objects have a quantum mechanical wave function.
When two electrons are brought together such that their wave functions intersect, then
they are described by a two-electron wave function.
For the case of two rocks tossed into the pond, if the stones are identical and both
are tossed into the water in the exact same way, then the interference pattern that is
observed does not depend on which rock was tossed on the left and which on the right.
Similarly, in atomic physics, nothing that we can measure, such as the wavelength of
light emitted from transitions between quantized energy states, can depend on any artificial
labeling of the electrons.
In the case of the stones in the water, they are indeed distinguishable, for we can refer
to the stone on the left and the stone on the right in a meaningful way.
Heisenberg tells us that it is fruitless to try to specify the location of the electron
more precisely than the extent of its de Broglie wave.
When two de Broglie waves overlap, concepts such as left and right become irrelevant,
and all we have is the composite two-electron wave function.
Say I have two electrons, which I will creatively call electron one and electron two.
I bring them together so that their wave functions intersect.
The electrons are indistinguishable, and no measurements can depend on which one is labeled
electron one and which one is electron two.
Are there any differences at all between them at this point?
Indeed, yes.
The two electrons, one and two, have identical electrical charges and identical masses, but
they can have different intrinsic angular momentum.
Both electron one and electron two can have spin values of positive h divided by two, or
both could have a spin value of negative h divided by two, or one could have a spin
of positive h divided by two, while the other has a spin of negative h divided by two.
These different values of spin will be crucial for understanding solid state physics.
Think about a ribbon, one side of which is black and the other side is white.
The ribbon represents a single electron, and if I hold the ribbon so that the white side
is facing you, it indicates that the electron's spin is positive h divided by two, while if
the black side is shown, this means the spin is negative h divided by two.
Now, if I hold two ribbons far away from each other, I can easily distinguish them.
One is on the right and the other is on the left.
Bring them close so that their waves overlap, and I can no longer tell them apart.
In this case, I can describe them both with a single longer ribbon.
I can still represent the case where one electron has spin of positive h divided by two, and
the other has spin of negative h divided by two.
By having my right hand hold the ribbon with the white side facing out, and my left hand
hold the ribbon's black side facing out.
In figure 30 is shown a ribbon, where both ends of the ribbon have the white side facing
out, indicating that both electrons have a spin of positive h divided by two.
The arguments presented in this figure are a modification of those made by David Finkelstein,
as described in Richard Feynman's essay, The Reason for Antiparticles.
I need hardly stress that the ribbon is simply a metaphor that will, I hope, assist in the
visualization of a two-particle wave function, and is not intended as a literal representation.
The ribbon in figure 30 represents a two-electron wave function with both electrons having a
spin of positive h divided by two.
The fact that the two electrons are so close that they are described by a single wave function
is represented by the fact that I use one ribbon for both electrons.
Any change to one electron is thus also communicated to the other.
What if I switch their positions so that I move the right hand side to the left and the
left passes to the right?
If I do this without letting go of either end of the ribbon, then by switching their locations
I will add a half twist to the ribbon, figure 30B.
This is not the same situation I started with, as the ribbon has a half twist that it did
not have before switching their positions.
One can tell from inspection of the ribbon that a swap from left to right has occurred.
And that's it.
That's the heart of Fermi-Dirac statistics, which governs the way electrons interact with
one another and is the basis of the periodic table of the elements, chemistry, and solid
state physics.
How do I combine the wave functions for two electrons so that switching their order changes
the situation, but making another swap restores the original state?
Easy.
Let the two electron wave functions psi be described as the difference of two functions,
A and B. That is, psi equals A minus B, where A and B each depend on the one electron wave
functions at positions 1 and 2.
As in switching the two ends of the ribbon, let a rotation move the electron that was
at one position to the location of the other electron, and conversely, in this case the
wave function would be written as psi equals B minus A. The process of switching the positions
of the two electrons is the same as multiplying the original two electron wave function by
negative 1.
If I want to get back to the original configuration, I do another switch, which brings me to psi
equals A minus B again.
Note, those who know quantum mechanics will recognize that these two functions are A equals
psi sub M1, psi sub N2, and B equals psi sub N1, psi sub M2, where psi sub M1 is the wave
function for an electron at position 1 in quantum state M, and psi sub N2 represents
the second electron in a quantum state N at position 2.
If the positions of the electrons 1 and 2 are interchanged, then the total wave function
psi equals A minus B, which equals psi sub M1, psi sub N2, minus psi sub N1, psi sub
M2, acquires a minus sign.
If you understood this side note, then this book is not for you.
Anything that I can measure should depend on which electron I label at position 1 and
which one is at position 2.
Now, there's no problem with having a two electron wave function written as A minus
B. The fact that switching the positions is the same as multiplying the wave function
by negative 1 will not affect any measurement that we make.
Remember that while the wave function psi contains all the information about the quantum
mechanical system, it is the wave function squared, psi squared, that gives us the probability
of finding the object at some point in space and time.
It is also the wave function squared, psi squared, that is used in calculating the average
position.
We add up all possible positions when multiplied by the probability, psi squared, of the electron
being at that position, the average momentum, and so on.
And since the square of negative 1 is negative 1 times negative 1, or positive 1, then psi
equals A minus B is a physically valid way to represent the two spin H divided by two
electrons.
Right off the bat, there's a big consequence of writing the two electron wave function
as psi equals A minus B.
What happens if I try to make both electrons be at the same location, or have both electrons
in the same quantum state, when they are close enough to overlap and are described by a single
two electron wave function, so that the function of A is equal to the function of B?
Then the two electron wave function would be psi equals A minus B, which equals zero
when A equals B. If psi equals zero, then the square of the wave function psi squared
equals zero as well.
Physically, this means that the probability of finding two electrons at the same time
in the exact same quantum state is zero, as in, this will never happen.
Recall in chapter 8 our discussion of quantum mechanical tunneling.
In a tunneling situation, an electron in one metal, separated by the vacuum of empty space
from another metal, and not having sufficient energy to arc or jump from one metal to another,
may nonetheless find itself in the second material.
We pointed out that even though the probability for the electron to be outside of metal may
be very small, as in, one chance out of a trillion, then there was still some chance
of finding the electron in the second metal.
The only time something will never be observed is if the probability of it happening is exactly
zero.
If something can never be observed, in physics we say that it is forbidden.
Right away, from the fact that electrons have an intrinsic angular momentum of h divided
by 2, we can understand the structure of the periodic table of the elements.
In chapter 6, we discussed the solutions to Schrodinger's equation when the potential
v is that of the electrical attraction between the negatively charged electrons and the positively
charged nucleus.
Schrodinger found that there were a series of possible solutions corresponding to different
energy states that we argued were not unlike a series of rows of seats in a classroom,
sketched in figure 15.
Some seats are close to the front of the classroom, while there are other rows further from the
front of the room.
The configuration of the rows of seats depends only on the attractive force between the positive
nucleus and the negative electron, and, roughly speaking, is not very sensitive to how many
electrons are in the atom.
We now understand why all the electrons in an atom don't just pile up in the chair in
the front row, which is the lowest energy quantum state available.
For if they were to do that, then all of the electrons would be in the same location in
the same quantum state, and as we have just shown, the probability of that happening is
zero.
There's a fancy term used to describe the fact that no two electrons can ever be in
the same position in the same quantum state.
The Pauli Exclusion Principle Wolfgang Pauli, one of the founding fathers of quantum mechanics,
who collaborated with Niels Bohr in Copenhagen, postulated this principle in 1925 in order
to account for the configuration of electrons in elements.
Hydrogen with one electron has the lowest energy state occupied, showed in figure 31A.
As there is only one electron in this element, it is exempt from the Exclusion Principle.
The next element in the periodic table is helium, with two electrons.
We now extend this physical analogy and propose that each seat in the auditorium is actually
a love seat that can accommodate two electrons, provided that they face away from each other.
That is, as long as one is spin up and the other is spin down.
As in figure 31B, both of these electrons can reside in the lowest energy state.
As long as one has a spin value of positive H divided by two, and the other has a spin
of negative H divided by two, as each spin state counts as a different quantum state.
As there are no other possible spin values, a third electron in lithium, the next element
up the table, shown in figure 31C, will have to reside in the next higher energy state.
If all three electrons were to reside in the lowest energy state in lithium, then there
would be at least two electrons both with spin equals positive H divided by two, or
spin equals negative H divided by two.
And the probability of this occurring is psi squared, which equals zero.
Carbon, shown in figure 31D, has six electrons.
Two sit in the ground state, and the remaining four sit in the next highest row of seats,
and is able to form four chemical bonds in a wide variety of ways.
By forming these bonds, the carbon atom and the other atoms it chemically interacts with
lower their energies, compared to their un-bonded state.
If all of carbon's six electrons could drop down into the lowest energy state, there would
be no energetic advantage to forming chemical bonds with other atoms.
Consequently, there would be no methane, no diamond, no DNA, without the Pauli exclusion
principle.
Consider an atom such as aluminum with 13 electrons, shown in figure 31E.
All but one of these electrons are arranged in positive H divided by two and negative
H divided by two pairs, and thus only this last electron can participate in chemical
bonds.
The other 12 electrons are chemically inert, and form the inner core of the copper atoms.
Not that we can't make use of these inner electrons.
The Pauli principle forces the electrons to reside in higher and higher energy states,
equivalent to having some students sit in rows far from the front of the classroom, even
when the atom is in its lowest energy configuration.
If we could knock one of the electrons out of the ground state, a row close to the front
of the lecture hall, then an empty position suddenly would open up, as if we suddenly
ejected a student sitting in a front row seat.
A student sitting in one of the upper rows would then jump down into the newly vacant
seat.
Just such a situation can arise when a high energy beam of electrons strikes a copper
atom.
In that case, when one of the outer electrons falls down to occupy the lower energy state,
it can emit an x-ray photon during the transition, verifying the fact that the electrons in the
metal reside in quantized energy states.
This is, in fact, a very efficient way to generate x-rays, and most dental x-ray machines
employ electron currents striking a copper target to create the penetrating radiation.
How do the last few electrons that are not residing in paired quantum states, and are
thus available to participate in chemical bonds, combine with those from neighboring
copper atoms to hold all trillion-trillion atoms together in a cubic centimeter of aluminum?
How do the last unpaired electrons between carbon atoms and diamond combine to bind this
rigid insulator?
In both cases, the electrons arrange themselves to satisfy the Pauli Exclusion principle, though
the resulting material properties in aluminum and diamond could not be more different.
One easy way to satisfy the Pauli principle is to never let the electrons be at the same
place at the same time.
If I have a line of atoms, and next to each atom is a barrier, then I can place an electron
inside each theoretical box, we'll soon see what this box really is, and all of these
negative charges can be in the same quantum state.
This does not cause any problem, for by creating a series of containers for each electrons,
I have in principle made them distinguishable.
I can tell which electron is in the box on the right, and which on the left, just as
I could tell apart the two stones that I tossed into the pond.
The walls of the boxes prevent the de Broglie waves of each electron from overlapping with
those of its neighbors, so the trillion-trillion electrons can all be in the same quantum state,
as the total wave function is just the one electron function, repeated a trillion-trillion
times.
Each electron is described by its own ribbon, as shown in Figure 30, and no ribbon is used
for more than one electron.
When I calculate the average energy of each electron in a box, assuming the width of the
box is the spacing between the atoms and my solid, I arrive at a number of about three
electron volts.
The exact value obviously depends on all sorts of details of how the atom and the solid are
arranged, termed the crystalline configuration.
This is the energy I would have to give to an electron to remove it from the box.
Of course, as each electron has two possible values of spin, I can actually put two electrons
in each box.
Each box contains a love seat, as long as they have intrinsic angular momentum, positive
H divided by 2 and negative H divided by 2.
Consider carbon, shown in Figure 31D.
Carbon is unique in its ability to rearrange the seats in the rows of the four upper electrons,
allowing for some mixing of the quantum mechanical wave functions to form differing configurations
of quantum states that allow for a variety of chemical interactions.
Carbon can form strong bonds in a straight line in proteins and DNA.
It can form graphite, with three strong bonds in a plane and one weak bond above or below
the plane, which is why graphite can be easily peeled apart when used in a pencil, for example.
And when the seats are configured to form four equally strong bonds, we call this form
of carbon diamond.
In each case, the carbon atom has four electrons that are capable of participating in chemical
bonds, represented by four boxes, each of which holds one electron.
The Pauli principle tells us that each box can hold a second electron, provided it has
an opposite spin from the first.
When two carbon atoms come close enough to each other that the quantum states containing
these unpaired electrons overlap, the two electrons can be represented by a two-electron
wave function.
It turns out that each of the unpaired electrons can lower its energy if the electrons fill
up the love seats in each box, figure 32a.
That is, I must add energy to the atoms to remove the electrons from these boxes and
restore each one to its unpaired state.
The overlapping electron wave functions form a chemical bond between the atoms, holding
them together in the crystalline solid.
And because the Pauli principle is satisfied by the localization of the electrons in space,
the atoms are joined together in the solid.
In a diamond crystal, each carbon is surrounded by four other carbon atoms in a tetrahedral
arrangement, and their unpaired electrons can occupy the second seat in the first atom's
boxes, figure 32b.
But there is another way to satisfy the Pauli exclusion principle.
Let's say that there are no boxes, and I let the electrons wander over the entire solid.
In this case, two electrons can be at the same place at the same time, so I have to
ensure that they are each in different quantum states.
How many different lowest energy quantum levels are available for the last unpaired electron,
such as the 13th electron for aluminum, shown in figure 31e?
As many as there are atoms in the solid.
Since I have given up having any knowledge of where the electrons may be, I can compensate
by having the electrons reside in states that have a well-defined momentum.
I can have a matter wave with a very large wavelength, equal to the entire length of
the solid.
Since momentum times wavelength equals Planck's constant, this large wavelength corresponds
to a very small momentum, and hence energy.
At the other extreme, the smallest wavelength that can be constructed corresponds to the
distance between atoms in the solid.
This is very short, so the momentum of this matter wave is high.
The highest energy of this shortest wavelength is also about 3 electron volts, again, depending
on the details of the atomic configurations in the solid.
So, whether the electrons are put inside boxes in each atom, or allowed to roam over the
solid, we still wind up with an energy of about 3 electron volts.
However, in the second situation, where the electrons can move around the solid in discrete
momentum states, 3 electron volts is approximately the energy of the most energetic electron.
While when the electrons are placed in boxes, 3 electron volts is roughly the energy of
each electron.
The average energy of an electron in the free to roam case is less than 3 electron volts,
and in fact will be closer to 1.5 electron volts.
Recall the class from our discussion of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, where every
student had a different exam score, from 0 to 100.
In this case, the average grade was 50%.
For the electrons in a box situation, every electron has the same energy, so the average
energy is also 3 electron volts.
If every student scores a perfect 100, then the class average is also 100.
Consequently, depending on its chemical composition, the solid as a whole can lower its energy by
letting the electrons wander around the crystal.
This won't be true for all solids.
Some materials will be able to lower their total energy by keeping every electron localized
in boxes around each atom.
We call the free to roam cases metals, and the electrons in a box materials insulators.
And that's how quantum mechanics explain solid state physics.
At very low temperatures, all solids either conduct electricity, or they don't.
We call the first case metals, and the second are insulators.
The distinction between insulators and semiconductors is relevant only around room temperature, and
I defer for now a discussion of the differences between the two.
Metals, such as aluminum, are good conductors of electricity, because the outermost electrons
satisfy the pulley principle by residing in momentum states and are free to move around
the entire solid, while insulators keep theirs in boxes, bonds, around each atom.
To remove a metal atom from the solid, I must first grab one of the free range electrons
and localize it on a positively charged atom.
In essence, put it in a box so that I can pull the neutral atom out of the solid.
But this costs me a few electron volts of energy, and this can be considered the binding
energy holding the atoms together in the metal.
There are no directional bonds between atoms, so it is easy to move atoms past each other,
which is why metals are easy to pull into wires or pound into thin sheets, without losing
their structural coherence.
If light is absorbed by the solid, there is always a free electron that can absorb its
energy and re-emit it back again, which is why metals are reflective and shiny.
The sea of free electrons makes them good conductors of both electrical current and
heat.
Insulators however, such as diamond, have all the electrons tied into bonds between
the atoms, the two electrons per box as discussed earlier.
They are poor conductors of electricity and can conduct heat only by atomic vibrations,
sound waves.
The electrons in the box can assume only specific energy states, like electrons in atoms.
Consequently, if you shine light on an insulator that does not correspond to an allowed transition,
it will ignore the photons.
This is why some insulators, such as diamond or window glass, are transparent to visible
light.
The details of the material's properties are very sensitive to the configurations of
the boxes in which the electrons reside, which is why changes in crystal structure,
say when carbon transforms from graphite to diamond, can yield big variations in optical
and electrical properties.
The boxes here are the directional rigid chemical bonds between the atoms, figure 32b, and changes
in the type of these bonds and the chemical constituents lead to big variations in crystal
structure and rigidity.
Diamond is very stiff, while graphite is so soft we use it for pencil lead.
All of the differences between insulators and metals can be understood at the most basic
level as whether the last few unpaired electrons of the atoms in the solid satisfy the Pauli
exclusion principle by localizing themselves in real space, insulators, or in momentum
space, metals.
Thus, from playing with a ribbon with one side black and the other side white, we see
why the world is the way it is.
Note that not everything has an intrinsic angular momentum equal to H divided by 2.
Some objects, such as helium atoms or photons, have spin values of either 0 or H. This seemingly
small difference leads to superconductors and lasers.
