13. All for one and one for all. Burt Haldobler and Edward O. Wilson, in the
superorganism, the beauty, elegance and strangeness of insect societies, propose that colonies
of wasps, ants, bees or termites can be considered as a single animal. They argue that each insect
is a cell in the superorganism. Foragers are the eyes and sense organs, the colonies defenders
act as the immune system, and the queen serves as the colonies genitalia. The notion that
organisms with specialized skills could serve as analogues of sensory organs or other bodily
or psychological functions in a gestalt organism was anticipated in Theodore Sturgeon's 1953
novel, More Than Human. An important difference between a superorganism and a regular animal
is that the colony lacks a centralized brain or nervous system. Rather, each insect colony
has its own rules for local interactions between the insects that govern its organization
and size. In this way, the colony can achieve levels of development that are far beyond
the capabilities of the individual insects were they to act alone. As readers of science
fiction pulps know, this is the mechanism, or at least one of them, by which humans conquer
the stars. In Theodore Sturgeon's 1958 science fiction novel, The Cosmic Rape, an abridged
version was simultaneously published in Galaxy Magazine with the title To Marry Medusa. An
alien intelligence applies an unconventional approach to its efforts to conquer Earth. Spoiler
alert. The alien, in fact, a cosmic spore, is capable of controlling the intelligence
of a single human. It is surprised to discover that the people of Earth are not in mental
contact with one another, given that the planet is covered with complex structures such as
buildings, bridges, and roads. In the spores, experience is conquering other planets that
contained involved infrastructure. Such architecture is possible only when the primitive intelligences
of the individual agents are synchronized in a cooperative manner, as in a colony of
ants or a hive of honeybees. The invading spore had never encountered a species for which
a single agent was capable of designing a bridge or building on his or her own. And it
thus assumes that a previously existing collective connection had been severed. The spore sets
upon a plan to reestablish this connection and force all humans to think and work together
in unison. Unfortunately for the alien entity, it succeeds in its plan. Once it finds itself
dealing not with the intelligence of a single human, but with the collective consciousness
of all several billion humans, the hive mind of humanity quickly devises an effective counter-attack,
destroying the alien spore, and then looking for new challenges, takes to the stars. In
this way, Sturgeon has described the cooperative behavior of a Bose-Einstein condensate.
In Sturgeon's novel, the alien spore creates from humanity a macroscopic quantum state
with a single wave function containing all the information about its constituent elements.
Any change in one element, in Sturgeon's case a human being, is instantly transmitted
to every other element in the wave function, that is, the rest of humanity. Such situations
occur frequently in the real world through quantum interactions between pairs of electrons
in a superconductor or helium atoms in a superfluid. These collective states involve particles
whose intrinsic angular momentum are multiples of h rather than h divided by 2. Particles
with intrinsic angular momentum that are whole number multiples of h are called bosoms, as
they obey a form of quantum statistics elaborated by Sachendra Bose and Albert Einstein, termed
Bose-Einstein statistics. In the previous chapter we discussed fermions, for which the
angular momentum could be either positive h divided by 2 or negative h divided by 2,
but not any other value. This is intrinsically asymmetric as we can distinguish a top twirling
clockwise from one rotating counterclockwise. We represented this situation when the two
fermions are so close that their wave functions overlapped with a ribbon with one side black
and the other white. The significance of the two colors was that we could readily distinguish
the spin equals positive h divided by 2 electron from the spin equals negative h divided by
2 electron, as we could the black and white sides of the ribbon. But experiments have
revealed situations where the intrinsic angular momentum can have values of 0 or h or 2h and
so on, but not any fractional values. Let's consider the case of quantum objects with
the spin of 0 first and then turn to spin equals h particles such as photons later.
As the fundamental building blocks of atoms, electrons, protons and neutrons, are all fermions,
what sort of object would have a spin of 0? One example is a helium atom. A helium nucleus
has two protons and two neutrons, each having spin equals positive h divided by 2 or negative
h divided by 2. As the two protons are identical in their lowest energy state in the nucleus,
they would pair up, positive h divided by 2 and negative h divided by 2, for a total
spin of 0, as would the two identical neutrons. Similarly, the two electrons are spin paired,
as indicated in the sketch in figure 31b. Consequently, the total intrinsic angular momentum of a
helium atom, when in its lowest energy configuration, has a spin value of 0. Particles with 0 value
of spin are symmetric, in that we cannot describe the rotations as clockwise or counterclockwise.
When two such particles are brought so close that their wave functions overlap, we would
represent them by a ribbon whose sides are both white. I once again stress that the ribbon
is employed as a metaphor for the resulting two particle wave function, and as such, certain
issues are being ignored here that would only distract from our discussion.
Let's repeat the experiment with the ribbon from Chapter 12, only now using a ribbon with
both sides the same color, for example white, figure 33. I can hold each end and obviously
a white side of the ribbon faces out, figure 33a. Now, without letting go of either end,
I will switch positions as before. The end of the ribbon on the left is now on the right
and vice versa. This procedure has introduced a half twist in the ribbon as in Chapter 12,
figure 33b. Of course, now both sides are still white. I can undo the half twist by
flipping one end of the ribbon around, so that the backside turns outward, figure 33c.
When the ribbon had one side white and the other side black, this was a forbidden operation,
as it changed the state of the ribbon. Where before, both ends had black facing out, one
side would then have had a white side facing out. But if both sides of the ribbon are white,
then this symmetry means I can flip one end of the ribbon and I have not changed anything,
except undoing the half twist. The important point is that a white ribbon can be restored
to its original state following a single rotation, while the black-white ribbon required two
rotations to bring the original configuration back. This symmetry indicates that the two-particle
wave function for spin equals zero particles, such as helium atoms, as well as spin equals H
photons termed bosons, can be written as the sum of the two functions A and B, psi equals A plus B,
rather than psi equals A minus B, for fermions. As before, A and B depend on the product of
the one-particle wave functions at positions one and two. Now the two-particle wave function,
psi equals A plus B, is unchanged if the positions of particles one and two are switched, in which
case psi would be given by psi equals B plus A. But this is just the same as psi equals A plus B
equals B plus A. When two particles for which the intrinsic angular momentum has values of spin
equals zero or spin equals H are brought close enough to each other that their de Broglie waves
overlap, the resulting two-particle wave function is just the sum of the functions A and B, which
depend on the one-particle wave functions. Note, as before in chapter 12, the functions A and B
are products of the one-particle wave functions, with A equals psi sub M1 psi sub N2, where psi
sub M1 is the wave function for a boson at position one in quantum state M, and psi sub N2 represents
the second identical boson in a quantum state N at position two. If the positions of objects one
and two are interchanged, then the total wave function psi equals A plus B, which equals psi
sub M1 psi sub N2 plus psi sub N1 psi sub M2 is unchanged. While the illustration with the ribbon
does not apply for spin equals H or 2H and so on particles, the preceding mathematical arguments
about symmetric two-particle wave functions for these integral spin particles are identical to the
spin equals zero case. What is the consequence of writing the two-electron wave function as psi
equals A plus B? Recall that for fermions such as electrons, the fact that the two-electron wave
function is psi equals A minus B meant that the probability is exactly zero that both electrons
would be in the same quantum state for which A equals B. For bosons, psi equals A plus B
indicates that the probability is large exactly when both particles are in the same quantum state,
resulting in A equals B. Because when A equals B, then psi equals A plus A or 2A and the probability
density psi squared equals 2A times 2A or 4A squared. For a single particle in state psi
equals A, the probability density would be psi squared equals A times A or A squared. For two
single particles, the probability would be A squared plus A squared or 2A squared. So just by
bringing a second identical particle near the first, the probability that they would both be
found in state A is double what it would be for the two particles separately. While the probability
is not 100% that they will both be in the same state, it is enhanced compared to the single
particle situation. A larger probability of both particles being at the same location in the same
quantum state indicates that it is more likely to occur than not. As the temperature of a system
is reduced, the particles will settle down into lower energy states. If we had particles that
were somehow distinguishable, for example, if their wave functions did not overlap so we did not
have to worry about Fermi Dirac or Bose-Einstein statistics, then at low temperatures, we would
find many particles in the lowest energy state, some in the next available quantum level, a few
more in the next higher level, and negligible occupation of very high energy states. For
fermions such as two electrons in a solid, only two electrons can occupy the lowest energy level,
one with spin equals positive H divided by 2, and the other with spin equals negative H divided
by 2, regardless of temperature. In contrast, Bosons will have an enhanced probability of
collecting into the lowest energy ground state at low temperatures, relative to the distinguishable
particle case. For these particles, the rule of one particle per spin orientation per seat,
valid for fermions, is thrown out, and one can have many particles dogpiling into a single state.
These spin equals zero, or spin equals H particles, obey statistics described by Bose
and Einstein, and this settling into the ground state is termed Bose-Einstein condensation.
Why do we need to go to low temperatures to see this condensation? If the particles are
very far apart, then there will be no overlap of their wave functions, and the whole issue
of indistinguishable particles is irrelevant. Temperature is just a bookkeeping device to
keep track of the average energy per particle, so the lower the temperature, the less kinetic
energy in the lower the momentum. From De Broglie's relationship, a low momentum corresponds to a
long matter wavelength. If the particles involved have long De Broglie wavelengths, it will increase
the opportunity for the waves of different identical particles to overlap. Similarly,
confining the particles to a small volume also increases the possibility for interactions
between wave functions. Consequently, low temperatures and small volumes, achieved by
squeezing the system at high pressures, help induce Bose-Einstein condensation. What are
the special attributes of a Bose-Einstein condensate? We have considered the case of two identical
bosons, whose wave functions overlap such that they can be described by a single two-particle
wave function. As the temperature of a gas of bosons is lowered, millions of identical
atoms' wave functions overlap, all in the same quantum state. We thus obtain one single wave
function that describes the behavior of millions of atoms. In this way, the individual indistinguishable
bosons behave as a single entity, and whatever happens to one atom is experienced by many.
The Bose condensate is not unlike the demonically possessed children in the 1960 science fiction
film Village of the Damned. The fair-skinned, blonde children play the role of indistinguishable
particles, and the fact that knowledge gained by one child is instantly shared with all
is a natural consequence of the multi-particle wave function that describes this collective
phenomenon. True condensation, confirming the theoretical predictions of Bose and Einstein
from 1925, was experimentally observed by Eric Cornell and Carl Weiman in 1995, and independently
by Wolfgang Ketterli the same year, a feat for which they shared the 2001 Nobel Prize
in physics. Their investigations involved thousands of particular isotopes of rubidium
or sodium, cooled to temperatures below a millionth of a degree above absolute zero.
While these Bose-Einstein condensates are ephemeral quantum objects, difficult to obtain
or to probe, there are more robust systems that owe their striking properties to the
clustering of bosons into a single low-energy quantum state. As pointed out above, helium
is an example of an atom that is characterized by an intrinsic angular momentum of zero,
and is thus a boson. The two electrons in helium are spin-paired in the ground state,
figure 31b, and helium thus does not have strong chemical interactions with other atoms,
a feature it shares with other elements whose electrons are paired up in completely filled
rows, such as neon and argon, the inert or noble gases. Helium interacts so weakly with
other helium atoms that it does not form a liquid until 4.2 degrees above absolute zero.
If cooled even further at normal pressures, it does not form a solid, but rather undergoes
a quantum transition, where some of the atoms condense into the ground state. Suppose the
temperature of liquid helium is lowered all the way to absolute zero. We would expect that
the helium would eventually become a solid, but it in fact remains a liquid, thanks to
the uncertainty principle. At low temperatures, when the wave functions overlap, the uncertainty
in the position of each atom is low. There is thus a large uncertainty in the momentum
of each atom, which contributes to the ground state energy of the helium atoms, called the
zero-point energy. The lower the mass of the atom, the larger this zero-point energy, and
for helium, this contribution turns out to be just big enough to prevent the atoms from
forming a crystalline solid, even at absolute zero. Hydrogen has an even lower mass than
helium, but it forms a solid at 14 degrees above absolute zero due to strong electrical
interactions between hydrogen molecules. While for heavier elements, the uncertainty in the
momentum of each atom is not enough to overwhelm the tendency to form a solid at low temperatures.
While helium does not form a solid at normal pressures, if you squeeze the liquid, you
can force it to form a crystal. It does undergo a phase transition at 2.18 degrees above absolute
zero, as some of the helium forms a condensate in the ground state. What would be the properties
of a fluid for which some of the atoms have condensed into a single quantum state? One
surprising feature would be that the fluid would have no viscosity. Viscosity describes
the internal friction all normal fluids have. You can think of it as resistance to flow.
Water has a pretty low viscosity, and molasses or motor oil have much larger
viscosities. A fluid with no viscosity would, once started moving, continue to flow at a
constant speed through a hose without a continued applied pressure. Such a state is termed a
superfluid, for it does what a normal fluid does, but with the power of quantum mechanics.
Note, strictly speaking, the transition that helium makes as it forms a superfluid, or when
the electrons form cooper pairs in a superconductor, is not technically an example of Bose-Einstein
condensation. The distinctions between a true Bose condensate and the superfluid or superconducting
state are technical, and for our purposes we may take them to be the same. Experimentalists
in 1966 rotated a cylinder containing liquid helium at 4 degrees above absolute zero about
an axis passing through its center. The cylinder was packed with metal shavings, so the fluid
would have to move through the small pores and gaps between the metal flakes. The liquid
helium, not yet a superfluid at this higher temperature, began to swirl along with the
container. The temperature of the helium was then lowered to below 2.18 degrees above absolute
zero, at which point some of the helium condensed into the superfluid state. When the container's
rotation was then stopped, the superfluid continued to move with no change in speed.
When you stop stirring your coffee, the fluid comes to rest within a few seconds, but the
superfluid helium maintained its circulating motion for hours until the researchers eventually
stopped the experiment. If this system were warmed up above a temperature of 2.18 degrees
above absolute zero, then the superfluid would transform into a normal fluid, and it would
rapidly cease rotation. The low temperature is crucial. At low enough temperatures, the
lower momentum of the helium atom corresponds to a long de Broglie wavelength. There is
then sufficient overlap between the many helium atoms' wave functions that all of the atoms
can be described by a single quantum mechanical wave function. The atoms form one giant super
atom. To slow down even one helium atom in the condensate, it is necessary to decelerate
the entire multi-atom wave function, and provided the rotation is not too fast, there isn't
sufficient energy to do this. So the superfluid keeps on rolling. There is an electrical analog
to superfluidity that is found in many metals and even some non-metallic materials, termed
superconductivity. A wire that is a superconductor has no electrical resistance and is analogous
to a garden hose through which a superfluid flows. Any non-viscous fluid pushed into the
end of the hose would exit at the other end with the same velocity no matter how long
or clogged the hose, even if the tubing circled the equator. While we don't know whether the
electrical current circulating in a superconducting loop will flow forever, experiments have confirmed
that after 10 years, the supercurrent in a closed ring has decreased from its initial
value by less than one part in 100 trillion. In a normal electrical conductor, an externally
applied voltage induces an electrical current. The smaller the resistance of the conductor,
the greater the current for a given voltage. In the standard water flow analogy for electrical
circuits, water pressure plays the role of voltage. The greater the pressure, the more
of a push exerted on the water. The flow of water out of the faucet through a garden hose
is analogous to the electrical current. If the hose has imperfections and bumps along
its length that increase the water's difficulty flowing, this would reflect the electrical
resistance of the wire. The water loses energy through collisions with these partial blockages,
as well as with the walls of the hose, so a constant pressure is needed to maintain a
steady water flow out of the end of the hose. Similarly, as the electrical current collides
with imperfections in the wire, some of the current's energy is lost. This is why a constant
push, a voltage, produces a constant flow, electrical current. Rather than an accelerating
flow, Newton's second law that force equals mass times acceleration would suggest that
if the force is constant, then the acceleration, that is, the rate of change of the electron
speed, should also be constant. Superconductors have no electrical resistance, so that a current,
once started, will continue unchanged without an applied voltage, just as the helium atoms
in a superfluid are able to translate without viscosity. Currents in metals are carried
by electrons, not helium atoms. Remember that electrons are fermions that have intrinsic
angular momentum of h divided by 2. In order to observe Bose-Einstein condensation, the
electrons must form a composite particle consisting of two electrons, one having spin equals
positive h divided by 2, and the other with spin equals negative h divided by 2. Thus,
the two electron composite would have a net intrinsic angular momentum of zero, and would
therefore be a bosom. As such, at a low enough temperature, these paired electrons would
condense into a ground state and be able to flow without resistance. Electrons are negatively
charged, and as two negative charges repel each other, the question is why would two electrons
bind together to form a composite particle that acts as a bosom? The answer lies in the
positively charged atoms, termed ions, that make up the metal. Recall from the preceding
chapter that in a metal such as lead, the last unpaired electrons from each atom reside
in quantized momentum states. The electrons are free to roam over the solid, but can do
so in well-defined energy states. As the metal atoms were initially electrically neutral,
if an electron leaves the immediate vicinity of its atom, it leaves behind a positively
charged ion. An ion is an atom with a net electrical charge due to the removal or addition
of electrons. These metallic ions form order to raise and comprise the crystal. As a negatively
charged electron moves through the metal, the positively charged ions are attracted to it.
The positive ion is too large to leave its position in the crystal, but it strains toward
the negatively charged electron, slaved to the electrostatic attraction between them.
As the electron speeds along, it leaves in its wake a trail of positively charged ions
that are pulled along its trajectory, not unlike the way metallic objects bend toward
magneto, the mutant master of magnetism, from the X-Men comic books when he employs his
mutant power. In time, the ions would be repelled from each other and returned to their normal
crystalline locations. At temperatures less than 7 degrees above absolute zero, the lead
ions move slowly, and this positively charged channel in the wake of the first electron
can persist long enough for a second electron to be attracted into this positive valley.
That is, the first electron polarizes the positive ions in the lattice, and a second
electron is attracted to this positively charged channel and follows the same path. In this
way, the two negatively charged electrons are bound together and form what is known
as a cooper pair. After Leon Cooper, who first theoretically showed that such a binding mechanism
could operate in metals at low temperature, the lowest energy configuration corresponds
to two electrons with spins of positive H divided by 2 and negative H divided by 2 respectively.
So, the cooper pair formed from the two bound electrons has an intrinsic angular momentum
of zero and acts as a boson. Once at least some of the electrons in a metal start acting
like bosons and condense into a low energy state, superconductivity is observed. When
the wave functions for the many cooper pairs overlap, they form a single multiparticle
wave function. In a normal metal, collisions with vibrating atoms or defects in the metal
cause the current to lose energy, which is why a constant voltage is needed to maintain
a uniform current. In order to slow down a supercurrent consisting of a condensate of
overlapping cooper paired electrons, the collisions must break apart a cooper pair. Also changing
the energies of all the overlapping pairs and at low temperatures and moderate currents,
this is not energetically possible. The cooper paired electrons are able to carry the electrical
current, provided it isn't too high, without any resistive loss, just as the helium atoms
in a superfluid are able to flow, but not too fast, without viscosity. There are many
free range electrons in a metal, but not all of them have to form cooper pairs for the metal
to exhibit superconductivity. What about the other electrons that may not bind up in pairs
to form boson composite particles? They still have a normal resistance, but their contribution
is shorted out by the supercurrent. If I have two roads to a destination, one that is a
bumpy unpaved dirt road with a speed limit of five miles per hour, and another a sleek
superhighway with no upper speed limit, I will take the second road. Any electrical current
in a metal, once it has been cooled below the temperature at which cooper pairs form, will
be carried by the superconducting paired electrons. Similarly, not all the helium atoms in a superfluid
reside in the ground state condensate. Only at a temperature of absolute zero will one
hundred percent of the electrons form cooper pairs, or helium atoms join the superfluid state.
Fortunately, we don't have to go to such extremes to see these striking cooperative
effects, as long as some of the particles form composite bosons. Superconductors do not just
carry electrical current with no resistance whatsoever. They are also perfect diamagnets.
This means that they resist any externally applied magnetic field. Some metals are
attracted to magnets, while others are actually repelled. Gold and silver are examples of
this latter type of metal. If you are able to pick up your gold jewelry with a refrigerator
magnet, you should probably look into a refund, or at least check to see whether the jewelry
is filled with chocolate. The internal magnetic fields of the electrons in gold atoms polarize
in the opposite direction to an external magnetic field, such that they develop a north pole
that faces the applied north pole. As north repels north, the gold ignores the magnet,
or if the applied magnetic field is strong enough, the gold is pushed away from the outside magnet
through its diamagnetism. Superconductors are perfect diamagnets, as they can set up electrical
currents that generate magnetic fields that exactly cancel out inside themselves all of the
externally applied magnetic field. As these materials have no electrical resistance, once
the current is started, it can continue indefinitely, as long as the outside magnetic field is applied,
which would make superconductors ideal materials from which to construct rails for magnetically
levitating trains. The drawback at present is the ultra-low temperature is necessary
to induce superconductivity in most metals. In section 6, I discuss materials termed high-temperature
superconductors that show superconductivity at much higher temperatures, though not yet
at room temperature, and turn out to not even be metals. Aside from certain elementary particles
generated at particle accelerators, or in cosmic ray showers, most bosons that have
mass are composite particles such as the helium nucleus, or Cooper pairs of electrons. There
is, however, a very common massless particle that has an intrinsic angular momentum equals
h, when the intrinsic angular momentum is measured relative to the direction of the
photon's motion, and obeys Bose-Einstein statistics.
Light Recall our discussion in chapter 1 of Max Planck
and how his explanation of the spectrum of light emitted from hot objects, shown in figure
2, ushered in the quantum age. Measurements of the intensity of light given off from an
object, as a function of the frequency of the light, found that very little light is
emitted at low and high frequencies, and that the light intensity peaks at some frequency
that depends only on the temperature of the object. Figure 2 showed the light spectrum
for an object with you right now. Theoretical physics calculations prior to Planck indicated
that the intensity should indeed be small at low frequencies, but would grow without
limit as the frequency increased. We now know enough about quantum statistics to see what
these theorists got wrong. A box of molecules, such as a gas, will have some total amount
of energy that is indicated by the gas's temperature. A central principle of non-quantum
thermodynamics is that as the gas molecules collide with one another, they share and transfer
their energy, so that in equilibrium we would find that on average, each molecule has an
equal portion of the total energy of the gas. Of course, there will be random fluctuations,
so that one may see a molecule with a little more or a little less energy than the per
molecule average, but subsequent collisions with other molecules would tend to bring this
molecule's energy back toward the per molecule average. When you add up the average energy
per molecule for all trillion, trillion molecules in the box, you get the total energy of the
gas. This is not only perfectly reasonable, but is in fact what is observed in real gases.
When the quantum nature of the molecules can be ignored, that is, at high temperatures
and low pressures, so that the molecules to broy wavelengths do not overlap. What if the
box were filled with light, treated as extended electromagnetic waves? The atoms in the walls
of the box are at some temperature and will jitter back and forth around their normal
crystalline positions. It was known before quantum mechanics that oscillating electrons
emit electromagnetic waves, which is the basic principle underlying radio and television
broadcasting. If there is some dust in the box that absorbs and re-emits light, serving
the same role as the collisions between gas molecules described earlier, then each electromagnetic
wave will have the same average energy per wave. Non-quantum thermodynamics, which is
the only kind that existed before Max Planck published his paper in 1900, would say that
the average energy per wave is a constant multiplied by the temperature of the system.
This analysis works very well for a box filled with gas molecules. For the case of the gas
molecules, we add up the average energy per molecule for the trillion-trillion molecules
and find the total energy of the gas. A trillion-trillion is a big number, but it's just a number.
However, there is no upper limit on the frequencies of waves that could possibly reside in a box
filled with light. A clamped guitar string, when plucked, has a lowest possible frequency,
but there is in principle no upper limit on the highest frequency that can be excited.
If each possible wave has the same average energy per wave, and there are an infinite
number of possible waves, then the total energy of the light in the box is infinite. Fortunately,
this does not happen in real objects, or else all matter would emit an infinite amount of
energy in the form of x-rays and gamma rays. This would be catastrophic, which is why physicists
call it the ultraviolet catastrophe. To resolve this contradiction between calculated and
observed light intensity spectra, Planck assumed that the atoms in the walls of the box can lose
energy only in steps proportional to the frequency of the light, from which the relationship energy
equals h times frequency was proposed. At this stage, we know more about quantum mechanics than
Planck did in 1900, so we can use a simpler argument than his original one to understand the
observed spectrum of light emitted by all glowing objects. The box containing light can be considered
a gas of photons, each of which has an intrinsic angular momentum of h. These photons are thus
bosons and will obey the same Bose-Einstein statistics that we invoked for helium atoms
and Cooper-paired electrons. For a gas of bosons, there is an enhanced probability of finding the
particles in lower energy states. Most bosons will be in the lowest energy state, some will be in
the next higher level, a few will be in the next higher energy state, and states very high in energy
will have an exponentially small chance of being occupied. The energy of the photon gas as a function
of the frequency of light is the energy of the photon, E equals h times f, multiplied by the
average number of photons with this energy. Most of the photons are in the low energy states that
carry very little energy. Higher energy photon states are exponentially less likely to be occupied,
so the contribution to the average energy from these photons will also be low. The resulting
product of an increasing energy for a photon with a decreasing number of photons with that
particular energy yields an average energy per frequency that is very low at low frequencies,
peaks at some intermediate frequency, and is again very small at higher frequencies, exactly as
observed. This is akin to the payouts for a powerball or lotto lottery system. There the ticket
holder must match all six randomly selected numbers in order to claim the grand prize jackpot,
but even if no one matches all six numbers, smaller awards are possible. Those matching only three
of the selected numbers will win a smaller prize, say $10. Those with four matching numbers might win
$10,000, and five matches would garner $100,000. The payout amount starts off small. Many people
may match one or two numbers, but they do not win any money. Some will match three numbers,
but the amount they win is low. Fewer will match four numbers, but they have a larger payout,
and very few will have selected five of the winning numbers, so there the total payout will
also be lower. A large prize, but with few winners. A graph of the amount paid out by the lottery
agency against the size of the prize would start off small, reach some peak value, and then drop
back down again. The number of gas molecules in a box is fixed when we set up the container,
but the number of photons can vary depending on the temperature.
Hot objects emit very bright light, that is, give off a large number of photons,
while cooler objects emit a lower number of photons. At higher temperatures, the exponential
tail in the number of photons extends to higher energies. The peak in the spectrum of light energy
emitted by a glowing object as a function of frequency will thus depend on the object's temperature.
Cold objects will have their peak at lower frequencies, and the hotter the object, the
higher the frequency at which the curve peaks. Measurements of the light spectrum of objects
that can be considered black bodies therefore provide a way to determine the temperature of
very hot objects, such as the interior of a blast furnace, or the surface temperature of the sun.
But this technique works for cold objects as well. Space is infused with microwave radiation
that is the remnant energy from the big bang creation of the universe.
Measurements of the spectrum of this radiation as a function of frequency find that it beautifully
fits the Planck expression if the characteristic temperature of the universe is 2.7 degrees above
absolute zero. Figure two from chapter one in fact shows the measured black body spectrum of the
cosmic microwave background radiation present at every point in the universe, even where you,
fearless listener, are right now. From the measured expansion rate of the universe,
we can determine that it took approximately 15 billion years for the universe to grow and cool
to its presently measured temperature. In section three, I showed how quantum mechanics
developed to account for the manner by which atoms interact with light enables, through radioactive
isotope decays, a determination of the age of the earth. Now, we see that quantum physics also
provides an age for the oldest thing in the universe, the universe itself.
