Section 5. Modern Mechanics and Inventions. Chapter 14. Quantum Invisible, Inc. Light is an electromagnetic
wave that is actually comprised of discrete packets of energy. New York City in 1933
boasted many skyscrapers, but only one had an 86th floor. In our world, the 86th floor
of the Empire State Building is dedicated to the observatory deck. But in the world of
the PULPS, this entire floor was rented to one man, who made it his residential home,
complete with an extensive library and advanced chemical, medical and electronic laboratories.
This man, an expert in all pursuits intellectual and physical, was frequently joined by his
five close associates, each an expert in a different field of the practical and mechanical
arts, such as chemistry, law, electronics, engineering and archaeology, on adventures
that spanned the globe. The leader of this team, not content to rely solely on his amazing
mental capabilities and his imposing physical prowess, would also employ a host of seemingly
miraculous inventions and gadgets. Many of these exotic devices would not be realized
in our world until years later, when non-fictional scientists and engineers had mastered the
principle of quantum mechanics have described and managed to catch up to the achievements
of one of Pulp Fiction's greatest heroes, Clark Savage Jr. Though he had the equivalent
of several PhDs owing to his MD from Johns Hopkins and several years studying brain
surgery and neurology in Vienna, his friends and the public knew him as Doc. Doc Savage's
adventures were described in the Pulp Magazine title before his name, and his first story,
The Man of Bronze, was published in March 1933, written by Lester Dent. Before the year
was out, Doc Savage would be one of the top selling pulps on the newsstand. Dent would
go on to write 160 more full-length Doc Savage novels over the next 16 years, at a pace of
nearly one a month. There were a few Doc Savage novels published in the 1970s and 1990s that
were credited to Dent posthumously, but his main run on the Pulp Magazine ended in July
1949. Even at the pay rate of a penny a word, his writing income enabled Dent and his wife
to live a life of personal adventure and travel that would inform his fictional tales. Doc
Savage and his team would often travel the high seas in one of Doc's yachts or his personal
submarine, battling modern-day pirates or exploring an island where dinosaurs still
walk the earth. Meanwhile, Dent and his wife lived for several years on a 40-foot schooner,
traveling along the eastern seaboard, fishing and diving for buried treasure in the Caribbean by
day and riding pulp adventures by night. Dent was a licensed pilot and radio operator, climbed
mountains, prospected for gold in Death Valley, was a vast storehouse of obscure information,
and was elected a member of the Explorers Club. Dent's most famous literary creation would serve
as the inspiration of Superman and Batman. Doc would retreat to an Arctic sanctuary to develop
new inventions that he called his fortress of solitude, and he carried many of his crime-fighting
gadgets in a utility vest. James Bond and the man from Uncle, his tie and jacket buttons hid the
chemical ingredients of thermite, and his car could produce a smoke screen to blind pursuers,
and Marvel Comics Fantastic Four. The comic book superhero foursome also lived in a skyscraper
headquarters, and the friendly bickering between two of Doc's teammates presaged the relationship
between the thing and the human torch, and even Star Trek's Mr. Spock. Doc could incapacitate
foes by pinching certain nerves in their neck. Doc's gadgets were similarly ahead of his time.
In 1934, Doc employs a version of radar long before its debut in World War II. According to Dent,
a reference to radar in a 1943 Savage novel was censured by the military immediately prior
to publication, requiring him to scramble to come up with an alternative plot device. The
government should not have bothered. In 1911, Modern Electronics published Ralph 124C41 Plus,
a science fiction story by Hugo Gemsback, who would later go on to found amazing stories,
that featured a fairly accurate description of radar long before the term was coined.
Doc Savage employed shark repellent and colored dyes to mark a pilot's location when forced
to eject over the ocean, a good 10 years before the Navy would adopt these innovations. He invented
a small tracking device that, when affixed to an automobile, would transmit a radio signal enabling
the car's position to be monitored from a remote location. And one of Doc's inventions, ultraviolet
writing, employed in his first pulp adventure, makes use of the same quantum mechanical principles
that underlie the laser. In 1933, as the man of bronze, Doc and his team of adventurers searched
their quarters on the 86th floor for a message from Doc's recently deceased father. Knowing that
his father would often leave him missives using a form of invisible writing, Doc brings out a small
metal box that resembles a magic lantern. Showing the interior of the mechanism to Long Tom,
the group's electrical expert, Doc tests his companion, asking him whether he recognizes
the device. Of course, that is a lamp for making ultraviolet rays, or what is commonly called
black light. The rays are invisible to the human eye since their wavelengths are shorter than
ordinary light. Long Tom then points out that while we may not see in the ultraviolet many common
substances such as quinine and Vaseline fluoresce when so illuminated. When they shine this ultraviolet
light on a window in Doc's office, sure enough a message from his father is revealed in glowing
blue letters, directing them to the hiding place where they would find important papers that would
in turn send them on a perilous journey to the fictional Central American nation of Hidalgo.
The mechanism by which Doc and his father, and in later pulp adventures, Doc and his teammates
communicate through ultraviolet writing relies on the variation in transition rates for quantized
levels. We have seen that electrons bound in atoms are constrained to particular energy levels.
A consequence of this discreteness is that the atoms can absorb or lose energy only when it enables
transitions between these allowed energy states. We will neglect transitions of protons or neutrons
within the nucleus as these energy scales are in the gamma ray range, and we are interested now
in transitions in the visible portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. Any energy interacting
with the atom in the form of a light photon or a collision with another electron or atom
will not induce an electronic transition if the change in energy does not correspond to the
difference between two energy levels. In our analogy of students in a classroom where the
rows of seats represent allowed energy levels, students may be promoted from their original
seats at the front of the room to empty seats near the rear of the lecture hall. However,
students are not allowed to stand between rows and may change their seats only if the energy
they absorb takes them exactly from one row to another. When an atom relaxes from some high
energy state back to the ground state, it similarly may do so only by emitting a photon whose energy
is equal to the difference between the starting and final energy levels. That is, only electronic
transitions that satisfy the principle of conservation of energy are allowed. This accounts
for the discrete line spectrum, with only a very select number of wavelengths observed.
See figure 13 in chapter 5. When an atom is placed in a high temperature environment,
different elements will have their allowed quantum levels at different energies so that the spacing
between levels, and hence the frequency of the light emitted when the electron moves between
states, will differ. Just because an electron can make a jump between two quantized energy
levels does not determine how fast or slow such a transition may be. For a collection of atoms,
the light will be brighter for those transitions for which this probability is higher.
Some lines will be present, but very faint, as the probability of a transition occurring at any
given moment might be very low. One of the great successes of the quantum theory is that it actually
makes predictions of the transition rates. That is, the probability per second that an
atom with an electron in an excited state would drop down to a lower energy state emitting a
photon in the process. Thus, the quantum theory correctly predicts not only what wavelengths
will be observed for a given atom, but even how bright the lines will be. What determines these
transition rates is fairly complicated and depends on details of the wave functions for the initial
and final states. The important point is that quantum mechanics is able to account for the
following. One, the fact that electrons in atoms may have only certain energies. Two, the fact that
only certain transitions between allowed states are possible. And three, the probability per second
of a given transition occurring. That is, the theory can explain why only discrete lines rather
than continuous spectra will be observed for the light emitted by an atom, as well as predicting
the wavelengths of the line spectrum and the intensity of the lines, all in excellent agreement
with experimental observations. We now know enough about how atoms interact with light
to explain two of the most important inventions of the 20th century, lasers and glow-in-the-dark
action figures. I'm sure that there was a point in time for nearly all listeners
when glow-in-the-dark materials seemed to be the greatest technological invention in the history of
the universe. Let's first consider glow-in-the-dark materials. Each atom in the solid has a highest
occupied energy level, as in figure 31, and when a trillion trillion of these atoms are collected,
all of these seats broaden into an auditorium of quantum states, as illustrated in figure 34.
In chapter 12, we saw that, thanks to the Pauli exclusion principle, each seat is actually a
love seat, in which two electrons can sit if they have opposite spins, one with positive h divided
by 2 and the other with negative h divided by 2. The trillion trillion seats in this ground state
auditorium can therefore accommodate two trillion trillion electrons. If the atoms in the solid form
bonds by keeping their electrons in boxes, as in the case of the carbon-carbon bonds in diamond,
figure 32, then every love seat in the auditorium has two electrons, and the auditorium is completely
filled, figure 34a. The electron thus has to move to a higher energy, the next available empty
quantum state, in order to find a vacant level. All of these higher energy states will also
broaden into an auditorium of seats. Atoms that form solids similar to diamond can be considered to
have an orchestra of seats, all of which are completely filled, and a higher energy balcony
with an equal number of seats, which are all empty. When a current flows in a solid in response to an
applied voltage, the electrons gain kinetic energy, but this cannot happen if there are no unoccupied
higher energy states accessible to the electrons. Consequently, only those electrons promoted to
the balcony by either heat or light will be able to participate in an electrical current,
moving along the newly available empty seats. Diamond is an electrical insulator,
because normally there are too few electrons in the balcony to provide an appreciable current.
In contrast, in metals the ground state electrons are localized in momentum space,
and the orchestra that can seat two trillion trillion electrons is occupied by only one trillion
trillion electrons. There are therefore many empty seats in the half-filled orchestra,
and it is easy for the electrons to move from seat to seat when carrying an electrical current,
as sketched in Figure 34b. To construct a glow-in-the-dark non-metallic solid,
we need a filled orchestra, an empty balcony, and a mezzanine of seats, also unoccupied,
just below the balcony, sketched in Figure 35. Let's assume, for the sake of argument,
that blue light is required to promote an electron from the orchestra to the balcony,
but the mezzanine can be filled using lower-energy green light. The energy separation between the
balcony and the mezzanine is in the infrared position of the electromagnetic spectrum. These
mezzanine seats may arise from a different element or chemical that is incorporated into the solid.
Now, assume that the transition rate from the orchestra to the balcony is high. This means
that it is easy to promote the electron up from the filled lower auditorium to the balcony,
and once up in these states, the electron quickly falls back to the orchestra. The mezzanine is
different. It has a very low transition probability, so that it is very hard to promote an electron
from the orchestra into these levels. Once in the mezzanine, the electron has a very low
probability of dropping back to the lowest-energy state. It will thus sit in this state for a
long time before dropping down. Now, what will happen if we shine white light on this solid?
White light is comprised of all visible colors in equal intensities. Due to the discrete nature
of the quantized energy levels, the atom will ignore all colors except for the blue and the green.
Let's not worry about the finite energy width of the different orchestra and balcony for now.
The blue light will be readily absorbed, as the transition rate for the orchestra to the
balcony is high. Of course, easy come, easy go, and the electron in the balcony also has a high
probability of dropping back down to the orchestra. In either its original seat or an empty seat
created when another electron was promoted into the balcony, emitting a blue light photon as it
does so. Figure 35A. For the most part, this cycle continues. Orchestra absorbs blue light,
promoting electron to balcony. Electron then releases another blue photon when falling back
to the lower-energy state. Occasionally, if we do this enough times, a seat in the mezzanine
level becomes occupied, either by an electron being directly promoted from the orchestra
to this level, just because the probability is low doesn't mean it won't happen if we try enough
times, or possibly from the electron in the balcony dropping down into the lower-energy
mezzanine instead of falling back to the orchestra. Figure 35B. We would not notice the infrared
light emitted when the electron went from the balcony to the mezzanine unless we had specific
detectors sensitive to this portion of the spectrum. Alternatively, the electron can release some
thermal energy as it moves from the balcony to the mezzanine. Once in the mezzanine, the electron
will stay there until, one, an infrared photon excites it back into the balcony, not likely,
as there is very little infrared light of the necessary energy in the white light source I am
using. Or, two, the electron drops back to an empty seat in the orchestra, emitting a green
light photon in the process, which can happen but has a low transition probability. So, as we
expose this solid to white light, blue light is absorbed and we get blue light back, but eventually
the solid ends up with electrons sitting in the mezzanine, leaving unoccupied seats in the orchestra.
Now the light is turned off. All the electrons that are still up in the balcony rapidly drop
down into the empty orchestra seats, and then as time goes on, the electrons in the mezzanine
seats also fall back to the orchestra. Figure 35C. Emitting photons as they do, even if the solid
is now in a completely darkened room, glowing in the dark. Eventually, as the number of electrons
in the mezzanine decreases, the light emitted by the solid becomes dimmer and dimmer, until it is
recharged with another prolonged exposure to white light. From such simple quantum mechanical phenomena
are totally awesome toys made. Doc Savage's invisible writing must employ an ink for which
the separation between the orchestra and the balcony is in the far ultraviolet portion of the
spectrum, while the spacing between mezzanine level and the filled orchestra corresponds to blue
light. Doc used the black light lamp that emits ultraviolet light to promote electrons to the
balcony, which then subsequently charge up the mezzanine. From the fact, as described in the
pulp adventure, that the blue writing rapidly fades, we can assume that the electrons do not
stay in the mezzanine level for more than a few seconds. The intensity of ultraviolet light in
the plank spectrum for sunlight is too weak to charge up these states, which is why Doc needed
to use the black light lamp. The energy separation between the balcony level and what we have termed
mezzanine states and how long electrons will remain in these states in the dark depends on the
particular elements that one introduces into the solid to produce these long-lived states.
One does not need to use ultraviolet or visible light to promote electrons into these levels.
Any source of energy that can excite electrons from the orchestra to the balcony states can work.
Back in the 1950s, the hands of some alarm clocks were painted with radium, and the
continuous emission of alpha particles would provide the energy necessary to keep the balcony in
the phosphor material occupied, thereby enabling the hands to glow in the dark. When the radium
emits an alpha particle, the nucleus converts into radon, which is also radioactive. Eventually,
the materials for glow-in-the-dark alarm clocks were replaced with less toxic substances.
Nevertheless, radioactive materials and their ability to emit sources of energy at a uniform rate
are hard to give up. Smoke alarms use a radioactive isotope to create a beam of particles,
and an alarm is triggered when this beam is obscured from its detector by smoke or haze.
Wrist watches with glow-in-the-dark faces have replaced radium as the radioactive source that
excites the phosphorescent material with high energy electrons from the decay of tritium
as the source of external energy. Most diners are likely relieved that fiestaware dishes no
longer employ uranium oxide in their bright orange-red glaze, as they did back in the 1930s.
The shine on modern fiestaware dinner plates may not be quite as bright, but it is much safer.
