Chapter 15 Deathrays and DVDs
The popularity of the Buck Rogers newspaper strip led to a similarly successful radio
serial program, and in 1934, a competing strip featuring the adventures of Flash Gordon
was introduced.
By the mid-1930s, the demand for Buck Rogers and Flash Gordon inspired toy ray guns was
so high that the Daisy Manufacturing Company, which had the license to create stamped metal
versions of Buck's XZ-31 rocket pistol, ran out of both steel and cardboard boxes.
Given the association of ray guns with the future conquest of space, perhaps it is not
surprising that in 1960, when the development of the laser was announced, the first thing
the public wanted to know is whether science had at last delivered the long-anticipated
death ray.
A patent for a laser capable of projecting a high-intensity beam of visible light, designed
by Charles H. Townes and Arthur L. Shalow at Bell Labs, was filed in 1958, and in 1960,
Theodore H. Mayman at Hughes Research Laboratory in California constructed the first working
device.
At his press conference in 1960, Mayman was peppered with journalists' questions about
whether he had in fact invented a death ray.
When speaking to the public, scientists from Bell Labs were instructed by management to
deflect any questions concerning using the laser as a lethal weapon, and took pains to
avoid saying anything that might be misconstrued or misquoted.
Yeah, good luck with that!
In 1961, the report in the Detroit News of a lecture by a Bell Labs scientist involved
in their laser program prominently featured death ray as the invention's first potential
application.
Four years after Mayman's announcement in 1964's MGM film Goldfinger, James Bond is
threatened with a slow, painful death while strapped to a table.
The circular buzzsaw of the 1959 novel was replaced in the movie with a high-power industrial
laser, its beam slowly moving along the length of the table on a trajectory intended to bisect
Agent 007.
The physics of the laser is essentially that of a glow in the dark solid.
Depending on their chemical composition and material properties, lasers can emit not just
green light, but red, green, blue, ultraviolet, and infrared photons.
The two big differences between lasers and glow in the dark solids is that in lasers,
the mezzanine levels are nearly completely occupied with electrons, and, more important,
when the electrons in the mezzanine level drop down to the ground state, they all do
so at the same time.
How can one ensure that all of the electrons residing in the laser levels will choose to
drop down to the ground state, emitting photons simultaneously?
Consider the auditorium analogy for a solid, shown in Figure 35.
Note that a laser does not need to be a solid.
The helium-neon laser pointers used by public speakers and lecturers employ a mixture of
two inert gases to generate laser light.
Their simplicity will stick with solid state lasers, but our arguments hold just as well
for gas lasers.
I use essentially the same argument as for the glow in the dark situation from the last
chapter.
Electrons from the filled orchestra level are promoted up to the balcony by, for example,
the absorption of light, or an electrical current.
The electrons excited up into the balcony leave behind empty seats in the orchestra.
The transition rate is high for electrons to go from the orchestra to the balcony, and
it is similarly easy for these electrons to drop back down into the orchestra, emitting
light as they do so.
Occasionally an electron will not fall from the balcony to the orchestra, but into a mezzanine
seat instead.
The transition rate into or out of these mezzanine levels is very low, so once the electron is
in one of these quantum states, it will stay there for quite some time.
But electrons can be excited up to the balcony, and from there to the mezzanine, faster than
they spontaneously drop down from the mezzanine level back to the orchestra, then we can obtain
a situation where we have nearly as many electrons in the mezzanine level as in the orchestra.
We are now ready for some laser action, as shown in figure 36.
There are two ways that an electron in the mezzanine band can return to an empty seat
in the orchestra.
It can fall, or it can be pushed.
The transition rate for an electron to spontaneously fall from the mezzanine to the orchestra can
be for some materials up to a hundred million times slower than for the electron to move
from the balcony to the orchestra.
This was why we needed to go through the balcony levels in order to populate this intermediate
energy band.
As the electron moves from the mezzanine to the orchestra, its wave function can be expressed
as the overlap of the orchestra and mezzanine quantum states.
During this process, the electron's average location may be considered to oscillate between
its value for each state.
An oscillating electric charge emits electromagnetic waves at the frequency of vibration.
A formal quantum mechanical analysis of this process finds that the energy emitted is in
a discrete packet of energy, that is, a photon, whose energy corresponds to the energy difference
between the mezzanine and orchestra levels.
Experts will note that the previous argument applies to electric dipole transitions, but
not to those involving magnetic dipole or electric quadrupole transitions.
These are typically 10,000 to a million times less likely than electric dipole transitions.
For the non-experts, nothing of interest here move along.
Once a photon is emitted, this quantum of the electromagnetic wave can induce oscillations
in another electron up in the mezzanine level, making it easier for this second electron to
jump down into the orchestra, emitting its own light quantum in the process.
This second photon can stimulate another electron to make the transition, generating yet another
photon with an energy given by the separation of the mezzanine and orchestra bands.
In this way, a cascade of falling electrons, each induced, pushed by the oscillating electric
field of a light quantum, results.
One photon in, therefore, leads to potentially trillions of photons out, all with exactly
the same energy emitted all at the same time.
As the photons are so fast, as in speed of light fast, there is no noticeable time lag
between the first electron falling from the mezzanine and the trillions of electrons stimulated
by other photons.
The device produces light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation, and is called
a laser for short.
Of course, if I want this stimulated emission of light to occur more than once, I have to
continue to excite electrons up to the balcony level, so that I can maintain the population
inversion of electrons in the mezzanine.
Thus it will take a great deal of energy to run the laser.
The more photons that I want to be emitted per second, the more energy I have to expend
maintaining the occupancy of the mezzanine level.
A laser pointer used in a lecture presentation is relatively low intensity, and can be run
from two AA or AAA batteries, while the high power versions used in industrial laser cutting
procedures require a thousand watts of power, enough energy to run a standard household.
Lasers make use of the fact that the emitted light is coherent, that is, all the light
waves are in phase with one another, as in the constructive interference example from
chapter 2, figure 4.
The material that is being stimulated to emit photons is typically housed in a long cylinder,
both of whose ends are mirrored, and only one end has a small hole for light to escape.
That is, all of the walls of the auditorium reflect photons, and only those light quanta
moving in exactly the right direction toward the single exit will depart the hole.
The operation of a real laser cavity is a bit more complicated than this.
Those photons that do not leave the chamber will bounce back and forth, inducing more
transitions from the mezzanine to the lower level.
The laser light thus forms a tightly focused beam, and as the photons are in phase, they
will exhibit minimal spreading upon leaving the laser cavity.
Laser light is therefore invisible unless you look directly at the aperture of the laser
cylinder, unlike incandescent light bulbs, from which the illumination spreads out uniformly
in all directions.
We can see light from an incandescent bulb regardless of where we are looking, but in
a sense, these photons' energies are wasted, as light is hitting objects I don't care
about seeing.
The laser beam can be seen only if it reflects off the surface.
If there is no dust or particulates in the air to scatter the laser beam, the only way
to see it is when it gets to where it is going.
A tight, narrow laser beam sent out from a lab on Earth was measured to have broadened
out to a width of only about two miles after traveling 240,000 miles to the moon.
Thanks to the quantization of energy levels, when the electrons drop from the mezzanine
to the lower energy orchestra in response to the photon stimulation, they will all emit
light of exactly the same energy.
The light from a laser will thus be of a single frequency, that is one color, with remarkably
small variations.
An efficient mechanism to generate red laser light is to use a mixture of two gases, helium
and neon.
Both of these elements have completely filled out our quantum levels, as shown in figure
31b, and are thus chemically inert.
They do not lower their energy by forming any type of chemical bond.
They consequently remain gases, until their temperature is so low that small fluctuations
in their electrical charge distribution induce weak electrical attractions.
This is why helium does not form a liquid until 4.2 degrees above absolute zero, as
discussed in chapter 13.
When an electron beam is passed through this gas mixture, the kinetic energy of the electron
current can be transferred when it collides with a helium atom.
An electron in the helium atom is excited from the ground state to an excited state,
which we have been terming the balcony level.
The spacing of their quantum levels is such that when the helium atom with its electron
in the higher energy state collides with a neon atom, it promotes an electron into a
very long lived excited state in the neon atom that acts as the mezzanine level.
When light of the necessary frequency stimulates the neon atoms, they drop back to their ground
state, emitting red photons.
By using electrically charged, that is ionized, argon gas, instead of a helium-neon mixture,
green light can be produced.
Using semiconducting diodes, much more on this in the next chapter, one can dispense
with the gases and construct a completely solid state laser, capable of producing red,
green, or even blue light.
Red light has a lower energy of 1.9 electron volts and longer wavelength about 650 nanometers
compared to blue light's photon energy of 2.6 electron volts and a wavelength of 475
nanometers.
The difference in wavelength may not seem like much, but it makes a big difference in
your DVD player.
Anyone who has closely examined an old-style newspaper photograph, composed of a series
of black and white dots, understands that the information contained in an image may
be relayed via a series of pixels.
Digital versatile disks, DVDs, and compact disks, CDs, encode images and sound or just
sound respectively, through a set of instructions for either a video display or audio system.
Lazers are binary, in that they have just two states, on or off, bright or dark.
Old digital data representation basically involves strings of ons and offs, often referred
to as ones or zeros.
The development of inexpensive compact solid state lasers enables one to read the storage
of these ones and zeros on a disk.
A laser is bounced off the shiny side of the disk, and the reflected light is detected
by an optical sensor.
If the surface of the disk is smooth, then the laser light, which travels in a straight
line, will be reflected directly onto the optical detector, and that location on the
disk will be recorded as being a bright spot.
If the laser light falls on a region of the disk that is distorted, for example a little
pit is gouged into the disk or a bump is protruding from the surface, then the light
will scatter in some random direction and not be smoothly reflected onto the optical
detector.
The detector will thus indicate a dark spot at this location of the disk.
Calling the bright spot a 1 and the dark spot a 0, we can store and transmit digital information.
Moving the laser along the disk, one can record the sequence of smooth and rough regions
and translate that into ones and zeros, which in turn can be decoded to make beautiful music.
Typically it's easier to keep the laser fixed and move the disk underneath it.
Rotating the disk at high speed, typically at several hundred revolutions per minute,
as the laser spot is moved from the center of the disk to its outer edge.
The higher the density of ones and zeros, that is, the more bits of information in a
given length, the higher the resolution of the video or audio signal.
Here is where innovations in laser technology, thanks to quantum mechanics, have had a real
impact on consumer entertainment technology.
If you wish to paint a two-inch-high statuette of an orc to take a random geeky example,
you do not use the same large brush you would use for painting your house, assuming you
are interested in doing more than just glopping a single color of paint on the figure.
In order to apply different colors over the small details on the tiny character, you will
need a very fine brush that would make house painting tedious but as well suited for the
detailed work on the statuette.
When the light is used as a probe, the wavelength plays the same role as the fineness of the
brush's bristles.
One cannot use a wave to detect features smaller than the spacing between the peaks or troughs
of the wave.
This is why optical microscopes, using visible light whose wavelengths run the order of several
hundred nanometers, are not able to let us see viruses or other nanometer-scale objects
regardless of the focusing.
To see such small-scale structures, either you need light with a wavelength on the order
of nanometers or smaller, such as high-energy x-rays which lead to the necessity to develop
x-ray lenses and focusing procedures, or you can employ electrons.
The de Broglie wavelength of electrons can be adjusted by varying the momentum, which
is easy to control by changing the magnitude of the accelerating voltage acting on the
electron beam, and a series of charged plates can focus the electron beam.
Detection of the current either reflected from a surface or transmitted through a thin
sample can thereby provide images with atomic-scale resolution, and these electron microscopes
are another example of quantum mechanics in action.
In the early days of compact disk storage media, only infrared solid-state diode lasers
were available.
The wavelength of infrared light is fairly long, so the density of bits, bits per area,
was low.
As the size of the disk was fixed, this meant that the spacing between pits on the disk
had to be relatively large, and a typical disk could hold roughly 600 to 800 million
bits.
With fewer ones and zeros available, these pioneering compact disks could store enough
information for music but not enough for high-quality video.
Old-timers may recall an early ancestor of the DVD, laser disks, which were 12 inches
in diameter, in order to have sufficient room for the relatively low-density bits encoding
a video image that could be read with a red laser.
With the fabrication of visible light red solid-state lasers, the wavelength of the
light decreased, and the number of bits that could be squeezed on a disk similarly increased,
up to approximately 5 billion bits.
These digital disks were highly versatile, hence the name DVD, as they could encode both
images and music.
With the recent innovation of relatively inexpensive blue-light solid-state lasers, the density
of bits can be increased even further.
Now the same movie can be stored using a much greater number of pixels per inch, and these
high-definition blue-ray DVD players, where blue stands for blue, can bring theater quality
video to the home.
How do the pits get on the DVD disk in the first place?
With another laser, readers of Dr. Solar, Man of the Atom, number 16 in 1966, were treated
to a feature page after the regular story, divulging secrets of Atom Valley.
One such page discussed the birth of the death ray, which in comics at the time consisted
of a laser mounted on a rifle.
The concentrated beam of photons emanating from a laser can indeed do great damage, depending
on the surface it illuminates.
The light carries energy, and when the material absorbs this light, it must have a way to
dissipate the excess energy per atom provided by the laser.
Laser is basically a bookkeeping device used in physics to keep track of the average energy
per atom in a system.
If the material cannot re-emit the energy absorbed as light, then it must do so as atomic
vibrations.
That is, the material will heat up due to the application of the laser light, and if
the power density, that is the number of absorbed photons per area per second, is large enough,
the material can be heated by the laser faster than the excess heat can be transferred to
the rest of the solid.
In that case, the atoms may be shaken so violently that they break the bonds holding them in
the material, and either melt or vaporize.
The power of early lasers in the 1960s was characterized by the number of Gillette razor
blades they could melt through.
Laser ablation, where a laser beam evaporates a material, creating a vapor of a substance
that is ordinarily a solid, is used in research laboratories to synthesize novel semiconducting
materials when the resulting vapor condenses onto a substrate or reacts with another chemical.
When writing information on DVDs and CDs, say in the CD-DVD burner in some home computers,
the laser need not vaporize the disc.
Rather, either it induces a chemical change in a dye that coats the disc, darkening it
so that it is no longer reflective, or it can melt the material under the laser spot.
When rapidly cooled, instead of being a smooth, uniform surface, the newly melted region will
be rough and will ably serve as a pit that will scatter a second laser beam in the CD
or DVD player.
For commercially manufactured CDs and DVDs, a laser is used to cut a master disc, which
is then used to stamp out multiple copies that contain the encoded information.
The trouble with using lasers as death rays is that it is difficult to achieve the necessary
power density needed to wreck any significant mayhem.
To locally melt a small region on a DVD disc, one must supply a significant amount of energy
in a short amount of time, faster than the energy can be transferred to the rest of the
material.
The issue is thus the rate at which the energy can be delivered, which in physics is termed
the power.
One could construct a laser capable of melting large holes in the steel plating of tanks,
but they would be as large as a desktop, not counting the required power supply.
The last panel of the Dr. Solar informational page in Figure 37 alludes to the laser's potential
for healing as well as harm.
This was anticipated in comic books as well.
In A Matter of Light and Death, in 1979's Action No. 491, Superman removes the thick
cataracts that have blinded a companion by using his focused heat vision.
First Superman takes two lumps of coal and squeezes them until they form large, perfect
diamonds.
This is harder than you think.
As Superman muses while compressing the coal, transforming carbon from its crude coal form
to its purest state is no easy trick, even for me.
After all it takes mother nature millions of years and just as many tons of underground
pressure to produce even one raw diamond.
That alone too.
As coal is fossilized peat moss, what happens to the impurities in the lumps Superman squeezes,
such as sulfur, nitrogen and other chemicals, which are present in coal but not in an optically
pure diamond, is not revealed.
Holding these two large diamonds in front of his friend's eyes, he then uses his heat
vision.
As he performs the operation, the man of tomorrow thinks to himself, these diamonds are filtering
and concentrating my beams of heat vision into two super laser beams, enabling me to
do what man-made lasers couldn't, burn away those cataracts and restore his eyesight.
Good thing for readers that superheroes always narrate their actions and their heads.
Eight years later, Dr. Stephen Trocol performed the first non-superhero-enabled laser eye
surgery, using an eczema laser that emits ultraviolet light, as opposed to Superman's
heat vision, which presumably consists of infrared light, and was previously used to
pattern semiconductor surfaces.
While not a common method for treating cataracts, laser surgery for reforming the cornea to
correct myopia and other refractive vision processes is now quite common.
Did Doc Savage understand all of this when he communicated via invisible writing that
could be read only under ultraviolet illumination, employing the same physics as glow in the
dark solids?
Perhaps he didn't know all the details of how high-resolution DVD players worked.
But we need not wonder whether Doc was familiar with basic quantum mechanics.
In 1936's Doc Savage Adventure, the South Pole Terror, Doc and his band of adventurers
foil the elaborate scheme of a group of thieves and murderers, who attempt to mine platinum
from an Antarctic valley.
The crooks are able to melt vast quantities of ice, and also kill interfering witnesses
using a strange heat ray, whose operation mystifies all but Doc, as he explains at the
tale's conclusion.
It has long been known that the atmosphere layer around the Earth stops a great many
rays from the sun.
Some of these rays are harmless, and others are believed capable of producing death or
serious injury to the human body.
The particles of air, for instance, are made up, according to the Schrodinger theory, of
atoms which in turn consist of pulsating spears of electricity.
Doc had correctly surmised that his opponents had an apparatus for changing the characteristics
of a limited section of atmosphere above the Earth to permit the entrance through this
atmospheric blanket of the cosmic rays.
Nine years before the Manhattan Project, Doc Savage was citing Schrodinger and fighting
theens who possessed a device that could open, at will, a hole in the ozone layer above Antarctica,
demonstrating his mastery over both quantum physics and evil doers.
