Chapter 16 The One-Way Door
Matter is comprised of discrete particles that exhibit a wave-like nature.
Science fiction pulps and comic books from fifty years ago told of how by the year 2000
robots would break free of their shackles of servitude and rebel against their human overlords.
In order to be capable of such insubordination, these automatons must have electronic brains
capable of independent thought and initiative.
They must therefore possess very sophisticated computers that are able to go far beyond the
mathematical calculations of the difference engines of the 1950s.
Such powerful computers are closer to reality than the writers back then may have thought,
thanks to scientists at Bell Labs, who in 1947, making use of the advances in our understanding
of the solid state afforded by quantum mechanics, developed a novel device that would dramatically
shrink the size and simultaneously expand the computing power of electronic brains.
The Transistor
In the 1957 issue of DC Comics Showcase No. 7, the challengers of the unknown crossed swords
with a sophisticated computer atop a giant robot body.
The challengers were four adventurers, a test pilot, a champion wrestler and explorer, a
professor and deep-sea diving expert, and a mountain climber and circus daredevil who
were the sole passengers on a doomed cross-country flight.
Crashing in a freak storm, the plane is completely destroyed, yet the four passengers walk away
from the carnage unharmed, realizing that they are living on borrowed time.
They devote their lives to adventure, repeatedly throwing themselves in harm's way as they
thwart alien invaders, mad scientists, and undersea monsters.
Frankly, my response to the premise of this team's origin would be quite different.
If I were to survive a horrific car crash, for example, I doubt I would then jump out
of airplanes without a parachute or juggle nitroglycerin, reasoning that, as I could
have died in the traffic accident, I am now able to take additional insane risks.
But luckily for comic book readers, the challengers' attitude toward danger differed from my own,
because not only were their tales exciting in their own right, but the foursome served
as one of the models for Marvel Comics' 1961 superteam, The Fantastic Four.
The challengers' challenge, in showcase number seven, was Ultivac, a 50-foot-tall robot capable
of independent thought.
Ultivac was constructed by Felix Hess, a German scientist who was captured by the allies
at the end of World War II and sent to prison as a war criminal.
Hess was assisted by Floyd Barker, a bank robber he met in prison.
They passed the time with physics lessons.
The scientist teaching Barker, all it takes is some study, says Barker.
Not too long after being released, they design and construct a giant calculating machine,
as shown in Figure 38.
The scientist remarks that Ultivac must be enormous to do all the things we wanted to
do.
This is going to be the greatest calculator of all time.
Apparently, as later revealed in the story, their get-rich scheme involves exhibiting
their creation in Yankee Stadium, charging admission to see two tons of steel that thinks
and talks like a man.
Ultivac rebels against this public display and flees, joined by Dr. June Robbins, a scientist
who convinces Ultivac that humans and computers can be friends.
Addressing an assembly of politicians, scientists, and national leaders, Ultivac promises, I
am willing to apply my power to the cause of helping mankind if humanity meets me halfway.
However, rather than hand over to the government what he imagines to be a great source of wealth,
the German scientist who built Ultivac damages him mortally.
Emergency repairs are affected, and in the final panel we see that Ultivac is now a stationary
calculating machine.
As shown in Figure 39, Dr. Robbins has the last word, telling the challengers, the spark
that made Ultivac think like a man is gone, but as a pure machine, he is still contributing
much to man's knowledge.
By 1957, computers had indeed begun contributing much to humanity's knowledge, helping us
with complex tasks.
In 1946, scientists at the University of Pennsylvania constructed the first electronic
computer, called ENIAC, for Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer.
It was more than 80 feet long and weighed nearly 54,000 pounds.
As the semiconductor industry did not yet exist, it employed vacuum tubes, nearly 17,500
of them, and more than 7,000 crystal diodes.
It was owned by the U.S. military, and its first calculations were for the Hydrogen Bomb
Project.
In 1951, the same scientists who built ENIAC, now working for Remington Rand, which would
become Sperry Rand, constructed UNIVAC, a universal automatic computer that consisted
of more than 5,000 vacuum tubes and was capable of performing nearly 2,000 calculations per
second.
This computer sold for more than $125,000 in the early 1950s to the military or large
corporations and was used by CVS-TV to predict Dwight D. Eisenhower's victory in his run
for the presidency in 1952.
UNIVAC was unable to walk or fight jet planes, but it was about the size of Ultivac's electronic
brain as shown in Figure 39.
Absent the semiconductor revolution, increasing the computing power of such devices entailed
using more and more vacuum tubes and complex wiring, and as mentioned in the introduction,
only a few large companies or the government would have had the resources to purchase such
machines.
The groundwork for the dramatic change that would reverse this trend, leading to smaller
yet more powerful computers, began in 1939 when a Bell Lab scientist, Russell All, invented
the semiconductor diode.
We now know enough quantum mechanics to understand how this device and its big brother, the semiconductor
transistor, work, and why many believe them to be the most important inventions of the
20th century.
The first thing we need to address is the definition of a semiconductor.
We have discussed two types of materials in Section 4, metals and insulators.
Metals satisfy the Pauli exclusion principle by allowing each atom's balance electrons,
those last few electrons not paired up in lower energy levels, to occupy distinct momentum
states.
The uncertainty in their momentum is small and the corresponding uncertainty in their
position is large, as these electrons can wander over the entire solid.
At low temperatures, there are many electrons available to carry an electrical current.
Insulators satisfy the requirements of the Pauli principle by spatially restricting each
atom's balance electrons, keeping them localized in bonds between the atoms, like the carbon-carbon
bonds and diamond, sketched in Figure 32 in Chapter 12.
At high temperatures, some of these electrons can be thermally excited to higher energy
states, that is from the orchestra to the balcony, where they can conduct electricity.
But at low temperatures, all the electrons stay locked within each atomic bond and the
material is electrically insulated.
But what is a low temperature?
Low compared to what?
A convenient and natural temperature scale to compare low and high would be room temperature.
In this case, there is a third class of materials that are much better conductors of electricity
at room temperature than insulators such as glass or wood, but much poorer conductors
than metals such as silver or copper.
These part-way conducting solids are termed semi-conductors.
Recall from our discussion in the previous chapter that a laser is a material with an
orchestra of seats, all filled with electrons, separated from a balcony where all the seats
are empty.
Let us ignore for the time being the mezzanine we posited residing between the filled orchestra
and the empty balcony.
We'll get back to those states soon.
In an insulator, the energy separation between the orchestra and the balcony is typically
5 to 10 electron volts, well into the ultraviolet portion of the electromagnetic spectrum.
Consequently, only light of this energy could promote an electron up into the balcony, like
Doc Savage's Invisible Writing from Chapter 14.
The intensity of this light is normally low, and at room temperature, there isn't enough
thermal energy from the atoms to promote a significant number of electrons to the empty
balcony.
Consequently, if a voltage is applied to an insulator, there is a negligible current
at room temperature.
In a semi-conductor, the energy gap between the orchestra and the balcony is much smaller,
usually 1 to 3 electron volts.
The light photons of energy between 1.8 and 3.5 electron volts have sufficient energy
to excite electrons up to the conducting balcony.
Similarly, at room temperature, the thermal energy of the atoms is large enough to excite
electrons into the upper band, though far less than in a normal metal.
Of course, the larger the energy separation between the filled states and the empty band,
the fewer electrons will be thermally excited up to the conducting balcony at room temperature.
Semi-conductors make convenient light detectors, as the separation between the bands of filled
and empty states corresponds to energies in the visible portion of the spectrum.
A particular material will have an energy gap of, let's say, 1 electron volt, which
is in the infrared portion of the spectrum that our eyes cannot detect.
Normally, in the dark, some electrons will be thermally promoted to the empty conduction
band, leaving behind empty seats in the orchestra.
These missing seats are also able to conduct electricity, as when an electron moves from
a filled seat to occupy the empty one, the unoccupied state migrates to where the electron
had been, as sketched in Figure 40.
These missing electrons, or holes, in a filled band of seats, act as positive electrons,
and are a unique aspect of the quantum mechanical nature of electrical conduction in solids.
This process occurs in insulators as well, only then there are so few empty spots in
the lower energy orchestra, and so few electrons in the balcony, that the effect can be ignored.
The electrons up in the balcony in the semiconductor will fall back into the empty seats in the
orchestra, but then other electrons will also be promoted up to the empty conducting band.
So at any given moment, there are a number of electrons and holes in this semiconductor
that can carry current.
The current will be very small compared to what an equivalent metal wire could accommodate,
and a circuit with a semiconductor will look like it has an open switch in the dark.
When I now shine light of energy of one electron volt or higher on this semiconductor, depending
on the intensity of the light, I can excite many, many more electrons into the empty band
and leave many, many more holes in the filled band.
The ability of the material to conduct electricity thereby increases dramatically.
In the circuit, it will look as if a switch had been closed, and the electronics can now
perform its intended operation.
And that's how quantum mechanics makes television remote controls possible.
To the men of America, you're welcome.
The remote control sends a beam of infrared light, invisible to our eyes, to your set.
If you point the front edge of the device away from the set, the signal does not reach
the photo detector, and the setting remains unchanged.
With certain models, one is able to bounce the infrared beam off a wall and still have
sufficient intensity of photons reach the set to be detected.
Once the light beam reaches the semiconductor and is absorbed, the conductance of the material
increases and the circuit is closed.
The infrared beam sent when you press a button on the remote control encodes information
through a prearranged series of pulses, not unlike Morse code, and thus different instructions
can be transmitted to the set.
This is the same physics by which your smoke detector works.
Some models use a beam of infrared light directed toward a photo detector.
When the particulates in the smoke scatter the beam away from the detector, the circuit
is broken and a secondary circuit sends current to the loud, high-pitched alarm.
Other models employ a small amount of the radioactive isotope, americium, which emits
alpha particles when it decays.
These alphas electrically charge the air in the immediate vicinity of the source, and
the electrical conductivity of the charged air molecules is measured.
Smoke particles trap these charges, and again, once the primary circuit is broken, a secondary
circuit sets off the alarm.
From automatic doors that open when you approach, to street lights that turn on when darkness
falls, we do not notice how often we employ semiconductor's ability to change their electrical
properties dramatically when illuminated by light.
These photo detectors played a key role in a broadcast of The Shadow radio show, back
in 1938.
The Shadow, who in reality is Lamont Cranston, wealthy man about town, whose true identity
is known only to his constant aide and companion, Margo Lane, had learned while in the Orient
various mental powers that enable him to cloud men's minds.
In Death Stalks the Shadow, a crooked lawyer, Peter Murdock, sets a death trap for the Shadow
using solid-state light sensors.
When Lamont and Margo are out at a nightclub, they note a gimmicked door that opens whenever
a waiter approaches.
Lamont explains to his companion that the door is controlled by a photoelectric ray
emitted by and detected by chromium fixtures on either side of the door, so that whenever
the beam is broken the door is opened.
Lamont muses that such innovations pose a risk for him as, the Shadow can hide himself
from the human eye, Margo, but he has a physical beam, and the photoelectric beam could detect
his presence.
This is just the plan of Peter Murdock, who hires an electrician to wire a sealed room
with a steel door that will slam shut when a similar invisible beam, you can't see it,
the beam is infrared, explains the electrician, is broken when the Shadow enters the room.
The death room trap set, the electrician is murdered so that he cannot reveal Murdock's
plans.
The Shadow does indeed enter the room, the steel door slams tight and is electrified,
and poison gas is pumped into the room.
Through this all the Shadow checkles his low, sinister laugh, for he knows not only what
evil lurks in the hearts of men, but also that in 1930s radio serials, even master criminals
with law degrees are not very smart.
To taunt his adversary, Murdock had left the body of the electrician in the room with
the Shadow.
Removing a pair of pliers from the dead workers overalls, our hero proceeds to disable the
electricity in the room.
The door no longer a threat, the Shadow escapes, captures Murdock and his gang, and hands them
off to Commissioner Weston and a promised cell on death row.
The weed of crime bears bitter fruit after all.
Even infrared photo detectors are no match for the Shadow.
But if this were the only advantage of semiconductors, the world we live in would not look that
dramatically different from that of the 1930s.
The real power of semiconductors is realized when different chemical impurities are added
to the material, a process that goes by the technical term, doping.
Consider Figure 41, featuring filled states and the empty band of states at higher energy,
like into the filled orchestra and empty balcony in a concert hall.
When discussing the physics of lasers, we introduced a mezzanine level at a slight lower
energy than the balcony, which resulted from the addition of another chemical, typically
phosphorus, to the material.
In semiconductors, there are two kinds of mezzanines that can be incorporated, depending
on the specific chemical atoms added.
Those that are very close to the empty balcony, and those that are just above the filled orchestra.
If I manage my chemistry correctly, I can ensure that the benches right below the empty
balcony have an electron in their normal configuration.
Then, even at room temperature, since there is only a very small gap in energy between
the occupied bench and the empty balcony, nearly all the electrons will hop up to the
balcony, and the holes they leave behind will not be in the orchestra, but in the seats
in the upper mezzanine.
Similarly, with a careful reading of the periodic table of the elements, a narrow band of seats,
a lounge, let's call it, can be placed just above the filled orchestra.
These lounge seats normally would be empty of electrons, depending on the chemistry of
the added atom and the surrounding semiconductor material.
An electron can then jump up from the filled orchestra, leaving a hole in the lower band
without having to promote an electron up in the balcony.
The seats in the lower energy lounge band, as well as the higher energy mezzanine, are
far enough apart from each other that it is hard for an electron or hole to move from
seat to seat in these states.
The mezzanine and lounge states are ineffective at carrying electrical current, but they can
dramatically change the resistance of the surrounding semiconductor by easily adding
either electrons to the balcony or holes in the orchestra.
The first situation, with the mezzanine adding electrons to the balcony, is called an n-type
semiconductor, since I have the net effect of adding mobile negatively charged electrons.
While the second situation, with a low energy lounge accepting electrons from the orchestra,
leaving behind holes in the lower band, is termed a p-type semiconductor, as the current
carrying holes added are positively charged.
As the atoms added to the material were previously electrically neutral, promoting an electron
to the balcony from the mezzanine leaves behind a positively charged seat in these upper states,
and accepting an electron into the lounge, leaving a mobile positively charged hole in
the orchestra, makes the lounge seat negatively charged.
If we added either n-type impurities or p-type impurities to a semiconductor, then the number
of electrons or holes would increase, with the effect that the semiconductor would be
a better conductor of electricity.
Of course, if all we wanted was a better conductor of electricity, then we could have used a metal.
No, the real importance is when we take two semiconductors, one that has only n-type impurities
so that it has a lot of mobile electrons in the balcony and electrons stuck on the benches,
and another semiconductor with mobile holes in the nearly filled orchestra, and electrons
sitting on the benches near the filled band and bring them together.
If these two pieces were each a mile long, then we would expect that very far from the
interface each material would look like a normal n-type or p-type semiconductor.
But the junction between the two would be a different matter.
The n-type material has electrons in the balcony but no holes in the orchestra, while the p-type
semiconductor has mobile holes in the orchestra but none in the balcony.
As shown in figure 42, when they are brought together, the electrons can move over from
the n-type side to the p-type, and the holes can do the reverse, where they combine, disappearing
from the material.
That is, the electrons in the balcony can drop down into an empty seat in the orchestra.
Remember that the Poli Exclusion Principle tells us that no two electrons can be in the
same quantum state, so the electron can drop down in energy only if there is an empty space
available to it, and it will be as if both an electron and a hole were removed from the
material.
But the positive charges in the seats in the mezzanine in the n-type solid and the negative
charges in the seats in the lounge in the p-type material do not go away.
As more and more mobile electrons fall into the mobile holes, more positive charges in
the mezzanine in the n-type material and negative charges in the lounge in the p-type material
accumulate, neither of which can move from one side to the other.
The net effect is to build up an electric field from the positive charges in the n-type
side to the negatively charged seats in the p-type material.
Eventually, this electric field is large enough to prevent further electrons and holes from
moving across the junction, and a built-in voltage is created.
Remember that the energy of these quantum states was founded by the Schrodinger equation,
and is determined by the electrical attractions between the positively charged nucleus of
each atom in the semiconductor and the negatively charged electrons.
The effect of having an electric field across the interface between the n-type and p-type
semiconductors is to raise the energy of the seats on the p-type side relative to the
energy of the seats on the n-type side, as shown in Figure 42b.
Electrons on the left will now find it harder to move over to the right, and holes on the
right will find a barrier inhibiting them from moving to the left.
I have now made one of the most revolutionary devices in solid state physics, the diode.
The built-in voltage across the junction between the p-type and n-type semiconductors serves
as a one-way door, such as a turnstile that rotates in only one direction, for electrons.
The arguments for electrons in the balcony in one direction will hold for holes in the
orchestra in the opposite direction.
For simplicity, I focus on the electrons.
Unit directional valves are, of course, quite common, from the valves in your heart to the
cat's whisker rectifiers employed in early radio sets, used to convert an alternating
current into a direct current.
Solid state semiconductor diodes are durable and small and can easily be tailored for specific
electronic needs.
If an external voltage is applied across the junction, with a polarity that is opposite
to that of the built-in electric field, it will cancel out the internal energy barrier
at the interface.
The seats on the left and right-hand sides will line up if there is no built-in electric
field, figure 42C.
It will then be easy for electrons to move from the n-type side to the p-type side, and
we will see a large current.
If the direction of the voltage is reversed, the applied voltage adds to the built-in voltage,
there will be a large electric field opposing current flow, and the seats on the right-hand
side are pushed up to an even higher energy.
The diode then acts like a very high-resistance device.
This directionality is important in radio detection or for power supplies, where an alternating
current input must be converted into a direct current.
One way to moderate the current passing through a diode is to vary the barrier that inhibits
charges from moving from one region to another.
In addition to barriers created by internal electric fields at the PN interface, one can
construct a diode where the two regions of an identical semiconductor are separated by
a very thin insulator.
The electrons cannot jump over this insulating partition, and the only way they can move
across the interface is to quantum mechanically tunnel.
Using the voltage applied to the insulator has the effect of changing the height of the
barrier seen by the electrons, and the tunneling current is a very sensitive function of the
barrier height.
In this way, a small applied voltage can have a large influence on the flow of electrical
current, and these tunneling diodes are an integral part of many consumer electronics,
such as cell phones.
Though I cannot predict whether any particular electron will pass through the barrier or not,
in dealing with a large number of electrons, I can accurately determine the fraction that
will make it across.
In this way, electronic devices that rely on one of the most fantastic of quantum mechanical
phenomena can be designed and counted on to operate in a routine, dependable manner.
A one-way door for electrical current is sometimes referred to as a rectifier, and is useful for
converting a current that alternates direction into one that moves in only a single direction,
as in a radio receiver.
In 1939, Russell Oll, a scientist at Bell Labs, was studying the electrical properties
of semiconductors for use as rectifiers when he examined a sample that accidentally contained
a PN junction.
As he investigated the unusual current carrying properties of this sample, he was surprised
to find that a large voltage spontaneously appeared across the material when he illuminated
it with a 40-watt desk lamp.
Oll was looking for a rectifier, and he found a solar cell.
If I shine light on the semiconductor PN junction, as shown in Figure 43a, then as the energy
separation between the orchestra and the balcony is the same on either side, the built-in electric
field has just shifted the energy of the seats on one side relative to the other.
Photons will be absorbed on both sides, creating electrons in the balcony and holes in the orchestra.
As everything we say about electrons in a diode will hold for the holes, but in reverse,
we will focus on just the electrons.
From the point of view of the electrons, if they are on the P-type side, the internal
built-in electric field makes it as if they start at the top of an energy hill.
These electrons will easily move down the hill in the balcony over to the left-hand side
and through the device.
The electrons and holes are generated throughout the material, but those in the vicinity of
the interface between the P-type and N-type semiconductors will see an internal voltage
that will push the electrons down the hill and through the device.
We will be able to draw a current and obtain usable electrical energy simply by shining
light on the diode.
So a solar cell is an illuminated P-end junction that generates a current, and a light-emitting
diode, LED, is a P-end junction with a current that generates light.
How do we get light from a diode?
Remember that very far from the interface, the device looks like either a normal N-type
semiconductor or a normal P-type semiconductor.
In an N-type material, there are a lot of electrons with very few holes, because the
electrons were not excited from the filled band but were introduced by the chemical impurities.
Thus there is very little light generated when electrons in the nearly empty balcony
fall to the orchestra, simply because there are very few vacant seats for them to fall
into.
If I force the electrons by way of an external voltage to move from the N-type side to the
P-type side, there will be a lot of electrons in the middle junction region, where there
will also be a lot of holes heading in the opposite direction, figure 43B.
As the electrons fall into the holes, they emit photons.
It takes electrical energy to move the electrons up the hill into the P-type region, and we
get some of that energy back in the form of photons.
With a cylindrical transparent lens covering the LED, we now have a light source without
a filament, so nothing to burn out, and that is highly efficient, as very little electrical
energy is converted to waste heat.
Initial LEDs back in the 1960s could produce only red light at very low intensity, and
the past 30 years the luminosity of these devices has increased by a factor of 10,000,
and LEDs that generate white light can put out as much illumination as an incandescent
60-100 watt light bulb.
LEDs are much longer lived than standard incandescent bulbs, and some LEDs manufactured in the 1970s
and 1980s are still operational today.
There is interest in replacing silicon with organic chemicals as the semiconductor in
these devices, as these organic light-emitting diodes, OLEDs, can be spread easily over large
areas, and in some cases are brighter than silicon-based LEDs.
These devices use polymers, consisting of long chains of carbon atoms bonded in a line,
with different chemical groups protruding from the chain, referred to by chemists as
organic molecules, as the semiconductor element in the LED.
There may come a day, and it may be relatively soon, when conventional incandescent light
bulbs are replaced with white light LEDs, which are much more environmentally friendly, use
less power, and last much longer than compact fluorescent bulbs, all thanks to quantum mechanics.
If you'll allow me to digress, fearless listener, I'd like to relate a personal experience
with diodes.
When I was a new graduate student, I had a desk in the research group where I would eventually
conduct my dissertation studies.
A more senior student, Peter, had recently convinced our research advisor to install
a separate phone line in the lab where Peter worked.
This was back in the days before AT&T had been broken up into the baby bells by court
order, and one had to order phones from Bell Telephone, which would then come and install
the landline.
Cell phones were an extreme rarity back then.
As a cost-saving measure, our professor had ordered a phone that would allow incoming
calls but not outgoing ones.
As soon as the phone company employees departed, Peter took the phone off the wall, opened
it up, and compared it carefully to another phone that did allow outgoing calls.
At one key juncture, Peter noted, a diode, a simple and elegant way to ensure that signals
could propagate in one direction but not in the other.
Removing the semiconductor device and reconnecting the wires, Peter was then able to make outgoing
calls on the phone.
All of which I was unaware of when the next day, a Saturday, the phone company employees
returned to check on the line and attached the sticker to the phone that would indicate
it to signed phone number.
A short while later, the phone in the common room where I was studying rang, and when I
answered it, the telephone workers apologized, saying that they just wanted to make sure
that the phone could make outgoing calls.
A short while after they left, Peter came in and told me about his fixing of the phone
in his lab.
He turned white when I mentioned that the phone company man had been by earlier, wanting
to make sure that the phone could make as well as receive calls.
Racing to his lab, he quickly ascertained that the phone would no longer make calls.
I watched as he took the phone off the wall, removed the plastic cover, and spotted a small
white card inside the phone tucked underneath a tangle of wires.
Using the card with tweezers, we saw the handwritten suggestion, try it now, whiz kid.
Sure enough, the phone had been completely rewired, with great effort going into replicating
the functions performed by one simple diode.
Without the innovation of the solid state diode, electronics would be a great deal more
complicated and bulkier, though the phone company would still always win in the end.
