Chapter 17 The Gadget That Made the Future
The diode was the first important step into the semiconductor age, and the second major
advance also came from Bell Labs, with the invention of the transistor.
There were two different structures for a transistor, one that involves adding another
n-type semiconductor to the PN junction to make an NPN device, and the simpler to understand,
in my opinion, field effect device.
I discuss here the field effect structure, as it will also help us understand how a flash
memory stick, also known as a jump drive or a USB drive, works.
The arguments here do not depend on whether the material is n-type or p-type, but for
simplicity we will pick a p-type semiconductor for definiteness.
Imagine a semiconductor, such as silicon, as a rectangular slab, longer and wider than
it is thick, not unlike this book, with the front cover facing up as illustrated in Figure
44.
On the front cover of the book we place a CD case, which is as wide as the book but
not as long.
The CD case represents an insulator that could be silicon dioxide, which in its crystalline
form is called quartz, and in an amorphous phase is termed glass.
On the top cover of the book, there are two metal electrodes at each end, not touching
the CD case.
At one electrode, a voltage is applied, and the resulting current pushed through the semiconductor
is withdrawn at the other electrode.
So far we have just described a way to measure the current passing through the material for
a given applied voltage, and the CD case insulator plays no role in the conduction through the
semiconductor.
If we are trying to pass a flow of electrons through a p-type doped material, as shown
in Figure 41D, the current will be very low.
Now to make this device a transistor, let's put a sheet of metal atop the insulating slab,
that is, the CD case on the book.
So now, as shown in Figure 44, there are two metal electrodes apart from each other, on
the front of the semiconductor, between which is an insulating slab, atop of which is another
metal electrode.
We have constructed a field effect transistor.
Note, there are many different types of transistor structures.
What we have described is technically referred to as a metal oxide semiconductor field effect
transistor, or a MOSFET.
What happens if we apply a positive voltage to the metal electrode that is covering the
insulating slab?
As the metal is in contact with an insulator that does not conduct electricity, the charges
will just stay on the metal, having no place to go.
The electric field created by these charges will extend through the insulator into the
semiconductor layer.
Compared to the insulator, the semiconductor on the top of the insulating slab is a pretty
good conductor, though not as good as the metal.
The electrons will be drawn toward the region near the insulator semiconductor interface
by the electric field.
Without a voltage, the metal is electrically neutral, and there is no reason for any electrons
in the semiconductor to be pulled toward this region.
The voltage applied to the insulator, piling up positive charges on the top of the insulating
slab, will thus create a channel of electrons connecting the two other metal electrodes
at either end of the semiconductor, shown in figure 44B, and the ability of the material
to carry a flow of electrons will be greatly improved.
The positive voltage on the metal atop the insulator, in a sense, opens a gate through
which the electrons can flow.
Applying a negative voltage would push electrons away from the insulator semiconductor interface,
and the ability for electrons to flow would be reduced.
The gate would swing shut, in this case.
This is what a transistor does.
It provides a way by applying a small voltage to the gate electrode to dramatically alter
and potentially amplify a current passing through the semiconductor.
Remember from the last chapter the discussion of the influence of a built-in electric field
on a PN junction on the energy of the bands of states in a semiconductor.
Changing the electric field alters the energy of the quantum states that are calculated
using the Schrodinger equation, and which were found by finding the influence of the
electric field of the positively charged nucleus on the electrons-allowed energies.
As shown in figure 45A, if no voltage is applied, then there is no extra field on the semiconductor,
and the number of electrons available to flow in the P-type semiconductor is very low.
If a positive voltage is applied to the insulator, it will change the energy of both the orchestra
and the balcony of states, shown in figure 45B.
The change is strongest near the positive charges on the insulator, and decreases as
one goes farther into the semiconductor.
Near the region by the insulator, electrons can now be promoted into the balcony by thermal
energy of the material.
Consequently, the region near the insulator, when there is a positive voltage applied to
a P-type semiconductor, will see a large enhancement in its ability to carry a current of electrons.
The sensitivity of the current passing through this device to an externally applied gate
voltage results from changes in the energy of the quantum states in the filled orchestra
and empty balcony, which in turn arise from the quantum theory of solids.
If the voltage applied to the insulator changes with time, say it is a weak radio signal detected
by an antenna, then the current passing through the semiconductor will also vary in time, but
will be an amplified version, now capable of driving speakers so that the radio signal
can be heard.
Transistor radios and television sets, employing the amplification capability of these devices,
were some of their first applications, replacing the bulky, fragile, power-demanding vacuum
tubes and making these consumer electronic products smaller and lighter.
Vacuum tubes accomplish the same task by heating a wire until electrons boil off the filament.
A voltage applied to a screen then attracts these free electrons to a collector, and depending
on the voltage they could be accelerated toward or reflected away from the collector.
In order to minimize the electron beams scattering from air molecules, the tube should have all
the air removed.
Such devices are bulky and fragile, use considerable power, generate a great deal of heat, necessitating
spacing them a distance from each other, and are expensive to produce.
A semiconductor transistor accomplishes the same task without requiring a glass-enclosed
vacuum in a compact rugged design and wastes very little energy as heat, and the only limitation
on the size of the device is the ingenuity in constructing the insulating slab and applying
the metal electrodes and making contact with the rest of the circuit.
If we can make the transistor small, we can put several transistors on a single piece of
silicon by varying the concentration of chemical impurities that add either excess electrons
or holes to the semiconductor, and through the placement of other metal electrodes and
insulating slabs, one can incorporate diodes, resistors, and capacitors into the same semiconductor
along with the transistor.
In this way, the various aspects of a complex circuit can be integrated onto a single semiconductor
chip.
In 1958, just a year after the challengers of the unknown faced off against Ultevac, whose
electronic brain was as large as a room, figure 39, Robert Noyce and Jack Kilby independently
designed and constructed the first integrated circuits.
The first of these devices incorporated roughly 5 to 10 transistors on a single silicon wafer.
In the introduction, I discussed Moore's Law, whereby the number of transistors on an integrated
circuit doubles every two years.
The continued accuracy of this prediction surprised even more, and in 2010, the number
of transistors on a chip can be more than a billion.
Estimates of the number of integrated circuits in the world suggest that there are vastly
more transistors on the planet right now than there are stars in the Milky Way galaxy.
These transistors do more than simply amplify information, as in the case of a weak electromagnetic
wave signal being boosted in a cell phone.
They can also store and manipulate information.
When a large positive voltage is applied to the gate electrode on the insulator, the current
carrying capability of the semiconductor is greatly enhanced.
Removing this large voltage restores the silicon to its poorly conducting state.
The first situation can be described as a one, while the second is a zero.
Just as the DVDs and CDs in the previous chapter are able to encode complex information
through a series of ones and zeros, the transistors on the integrated circuits can do the same.
However, transistors offer the possibility of much greater sensitivity to small perturbations.
Transistors have been fabricated in the research laboratory with dimensions of just a few nanometers,
where depending on the voltage applied to the gate electrode, the transport of a single
electron can be detected.
Computers use transistors as logical elements that can be in an on or off state.
And transistors can be fabricated whereby the difference between the two conditions
is the motion of one electron.
It may seem surprising that one could construct a complex literature using an alphabet consisting
of only two letters, but if there is no constraint on the length of a given word, then there
is indeed enough flexibility to perform even the most sophisticated mathematical operations,
such as adding two numbers.
A full discussion of how diodes and transistors are combined to perform a variety of logic
functions and the Boolean mathematics that underlies their calculations warrants its
own book, and would take us too far afield for a discussion of the applications of quantum
mechanics.
Nevertheless, I do want to conclude this chapter with a discussion of one modification
of the transistor structure that is already changing our everyday life.
Long term information storage in a computer is done via the magnetic hard drive, a disk
containing a record of ones and zeros in the form of magnetic domains, with a magnetic
field pointing in one direction counting as a one, and a field pointing in the opposite
direction as a zero.
For technical reasons, the actual bits on a hard drive involve several magnetic domains,
arranged in different sequences to represent ones and zeros, but for our purposes we can
simplify this to single domains for a one or a zero.
An externally applied magnetic field can polarize regions, bits, on the drive, and write the
sequence of ones and zeros that encode information.
A smaller magnetic sensor, essentially a layered metallic structure whose resistance is very
sensitive to the external magnetic field, is brought near the disk.
If the magnetic field of a bit points in one direction, the resistance of the sensor will
have one value.
It will have another if the bit's magnetic field is in the opposite direction.
The disk itself spins like a DVD or CD at high speeds of more than 5,000 revolutions
per minute, and the sensor rides just above the hard drive, with a spacing that is equivalent
to one hundredth the diameter of a human hair.
To store more information, one makes the platter larger and the bits smaller.
That this magnetic device is capable of storing information without an external power supply.
Once the bits are magnetized they stay in the same orientation, and with a relatively
low failure rate, despite fears of hard drive crashes, the medium is extremely reliable
given the use it endures.
Is a testament to the skill and art of engineers.
Transistors are also able to store information.
A field effect transistor alters the ability of a semiconductor to carry electrical current
through the application of a voltage to the gate electrode residing on an insulating slab
on the device.
For the device configuration we have discussed, there are obviously other possibilities, the
conductance of the semiconductor is low if there is no voltage to the gate metal, representing
a zero, and high standing in for a one, when a positive voltage is applied, as shown in
figure 45.
With a large enough array of transistors, one can generate any sequence of ones and
zeros desired.
However, once the external voltage is turned off, then all transistors in a circuit default
back to their low conductance state.
How can I store and preserve the high conductance channel of a transistor, that is, keep the
ones from turning into zeros after the voltage is turned off?
Flash memory devices add a very small wrinkle, as in nanometer small, on the field effect
structure we have described.
To the standard field effect transistor configuration, the flash memory adds a layer of silicon particles
in the insulating layer, a very short distance between the metal gate electrode.
So the device has a metal gate, a thin layer of insulator, another very thin layer of silicon
bowled up into little beads, and then the normal remaining thickness of the insulator
atop the semiconductor.
What's the point of the silicon beads?
If the two electrodes used to pass the current through the semiconductor are shorted, and
the large positive voltage is applied to the gate metal, then the positive charges could
be transferred to the silicon beads.
The nanocrystals must be small and separated from one another, so that these charges remain
on the silicon particles and do not leak away.
The charged nanoparticles generate an electric field in the semiconductor, expanding the
current carrying channel and maintaining the device in the high conductance state, that
is, recorded as a one, even after the voltage is removed from the gate metal.
Until a voltage of opposite polarity is applied, the transistor will store the high conductance
state on this transistor.
Even when the transistor is unplugged from any power supply.
Such a memory is termed non-volatile.
The story goes that a colleague of Fujio Masuoka, the inventor of this type of transistor memory,
when describing how quickly the stored information could be erased, said that it reminded him
of a camera's flash, from whence the nickname for the device derives.
At the time of this writing, flash memory devices capable of storing 256 gigabytes of
information, large enough to store more than 10,000 copies of this book as Word documents,
were being manufactured, corresponding to a higher data storage capacity than Blu-ray
DVDs have.
Non-volatile memories have also revolutionized photography.
In conventional non-digital cameras, a light photon induces a chemical change in a photographic
film.
The information as to where the photon was absorbed by the molecule in the film is stored,
and then a series of wet chemistry steps transfers this information to a photographic print.
The graininess of individual molecules in a conventional film is now replaced with a
pixelated grid.
When photons strike the photo detectors in a given pixel, they will, if absorbed, create
mobile charges.
Using different semiconductors, the energy separation between the filled and empty bands
of states can be changed, enabling photo detectors that can image in the infrared,
visible, or ultraviolet portion of the spectrum.
The charges up in the balcony can be converted to voltages, and then stored on flash memories.
The location of each pixel is known, so a digital record of the number of photons that
struck the array of photo detectors is obtained.
The ability to instantly display the stored image, or video, and the convenience of data
transfer and large storage capacity, coupled with the incorporation of these cameras into
other devices such as cell phones or computer screens, has exceeded the expectations of
science fiction pulp magazines.
Well, with one exception.
As illustrated in Figure 46, the notion that a device capable of wireless video reception
and broadcasting, small enough that it would fit on a person's wrist, was indeed anticipated
in 1964 by the comic strip creator Chester Gould.
Wrist phones that are capable of video transmission are now becoming available, another example
of fiction becoming reality through quantum physics.
Now if we could only figure out how to construct personal garbage cans, Chapter 4, Figure 8,
that fly by means of magnetism.
