CHAPTER 18 SPIN TRONICS
Everything, light and matter, has an intrinsic angular momentum, or spin, that can have only
discrete values.
One of the most surprising discoveries made by physicists probing the inner workings of
the atom was that electrons, subatomic particles that are the basic carriers of negative charge,
also are little bar magnets, like those shown in Figure 10.
This intrinsic magnetic field is associated with a property called spin, although, as
I have argued, this term is a misnomer.
While it does relate to intrinsic angular momentum, the magnetic field associated with
the electron doesn't really come from its spinning like a top.
Nevertheless, when physicists refer to the internal magnetic field possessed by electrons,
or protons or neutrons, they inevitably speak of the particle spin.
The transistor modulates the current flowing through a semiconductor by the application
of an electric field to an insulating slab on top of the conducting material.
In this way, the current flowing through the semiconductor is regulated through the electron's
negative charge.
The magnetic field that the electron exhibits has been, in most electronics up till now,
completely ignored.
As one might imagine, this situation changes in devices characterized as spin-tronic, a
shorthand expression for spin-transport electronics.
Here the electron's magnetic field is a crucial component of the signal being detected or
manipulated.
One form of spin-tronics is already employed in current computer hard drives, while the
next generation of such devices, discussed in the following section, may make hard drives
unnecessary.
As described in Chapter 15, a DVD encodes information in the form of ones and zeros as
smooth or pitted regions on a shiny disk.
A laser reflected from the surface of the disk does so either specularly, that is, smoothly
onto a photo detector if the surface is smooth, or diffusely, away from the detector if it
strikes a jagged pit.
Similarly, the hard drive in a computer is a magnetic material with regions magnetized
in particular patterns.
The smallest elements of the pattern are termed bits.
The drive stores information in the form of ones and zeros as magnetized regions, with
north poles pointing in one orientation representing a one, and in the other direction standing
for a zero.
Each bit in current disk drives is written by moving a magnet over the region which
orients the magnetic pattern.
To create the opposite pattern, a magnetic field in the reverse direction is applied.
To erase the bit, a depolarizing magnetic field is applied.
To read the one or zero now stored on the disk, hard drives employ sensors that utilize
a quantum phenomenon, termed giant magneto-resistance.
All solids have bands of allowed states in which the electrons may reside, separated
by energy gaps where there are no allowed quantum states.
The difference between an insulator and a metal is that for an insulator, or a semiconductor,
the last filled band, the orchestra in our auditorium analogy, is completely filled with
every possible energy state being occupied by an electron.
In contrast, in metals, the lower orchestra level is only half filled, as shown in Figure
34b.
If a voltage is applied to a metal, the electrons feel a force.
This force in turn accelerates the electrons, causing them to speed up and increase their
kinetic energy.
Recall the water hose analogy of metal wires.
The voltage is like the water pressure, and the electrical current is the resulting flow
of water through the hose.
As there are always some unoccupied seats in the lower orchestra level of a metal, electrons
in the upper filled rows can always move to higher energy states, and the material is
able to conduct an electrical current.
What determines the current observed in a metal for a given applied voltage?
Normally, the electrons can surf by the atoms in the metal wire.
As long as the atoms are in a uniform crystal and arrangement, they do not impede the electrical
current.
One can run on a city sidewalk and never step on a crack, thereby preserving one's mother's
back.
As long as the placement of the concrete segments is uniform and matched to one's stride.
If there is a hole in the sidewalk or a protruding tree root or a shortened segment, then it
is likely that the runner will stumble.
In any real metal wire there will be defects such as crystal and imperfections, atoms randomly
located out of their preferred ordered positions, and impurities that inevitably sneak into
the solid during the fabrication process.
Electrons accelerated by a voltage will scatter from these defects and transfer some of their
kinetic energy to these atoms.
Sometimes this scattering is a good thing, as in an incandescent light bulb or a toaster.
There a large current is forced through a narrow filament, and the accelerated electrons
transfer so much of their energy to the atoms in the wire that they shake violently about
their normal crystalline positions.
This shaking heats the wire until it is glowing red hot, as in the coils in your toaster.
And for higher currents in thinner wires, the shaking can cause excitation of electrons
to all higher energy states equally with resultant emission of light of all frequencies, perceived
as white light, as in the filament of a light bulb.
Sometimes the loss of energy through collisions with atoms in the metallic wire is a bad thing,
as in electrical power transmission cables.
In order to compensate for these energy losses, the voltages along the lines must be very
high, requiring power substations and transformers along the line to lower these lethal transmission
voltages to values suitable for home use.
Computer hard drive disc readers employ the scattering of an electrical current by magnetic
atoms to sense the different fields of the magnetized bits.
A thin non-magnetic metal is sandwiched between the two magnetic metals.
In the absence of an external magnetic field, one slice of magnetic bread is permanently
polarized so that its magnetic field points in one direction within a layer, while the
other slice of bread is polarized in another direction.
The nature of the quantum mechanical coupling between the magnetic layers, separated by
the non-magnetic middle layer, leads to this configuration being the low energy state.
Imagine a flow of electrons perpendicular through the top of this sandwich, passing
through the face of one slice of magnetic bread, through the non-magnetic metal meat
of the sandwich, and finally through the face of the other magnetic metal bread slice, as
shown in Figure 47.
When first entering the first magnetized layer, the electrons are unpolarized in that their
internal magnetic fields are as likely to point in one direction, spin up as in the
other, spin down.
The first ferromagnetic layer polarizes the electrons, and those that move into the non-magnetic
spacer layer will have their internal magnetic fields pointing in the same direction as the
field in the first metal layer.
When they reach the second magnetized layer, which normally has a field pointing in the
opposite direction, these polarized electrons are mostly reflected, so very little electrical
current passes through the second layer and leaves the sandwich.
If very little current results for a given voltage, we say that the device has a high
resistance for an electrical current passing perpendicular through the three layers.
Now this structure is placed in an external magnetic field, such as that created by a
magnetized bit on a computer hard drive.
The external field forces both magnetic layers in this sandwich, in Figure 47B, to point
in the same direction.
When an electrical current now passes through this structure, the first layer polarizes
the electrons' magnetic fields as before, and the second layer, now pointing in the
same direction, readily allows the electrons to pass through, and hence a large current
flows through the three-layer device.
This change in resistance with an external magnetic field can be very large, up to 80%
or more.
They are seriously technically known as giant magneto-resistant devices, which means that
they are very sensitive to even small magnetic fields.
One can thus make the magnetically polarized bits on the hard drive smaller and still be
able to reliably read out the sequence of ones and zeros.
Smaller bits means more of them can be packed on a given disk area, and the storage capabilities
of computer hard drives have increased dramatically since the introduction of this first spin
tronic device.
The first generation of iPods was able to store large data files on a small magnetic
disk because the sensors used to read the information made use of the giant magneto-resistance
effect.
The pace of technological innovation is such that hard drives currently available for purchase
use another quantum mechanical phenomenon, tunneling, to sense the magnetic fields of
the bits.
Nevertheless, the basic principles underlying giant magneto-resistance are finding new
applications in future spin tronic devices.
Giant magneto-resistance was discovered in 1988 by Albert Fert in France and independently
by Peter Grunberg in Germany, for which they shared the Nobel Prize in Physics in 2007.
By 1997, hard drives containing read heads making use of the giant magneto-resistance
effect were available for sale.
It is actually not unusual for quantum mechanics-enabled devices to quickly find their way into consumer
products.
Bell Labs held a press conference announcing the invention of the transistor in 1948, and
by 1954, one could purchase the first expensive transistor radio.
