Chapter 19 A Window on Inner Space
In the 1963 Roger Corman science fiction film, X, The Man with the X-ray Eyes, Dr. James
Xavier, searching for improvements in patient care, develops a serum in the form of eyedrops
that enables a person to see through solid matter.
Deshewing animal testing as not being suitably reliable, he experiments on himself and does
indeed gain the ability to see through a person's clothing and epidermis.
However, this success leads to one of the greatest catastrophes that can befall any
scientist.
He loses his research grant when his funding agency discounts his claims of X-ray vision.
Nevertheless, his ability to see within the interior of a person enables him to save a
small child's life, as he recognizes that she was about to receive an unnecessary and
ineffective operation.
Sadly for Dr. Xavier, his X-ray vision becomes stronger and stronger until his eyelids and
thick dark glasses provide no respite.
It does not end well for the well-meaning doctor, as the biblical expression, if thine eye offend
thee, plays a key role in the film's conclusion.
Fortunately, we can safely peer inside a person, see his or her internal organs, and
discriminate healthy tissue from cancer's growths, without the disastrous consequences
suffered by Dr. Xavier.
I now address a device that has become common in most hospitals and many medical clinics
and would certainly have strained the credulity of the editors of any science fiction pulp
magazine had it been featured in a submitted story.
Magnetic Residence Imaging, or MRI.
This process, enabling detailed high-resolution imaging of the interior of a person, is a
striking illustration of how our understanding of the quantum nature of matter, driven by
curiosity about the rules governing the behavior of atoms and light, has led to the development
of technologies that futurists could not suspect fifty years ago.
We have made use of the intrinsic angular momentum of fundamental subatomic particles
when determining which form of quantum statistics, Fermi, Dirac, or Bose-Einstein, they would
obey.
In this way, the internal spin is crucial to understanding the nature of metallic or
insulating solids, but was not employed directly when describing the physics of diodes or transistors.
Included with the spin is a small, intrinsic magnetic field that enabled Stern and Gerlach
to measure the spin in the first place, Chapter 4, and remotely probing the magnetic field
from the spin of nuclear protons enables magnetic imaging.
We are composed mostly of water, molecules consisting of an oxygen atom bound to two
hydrogen atoms. Each hydrogen atom has a single proton in its nucleus. The intrinsic spin
of the proton is plus or minus h divided by 2, and there is a small magnetic field associated
with each proton. The magnetic field has a north and south pole, see Figure 10. And when
we place the water molecule in an external magnetic field, the hydrogen atom's proton
points either in the same direction as the applied field, that is, its north pole points
up while the lab magnetic field does likewise, or in the opposite direction. Its north pole
points down while the external field's north pole points up. The proton in the nucleus
has a series of available quantum levels, just as the electron has its own series of
possible states. If the proton's magnetic field is in the same direction as the external
magnetic field, it is in a lower energy state. If the proton's magnet is opposite to the
external magnetic field, then it will have a higher energy, as it takes work to rotate
it to the lower energy-aligned configuration. As indicated in Figure 48, the energy level
that is occupied by the single proton can thus be split into two energy values by placing
the hydrogen atom between the poles of a strong magnet, with the proton's energy being lower
than what we find with no outside field or the energy being higher, depending on whether
the proton's magnetic field points with or against the external field, respectively.
Say a proton is aligned in the same direction as the external magnetic field in the lower
energy-split state, Figure 48b. If I provide energy in the form of a photon, I can promote
the proton to the higher energy state, which corresponds to the proton's magnetic field
being opposite to the outside magnet. This resonant absorption is entirely analogous
to the line spectra, Chapter 5, Figure 6, for electronic energy levels in an atom. In
essence, the photon provides energy to flip the proton's internal magnet from pointing
up, for example, to pointing down. It is as if I had a top that was spinning clockwise,
and with an appropriate pulse of energy, I caused its direction to reverse so that it
was now rotating counterclockwise. The bigger the external magnetic field, the larger the
energy splitting. That is, it requires more energy to flip the orientation of the proton's
magnetic field if it is in a large external field than in a weak field. If the hydrogen
atom is placed in a magnetic field, roughly 20,000 to 60,000 times stronger than the Earth's
magnetic field, which is why one must avoid stray metallic objects in the MRI room when
the magnet is powered, then the separation in energy between when the proton is aligned
with and against the external field is roughly a thousandth of an electron volt. In comparison,
the binding energy holding the hydrogen atom to the oxygen atom in the water molecule is
nearly five electron volts. Recall from Chapter 2, Einstein's suggestion
that the energy of a photon is proportional to its frequency, E equals H times F, a photon
capable of promoting the proton from one magnetic orientation to the other, as in Figure 48B,
is in the radio portion of the electromagnetic spectrum, as this form of electromagnetic
radiation penetrates through a person, which is why you can hear your transistor radio
even when you place your body between it and the broadcast antenna. This energy region is
well suited to probing the proton's orientation within a person. The idea begins to form.
Place a person in a large magnetic field strong enough to generate an appreciable energy splitting
for the protons in the water molecules that are in every cell in his or her body. Direct a
transmitter of radio waves at the person and the more photons that are absorbed promoting a proton
from one magnetic orientation to the other, the more water molecules there must be. How do we
determine whether a radio wave is absorbed or not? A high exposure will transfer many protons
from the lower energy state to the higher energy state. When the radio frequency light is turned
off, the hydrogen atom's protons flip back down to the lower energy state emitting photons as they
do. In this way, the person glows in the dark, emitting radio frequency light that is detected
and is the hallmark of the resident absorption. The number of aligned protons throughout the bulk
of the person's body may thus be measured. In fact, the radio wave signal is turned on and off
continuously, but the emission of radio waves when the system relaxes back to the lower energy
configuration is what is detected. How do we obtain spatial resolution throughout a cross
section of the person by varying the strength of the magnetic field? Make the magnetic field very
small at the left-hand side of the person and very large on the right, increasing linearly from one
side to the other. As the energy spacing depends on the strength of the external magnet, the separation
between levels will be small on the left and grow to a larger energy gap on the right. Consequently,
the minimum photon energy that will induce a transition will be larger on the right than on
the left. By varying the frequency of the radio signal, one can determine the amount of absorption
on the left, middle, and right of the person. By using secondary magnets in the cylinder that
encloses the person, information on the proton density with full spatial resolution can be obtained.
As shown in Figure 49, this imaging of the magnetically induced resonant absorption enables
us to probe the inner secrets of a three-pack of chocolate peanut butter cups, confirming through
application of advanced quantum mechanics that there is indeed delicious peanut butter within
the chocolate coating. But all cells in the body contain water, so there will be strong proton
absorption at all points in the body. Where does the contrast come from? There are other elements
that exhibit a magnetically induced resonance absorption signal, such as sodium, phosphorus,
carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, and calcium. These elements have radio resonances at different
frequencies than hydrogen, and can thus be distinguished from the single proton signal.
However, a more powerful technique involves not the magnetically induced signal, but the
manner in which it goes away and then returns. When the magnetic field is applied, many of
the hydrogen atom's protons in the water molecules will line up with the external field,
so that nearly all of the lower energy states will be occupied, and the higher energy states,
corresponding to the proton's magnetic field opposing the applied field, will be less occupied.
As the person is at a temperature of 98.6 degrees Fahrenheit, there is enough thermal energy to
promote protons into the higher energy state, even without radio frequency light. Increasing
the external magnetic field raises the energy separation between states, and fewer protons will
be found in the upper level in the dark. The detection sensitivity in an MRI device is quite
high, and the MRI system is unable to detect the small additional fraction of protons that
are promoted by the radio waves. Under a continuous exposure of radio frequency light, more and
more protons are promoted to the higher energy state, until the situation is reached when
the average number in the upper state, with a magnetic field pointing down, is equal to the
number in the lower state, with a magnetic field pointing up. At this stage, we have for the
collection of protons an equal number with their north poles pointing up, as we have with their
north poles pointing down. The total magnetization of the protons will therefore be zero. If we
now stop the continuous illumination, the protons in the higher energy state will relax back to
the lower energy configuration. The characteristic time that this will take is highly sensitive to
the local environment in which the particular water molecule resides. As the interaction of the
protons magnetic field with thermal vibrations of other atoms, and with the magnetic field from
other elements in its vicinity, determines how hard or easy it is to polarize. It was discovered
through careful experimentation that the time dependence of the restoration of the net magnetization
is different for the various tissues in the body, providing a basis for contrast in the resulting
images. One can inspect for blood vessel blockages, cysts or growths, and determine whether or not
tumors are benign, based on differences in magnetization times. By careful examination of the
time dependence of how the protons resume their original magnetization, a thorough diagnosis,
which previously would have required x-ray eyes, is possible. There are of course a host of complex
technical issues that go into generating a three-dimensional image using MRI. I never promised
I would tell you how to construct your very own imaging device, only that I would explain the
essential quantum mechanics that underlies such a process. Needless to say that all of the above
would be useless without high-speed computers enabled by solid state integrated circuits to
record, store, and analyze the radio frequency absorption data. So in a sense, quantum mechanics
enables MRI machines at two separate levels. Dr. James Xavier could have saved himself a great
deal of grief with his experimental eyedrops by using an MRI to perform diagnosis on patients by
peering at their inner organs. Similarly, Professor Charles Xavier, mutant leader of the X-Men and
the world's most powerful telepath, could read people's thoughts. While this is not possible by
employing functional magnetic resonance imaging, fMRI, we can determine what regions of the brain
a person is using, and from that make inferences as to what they are thinking. This technique is
still in the experimental stage, so you don't need to invest in tinfoil hats just yet. All cells in
your body have a function and require energy when carrying out their designated tasks. Nerve cells,
neurons, process information through the generation and transmission of voltages and ionic currents.
When we eat, we ingest molecules originally generated by plants that contain stored chemical
energy. The plants utilize the energy in photons from the sun to construct complex sugar molecules.
The mitochondria in every cell synthesize adenosine triphosphate, ATP, from these sugars,
and thereby release some of that stored energy, which the cell can then use to perform various
functions. The chemical trigger for the construction of ATP is the incorporation of oxygen molecules
and the release of carbon dioxide. Consequently, whenever a cell is actively working, in particular
for a prolonged period of time, there is an increase in blood flow to this cell in order to
maintain sufficient oxygen to maintain ATP production. By looking where the blood is flowing,
we can determine those cells that are most active. Neurons do not store glucose, and consequently,
within a few seconds after you start some heavy thinking, there is an increase in blood flow
to the region containing the active neurons. The brain has the same relationship to the body
as the United States has to the rest of the world. The brain has roughly 3% of the total body mass,
while it consumes 20% of the energy expended. You use different portions of your brain depending
on the task you are performing, sitting and listening to this book, walking and listening to
this book, or showering and listening to this book. Thus, by monitoring which regions of the brain
are receiving more oxygenated blood, one can ascertain what activity a person is engaged in,
without having to look at the person directly. The true power of this technique for determining
brain activity from the variations in blood flow is when one can distinguish between cerebral tasks,
mentally doing arithmetic, compared to recalling a pleasant summer memory. In this situation,
the beatific smile on the person's face would not betray which task was being performed.
When an MRI scan is taken of a person's brain, spatial resolution on the orders of millimeters
and time resolution of one to four seconds are possible. When red blood cells are carrying oxygen,
they are diamagnetic, which means that their internal magnets orient opposite to the direction
of an external magnetic field. Conversely, deoxygenated hemoglobin is paramagnetic. That is,
it will align in the same direction as an external field, but will have no net magnetization
in the absence of an applied magnetic field. Using magnetic resonance imaging,
one can examine a deep region within the cerebral cortex and ascertain its rate of blood flow.
By measuring the time dependence of the variation in magnetization, when the saturating radio
frequency radiation is removed, one can distinguish which regions of the brain are in high need of
additional oxygen and energy. Alfred Bester wrote of the difficulty that Ben Reich faced,
plotting and carrying out an undetected murder in a society where nearly everyone,
particularly the police, is telepathic. In his 1953 novel, The Demolished Man,
the ability to read minds to know what another person is silently thinking has long been a
hallmark of science fiction stories, predating the pulps and continuing into the present.
The cooperative behavior exhibited by the characters in Theodore Sturgeon's novels,
More Than Human, and Medusa Plus X, and the hammer film Village of the Damned,
all presume the ability to remotely link neuronal activity for various individual agents.
Certainly, the apparatus for a functional MRI device is considerably larger than the
compact mental helmets frequently depicted in science fiction magazines and comic books,
and this technique provides information only about blood flow in the brain.
While many are not convinced, some believe that this technique may someday serve as an
accurate lie detector, enabling us to directly discern a person's thoughts and intentions.
Quantum mechanics brought us a world unimagined by the science fiction stories of 50 years ago,
and it may now actually start bringing aspects of the science fictional world into reality.
