Chapter 20 Coming Attractions
I have described the basic concepts underlying quantum mechanics and have discussed how these
principles account for the properties of single atoms, nuclei, and many body systems such
as metals and semiconductors.
By elucidating the physics of the laser, the diode, the transistor, and disk drives,
we now have an understanding of the basic building blocks of modern technology such
as laptops, DVDs, and cell phones, which for many are part of everyday life in the 21st
century.
All of us routinely make use of devices and applications that would not be possible without
the understanding of nature provided by quantum mechanics.
We have obviously not gone into any detailed descriptions as to how consumer products such
as a computer operate.
By combining the electrical current inputs in a series of transistors and diodes in ingenious
ways, one can arrange it so that two high currents cancel each other out and lead to
either a low current, two ones combined to form a zero, or a high current, two ones yield
another one.
Similarly, if one current level is high and the other is low, then a circuit can be constructed
so that the output is either high or low, depending on the required logic operation.
In this way, the ones and zeros in the computer can be manipulated.
A full discussion of Boolean mathematics, logic gates, and data storage and processing
employed in a computer would be fascinating, in my nerdy opinion, but it would involve
no new principles or applications of quantum mechanics.
Similarly, the scheme by which mobile phones send and receive electromagnetic signals
to radio towers that then connect to a land-based call router is rather clever.
Present models use very sophisticated protocols to determine the optimal region or cell with
which to transmit the call, but the basic quantum mechanics in the cell phone itself
essentially involves applications of transistors and diodes.
The heart of the cordless phone is the analog-to-digital converter, which takes a variable voltage
generated when spoken sound waves are transformed into electrical signals, as occurs in a conventional
landline phone.
And through what is effectively an operational amplifier, a series of transistors and resistors,
coupled with a diode, converts this variable voltage to either a one or a zero.
Obviously, devices must also exist that operate in reverse so that a digital-to-analog conversion
can transform the received signal into the variable sound we hear.
One really cool feature in the latest generation of cell phones is the touchscreen.
While many simple touchscreens, as in kiosk information displays or automatic tele-machines,
detect the alteration in electric field caused by the electrical conductance and capacitance
of your finger.
The newest multi-touch versions send an LED-generated infrared light beam skimming along the inner
surface of the screen.
Touching the screen causes some of the infrared light to be scattered, and the location of
your finger is ascertained by determining which photo detector behind the screen collects
the scattered light.
Here again, all of the quantum physics in a touch screen is represented in the infrared
light-emitting diodes and photo detectors.
Consequently, rather than delve into the inner workings of a variety of electronic products
which will not necessarily add much to our discussion of quantum mechanics, I use this
final section to describe how quantum physics may continue to shape the future.
That is, I would like to describe the concepts and devices that may become part of our world
five or ten or twenty years from now.
I will not try to make actual predictions, as that is a mug's game, but will rather explain
the relevant quantum mechanics that underlie such phenomena as quantum computers and nanotechnology.
We already understand the basics.
Now I will discuss some novel advanced applications that may be coming to a consumer electronics
store near you the day after tomorrow.
As described in Chapter 18, the greater sensitivity of read head sensors using the giant magneto-resistance
effect means that smaller magnetic bits can be detected, resulting in an increase in the
storage capacity of hard drives.
These magnetic sensors can also enable faster data retrieval.
The polarization and depolarization of the magnetic layers happens quickly, so the sensor
can read the bits even when the hard drive platters are rotating at speeds over ten thousand
revolutions per minute, but the next generation of semiconductor spin-tronic devices may increase
the speed of computers even more by removing the need for a separate magnetic storage medium.
There has been considerable interest by researchers in developing semiconductor transistor structures
that make use of the electron's internal magnetic field to process information.
Using magnetic metals as the electrodes on a semiconductor device, it is possible to inject
magnetically polarized electrons, that is charge carriers, whose internal magnetic fields
all point in the same direction, into a semiconductor.
By varying the magnetic field in the device, the current could be controlled without the
need to change the concentration of charge carriers, as in the field effect transistor
discussed in Chapter 17.
The goal is to construct a device with a steeper on-off transition for the high-low current
levels that are used to represent ones and zeros, with faster switching between these
two states that uses less energy to operate.
This last point is important.
Each transistor in your computer creates a small amount of heat as it drives a current
from low to high values and back again.
Passing a current through a toaster wire or light bulb filament generates heat, and the
same physics applies inside a semiconductor transistor.
When millions and millions of these transistors are packed into a confined space, the resulting
temperature rise can be significant, and in turn, this consideration can limit the integrated
circuit's performance, hence the need for multiple cooling fans in most computer towers.
Spin transistors use less power, thereby allowing a greater number of devices to be placed in
close proximity, resulting in more computing power packed onto a microprocessor.
In addition, the ability to both store magnetic information and manipulate ones and zeros,
as in an integrated circuit, suggests that it might be possible to combine both magnetic
data storage and computer logic functions on a single chip.
In the late 1950s, when the challengers of the unknown faced off against a calculating
machine capable of independent thought, it was believed that such a device would have
to be the size of a large room, while in the future, thanks to quantum mechanics, we may
all be able to carry our own artifacts in our back pockets.
The need for speed in computation is driving interest in an even more exotic use of quantum
mechanical spin in calculators, often referred to as quantum computers.
Of course, in a sense, all computers, aside from an abacus or a slide rule, are quantum
computers, in that their fundamental data processing elements, diodes and transistors,
would not have been invented if not for the insights into the properties of matter provided
by quantum theory.
A quantum computer is a different beast entirely.
In short, rather than represent a one or a zero through a high or low current passing
through a transistor, or from a region of magnetic material with its north pole pointing
in one direction or the other, the atoms themselves are the ones and zeros.
Actually, quantum computers have been proposed that involve atoms, nuclei, ions, photons,
or electrons as the base of computing element.
I focus my discussion on electrons for simplicity.
Electrons have an intrinsic angular momentum of either positive H divided by 2 or negative
H divided by 2, and in a quantum computer, these are the elements that will represent
the ones and zeros.
While this would indeed shrink the size of the computer's elements nearly as far as
physically possible, this alone is not what drives interest in quantum computers.
Proposed quantum computers involve using pairs of identical particles arranged so that their
wave functions overlap.
Recall the discussion from Chapter 12 of two electrons brought so close that their de Broglie
waves interfered.
In this case, we represented the new two electron wave function by a single ribbon, where one
side of the ribbon was white and the other was black.
In the example in Figure 30, both sides of the ribbon facing out were white, but we could
also have held both black sides facing out, or the left side could have been black and
the right side white or the reverse.
To represent these four possibilities, white-white, black-black, black-white, white-black, using
conventional computer elements would require two transistors, and they could generate these
states only one at a time, that is, in a series.
With the quantum ribbon from Chapter 12, all four states are possible simultaneously.
If the ribbon is in a dark room and we don't know which sides are facing out, in this case
all four states may be present, and until we turn on the lights and examine the ribbon,
the ribbon can represent the four possible states in parallel.
After I need four separate conventional bits to represent these outcomes, I need only two
quantum bits, or qubits, to accomplish the same task.
While the ribbon analogy breaks down when dealing with more than two entangled wave functions,
the arguments hold, and one needs only three quantum bits to represent eight distinct conventional
states, and ten qubits can do the work of 1,024 classical bits.
This parallelism implies that a quantum computer could perform calculations much faster than
a conventional computer.
Encryption of information for national security, online commerce, or just using a credit card
to pay for a purchase at a gas station involves knowledge of the prime number factors of numbers
that are so large that even the fastest conventional computers could not determine the factors in
a reasonable time.
A prime number is a number that can be divided only by itself or one.
The number five is a prime number, while eight is not.
It can be divided by two and four, in addition to eight and one.
Computer security involves numbers that are the product of two very large prime numbers.
Security is maintained by requiring both sides of the transaction to know the factors, which
are so large that it is impossible to guess even using conventional supercomputers to
try all possibilities.
Quantum computers, with the ability to perform multiple tasks at the same time, could change
this situation.
A small-scale prototype quantum computer has been able to successfully factor a two-digit
number, 15 equals five times three.
But a fully operational quantum computer does not exist and is years and years away in the
most optimistic scenario.
Nevertheless, data security and cryptology will be dramatically changed if such devices
are ever constructed.
It will be up to all of us to ensure that this technology does not fall into the wrong
hands.
For who could forget when the evil Decepticons used quantum computers to hack into the Pentagon's
secure computer system in the Transformers movie, 2007, cracking a code in ten seconds
that would take more than two decades for the most powerful supercomputer?
Now, to say that two overlapping electrons can represent all four spin combinations providing
we don't examine them may seem a bit of a cheat, no pun intended.
You can argue that any pair of transistors can represent all four states if I do not
actually examine whether the currents passing through them are high or low.
But there is a fundamental difference in the quantum case that gets to the heart of
some of the philosophical arguments over the role of measurement in quantum mechanics.
Throughout this entire audiobook, I have pulled a fast one on you, fearless listener,
and it's time to come clean.
The difference between the quantum case of overlapping electronic wave functions and
the conventional situation involving transistors, and the reason that the quantum ribbon can
represent all four outcomes simultaneously is that if the ribbon remains in the dark,
that is, until I do a measurement and examine it, the very concept of the color of the ribbon
is not well defined.
Let's return to the real world of electrons for a moment.
I have specified that an electron can have only one of two possible values of its intrinsic
angular momentum, rotating either clockwise, that is, spin up, or counterclockwise, spin
down.
But we never ask the question up or down relative to what?
Clockwise or counterclockwise rotations about what axis?
The intrinsic angular momentum has a small magnetic field associated with it, with a
north pole and south pole.
If I don't measure this magnetic field, that is, in the absence of an external magnetic
field, then I have no way of knowing where the pole is oriented.
If I apply an external magnetic field and measure the electron's magnetic orientation,
it will either line up with the field or be 180 degrees opposite to the external field,
as in our discussion of MRI in Chapter 19.
If the external magnet I apply has its north pole pointing toward the ceiling of the room
you are in, then this defines the up-down direction.
The electron's magnetic field will point either to the ceiling or to the floor.
If the external magnetic field is instead applied pointing toward one of the walls in
your room, then this defines the up-down direction and the electron's magnetic field will point
either toward the wall or toward the wall opposite it.
Once I apply an external field and measure the electron's magnetic field, that very act
defines the axis about which clockwise and counterclockwise make sense.
And until I do, all I can say is that the electron is in some superposition of these
two possibilities.
It is in this way that we can say that a quantum system can represent multiple states simultaneously.
Einstein smelled a rat in this scenario and spent a considerable fraction of his later
years trying to catch it.
So the situation just described opens up the possibility for information to travel faster
than the speed of light.
Say I arrange my two electrons so that the total angular momentum taken together is zero.
One electron has spin equals positive h divided by two, and the other has spin equals negative
h divided by two.
But let's say I don't know which is which.
When I measure the electron on the left and find that its spin is positive h divided by
two.
Not only do I know logically that the other spin must be negative h divided by two, since
I already knew that the total spin was zero.
But I also now know what axis the second electron will be anti-aligned with.
The process of measuring the first electron's magnetic field picks a preferred direction
not only for that electron, but for the other one as well, since they are both part of the
same wave function which contains all the information about the system.
Now here's where it gets fun.
Let's assume I have an infinitely stretchy ribbon representing the two electrons.
I hold one end of the ribbon and pull the other end all the way across town, keeping
the electron still connected.
Now I measure the spin of one electron by placing it in an external magnetic field.
This not only tells me if this electron is pointing with or against the applied field,
but determines what direction the electron's magnetic field points.
As soon as I do this, the properties of the other electron are also determined.
After all, both electrons are described by a single wave function and thus behave as
a single entity.
In this way, the entangled quantum state is like the famous twins in fairy tales, joined
by a special bond so that what happens to one is instantly felt by the other.
Einstein objected that this would enable information about the direction of the magnetic field
being used in my lab to measure the electron to be transmitted from one point in space
to another, potentially faster than light could cover the same distance.
In his famous phrase, this represented spooky action at a distance, and he would have none
of it.
Books have been written over the question of whether this scenario does indeed provide
a mechanism for instantaneous transmission of information.
And if it does, how to reconcile this with the principles of the special theory of relativity
that states that nothing, not even information, can travel faster than light.
It remains a topic of lively debate among physicists.
As the man said when asked by the child about the nature of the afterlife, experts disagree.
Now, questions of what happens to a quantum system in the moment of observation are fascinating,
but a full discussion of these topics is not the focus of this text.
I will therefore now exit stage left, following two brief observations.
First, the issue of faster than light transmission of information holds only if the two electrons
are described by a single wave function, and that will be true only if the infinitely
stretchy ribbon does not break as I pull the two ends farther and farther apart.
As you might expect, the more the ribbon is stretched, the easier it is for some stray
perturbation to disturb the overlapping waves between the two ends.
Once the connection between the two ends is severed, then a measurement of the spin of
one electron will have no bearing at all on the other electron, as they are now described
by two distinct ribbons.
The fancy way to describe this is that the two electrons' wave functions must remain
entangled in order for this process to hold, and any object or input of energy that disturbs
this state breaks the ribbon, causes decoherence.
Overcoming the enormous challenges involved in avoiding decoherence keeps experimental
physicists busy, and whether a functioning quantum computer is ever constructed that
can live up to its potential remains to be seen.
The second point is that whenever one reads in the popular science press about recent
experiments in teleportation, what they are always referring to is the transmission of
information concerning a quantum state similar to the situation described above.
They are not dealing with beaming people as in Star Trek, or sending atoms or electrons
from one point in space to another.
You will have to face your daily morning commute for quite some time.
There have recently been experiments that indeed support the notion that information
concerning two entangled quantum entities, such as the polarization of photons, can be
transmitted even when separated by a great distance.
That is, experimental techniques have now advanced such that considerations that previously
had been purely theoretical may be put to empirical verification, as shown in Figure
50, from a 1998 issue of the Adventures of the Justice League of America.
We have now reached the stage where it is the real science that is inspiring the comic
books, and not the other way round.
