Afterward, Journey Into Mystery. Every morning when I look out the window, I am reminded
that we do not live in the world promised by science fiction pulp magazines as I note
in the skyline the absence of zeppelins. However, before I arise, the programmable solid state
timer on my coffee maker begins brewing my morning Java. I thus literally do not get
up in the morning without enjoying the benefits of a world informed by quantum mechanics.
As noted in the introduction, the pulps and science fiction comic books of 50 years ago
certainly missed the mark, sometimes by a wide margin, in their prognostications of
the technological innovations we would enjoy in the far-off future of the 21st century,
a chronological milestone we have now reached. While their crystal balls may have been foggy,
these errors concerning technology seem presciently accurate compared to how far off their sociological
predictions were. For example, few science fiction writers in the 1950s anticipated how
much of public and private space would be designated smoke-free environments, and it
was generally expected that in the year 2000, as in the year 1950, a universal truth would
remain that all scientists smoke pipes. Predicting the evolution of language is another challenge
for those trying to create visions of life in the distant future. It is amusing to read
Old Buck Rogers' newspaper strips from 1929 on and see, amid the descriptions of rocket
ships, disintegration rays, and levitation belts, that colloquial expressions of the early
20th century America remain vibrant and comprehensible in the 25th century. Buck, who fell asleep
in the 1920s and awoke 500 years later, can be excused for his use of slang, but apparently
everyone in the future speaks this way. When facing an overwhelming robot army, warriors
of a besieged city lament, they've got us licked, while in other councils, let's fade.
Gender equality appears set to move in reverse in the next 500 years as well. Buck's fiancee
leads a scouting team into enemy territory on Mars and gets separated from the rest of
the group. Cell phones appear to be a lost technology in the future. At the base ship,
Buck complains, this is what comes of trusting a woman with a man's responsibility, to which
his lieutenant agrees, they're all alike. They can drive a man crazy. Just another reason
why life is envisioned in science fiction isn't all it's cracked up to be. Some of the writers
of science fiction of 50 or more years ago had great optimism regarding the coming future.
Those who were not proposing dystopian futures of atomic warfare and unceasing hostilities
between nations and alien species were confident that many, if not all of the ills that plague
humankind, would be defeated in the coming years thanks to science. Science would free
the housewife of the 1950s from the drudgery of housework and food preparation. The May
1949 issue of Science Illustrated speculated that a new wiring idea may make the all electric
house come true. The wiring idea involved dropping the operating voltage from 110 volts
to 24 volts using a small transformer. These may seem like simple devices, but there is
more to them than meets the eye. The article argues that the benefit of using the lower
voltage is that it enables the safe operation of many consumer items, and by adopting an
all electric household, the $5 cost of the transformer becomes a reasonable expense when
a mortise over a dozen household helpers. A photo spread shows that a young housewife
from a single bedside panel with remote control switches can turn on the percolator in the
kitchen, turn radios on and off, light up a flood lamp in the yard for a late homecoming
husband, control the electric dishwasher and toaster, and control every light and electrical
outlet in and around a house from one single point. Little did the writer imagine that
wireless technology and semiconductor based sensors whose operations could be pre-programmed
would remove the need for remote control switches on a bedside panel. No wonder social theorists
worried about how the young housewife would fill the hours of the day in such a homemaker
utopia. Similarly, science has indeed revolutionized the workplace. Forget about inquiring here
in the 21st century as to the location of our jetpacks. What many want to know is, where's
our four hour work day? It was a general expectation that by the year 2000 people would have so
much leisure time that the pressing challenge would be to find ways to keep the populace
entertained and occupied. Instead, for too many of us, the de facto work day has lengthened
thanks to the modern electronics that flowered from the development of quantum mechanics
as the ability to be in constant contact has evolved into the necessity to be always connected.
Youngsters 50 years ago may not have been reading modern mechanics or popular science,
but they learned of the brighter future to be delivered by scientific research and innovation
in the pages of their comic books. While nowadays a best-selling comic book may have sales of
a few hundred thousand copies, in 1960 sales of Superman comics were over eight hundred
thousand per issue, and studies found that a single issue was shared and read by up to
ten other kids. Lifelong attitudes about better living through technology were fostered in
the four color pages of these ten cent wonders. The Man of Tomorrow in particular starred
in many classic stories describing the world of tomorrow. Superman was so popular in the
1940s and 1950s that at times he appeared in up to seven comics published by National
Periodicals, the company that would become DC Comics. In addition to his own stories
in action and Superman, the Man of Steel could be found in Lois Lane's Superman's girlfriend,
Jimmy Olsen's Superman's pal, World's Finest, where he would team up every month with Batman
Robin, and Superboy and Adventure Comics, these latter two were filled with tales of Superman's
teenage years as Superboy. In 1958's Adventure Comics number 247, the Teen of Steel encounters
three superpowered teenagers, who after playing some fairly harmless pranks on him, revealed to
Superboy that they are from one thousand years in the future. These superteens have traveled back
in time to offer Superboy membership in their club, the Legion of Superheroes. Apparently
one thousand years from now, a group of teenagers with a wide variety of powers and ability from
Earth and other planets would band together to fight crime and evil throughout the United
Planets. These young heroes were inspired by history tapes of the adventures of Superboy,
and between their mastery of time travel and the Teen of Tomorrow's ability to fly so fast that he
could break the time barrier, Superboy would become a regular member of the Legion. Stories
featuring the Legion would prove so popular with readers that they became a regular feature in
Adventure and eventually squeezed Superboy out of the comic, aside from his appearances with the
Legion in the 30th century. According to these Legion tales, the promise of the space program and
the race to the moon underway in the 1960s would culminate in the 30th century in a society ruled
by and dedicated to science. In the world of the Legion of Superheroes, if you found yourself in
trouble you didn't call the police, you sent for the science police. While evil despots and warlike
alien races would still be devil humanity in the year 2958, the Legion of Superheroes tales
featured a general sense of progress and hope that may have in part accounted for their
popularity. A thousand years hence, intelligence and knowledge would be honored and rewarded. In
Adventure number 321, when Lightning Lad, one of the Legion's founding members, was sentenced to
life in prison for betraying the Legion by revealing the secret of the concentrator, his cell featured
buttons that when pressed would provide the three basic necessities of life, food, water, and books.
Don't worry, fearless listener, he was framed and eventually demonstrated his innocence. The
writers of the Legion of Superheroes stories promised that in the future we would live in a
golden age of science. Similarly, over at Marvel Comics, though in the mid to late 1950s the company
was known as Atlas, scientists were also given pride of place in society. Stan Lee and Jack Kirby
would not begin recounting the adventures of a quartet who took an ill-fated rocket trip to the
stars and returned as the super-powered Fantastic Four until November 1961. Prior to the silver age
introduction of superheroes to the Marvel Comics universe, there were still plenty of
manaces to be dealt with as tales to astonish, amazing fantasy, strange tales, journey into mystery,
and tales of suspense documented the near continuous onslaught of monstrous invaders from
space, time, and other dimensions, all seeking global conquest. These would be conquerors would
regularly prove too much for local law enforcement and the military, and often could be thwarted
only by the lone efforts of a scientist. And it's a good thing scientists were on the case,
as Earth had to contend with the likes of Pildor, Rorg, Spore, Orgo, Gruto, Rambu,
Bamboo, Moomba, Dragum, and Kragum. These creatures were rarely less than 20 feet tall,
and were not generic bug-eyed monsters or monstrously oversized bugs. They were composed of
stone, smoke, fire, water, electricity, wood, mud, or oozing paint. But none of these were as
fearsome as Org, the tax collector from outer space. Fairly typical was the November 1960 issue of
Tales to Astonish, number 13, figure 51, where we hear the first-hand testimonial,
I challenged Gruto, the monster from Planet X. This is presumably the same Planet X
that is home to Goom and his son, Gugam. The thing from Planet X, as well as Curgo,
the master of Planet X. I don't want to tell them their jobs, but if I were an astronomer,
I'd keep my eye on Planet X. I think it might be trouble.
Gruto was a giant tree-like creature who came to Earth intending to steal an entire village
and bring it back to his home planet for study. Bullets did not harm Gruto,
and his wooden hide was too tough to burn. Gruto's ability to mentally command other trees to move
into his bidding quickly disabled the town's defenses, and all seemed lost until the timely
intervention of Leslie Evans, scientist. Working nonstop for several days, Evans developed the
one weapon capable of immobilizing Gruto, mutated termites. As shown in figure 52,
when the town's sheriff is chagrin that he never even thought of that, a relieved villager points out,
that's why Evans is a scientist, and you're only a sheriff.
Meanwhile, Evans' wife hugs her husband, declaring,
Oh darling, forgive me. I've been such a fool. I'll never complain about you again. Never.
Personally, I can't tell you how many times I've heard those very same words from my own wife,
primarily because it involves imaginary numbers. While the scientist as world-saving hero is a
caricature, I hope that I have convinced you that the scientist as world-changing hero
is a pretty apt description for the physicists who developed the field of quantum mechanics.
In this, these investigators followed a trail blazed hundreds of years ago. For science has
always changed the future. Technological innovations from movable type to steam engines
to wireless radio to laptop computers have time and again profoundly altered interactions among
people, communities, societies and nations. Discoveries in one field of science enable
breakthroughs in others. The elucidation of the structure of DNA resulted from the
interpretation of x-ray scattering data. This technique of x-ray spectroscopy was developed
through the application of quantum mechanics to facilitate the study of crystalline structures
by solid state physicists. The deciphering of the human genome is inconceivable without the use
of high-speed computers and data storage that rely on the transistor, invented 50 years ago by
scientists at Bell Labs. Using the tools developed by physicists in the last century, biologists
in this century are poised to enact their own scientific revolution. Time will tell whether
years from now another book will describe how biologists changed the future. But one thing is
for sure, we will not be able to embrace and participate in that future without the discipline,
curiosity, questioning and reasoning that science requires. And if Orgo the Unconquerable,
Strange Tales number 90 ever returns, we'll be ready.
This concludes the amazing story of quantum mechanics.
Please visit our website, www.tantor.com, for more information on our growing library of
unabridged audiobooks and to take advantage of special offers. Or call toll-free, 877-7-TANTOR to
request a catalog.
