A visually intuitive model illustrating the connection between gravity, black holes, accelerating
expansion of the universe, and inertia, all in six minutes.
Our universe is described as a local density fluctuation, a wave pulse.
The universe, and everything in it, exists at least in part as waves that interfere or
resonate with themselves and all other things, which are also waves.
Existence is interference patterns interfering with other interference patterns.
This process makes up the world in the finest detail and the grandest scale.
At the bottom of this majestic creation are the three fundamental waveforms that exist
before any interference.
The three waveforms actually are three different shapes.
The shape depends on the speed of the wave relative to the speed of the source of that
wave.
These waves exist in two and three dimensions, at least.
When a source is still relative to the wave that it makes, you get a circle or a sphere.
When the source is faster than the wave it makes, you get the v-wake of a speedboat or
the sonic boom cone of a jet aircraft.
When the source and wave both move at the same speed, you get, perhaps less visually
intuitively, a propagating torus in three dimensions or twin vortices for an ore stroke
in two dimensions.
All three waveforms hold their shape as they propagate and have no limits to their scales.
While spherical and conic waveforms can be continuous, expanding as they pass through
space and time and crossing all observers, the propagating torus exists in discrete units
and moves in one direction without expanding.
Any resident wave path around the torus will create a torus an exact number of times, both
linearly and laterally, a rational slope.
The field is quantized in both directions.
Such unit spin particles are bosons of exchange.
The chorus is the waveform of exchange from photons to neural impulses to hurricanes and
tornadoes.
A wave pulse, like our universe, is a place of constant change, an oxymoron.
During propagation, the mass particles and energy waves continue to change to stay the
same.
The relationships within entities and between entities change in and with the field of space
time.
The wave shapes of the sphere cone and torus each maintains a different enfoldment of wave
space, yet each is clearly a dynamic surface, a wave pulse, that has its own relationship
of masses and energies in its particular field of space and time.
Each waveform is its own kind of universe.
Consider a propagating torus as a two-dimensional universe, one of space and one of time.
Our universe is not as simple as a torus, but Einstein's equations are topological
and dynamic and a single torus model allows for a simplified version of space and time
to demonstrate concepts on.
The axes of space and time are different.
In the space axis, motion is in either of two directions.
From the time axis, motion tends to oppose the direction of propagation, classically
in one direction.
In fact, the torus, with its wave and source both moving at the same speed, has its resonant
entities remaining laterally still as time moves through them.
Resonant energies swim upstream, in time, to hold still in the here and now.
The rubber sheet model of gravity shows how space is distorted by mass in that field of
space time.
The distortion is due to acceleration of the mass, or energy, perpendicular to the plane,
in this case by gravity.
Einstein said gravity is indistinguishable from acceleration.
Just as there is angular momentum and linear momentum, there is also angular acceleration
and linear acceleration.
While a propagating torus moves in a straight line, all the points on the surface of the
torus move in circles and experience angular acceleration.
The tension field that separates the inside of the torus from the outside experiences
angular acceleration and can be deformed by the masses and energies of the propagating
torus, just like the rubber sheet experiencing gravity.
If you blow a big slow smoke ring into a room with very still air, as it propagates and
slows even more, the smoke ring will eventually produce a bulge of mass energy moving around
on the propagating surface of the smoke ring.
The bulge is a gravitational depression that will attract additional mass and energy.
Eventually, the bulge gathers enough mass and energy to collapse the field and emit
a new smaller torus with the time and space axes reversed.
It is a black hole in the field, inside the new torus.
Motion through space is restricted, just like our motion through time.
But in a black hole, motion through time is allowed.
Big picture, concepts like time and space may be too concrete and might more generally
be called linear and lateral.
The energy of propagation is causing our current accelerating expansion and will cause the
eventual contraction as well.
Globally, the inertia of the propagating field is the dark energy of the universe.
Locally, the inertia of mass and energy collapses the propagating field into a new torus, while
switching what is linear and lateral.
Global inertia drives space-time.
Local inertia collapses space-time.
By me, Dan Atchagoyan, from my video, the Structure of Existence video on YouTube, it's over
an hour long.
I have many new ideas and lots of insights, and I hope you watch it in order.
Thank you so much.
