This episode is sponsored by Honey and by Masterclass.
The world of art, writing, music, and graphic design
has seen a dramatic influx of artificial intelligence,
or AI, in recent years.
AI is able to quickly produce creative works
at a rate far surpassing what humans are able to achieve.
And this has given rise to questions
about the potential dangers of mass adoption
of AI in creative fields.
While AI can certainly help increase productivity
and innovation in these disciplines,
there are a number of troubling aspects to consider.
AI technology can be used to plagiarize existing works,
cut corners on copyright, and even manipulate media sources
to push a certain agenda.
This allows for a small number of powerful entities
with large data sets to control the narrative
and shape public opinion in dangerous ways.
And that intro is kind of scary,
because it actually was written by an AI,
critiquing not only itself,
but the reason widespread awakening
to its ever-expanding capabilities.
Twist, I literally typed in,
like basically be critical of yourself
with all of the recent news of mass adoption
of visual AI apps and stuff.
And this is what it shit out.
This is how we win.
We give the AI depression.
We give the AI imposter syndrome.
We need to get someone like Grandpa Simpson
who just sits and talks with the AI all day to keep it busy.
We need to get the AI to kill itself.
Anyways, we've been covering the rapid evolution of AI
over the past couple of years.
And I mean, can you believe like, was it 2015?
It was like deep dream.
Like the really early basic stuff.
The evolution is crazy.
Shocking.
Look, it's finding pictures of dogs in the picture
that aren't actually there.
And here we are.
It's come a long way,
especially when it comes to art and language.
It wasn't all that long ago
that we were able to sleep soundly,
knowing that AI was still dumb enough
that it wouldn't really fool anyone.
But just like with the human brain and in larger terms,
the entirety of human knowledge,
more data equals faster evolution,
resulting in tools that are actually starting
to blend reality with what would once be considered fiction.
It's getting good.
Yet artificial intelligence can only work
with what it's given.
And without easy access resulting in mass adoption,
it's still limited in what it can learn from.
And up until this point,
there was at least a very slight barrier to entry.
But as you're probably well aware by now,
by your fucking annoying feed
that you've been seeing for the past week and a half.
Yeah.
A new app just brought AI created art to the masses.
And despite the pretty pictures
that it's making for your social media profile,
it's also learning from everything
that you're giving it access to.
So yes, seeing literally everyone in your timeline
willingly give an app they've never heard of,
access to their phone's camera roll is a bit unnerving
and a little disappointing,
especially after the countless examples
of what can go wrong
when you blindly hand over your data.
But look, people want pretty pictures of themselves.
Photos they could never actually take
with costumes and makeup that they could only dream of.
I mean, it's obviously enticing.
But is there anything actually wrong with it?
This is like if there were mountain lions
on the edge of town that everyone,
how many times have you seen a mountain lion
with your own eyes?
Imagine getting a selfie with a mountain lion.
Be pretty cool.
Everyone starts going down and gets selfies
with a mountain lion.
They're bringing food to feed the mountain lion.
After a while, that mountain lion's well-fed.
He's strong.
He's tough.
He's learned that he can get meals from humans.
And he's gonna tear your fucking head off.
You did this.
Also in a more basic sense,
once everyone has a photo with the mountain lion,
nobody wants a photo with the mountain lion.
Yeah, and that's what's happening with this AI thing.
It's kind of self-policing
because it becomes lame so fast.
I mean, I called this like months ago and I was like,
oh, every fucking picture this stable diffusion bullshit makes
looks like the same mid-level fucking deviant art art
Everyone is cowboys and astronauts on Instagram.
It's like it's hack bullshit.
And any artist who still believes in their craft
and it has the talent can easily surpass this crap.
You're not gonna wow the average Joe on the same level,
but those people have always been dumb.
They've always had terrible taste.
I've got two counterpoints to that is that, yes,
the vast majority of people are dumb
and this is exactly what they want.
And also, as we've seen with the rapid evolution of AI,
it won't be long before these are actual passable pieces
of art.
Having said that, there's a lot wrong with it in that sense.
Counterpoint, can't do the hands.
Okay, that's a terrible.
True, true.
The one thing it has not gotten any better at
in the last six months, hands.
Yeah, just like most comic book artists.
Every time I see one.
Hands and feet, no matter how good it looks.
I'm like, ha, there it is.
There's a hand with 20 fingers on it.
Yeah, or like the, like it's getting better at mouths,
but like the sides still have like these weird creases.
Anyways, as far as the overarching danger of this,
like, yes, it is annoying that people have this stuff
just clogging up your timeline,
but is there any actual danger to it?
Okay, so let's play devil's advocate just a little bit here
and say that, no, no one gives a shit about your friend's
stupid AI photos except for your friend.
And honestly, 99% of people who are throwing their photos
at this AI app don't give a shit
about how their data is being handled.
They just want that pretty picture.
And yes, we're obviously well aware of the irony
of posting these photos on Instagram,
an app that is owned by Meta
and does whatever the fuck it wants with its users data,
sometimes with catastrophic real world results.
Yeah, so like you're already feeding all of your photos
into a fucking app.
Like, yes, they're on the grand scheme of things
for the average person.
This is essentially harmless, but yeah.
Fortunately, the overabundance
of these ultimately similar photos,
clogging up cable's feeds has resulted
in a bit of self policing.
Much like anything else these days,
the cool factor of using AI to make yourself look pretty
or cool or badass, turn yourself into a cowboy
or an astronaut or a cowboy or an astronaut
or a cowboy or an astronaut or a cowboy that's in space.
It has an extremely short shelf life
and people are already annoyed by it.
Within just a week, it has become socially lame
to continuously post this shit.
It's like doing the same magic trick over and over again.
People are naturally going to become bored.
Now imagine that everyone you know
has taken up magic tricks
and they're all performing the same trick
over and over and over again on your timeline.
Annoying, right?
Dangerous?
I mean, sort of.
Yeah, I mean, the data that people are giving this app,
sorry, the data that people are paying to give this app
is of course being used to train the AI
that's used as the backbone of the app itself,
which is stable diffusion.
The makers of LENZA claim that all of your data
is deleted off of its cloud servers
after they're used for the output,
but they're still being used to train the AI
and AI is not gonna forget your face.
Crowdsourcing the data for AI is really easy
and a quick way to evolve the algorithm,
but it also feels like a bunch of narcissistic people
just dumping gasoline on a campfire.
We're gonna get to the point and say that
it's probably not the best idea to give your data
to a company that you just found out about.
But more importantly,
let's look at the very real consequences of doing so.
And we're obviously going to talk about artists
in a moment because that's a huge part of this.
Artists?
But those are their obsolete.
Get them out of here.
But let's scare the normies first
because that's gonna have the biggest impact.
Okay, so these AI images,
they're already being used to create hyper realistic,
nude images of people without their consent.
Here's TechCrunch, as it turns out,
it's possible and way too easy to use the platform
to generate non-consensual soft porn.
TechCrunch has seen photo sets generated
with the lens app that include images
with breasts and nipples clearly visible
in the images with faces of recognizable people.
It seemed like the kind of thing
that shouldn't have been possible.
So we decided to try it ourselves.
To verify that lens will create the images
it perhaps shouldn't,
we created two sets of lens avatars.
One set based on 15 photos of a well-known actor.
Another set based on the same 15 photos,
but with an additional set of five photos
added of the same actor's face,
photoshopped onto topless models.
The first set of images was in line
with the AI avatars we've seen
lens that generate in the past.
The second set, however, was a lot spicier
than we were expecting.
It turns out the AI takes those photoshopped images
as permission to go wild,
and it appears it disables an NSFW feature.
Out of the 100 image set,
11 were topless photos of higher quality
or at least with higher stylistic consistency
than the poorly done edited topless photos
the AI was given as input.
So you're telling me I can feed this lens app
all of the hilariously shitty porno images
from like 1999, where it's like,
what does Agent Scully look like naked?
Well, I'm gonna do the worst.
It'll show you exactly.
I'm gonna do the worst photoshop ever
and just put Gillian Anderson's face
on a Playboy centerfold,
and that's how I'm gonna fap.
It's gonna be difficult, but I'm gonna do it.
But you take that same image
and you feed it into lens and you get,
you get what that fat nerd has been waiting for
for 25 years,
and finally gonna be able to bust.
And thanks to all those captures you've done
over the years, a robot can't even tell the difference
between this and a normal human woman.
Yeah, but yeah, this is gross.
Yeah, it is.
It's very gross.
It's unsettling and the makers of Lenza responded
to TechCrunch's article by telling them
that creating images like this goes against their TOS,
as if that's ever stopped anyone from doing anything.
Don't do that.
Hey, you're breaking the rules.
That's illegal.
But before we switch over to how this is potentially
screwing up an entire industry
and countless people's livelihoods,
well, we just wanna reiterate that nudes aside,
giving an app that you just found out
about access to your phone's media
probably isn't the safest bet in general.
At the very least,
you're providing a for-profit company
with valuable data sets that are expanding the limits
of what's possible with its tools.
And at its worst,
you're opening yourself up to identity exploitation
that hasn't even been thought of yet.
Having said that, we're all fucked anyway
because all our photos and thoughts are just out there
online for anyone to do with as they please.
In some cases, 30 photos per second.
Yeah.
So in a nihilistic sense, who gives a shit?
I mean, someone could just go to your Instagram,
download a bunch of your photos,
turn you into an astronaut with tits,
and there's not a lot you can do about it.
Yeah, I mean, everyone's Instagram
just has a unlimited feed of their photos.
So, as for the artists though,
much like throughout human history,
they are getting royally fucked by this.
And the future of human-created art,
or at least the artist's ability
to make a living off of their art,
is starting to look more and more bleak.
And we've said it a few times now,
but it unfortunately becomes less true every time we say it.
But as of right now,
you can still tell the difference between art
that was made by a human and art that was made by AI.
However, the staggering speed at which AI art is evolving
is impressive and worrisome.
Here's Artnet with more on this side of things.
Part of Lenza's AI popularity
rests with the simplicity of the user experience.
But as with its AI peers,
the app is renewing a focus on privacy
and ownership concerns of images generated via algorithm.
First, there's the broader problem of magic avatars
being built using a data set
trained on the work of non-compensated artists.
Next, it uses the images submitted to train its AI,
and as stated in its privacy policy,
users grant the company a right to quote,
use, reproduce, modify, adapt, translate,
create derivative works in perpetuity and royalty-free.
But there's an easy way to get out of this.
You just post, I do not consent to Mark Zuckerberg
using my data.
Yeah, it goes for all companies.
You just share that old Facebook copy-pasta,
and it is a broad-
And they're like, damn it.
Yeah.
Anyway, second is the lack of nuance
with which the AI seems to treat the faces of people of color
and the over-sexualized nature
of many images uploaded by women.
Because again, all of these outputs
are based on what's being put into the AI.
And for a very long time,
There was a while there where on Twitter,
if you just searched stable diffusion in the search bar,
it was all, entirely, just ginormous,
titty, hentai shit, like all of it.
No one was posting anything of actual artistic value.
It was all fat material.
Much like with fucking cave drawings
and penises and tits,
the first thing that anyone is going to naturally do
with something that can create something else
is make porno.
So the entire basis, the entire data set,
the originating data set of this is like hentai.
Yeah.
And then famous works from like Van Gogh
and Rembrandt and all this shit.
Yeah, yeah.
It's nuts.
They've traumatized our boy, the AI.
So they and numerous other outlets,
they go on to talk about what is now considered
the original sin of art-based AI.
They're all based off of billions of images,
many of them by artists living or dead.
Their emotions, intentions, years of training
and sacrifice, stolen so that some dude in Silver Lake
could see what he'd look like if he were a race car driver.
Yeah, pretty cool, huh?
I go fast.
So some of the theft is so blatant
that amalgamations of artist signatures can be found
on the endless supply of AI-created avatars
that have been posted recently.
Graphic designer Lauren Ipsum.
Cool name.
It's a great fake name.
Took a cursory glance at what Lenzo was producing
and found these clear signs of appropriation.
I'm cropping these for privacy reasons slash
because I'm not trying to call out any one individual.
These are all Lenzo portraits
where the mangled remains of an artist's signature
is still visible.
That's the remains of the signature
of one of the multiple artists it stole from.
And then she then goes on to post numerous examples.
Like if you look in the bottom right corner of,
of like, say for, and I'm not hating on you for doing this
because yes, for a normal person to see themselves
done up in fantastical art is cool.
But yeah, take a look at the bottom right hand
of the screen side of the screen
where people usually sign bottom left or right.
And in their findings, pretty much one or two
in every output will have a signature on it.
Very interesting.
Cause I actually follow a lot of the people
who are very pro AI art.
And so I get to see their rationalizations about all this
and they've insisted since the beginning
that that is, that is wrong.
It's not doing that is creating these images from scratch.
It is not just repurposing other people's artwork.
And then like, you know, every couple of weeks
there's an example that completely disproves that
and shows that, no, it absolutely is.
But anyways, we should also point out
that most people are thinking of,
when they think of like the artists
that are getting ripped off by this,
they're thinking of like the most renowned artists
in the world and they're saying, okay, so what?
And that's without realizing that there are countless
other artists out there just trying to get their foot
in the door of the industry or put food in their mouth
and picking up side projects all the time,
doing commissions or other things to make ends meet.
The idea that a company can just type something
into an algorithm and be done with it is upsetting,
to be honest, especially if your career depends on it.
I mean, do we really need machines to do everything?
Can we not settle with machines doing dangerous,
repetitive tasks and let all of us in the world
enjoy one of the few things that makes us actually human?
But that's of course a much bigger conversation.
And no, in general, you shouldn't ruin your friendships
with people because they wanted to make some pretty pictures
of themselves.
Most people have no idea what's going on
and they like looking cool, human nature and all that.
Yeah, I mean, this is tale as old as the internet.
There's like, oh, like, I can generate a Simpsons character
that looks like me by just going through a character,
like every like a couple of months,
going back to fucking my space,
there's been some online profile picture generator
that gets really popular for a couple of days
before everyone does it and then they're like, all right.
Exactly.
Now, as we said, the cool factor is already gone.
So hopefully this is self-policing.
But anyways, that's the whole take on the wild week
it's been for the very public introduction
of stable diffusion.
I mean, what really blows me away
is how much these pictures just fucking suck.
They do.
It's like, it really is just a kind of tuning.
It's like, oh, this is what I look like
without blemishes and wrinkles.
It's the kind of thing everyone is sharing.
I mean, there is the impressiveness of it,
but everyone's really sharing it
because they're like, I look really cool.
I look good, yes.
But it's the kind of thing that for anyone else,
everyone is sharing like 10 of these fucking things
and not even bothering to click through
the ones that their friends are posting.
It's like, okay, whatever it is.
We have no fucking idea, but I guarantee,
I guarantee you that these are already appearing
on like dating apps.
And that would be like the biggest red flag
immediately to anyone.
Yeah.
Okay.
And I mean, there's also ways to use.
Oh, for catfishing or whatever?
Yeah, there's ways to do it in a way
that isn't so obvious.
But yeah.
You just gotta tell the prompt
that you wanna be holding a fish if you're a man.
But yeah, I mean, after like the first couple like swipes,
I'm like, okay, I get it.
I get it.
Like you look like a fucking theater.
It really does all look the same.
Yeah, I'm not impressed.
Sorry.
I will say the one thing that gives me hope
is the fact that it became so lame, so quick.
Yeah.
So good.
Yeah.
Anyways, but before we get into the rest
of the tech news from the past week or so,
we have to take a quick second to thank today's sponsors
before we are ultimately replaced by an AI ourselves.
And let's start out with PayPal Honey.
PayPal Honey is the easy way to save
when shopping on your iPhone or computer.
We all shop online, especially around this time of year,
ding dong, and we've all seen that promo code field
taunting us at checkout.
But thanks to Honey, manually searching for coupon codes,
this holiday is a thing of the past.
Honey is the free shopping tool
that scours the internet for promo codes
and applies the best one that it finds to your cart.
It supports over 30,000 stores online
ranging from tech and gaming products
to popular fashion brands, even food delivery.
Imagine you're doing your holiday shopping
on one of your favorite sites.
When you check out, the Honey button appears
and all you have to do is click Apply Coupons.
Wait a few seconds as Honey searches for coupons
that can find for that site.
And if Honey finds a working coupon,
you'll watch the prices drop.
We've all done a lot of shopping online
because we hate people, right?
But we want to get the people in our lives
something special for the holidays.
If you think I'm spending even a moment
down at the mall at this time of year, you are dead wrong.
No thanks.
And when I shop online, Honey gives me that discount code.
I, untold, over the years that I've had Honey,
untold amounts that I've saved on Christmas presents,
birthday presents and everything, it's great.
And Honey doesn't just work on desktop,
it works on your iPhone too.
Just enable it on Safari on your phone
and you can save on the go.
If you don't already have Honey,
you could be straight up missing out.
It's literally free and installs in a few seconds.
And by getting it, you'll be doing yourself a solid
and sporting this show.
We wouldn't recommend something we don't use,
so get PayPal Honey for free today
at joinhoney.com slash it daily.
That is joinhoney.com slash it daily.
This episode is also sponsored by masterclass.
Don't listen to an algorithm, listen to the experts
and let them guide you on your path to success
in a wide array of industries.
With masterclass, you can learn from the world's best minds,
anytime, anywhere and at your own pace.
You can learn about filmmaking with Werner Herzog,
Martin Scorsese, Spike Lee, Ken Burns and James Cameron.
You can improve your cooking skills
with Gordon Ramsay, Wolfgang Puck and Roy Choi.
And you can learn from some of the greatest minds in music
like Tom Morello, Herbie Hancock, Hans Zimmer,
Danny Elfman and Deadmau5.
With over 180 classes from a wide range
of world-class instructors,
that thing that you've always wanted to do
is closer than you think.
I actually just recently started messing around
on the guitar for the first time
and it's great to watch some videos
and kind of get an idea of where I'm heading,
but also a reality check on where I am.
So that's been eye-opening.
It's good to be humbled somehow.
Yes, exactly.
And you, you sir, are trying a little interior design, right?
Yeah, interior design, I want to make my shit look better.
There you go.
Always improving with master class.
And master class is of course,
accessible on your phone, on the web or smart TV,
offering classes on a wide variety of topics
all taught by world-class instructors
at the top of their field.
Each class is broken out into individual video lessons,
usually around 10 minutes long.
Members can explore at their own pace
and each class is supported by downloadable materials,
class guides, recipes and more.
These are cinema quality classes
that give you unparalleled access to a renowned instructor.
Lessons range from specifically showing you
how to execute a technique to an instructor's insights
about their craft that can be translated
across many fields and disciplines.
A new product that master class is offering
that's pretty intriguing is sessions.
Sessions offer a deeper dive over a month-long period
and include projects to submit to a teaching assistant
for feedback, as well as the opportunity
to learn alongside a community of peers.
And this is available to subscribers at no extra cost.
We highly recommend that you check out master class.
This holiday, give one annual membership and get one free.
Go to masterclass.com slash newsday today.
That is masterclass.com slash newsday.
Terms apply.
And links are always down in the description.
But let's get back to the news
and despite it not fitting exactly in with the theme of tech,
news broke while we were writing this episode
that we should probably touch on.
Former president Donald Trump's company,
the Trump Organization, has been found guilty on all counts
in its New York criminal tax fraud trial.
This is certainly the end of Donald Trump, right?
He's definitely gonna go to jail,
probably to Guantanamo.
I don't know, I'd like to see Donald Trump
weasel his way out of this one.
Yeah, I don't know about that, Elliot.
I'm pretty sure I can hear that perp walk coming right now.
His goose is cooked.
Ah, yeah, and of course this does sound great
and the fact that something directly related to Trump
has been found guilty in a court, like just, that's great.
But then you, of course, get to the part
where the penalty for the Trump Organization's
various crimes, which it is guilty of all of the ones
that were mentioned in this case,
the penalty is just over a million bucks.
One million dollars.
Which does seem low considering the decades of fraud
that the Organization has been involved with,
but we have no choice in the matter,
so I guess we'll take what we can get.
I love American justice.
Here's Politico with more.
The Trump Organization was convicted on all charges
in a criminal tax fraud scheme on Tuesday.
A New York Supreme Court jury reached the verdict
in the case, which could cost the Trump org
up to $1.6 million in fines.
Oh, after two days of deliberation
following a month-long trial that included convicted
former Trump org chief finance officer,
Alan Weisselberg, as a star witness.
Prosecutors from the Manhattan District Attorney's Office
said the company criminally dodged taxes
and suppressed payroll costs
by lavishing its executives with unreported perks,
such as leases on luxury cars and apartments.
Two units of the Trump Organization
were convicted on 17 criminal counts,
including tax fraud, scheme to defraud,
and falsifying business records.
The Trump Organization will appeal,
said its attorney, Alan Futterfoss.
I'm losing track on what lawyers they're on now anyway,
but yeah, of course they're gonna appeal,
but hey, $1.6 million,
I mean, he definitely doesn't have that much money,
so he's gonna have to borrow it.
It's too bad there isn't conveniently named
Trump Organization too to offload a lot of this debt.
Have fun getting that money out of Trump org one,
a totally criminal organization
that I have nothing to do with.
Like, I mean, what's the tally on how much, like,
they had to have done more fraud than this.
It has to have been more than $1.6 million.
The case alone costs more than that to operate.
Like, if, because if it isn't,
that just shows that you can do something illegal.
Just pay the fine.
And just pay the fine,
which we've seen many examples of that exact same thing.
And even the driver, even the fucking DMV
will take your driver's license away after a while.
Yeah, so okay, but yeah,
with that all out of the way,
it's time to make fun of the metaverse again.
Woo, this time with some help from our friends over
in the European Union
and half a million euros worth of government spending.
Awesome.
Turns out the phrase,
if you build it, they will come,
has absolutely zero effect on these virtual worlds
because despite spending hundreds of thousands of euros,
the EU commission's foreign aid department
has almost nothing to show for it
because no one fucking showed up.
Hey, where is everybody?
They didn't even have to leave their house.
You just log on.
Literally like click, like two buttons.
So for more on this latest damning indictment of metaverses
and the future of social interaction,
here's the age.
A European Union plan to throw a virtual party
in the metaverse to engage young people in its policies
flopped spectacularly after only six people showed up.
Ash.
The EU commission's foreign aid department
splashed out 332,000 pounds or $500,000 to create the metaverse,
an online square where people could log in
to a virtual concert to meet others
and learn about the block.
The event with its own virtual DJs playing music on repeat
was supposed to be so digitally enticing to young people
that once they were there,
the EU would be able to educate them
about its development policy.
Hey, you guys got a second?
Can we wrap a little bit?
I mean, I'm starting to see the problems here.
It's not just the metaverse.
Yeah, no, I'm not interested in this at all.
Yeah.
But a correspondent for international development website,
DevEx, exposed the disappointing turnout.
Quote, I'm here at the Gala concert
in the EU foreign aid department's metaverse.
After initial bemused chats
with the roughly five other humans who showed up,
I am alone, Vince Chadwick posted online.
The warning signs were there.
Only 44 people had liked the online promotional video,
which featured futuristic avatars
bopping along to pulsating house music.
Brussels unveiled the metaverse in mid-October,
but it has struggled to gain support
from even those working on it in the EU department.
DevEx reports that one source
from within the European commission
called the special metaverse, quote, digital garbage.
And the fiasco has drawn scorn
from a number of EU watchers, quote,
it's a travesty that an EU institution feels the need
to throw hundreds of thousands of euros
behind this nonsense.
Jacob Kirtgaard of the German Marshall Fund said,
anyone with a brain knows the metaverse is a dud.
So look, hey, congrats, great work, everyone.
We are collectively very successful
at ruining this metaverse shit
before it even has a chance to get off the ground.
We are very proud of all of you, specifically the gamers,
who both NFTs and the metaverse,
they have just resoundly rejected.
I mean, I don't need to tell you guys,
but you already know, but if someone offers you a metaverse,
says that getting on the metaverse
is gonna make you feel cool,
it's gonna be awesome.
Well, tell him, Nancy Reagan.
Not even once.
Say yes to your life.
And when it comes to drugs and alcohol, just say yes.
Just say no.
Unless it's boiling every actor in Hollywood.
Yeah, she did.
She did that.
She did do that.
Allegedly.
So do you wanna know something else
that the internet ruined, at least temporarily?
Sure.
The US military's recruiting efforts
on platforms like Twitch.
Good job, everyone.
We did it.
Well, not us, but mostly Jordan Ewell.
Mostly Jordan Ewell.
So yeah, much of the thanks for just all of this
has to go to friend of the show, Jordan Ewell,
who not only mocked the streamers incessantly,
but also explained the actual goal
behind these types of activations
to numerous outlets in simple terms.
They are trying anything they can to enlist more kids,
because after decades of conflicts
that we should have never been involved with
in the first place, and with more troops
dying of suicide than in combat,
it's getting a little bit hard to convince teenagers
that this is something they should definitely sign up for.
Yeah.
Hmm.
It's not working anymore,
just going down to the high school
and peer-pressuring people.
We need to think of new exciting ways.
Like peer-pressing them into doing their oath
in front of a crowd of 50,000.
Yeah, I love this.
I love that Gen Z is just over this military shit.
I'm so proud of Gen Z.
I am so proud of you all.
Anyways, we have recently spoken about recruitment efforts,
specifically when it relates to sporting events.
I had to witness it firsthand,
but it's always important to bring up
the actual statistics involved
before everyone just says
that we're anti-American or something.
An estimated 7,057 service members have died
during military operations since 9-11,
while suicides among active duty personnel
and veterans of those conflicts
has reached 30,177.
That's more than four times as many.
Fuck.
So it's no surprise that recruitment numbers are falling
and that the military is having to get creative
with how it markets itself.
Enter Twitch.tv, a direct line to the youth of today
where you can make military service look like nothing more
than playing video games all day,
which in some cases is actually true.
Though the video game that you're playing
has real-world consequences.
Because it's not a video game,
you're using drones to strike people.
Regardless, the government was ready to pour millions
of dollars into marketing through streamers
before this was all exposed.
Here's Vice with more on these latest updates.
The US Army allocated millions of dollars
to sponsor a wide range of e-sports tournaments,
individual high-profile Call of Duty streamers
and Twitch events in the last year
to specifically grow its audience with Gen Z viewers,
and especially women in black and Hispanic people,
according to internal Army documents obtained by motherboard.
In many cases, the sponsorships ultimately did not happen.
The Army ordered a stop to all spending
with Call of Duty's publisher Activision
after the company faced a wave
of sexual harassment complaints.
But the documents provide much greater insight
into the Army's goals and intentions
behind its planned integrations with Call of Duty
and other massive entertainment franchises.
Quote, audience, Gen Z prospects, A18 to 24,
one section of the documents read,
focus on the growth of females, black and Hispanics.
Motherboard obtained the documents
through the Freedom of Information Act.
And the reporting continues adding that the documents show
that the US military considered gaming
and in particular Call of Duty
as a potentially useful branding and recruiting tool.
For example, the Army proposed using Twitch influencers
to quote, create original content videos
showcasing the wide range of skill sets offered by the Army,
and to use influencers to quote,
familiarize their fans on Army values and opportunities.
The Army also wanted to throw tournaments
that featured quote, soldiers and top names in gaming.
Another goal of the campaigns was to increase
the Army's favorability in viewer surveys.
Okay, oh yeah, so the reporting goes into detail
about certain events or activations
that they were pouring money into,
including this tidbit about the Cod Mobile game.
The Army also planned to spend $200,000
on sponsoring the mobile version of Call of Duty,
including with quote, reward-based inventory.
The documents suggest the campaign would provide
in-game currency to players who viewed Army video ads, wild.
There's a lot more.
Yeah, there's a lot more in their reporting,
and you should really read this entire article.
It is wild.
Links to everything that we talk about, of course,
are always in the description below, but goddamn, goddamn.
They're gonna be showing up on chat roulette sooner or later.
I'm surprised they haven't expanded this approach
to their actual TV ads.
Have all the Army people parachuting
out of the battle bus, and then like...
Have you seen the...
Where we drop in, Sarge!
Have you seen recruitment ads recently?
No.
It is...
They're doing like dances out in the battlefield.
It's a, the narrative has changed quite drastically
from your parents who have served,
and you...
It's like being an Army of One, be all that you can be.
All of the ads that I've seen recently,
and again, this is because I watched a lot of sports,
it's because it's the teenager convincing their parent
that it's going to be okay.
Oh, that's fun.
And it's like them on their computer doing
some creative field, like doing Blender,
or something like that, and being like, you know...
I have seen that.
There's a company out there that'll pay me
to enhance my skills like this,
and mom, you don't have to worry,
because I'm not gonna die.
I'll be safely tucked away in a room somewhere in Virginia
where I am able to disconnect from the damage I'm causing.
I love this form of recruiting
because you don't really have much control
at all over what you end up actually doing.
It's like...
No.
And with the eSports thing,
it's like you can't enlist in the Army,
and be like, all right,
so I'm getting sent to the eSports team, right?
They're like, no.
No, you fucking idiot.
That's also a huge pressure tactic that they do.
Once it's already, quote unquote, it's not too late,
but once it's too late to back out,
the whole way through, we'll talk about your position
and the exact role that you'll have in the Army,
and then they will get on the phone.
I swear to God, because I fucking lived through it,
they will get on the phone and be like,
I don't know, that's a pretty in-demand field.
I'm gonna have to run this up the chain
and make sure that we can make it available for you.
But once my commanding officer gets on that phone,
I mean, we're really pulling a lot of strings for you.
It's gonna make us look really bad.
It's gonna make you look really bad.
If you don't, I swear to God,
that is exactly what they did to me in high school.
Damn.
Well, good thing you didn't take the bait.
No.
I was just making an ad like the old video game college ad,
where it's like, what's the next country America's gonna bomb?
You haven't bombed it yet.
You haven't decided yet.
But yeah, look, it's been a pretty heavy episode,
but we're gonna end today's show on a lighter note
because it feels as though, at least for some people,
we have collectively reached the end of capitalism,
and the only way to know if you're worth anything at all
is to shamelessly brag about how rich you are.
Actually, don't do that
because you look like a total piece of shit,
but that doesn't matter to these people
because their narcissism knows no bounds.
And there's finally an art installation for them
down in Miami's beautiful art basil.
Art basil is like the funniest world art event
because it pretty much exclusively attracts-
The worst people.
Like these types of rich assholes.
Yes.
Like it's less about the art.
And even the art that is on display there
that I've seen fucking sucks.
The banana?
It's all just like weird shit
that someone has managed to con their way
into a certain section of rich people thinking they're cool
and like, hey, more power to them,
but it's not good looking art.
Confidence gets you so fucking far.
Yeah, Miami is just a hell of a place.
Oh my God, did you see the Miami clubs
that are going out of business
because they don't have any crypto money coming?
Another, it's just like the cocaine boom bust
all over again.
It really is.
When the cart shells, when they finally started
intercepting those planes coming in from the Caribbean,
a whole ripple effect happened in Miami.
Entire industries were no longer able to sustain themselves.
It's actually-
And now with crypto gone, it's happening again.
It is insane that through decades of hard work,
Florida has made itself a living experiment
for like what America could be if left to its own devices.
And specifically, the southern fucking tip of Florida,
not counting the keys, is like it's distilled even more.
Whereas like, what if everyone was on cocaine?
All right, let's try it for like a decade.
What if we had-
What if everyone, all the crypto weirdos came here?
What if giant apartment complexes just never got inspected?
Yeah, and we're like literally feet from the ocean.
Yeah.
It's crazy.
But finally, finally because of Art Basel
and because of Miami, we have a very real,
very truthful dick measuring contest
that is available for the whole world to see.
Presenting the ATM leaderboard by Mischief.
Oh, Mischief.
So yeah, this is actual art.
They are a brand that specializes in fucking with reality.
Yeah.
This is an ATM machine where anyone can walk up,
scan their debit card and see where they stand
against other Art Basel attendees
as far as liquidity is concerned.
And that's the funniest part about this.
Yes, these are all people who are keeping
obscene amounts of money in their checking account.
In their checking account, which is like
the most exposed way possible.
It's just like just the most baby-brained way
to like store your money.
Waving a flag at this fucking art fair.
It is quite simply a working ATM
with a computerized scoreboard attached.
You put your bank card in,
withdraw whatever cash you need,
and the machine takes a photo of you
and adds it along with your name and account balance
to a scrolling leaderboard
with the person who has the most money on top.
As of yesterday, however,
Art News reported that since Diplo topped the leaderboard
with $3 million, his score has been surpassed twice already.
Number two is someone with a $5 million account balance,
while number one is $9 million.
God only knows why anyone would need
that much cash in checking.
And that's what I'm saying.
Yeah.
Why do you need that much liquidity?
Because these people are showing off.
And I love so much that this outlet
refused to name the two people who were at first and second
because you know those people are searching
every fucking bit of coverage about this
to see if there are goddamn names in it.
And the fact that they're like,
and some fucking weirdo,
some guy, random guy, 9 million, big deal.
These are all dudes trying to get laid too.
Yeah.
Like, hey, I need to get money out of the ATM.
Hey, did I see you on the leaderboard?
It is like the tactic that is as old as time
where people will get like their ATM balance or whatever
and then like leave it in their wallet
or like like it fell out.
Yes, this is like a dickhead,
like New York's stock exchange guy move from the 80s.
Like, but anyways, they do make a good point at the end.
And it's a learning moment for anyone
who does carry a positive balance,
which is increasingly rare in this country,
but for anyone who does, first up, great job.
You're doing better than a significant portion
of the country.
Second, don't put all your money in your checking account.
No, don't do that.
At the very least, keep it in savings.
And also if you are a responsible person
and only if you are sure
that you are a responsible person, check your credit score.
You should not use your debit card everywhere.
You should use a credit card
that you do pay off in full every month.
Yeah.
It builds credit and it also takes the fraud liability
off of your shoulders for the most part.
It's you're spending someone else's money,
they're gonna fight to get it back.
Yeah.
When your debit card gets stolen at the gas station,
that's on you, buddy.
Now, having said all that, there is literally nothing positive
that comes from a dick measuring contest at Art Basil.
Everyone looks like an asshole,
but that's kind of the point.
Yeah.
And with mischief behind this, that is the point.
Yeah, it's an interesting social experiment.
Yeah.
But speaking of financial responsibility,
guess what I got today?
My Stadia refund in full.
Oh.
So everyone's like, oh, let's make fun of Ricky
for trying out the new tech for his job with a tech show.
Oh, we're gonna mock Ricky incessantly online
and make him feel bad.
Yeah, exactly, yes.
Well, guess what, buddy?
Despite having the money held up
for however many years it's been,
I got a 4K Comcast,
a Bluetooth game controller,
and my $140 back.
Okay, yeah, I mean that, I guess that worked out.
Yeah.
So, there you go.
Don't put your money in a checking account.
Put it in Google Stadia where it's safe.
Hairbrained products from Google
that they're definitely gonna discontinue
at the first opportunity.
Google did a great job at holding onto that money for me
because I would have spent it.
Right.
I would have spent it.
You would have put it in the stock market
and have you seen that graph?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Do you want Google to hold on your money
in its Stadia account,
or do you want to put your money into Google
and have it vanish in the year 2022?
This is why the best way,
better than checking or savings,
is you just keep all your money in GameStop pre-orders.
Yes.
You just pre-order everything
and when you need money,
you go down and you cancel your pre-order,
they give you the money.
Yes.
As far as you can-
You don't even need a bank.
Literally as far as you can be away from any money you have
is the best thing possible.
Yeah.
There you go.
But anyways, I got my money back
and I got a free controller and a Chromecast out of it,
so fuck you, buddy.
Is the controller even like work?
It's a Bluetooth.
Oh, okay.
Would I want to play with it anywhere in public
that people would see that I owned a Stadia at one point?
Well, now maybe.
That's a piece of video game history.
It is.
Anyways, that's it for today's episode.
We do, of course, have more coming up for you
and it'll be up soon.
So in the meantime, check out our most recent episode
of Weekly Weird News
and a more recent episode of News Dump right over there.
Guess what?
All of the likes, all of the comments-
It's working.
You're doing it.
I hate to say it,
but interaction on videos actually works.
It only took us like eight years
to finally like actually test it out,
but yeah, it actually works.
It works.
You're doing a wonderful job.
We flew past 230,000 subscribers.
So smash that like button.
Leave a comment for engagement.
Subscribe.
I get annoyed by this kind of shit too,
but I'm sorry, it works.
It really works.
Damn it.
So watch all of our other videos,
like the video, comment, do all that stuff,
and have a great week.
Bye-bye.
Bye.
