Lecture 16, Harmony Part 3, Progression, Cadence, and Modulation
Welcome back.
This is Lecture 16. It is entitled Harmony Part 3, Progression, Cadence, and Modulation.
My friends, I usually begin the final lecture of a teaching company course with just a touch
of regret. It's a regret born of the awareness of everything I have not had an opportunity
to share with you. Of all the pieces of music we didn't have a chance to listen to and examine,
both topics left uncovered and undiscussed of juicy anecdotes left untold because they
simply weren't germane to the discussion at hand. Frankly, I feel no such regret at
this moment. Now obviously, that's not because I believe we've mailed Western music theory.
My goodness, we've hardly scratched the surface. But by the time this lecture comes to its
close, we can confidently say that we've gone pretty much as far as we can go in a
course taught without recourse to music notation. Speaking for myself, I'm tickled to death
that we've gotten this far. The only large topic that we might have tackled here but
did not is that of musical form. But given that the topic of musical form is covered
extensively in my teaching company course How to Listen to and Understand Great Music
Well, we decided to forgo that subject area with the knowledge that you can seek it out
elsewhere. Onward then to the conclusion of our exploration of the basics of Western tonal
harmony, harmonic progression, cadence, and modulation. Harmonic progression. Harmonic
progression refers to the movement from one chord to the next. Now in truth, we've been
looking at, listening to, and talking about harmonic progressions in some form or another
since lecture 10. We've talked about the nature of the relationship between the tonic
and dominant harmonies and the movement between those harmonies. And we've talked about voice
leading, meaning the melodic motion between harmonies. Let's now formalize our exploration
of harmonic progressions by first addressing cadences, then extended subdominant progressions,
tonicization, and finally modulation. Cadence. A cadence is that harmonic progression that
occurs at the end of a phrase, section, or movement, a progression that conveys the impression
of either a temporary or permanent conclusion. A cadence is the musical equivalent of a punctuation
mark. There are four types of cadences, these musical punctuation marks, with which we should
be familiar. Closed or authentic cadences, open or half cadences, deceptive or false
cadences, and plagal or amen cadences. We begin with closed or authentic cadences. A
closed or authentic cadence is one that comes to rest on the tonic chord. Such a cadence,
such a harmonic progression, concludes with a palpable sense of rest and resolution. It
is the musical equivalent to a period in written language. Closed cadences will define the
endings of sections of music within movements, as well as the endings of movements themselves.
As an example of a local closed cadence, one that defines the ending of a section within
a movement, we turn to the second movement of Beethoven's Piano Sonata in F Minor, Opus
2, No. 1 of 1795. The movement opens with a graceful, classically styled theme. We are
going to hear the theme in its entirety. And how will we know that the theme is over, that
we will have heard it in its entirety? My friends will know, because the closed cadence
that concludes the theme brings it to an entirely convincing conclusion.
The sort of closed cadence that will conclude an entire work will usually be a bit more
vehement than the laid-back and elegant cadence we just heard. That vehemence will usually
be a product of cadential repetition, meaning that we'll hear a number of dominant tonic
progressions repeated back-to-back. This is especially true in the music of the classical
and romantic eras, during which cadences were cultivated with a rhetorical flourish almost
never heard in earlier music. As an example of a cadence gone mad, we turn to the conclusion
of the fourth and final movement of Beethoven's Symphony No. 3, the Eroica, the heroic symphony.
After the long expressive journey that the symphony marks, Beethoven clearly wanted to
go out with an exclamatory bang. The closing thirty-nine measures of the movement together
comprise the massive closing cadence, during which barking horns alternate tonic and dominant
harmonies for eighteen measures, followed by twenty-one full measures of the tonic E-flat
major harmony. Let's hear it!
Open
or half cadences. An open or half cadence is one that stops, without resolving, on the
dominant chord. Like a comma in the middle of a sentence, an open cadence creates tension,
tension that forces the music to continue in search of eventual resolution.
Back in Lecture 13, we talked about periodic melody and antecedent consequent phrases.
The opening theme of the second movement of Beethoven's Piano Sonata in F Minor, Opus
2 No. 1, the theme we just heard a few moments ago, constitutes just such a periodic antecedent
consequent phrase. We heard the entire theme, and in doing so, took special note of the
closed cadence that concludes the theme. Let's hear that theme again. Now taking note
of the open cadence that divides the theme exactly in half, in the same way a comma marks
the two phrases of a sentence. Open cadence.
Close cadence. Most self-standing movements of music will end with a closed cadence. Having
said that, every now and then a composer will end a movement with an open cadence that only
resolves with the beginning of the next movement, in order to create a link between those movements.
When this occurs, it will usually occur between the second to last and last movements of a
piece. For example, staying with Herr Beethoven, his Piano Sonata in C Major, Opus 53, the
Volstein of 1804. The second movement concludes slowly and quietly, and ends on a G chord,
the dominant of the tonic C Major.
That dominant harmony only resolves with the beginning of the third and final movement,
with the appearance of this low C. Let's hear the conclusion of the second movement.
Let's feel the harmonic tension at movement's end, and let's celebrate the resolution to
C Major as the third movement begins.
Let's hear the conclusion of the second movement.
Let's hear the conclusion of the second movement.
Let's hear the conclusion of the third movement.
Deceptive or false cadences. A deceptive or false cadence is one that does indeed resolve,
but not to the tonic harmony, not to where we expect it to resolve. In a closed cadence,
we expect the penultimate dominant seventh chord to resolve to a tonic chord.
But in a deceptive or false cadence, that penultimate dominant seventh chord does not
resolve to the tonic, but rather to somewhere completely unexpected.
And thus we are deceived. The dominant chord has resolved. The leading tone has moved
upwards by a semitone to the tonic pitch. But the chord beneath that tonic pitch is
not the tonic chord. This cadence thou art false, and our ears, thus deceived, must
await until a resolution proper is received. Yeah, whatever. A deceptive cadence is a delaying
tactic, a device by which a composer can avoid resolution. A deceptive cadence then forces
the music to continue in search of eventual resolution.
Made it! A deceptive or false cadence is the musical equivalent of a colon or semicolon.
After a deceptive cadence, we will usually hear a momentary pause as we ponder a resolution
gone awry before the harmonic motion resumes in search of resolution in search of the tonic.
Of course, if a composer really wants to torture us, he or she could, theoretically, never
properly resolve a single dominant chord, and instead sidestep any dominant tonic resolution
by a ceaseless use of deceptive cadences. My friends, we have just described the great
bulk of Richard Bachner's music drama Tristan and Esolda of 1859, in which harmonic usage
becomes a metaphor for Tristan and Esolda's own unfortunate inability to resolve their
relationship, to consummate their relationship over the five-hour course of the drama.
We return to the opening of the overture to Tristan and Esolda, an amazing exercise in
unresolved dissonance and deceptive cadences that foretells well the harmonic and dramatic
syntax of pretty much the entire work to come. The overture begins with a phrase that
features a half-diminished seventh chord. Oh, I wish we had more time to talk about this
particular harmony, but we do not. Suffice it to say, though, that Wagner's use of half-diminished
seventh chords here in Tristan and Esolda is so pervasive that the chord itself has come
to be called the Tristan chord. Anyway, the half-diminished seventh chord resolves outwards
and the opening phrase comes to a pause on an E dominant seventh chord, the dominant
chord of the key of A. Then open cadence, right?
And an open cadence means that some sort of resolution, some sort of closure should be
expected, right? Maybe something like this. Well, we can expect whatever we want. What
we get is a long bit of silence the better to stew in our unresolved juices.
Followed by an upwards sequence of the opening phrase that does not only not resolve the
hanging dominant of the first phrase, but ends itself on another dominant seventh chord.
Here's that second phrase.
Which we expect to resolve like this. But of course, no resolution takes place. Instead
we get another long silence followed by another upward sequence of the opening phrase.
We expect we long for we want, need, must have, this resolution must resolve, must resolve.
But such harmonic resolution is not to be. Instead, Wagner gives us this. A deceptive
cadence. Best to take a cold shower right now, because harmonic consummation, completion,
and resolution are not to be the stuff of this music drama.
We expect we long for we want, need, must have, this resolution must resolve.
We expect we long for we want, need, must have, this resolution must resolve.
We expect we long for we want, need, must have, this resolution must resolve.
Plagal or Amen cadences. A plagal or Amen cadence is one that consists of the chord
progression 4 to 1, from the subdominant to the tonic.
The plagal cadence is often referred to as the Amen cadence, because it is the harmonic
progression that underpins the word Amen in the great majority of Protestant church
hymns. A plagal cadence is not a substitute for a closed, open, or deceptive cadence.
Rather, a plagal cadence will typically follow a closed cadence at the very end of a phrase
or passage, and as a result we perceive the plagal cadence as prolonging the tonic harmony
at the end of that phrase or passage. For example, the opening phrase of the Second
Movement funeral march from Beethoven's Symphony No. 3. Let's hear that phrase up to and including
the closed cadence that brings it to its conclusion.
The cadence is closed, but the phrase is not quite over yet. Beethoven wants to linger.
He wants to prolong the moment, so now he adds a plagal cadence that immediately follows
the closed cadence.
And thus the tonic harmony that concludes the theme has been extended, with the addition
of a closed cadence.
Now, let's take a look at Beethoven's Symphony No. 3.
And thus the tonic harmony that concludes the theme has been extended with the addition
of a plagal cadence.
Sidebar, cadenza. Cadenza is the Italian word for cadence. The word cadenza is also associated
with the solos taken by soloists in a concerto, or singers in an aria, solos that, in spirit
least, have the character of improvisations. It was during the High Middle Ages that singers
in certain types of music were given the option of embellishing the final cadence of the work
under performance. Opera singers of the 17th and early 18th centuries likewise had the option
of thus embellishing their arias, an option that passed directly on to that most operatic
of all instrumental genres, the concerto. By the classical era, it had become standard
operating concerto procedure to interrupt the final cadence of both the first and last
movements of the concerto by allowing the soloist to perform an extended solo. This extended
solo is named for the harmonic progression it interrupts, thus the cadenza. We often
read that these cadenzas were improvised, but my friends, in reality, they were usually
very carefully prepared beforehand by the soloist, the better to exploit a particular
soloist, particular technical strengths and abilities. Anyway, for anyone who has heard
her fair share of classical and romantic erican charity, the harmonies that constitute the
run-up to a cadenza constitute a most familiar progression. Here's how it all works. Let's
say that the following chord progression represents the final cadence in a concerto movement.
This final cadence, this chord progression, will pause on the third to last chord, stopping
on a harmony called a cadential 6-4. It's a tonic triad in second inversion.
The cadenza then follows. The cadenza will conclude with a trill built atop the second
to last chord of the cadential formula, the dominant chord. After which point the orchestra
re-enters with the tonic chord, a cadence of its own, and just like that, the movement
is over. Using the first movement of Mozart's Piano Concerto in D major of 1788 as an example,
let's hear all of this in context. First, the run-up to the cadenza and the pause on
the cadential 6-4 chord.
The cadenza now follows. Eventually the soloist plays the trill over the dominant chord, which
is the signal to the orchestra that the cadenza is over. The orchestra re-enters, closes the
cadence, and brings the movement to its conclusion. Let's hear the remainder of the movement from
near the end of the cadenza.
Harmonic function continued, the sub-dominant. We have observed rather exhaustively, I think,
that at its heart the tonal system is about tension and resolution, about the movement
from a state of rest and consonance as represented by the tonic chord.
To a state of tension and dissonance as represented by the dominant chord, and back to a state
of rest and consonance as represented by the tonic chord. If the tonic and dominant chords
constitute the two great peers of functional tonality, then it is the motion from the tonic
chord to the dominant chord through various pre or sub-dominant harmonies that bridges
the distance between tonic and dominant. A harmonic progression between the tonic and
dominant chords can be as simple as 1, 4, 5, 1, or as convoluted as...
No matter how simple or complex the progression, the harmonies that transit from the tonic
to the dominant play collectively a sub-dominant role, that is, a pre-dominant role in that
they ultimately transit to and prepare for the dominant chord, and with it whatever sort
of cadence that dominant chord will be part of. Now, having broached this issue of sub-dominance,
we have opened a Pandora's box of entirely reasonable questions regarding chord progressions.
For example, what rules govern which chords can progress to the next? What's the difference
between a strong chord progression and a weak chord progression? What are parallel fifths
and parallel octaves? And why are they considered, together, the Ebola of voice leading? What's
the difference between a Neapolitan sixth, a German sixth, an Italian sixth, and a French
sixth? And no, we're not talking about the Benchwarmer on various international basketball
teams. Those are the names of some very special cadential harmonies. My friends, tonal harmony
is both an art and a science, and mastering its intricacies takes decades of study, practice,
and analysis. An undergraduate music major will have to take at least two years of harmony,
plus courses in harmonic analysis, counterpoint, ear training, and sight singing, and after
four years of that, he or she will still have only the most rudimentary understanding of
how the tonal system works mechanically, artistically, and spiritually. Then again, that's pretty
much all we can expect from any undergraduate program, impart the rudiments, create an outline,
and teach the students how to think and hear critically. Anyway, to the point, when it
comes to tonal harmony, we can A, stop here, B, we can go on for another 1500 words or
so, C, go on for another 50 or 60 lectures, and thus be prepared to answer the questions
I posed just a moment ago. I opt for B. Let's go on for another 1500 words or so with the
intention of covering one last harmonic topic, modulation. Modulation is that process by which
a piece of tonal music actually changes key during the course of a movement. If the motion
from tonic to dominant and back to tonic might be perceived as a local departure and return,
then modulation should be perceived as long range departure and eventual return. For example,
let's transit from the key of C major to the entirely different key of C major to the
different key of A minor. That's modulation. Modulation is at once the most difficult aspect
of tonal music for the untrained ear to perceive, and yet, at the same time, it is perhaps
the single most important aspect of functional tonality. As I never tire of saying modulation,
that is, long range harmonic departure and return, is the grease that lubricates the
skids of tonal music. Even the shortest piece of concert music will feature a modulation
or two, and longer movements will move constantly across the tonal landscape. Without modulation,
a piece of music would seem frozen and immobile, no matter how attractive its themes, properly
employed. Modulation allows a movement to soar through harmonic space, its propulsion
supplied by a subtle and constant use of both local and large scale harmonic departure and
return. Modulation 101. There are many different ways to modulate, and we'll discuss a number
of them in just a moment. What all modulatory methodologies have in common, however, is that
they must convincingly cadence to the new key. A convincing modulation, then, requires
that we introduce the dominant seventh chord of whatever the new key we're transiting
to, and then resolve that dominant seventh chord to the tonic chord of the new key. Well,
that sounds simple enough. Yes, well, if all that was required to convincingly modulate
to a new key was a new dominant chord, then modulating from, say, C major to G major would
be as simple as introducing a D dominant seventh chord, the dominant seventh chord of G major,
and then resolving to a G major triad. Okay, let's do it. First, I'll establish the key
of C major, our key of departure. Now, let's hear a D dominant seventh chord.
The dominant seventh chord of G major, and its resolution to G major. Let's hear that
entire progression from start to finish. Question. Does that final chord, that G major chord,
sound like a new tonic? Did those last two chords sound like a closed cadence? Does this
music feel temporarily at least at rest? I'll play the progression again. Does that feel
at rest? No, it doesn't feel at rest. It feels like a closed cadence. Does that sound
as if the final G chord needs to resolve right back to C major? Listen. G major? No. Back
to C major. Yeah, we're still in C major. Our ears never made the switch to G. We're
still in C. So, what happened? By introducing a new dominant seventh chord, in this case
a D dominant seventh chord, and resolving that chord, in this case to a G major triad,
we have only tonicized that G major triad. We haven't modulated to G major. Tonicization,
the process of introducing and resolving new dominant seventh chords in order to sharpen
harmonic motion and create momentary tendency happens all the time. Hey, check this out.
I'll play the beginning of the star spangled banner in C major, and I'll point out a moment
right near the beginning where the melody has an F sharp in it, the leading tone of
G major, a leading tone that then rises to G major. Well, have we modulated to G? No.
This is simply a tonicization. Here we go. Tonicization.
Are we in G? No. We're still in C, and that was a C chord. That melody doesn't modulate.
Rather, the new dominant seventh chord and the F sharp contained within that new dominant
seventh chord merely created momentary tendency, harmonic momentum, during the course of the
phrase, a phrase that is still perceived as being entirely within C major. Hmm. Modulation
201. If we want to convincingly modulate from C major to G major, yes, we have to introduce
the dominant seventh chord of G major, but as should now be apparent, we've got to do
a bit more than just that. We've got to obliterate the memory of C major by creating an extended
progression to the new key of G major so that there is no doubt once the modulation is over
that we have indeed gone to a new harmonic place. One of the simplest strategies for
a successful modulation is to go past the key you're actually modulating to and then
backtrack to where you actually want it to be. For example, let's modulate from C major
to G major by going past G major on the circle of fifths to D major and then fall back from
D major to G major. Check this out. First, let's establish C major. Now let's tonicize
D major. Let's hear it from the beginning. Now let's turn that D major triad into a D
dominant seventh chord, the dominant seventh chord of G major and then resolve it to G major
from the beginning.
And there we are, a convincing modulation to G major. There are countless different modulatory
strategies. The most common is to move from key to key along the circle of fifths, stepping
through closely related key areas as we wind our way from departure to destination. For
example, the simplest, now please I didn't say the fastest, I said the simplest way to
modulate from, let's say, C major to A flat major would be through the left or flat side
of the circle of fifths, moving from C major to F major to B flat major to E flat major
to A flat major. Easily done. First, we take our C major chord and turn it into a C dominant
seventh chord, the dominant seventh chord of F major. Now we resolve that C major to
a C dominant seventh chord to an F major chord and then turn the F major chord into a dominant
seventh chord, the dominant seventh chord of B flat major from the beginning. Starting
with our tonic C major, now a C dominant seventh chord, turning to an F major chord, turning
into an F dominant seventh chord, which then wants to resolve to a B flat. We can continue
this process all the way to D flat major because once again, we want to actually swing past
our target key and then backtrack. C, C dominant seventh, F, F dominant seventh, B flat, B
flat dominant seventh, E flat, E flat dominant seventh, A flat, A flat dominant seventh,
then D flat, E flat dominant seventh, A flat, E flat dominant seventh, A flat. We've made
our modulation. Let me play that entire modulatory progression now without the voiceover, from
C major to A flat major.
Now, as we observed moments ago, there are countless ways to get from harmonic point A
to point B, though the simplest is to go around the circle of fifths, as we just did in our
modulation from C major to A flat major. The problem with modulating via the circle of fifths
all the time, aside from the fact that it's boring, is that the more distantly related
the target key, that is, the further away it is on the circle from our starting point,
the more keys we have to traipse through on the way, like driving from Maine to Florida
on Route 1, such a trip can take forever. So, there are harmonic shortcuts, strategies
that allow us to transit relatively large harmonic distances at de facto warp speed.
For example, by short cutting off a deceptive cadence, we can get from C major to A flat
major in just seven harmonic steps, rather than the fifteen steps, the circle of fifths
modulation required. Check it out. Here's C major. Here we go. I'm going to introduce
a dominant of C major, and I'm going to resolve with a false cadence, and that false cadence
is going to allow us to get to A flat major in no time. Here we go. A flat major, hello!
Another strategy for covering big chunks of harmonic distance almost instantly is something
called pivot modulation, something at which Beethoven was particularly adept. In pivot
modulation, one or more pitches common to two different harmonies are used as a pivot
between those two harmonies, and thus we can pivot instantly between two such common tone
chords, whether they are closely related keys or not. For example, a C major triad consists
of the pitches C, E and G. The E and the G of a C major triad are common to C major
to an E minor triad as well, which is spelled as E G B. Here's a C major triad. I'll sustain
the E and the G. And now, here's an E minor triad. Well, by pivoting off the E and the
G, we can achieve an almost instant modulation from C major to E minor. Here we go.
Here's our pivot. I'll play that again, starting with C. We're going to pivot off of these
pitches. Back to the C major triad. Using just the pitch E as a common tone, we can pivot
directly to an E dominant seventh chord, and in doing so, affect an instant modulation
to the moderately distant key of A major. We start in C major again. Now, let me isolate
the pivot tone. It's the E, which will now become a common tone between C major and the
fairly distant key of A major. From the beginning. Pivot. Instant A major. Heck, using the E
as a common tone, we can pivot from C major directly to an F sharp dominant seventh chord,
and in doing so, affect an instant modulation to the extremely distant key of A major.
The distant key of B minor. Again, back to C major. Now, here's our pivot tone, that E,
from the beginning. And just like that, we've oozed our way to the key of B minor. And as
we discussed in lecture 15, if we really want to get somewhere fast, especially in minor
keys, all we need to do is use a diminished seventh chord, the musical equivalent to Star
Trek's transporter machine. Step on in and get beamed. Here you go. From C minor to the
incredibly distant key of F sharp dominant seventh chord, we can pivot from C minor to
get beamed. Here you go. From C minor to the incredibly distant key of F sharp minor in
what? Five chords. There's our raised, leading tone, diminished seventh chord of C major. And
now on to F sharp minor. Just like that. With pivot and dominant seventh chords, we can
use the diminished seventh chord modulations, little or no preparation of the new key by
way of going past it and then coming back to it is required. These sorts of modulations
are so dramatic, and the harmonic distance they cover is so great, that there's pretty
much no chance the original key, the key of departure, will still be in our ears once the
modulation has taken place. Modulation conclusions. This process of modulation of
shifting tonal centers during the course of a movement made possible the evolution of
large scale musical genres and forms. Forms in which tonal contrast became as important
a musical element as thematic contrast. The process of modulation also allowed composers
to differentiate between thematic music, that is harmonically stable music, during which
a theme is stated in the cozy confines of a single key, and transitional and or developmental
music, that is harmonically unstable music, music in which constant modulation creates
a sense of transitory, even breakneck excitement. Course conclusions. My friends, we have
covered a lot of ground in these 16 lectures. Instrumental families and timbre, pulse and
meter, sound, pitch and pitch collections, melody and texture, tonality and tonal harmony.
It is a rich and varied and magnificent language, this western musical language. It's a language
that pays us back tenfold, a hundredfold for every detail we come to recognize and perceive.
And it's a language that will only get richer and more varied as our increasingly global
culture contributes ever more vocabulary to it. As always, I wish you the very best
of listening. Thank you.
All our customer care representatives at 1-800-TEACH-1-2. That's 1-800-TEACH-1-2. Thank you very much.
