Welcome back.
This is Lecture 3 and it is entitled, Tamber Part 3.
Being the very many great lines uttered by the English conductor Sir Thomas Beecham is,
and we quote,
I NEVER look at the brass.
It only encourages them, unquote.
Whatever would have caused Sir Thomas to say such a thing, well I'll show you.
Let's hear a portion of the Dies Irae from Hector Berlioz's Requiem, Opus 5, of 1837.
Let's hear a portion of the Dies Irae from Hector Berlioz's Requiem.
Magnificent!
When a full brass choir begins to wail, my friends, there's pretty much no sound on
the planet that's more powerful, more magisterial, more viscerally moving.
But back to Thomas Beecham's comment.
The orchestral composer wanting a bit of climactic punch in a given section of music might indicate
a dynamic of fortissimo, loud, yes, but certainly not enough to induce a nosebleed.
Your average orchestra will have around 60 strings, 12 winds, and 10 brass.
Now I would tell you that for most brass players, a dynamic of piano is beneath contempt, mezzo-piano
is an insult, mezzo-forte is uncomfortably limiting, forte is permission, and fortissimo,
well, fortissimo is probably a mistake.
Why?
Because the brass may be outnumbered 72 to 10 in a modern orchestra, but they are certainly
not outgunned, and they will bury, they will absolutely bury the rest of the orchestra
except the piccolo, if they are given even half a chance to do so.
So conductors spend much of their professional lives attempting to quiet the brass, attempting
to rein in the brass, attempting to balance the brass with the rest of the orchestra.
Like herding cats, it's a dirty, difficult, often impossible task.
The brass players themselves, particularly the trumpet, trombone, and tuba players, almost
all of whom grew up playing in marching bands, chose their instruments just because they
could well, just because they were shiny, and loud, and macho.
Asking a brass choir to play pianissimo is like asking a Ferrari to stay under the speed
limit.
Against the very grain of what the instruments are all about.
I never look at the brass.
It only encourages them, unquote.
Wise words from a great conductor.
The French horn.
Like the English horn, the designation French horn is another case of an instrument whose
name has nothing to do with its country of origin.
The French horn was, in reality, developed in what is today Germany.
Like any instrument correctly called a horn, the French horn evolved from that most ancient
of instruments, a hollowed-out animal horn, bronx cheered into at the narrow end.
What is a bronx cheer, my friends, but the lips of the player vibrating together just
like a double reed?
The all modern brass instruments, the French horn included, use a cup-shaped metal mouthpiece
that is called a loose-lip mouthpiece.
The modern French horn, or simply horn, consists of a gradually tapered conical tube of metal
around 12 feet in length, coiled for your convenience and portability, with a series
of finger-operated valves that vary the overall length of the tubing, and therefore, along
with the player's lips, control the pitch of the instrument.
The French horn is the most difficult instrument to play in the orchestra.
Just to initiate a sound without smearing or fluffing takes years of work, and it takes
decades to master the horn's full range and astonishing four octaves from an F two-and-a-half
octaves below middle C to an F an octave-and-a-half above middle C.
In horn music, the opening of Ricard Strauss's Andante for horn and piano in C major of 1888.
Andante's Andante's Andante's Andante for horn and piano in C major of 1888.
Andante's Andante's Andante for horn and piano in C major of 1888.
As we discussed in lecture two, apropos of the wind quintet, the French horn occupies
a sort of middle ground between the wind and the brass choirs.
Its conical tube produces a gorgeously round and mellow tone, one that blends equally well
with the winds, strings, and brass.
In the orchestral music of the classical era, for example, as often as not, the horns doubled,
that is, played the same notes as the strings, in order to reinforce and give body and depth
to the string sound.
Of course, the horns make a glorious noise when put front and center, and for that, we
turn to the conclusion of the third and final movement of Robert Chumann's Concertstuk Concertpiece.
For four French horns and orchestra of 1849.
Andante's Andante's Andante's Andante for horn and piano in C major of 1888.
Andante's Andante's Andante for horn and piano in C major of 1888.
Sensational, the trumpet. Unlike the horn, whose tube is conical, that is, it flares
outwards. A substantial portion of the tube or bore of a trumpet is cylindrical, something
that imbues the instrument with a much brighter and more piercing timbre than the horn. Like
the clarinet, the trumpets comprise an extended instrumental family consisting of seven notes
and seven notes.
Andante's Andante's Andante's Andante's Andante's Andante's Andante's Andante's
The Piccolo trumpet and the bass trumpet in B-flat, the cornets in B-flat and E-flat,
the fluga horn in B-flat and the standard trumpets in B-flat and C.
The standard trumpets in B-flat and C, which together are the soprano voice of the brass
section, are almost exactly the same size. The B-flat is the more common instrument,
the C the slightly more brilliant. B-flat or C-trumpet?
well, it's usually left up to the individual performer to decide which instrument to play.
Let's hear some lovely trumpet playing.
The third movement of George Philip Telemann's Concerto in F Minor for Oboe arranged for a
modern trumpet.
My friends, let's glory in the agility and brilliance of the solo trumpet.
And let's be especially aware of the incredibly fast repeated notes the trumpet plays, using
a technique called double tonguing.
Try that on a French horn and you'll need an oral surgeon to get your tongue out of the
instrument.
The low brass.
Low brass, two words guaranteed to fill other musicians with fear and loathing.
As a group, low brass players can be a pretty wild bunch with their big horns and big spit
valves and their Homer Simpson beer bottle openers dangling from their belts.
Having said that, no one can question the majesty, gravity and dignity of the sound
that they together can create.
As an example of the low brass sound, let's hear the opening of the fourth movement of
Robert Schumann's Symphony No. 3 of 1850.
Subtitled the Rainish or the Rhineland Symphony, this movement was inspired by a ceremony Schumann
witnessed at the awesome Cathedral of Cologne in September of 1850.
Schumann indicates that the movement be played and we quote, in the character of an accompaniment
to a solemn processional, unquote.
While we listen, let's focus on the magisterial dignity of this music, a function of the three
trombones in the bass.
Schumann's Symphony No. 3 of 1850.
The trombone.
From a purely technological point of view, the trombone is the most primitive of any
modern instrument, plumbing with a mouthpiece.
Your basic trombone has no valves, no keys, no levers, no stuff.
Instead, it's got a slide by which the player manually extends or shortens the overall length
of the instrument.
Your basic tenor trombone is nine feet long with the slide fully retracted, that's in
what's called first position, and about 14 feet long with the slide fully extended in
what's called seventh position.
A trombone, my friends, is the only modern orchestral instrument that you can build in
your garage with about $20 worth of PVC piping, like I said, plumbing.
And yet, having blindsided the trombone for its technological simplicity, we're going
to turn around and suggest that its simplicity is a virtue and not a flaw.
My friends, if the shortest distance between any two points is a straight line, if less
truly is more, if the fewer bells and whistles you put between the source and the sound creates
a less corrupted, less distorted sound, then the trombone is the personification of just
enough.
The simplicity of its design belies a great truth.
The trombone produces one of the purest, least distorted sounds on the planet, and because
of the nuances and pitch made possible by the slide, it is by far the most vocally flexible
brass instrument.
In terms of its lyric capabilities, the trombone is the equal to the clarinet, violin, and
the cello.
While the trombone family consists of seven different instruments, we will generally hear
only two trombones in a modern orchestra, the tenor trombone and the bass trombone.
Most modern orchestras will feature two tenor trombones and one bass trombone, with a tuba
rounding out the low end of the brass.
The tuba.
The word tuba is an odd sounding and frankly confusing designation.
It's been applied to so many different instruments over the years as to become more a generic
label than an actual instrument.
A modern orchestral tuba is, in reality, an instrument called a bass or contrabass sax
horn.
Other instruments that have been called tubas include the euphonium, the baritone, the tenor
horn, the helicon, the sousaphone, and the so-called Wagner tubas, an instrument devised
by Richard Wagner for use in his epic cycle of music dramas, The Ring of the New Blung.
What all of these diverse instruments have in common is that they consist of a long conical
bore or tube and are operated using valves.
What we understand as tubas today, the bass and contrabass sax horns, anchor the brass
choir in the same way the double basses anchor the string choir and the contrabassoon anchors
the wind choir.
Despite their size and fantastically deep range, the sax horns are surprisingly agile
instruments.
It's a stock-and-trade given that a junior or senior year conservatory tuba recital will
include a tuba transcription of Rimsky Korsakov's The Flight of the Bumblebee, an experience
we will mercifully forgo for now.
Instead, we return to the bizarre funeral march version of Frere Jacques that opens
the third movement of Mahler's Symphony No. 1.
We first sample the movement in order to hear the solo double bass that actually begins
the movement.
But if we listen just a little further, we'll hear the tuba play its own version of the
tune.
The brass quintet.
A brass quintet is for brass players.
What a string quartet is for string players and a wind quintet is for wind players.
The preeminent chamber combination involving brass instruments.
The standard brass quintet consists of two trumpets, a French horn, a tenor trombone
and a bass trombone or two trumpets, a French horn, a tenor trombone and a tuba.
Like a string quartet and unlike a woodwind quintet, the individual instrumental timbres
of a brass quintet blend into a homogeneous whole with the French horn acting as the timbral
glue that connects the trumpets with the low brass.
Modern brass instruments are about power and brilliance, both of which are in high relief
in the following arrangement for brass quintet of a galleyard.
A galleyard is a type of Renaissance dance composed by the German Samuel Scheit around
1621.
For our information, the quintet on our recording employs a bass trombone rather than a tuba.
The quintet on our recording employs a bass trombone rather than a tuba.
The quintet on our recording employs a bass trombone rather than a tuba.
The percussion, categories and distinctions, categories first.
There are two basic categories of percussion instruments, pitched and non-pitched percussion
instruments.
A pitched percussion instrument is one that produces a clear fundamental pitch that we
can sing along with.
A non-pitched or noise instrument is one that produces a sound we cannot sing along with.
We'll discuss the nature of noise in Lecture 7.
For now, let's identify the instruments themselves.
Pitched percussion instruments include the timpani, the mallet instruments, meaning
those instruments played with rubber, wood or yarn-headed mallets, the orchestral bells
also known as a glockenspiel, the xylophone, the vibraphone and the marimba, the cellesta,
which is a glockenspiel operated by a piano-like keyboard rather than one manually struck with
mallets, and the tubular bells also known as orchestral chimes, which sound very much
like the chimes in a grandfather clock.
Non-pitched percussion instruments include the drums, triangle, cymbals and the orchestral
gong, which is properly called a tam-tam.
And my friends, I'll tell you why it's properly called a tam-tam.
A gong is a pitched percussion instrument of Chinese origin, which is only rarely used
in Western orchestral music.
A tam-tam, which is essentially a huge symbol, is a non-pitched percussion instrument of Turkish
origin and it is commonly used in Western orchestral music.
What is often called an orchestral gong should properly be called a tam-tam.
You needed to know that.
Categories and distinctions.
We've observed the two main categories of percussion instruments, pitched and non-pitched.
Now an essential distinction.
Percussionists, oh please, not drummers, don't call them drummers.
Percussionists play all the percussion instruments except one, and that would be the timpani
or the kettle drums.
An orchestra might boast four or five percussionists, most of whom could, if they had to, fill
in on the timpani.
But in reality, the timpani are incredibly difficult to play and they require a specialist.
They require a timpaniist.
You would no more want to call a timpaniist a percussionist or worse, a drummer, than
you'd want to call an Irishman, an Englishman, or a New Zealander, an Australian.
Drums fight in words and timpaniists own mallets and they know how to wield them.
Timpani come in a variety of sizes and are typically played in groups of three or four.
Each timpanum, the singular of timpani, is capable of playing the range of a fifth, five
white keys on a piano, so that by using an array of three or four different sized drums,
a not inconsiderable range of pitches becomes available.
Modern timpani are built with a foot pedal that tightens and loosens the drum head and
thus allows a timpaniist to constantly retune the instrument during the course of a performance.
And thus, the great challenge of playing the timpani above and beyond mere stick technique.
My friends, a timpaniist is typically surrounded by four timpani of different sizes.
At any given moment, each timpanim is tuned to a single pitch, so at any given moment,
the timpaniist can play four particular pitches.
But composers are constantly asking the timpaniist to play different pitches and so during the
course of a performance, a timpaniist must constantly retune each timpanim by putting
his ear just above the drum head and tapping it with his finger while moving the pedal
with his foot until the pitch is correct.
All of this must be done while the orchestra is playing and as the timpani themselves vibrate
sympathetically with the music being played.
There are times when a timpaniist might have only 30 or 40 seconds to retune all four timpani,
pick up his mallets and be ready to go.
A timpaniist must have the ears of a bat, nerves of steel, and be able to count like
an atomic clock.
Hey, if a violinist misses an entrance, who's going to know?
But if the timpaniist misses an entrance, it's as obvious as a centipede on Mona Lisa's
nose.
Beethoven was the first composer to treat the timpani collectively as a genuine and independent
instrument.
As an example, we turn to the opening of the second movement of Beethoven's Symphony number
nine of 1824, a movement that begins by actually treating the timpani as a solo instrument.
Never call a timpaniist a drummer, and never ever say anything bad about Beethoven in front
of a timpaniist.
My friends, just don't.
Are the percussionists paid the same amount of money as other members of the orchestra?
OK, we go to an orchestral concert, and Johannes Brahms's Symphony number four of 1885 is
on the program.
The joyful, buoyant third movement begins, and about 37 seconds into that third movement
we are greeted by the bright, metallic ringing of a triangle.
The first movement of Beethoven's Symphony number four of 1885 begins, and about 37 seconds
into that third movement we are greeted by the bright, metallic ringing of a triangle.
Having watched the percussionists play that triangle, some of us might very well think,
I wonder if they pay that percussionist the same amount as they do the string players?
Geez, I could have done that.
Well, no, you couldn't.
For a percussionist, there's a lifetime of training behind her ability to strike and
strike with confidence and conviction at exactly the right moment, not a millisecond
too soon or too late.
My friends, if orchestral musicians were paid by the note, the violinists would all be millionaires,
but musicians are not paid by the note, they're paid for their expertise and, in the case
of percussionists, their ability to negotiate risk.
As we observed apropos of the timpani, in most sections of the orchestra there is a
degree of anonymity.
The percussion players who are standing up and playing loud instruments one at a time
do not have.
To answer the question, yes, a full-time professional percussionist makes as much money as any full-time
member of the orchestra, and the timpanist makes as much as any section leader except
the first violinist, the concertmaster, who is usually the highest paid musician in the
orchestra.
Sidebar over.
The orchestra.
The orchestra, as we understand it today, a fixed body of instruments for which a composer
specifically composes, is a product of the 17th century opera house.
The growing expressive demands of the opera house put ever greater demands on the instrumental
ensembles or orchestras that accompanied early opera.
By the end of the 17th century, the core of orchestral strings had been joined in the
larger and wealthier opera houses by flutes, oboes, bassoons, trumpets, and even, on occasion,
trombones.
It was at just this time, the 1680s and 1690s, that orchestral music, primarily in the form
of concerti, began being composed for its own sake.
By the 1740s, the great composers of the high, or late Baroque, Johann Sebastian Bach, George
Friedrich Handel, George Philip Telemann, and Antonio Vivaldi, had created a body of
magnificent orchestral music that remains an essential part of the orchestral repertoire
to this day.
The Baroque Orchestra.
The high Baroque Orchestra came in two generic types.
The most common type was what's called today the basic or standard Baroque Orchestra, a
group consisting entirely of strings plus the ubiquitous harpsichord accompaniment, an orchestra
numbering anywhere between 12 and 16 players.
In his four violin concerti, collectively known as the Seasons, Antonio Vivaldi employed
just such a standard orchestra.
As an example, let's hear the opening of the first concerto of the set.
The ubiquitous, but by no means unworthy, violin concerto in E major, opus eight number
one, subtitled, Spring.
Here we go.
Your basic high Baroque string orchestra, consisting here of a total of 16 performers.
The
second generic type of Baroque Orchestra is the so-called festive orchestra, a string
orchestra with any number of wind and or brass and percussion instruments added to
the mix.
Outside of the opera house, such orchestras were usually pickup groups put together for
some special occasion.
For example, George Frederick Handel's in all ways awesome music for the Royal Fireworks
of 1749 was composed for an orchestra consisting of 41 players, small by modern standards but
for its time, gigantic and magnificent, as befit its dedicated T, the English King George
II, for whom the piece was composed.
We hear the conclusion of the overture.
Handel, music for the Royal Fireworks, 1749.
Music for the Royal Fireworks, 1749.
Music for the Royal Fireworks, 1749.
Music for the Royal Fireworks, 1749.
Music for the Royal Fireworks, 1749.
Music for the Royal Fireworks, 1749.
The Classical Era Orchestra. With the rise of the symphony as a compositional genre and
the growing popularity of the orchestra as a performance medium among both the aristocracy
and the growing middle class, the orchestra continued to expand. The string core was enlarged
now including the newly developed double bass. Horns became a standard orchestral instrument
and by the turn of the 19th century the clarinet as well. Having said that the strings were
still the backbone of the orchestra and winds and brass were most often employed to support
and reinforce the string sound rather than as important instrumental timbres on their
own. Let's hear as an example the fourth movement of Haydn's Symphony number 94 of 1791.
In explicitly celebratory orchestral works trumpets and drums were added to create an
appropriately pump filled timbrel environment as in the first movement opening of Mozart's Symphony
number 34 of 1780.
Mozart had a particular affinity for the wind choir which he featured in his orchestral music
to a degree most unusual for his day. For example, during the middle section of the third movement
of his symphony in G minor of 1788 Mozart absolutely wallows in the sounds of the horns
and winds. The result is an exquisite passage that offers a wonderful contrast with the
string-dominated music that surrounds it. Let's hear that wind and horn dominated passage.
The Romantic Orchestra. The 19th century my friends administered a major dose of growth
hormone to the orchestra. By the 1830s the public concert had replaced the private aristocratic
entertainment as the essential orchestral venue. It was during the 19th century that large standing
orchestras performing in large public concert halls became the orchestral norm, a norm which
continues to this day. The growing orchestra reflected a basic romantic era article of faith
that when it came to musical expression bigger was better. In fact in the post Beethoven self
expression at all costs world of the 19th century big was not only better it became an essential
aesthetic element unto itself. Big orchestras could create just that sort of power awe and amazement
that were the essence of romantic art transporting the audience away from the every day to a place
quite beyond anything they had experienced before. Hector Berlioz's Symphony Fantastique was a product
of just this sort of over-the-top expressive impulse. One that saw the orchestra balloon upwards
from the 25 to 35 piece ensembles of the late 18th century to the often 100 plus piece ensembles
of the 19th century oh my friends for our information Berlioz wrote that his ideal orchestra
consisted of 467 players an ensemble that included 242 strings 30 harps 30 pianos 12 symbols 16
french horns and a wide variety of percussion as Harold Schoenberg points out quote no wonder
his friends considered him impractical and his enemies crazy unquote well no crazier than Gustav
Mahler whose own symphony number eight came to be known as the symphony of a thousand because of the
number of performers orchestral and vocal who were reported to have participated in its premiere
we hear the grand eloquent final minutes of this symphony number eight
the 20th century orchestra
perhaps the biggest single change in the 20th century orchestra
was the demand by composers for an entirely new number and variety of percussion instruments
now this should come as no surprise as western composers became ever more aware of non-western
musics so the explosive driving and even violent sensibility of those non-western musics became a
basic syntactical element of 20th century concert music an early 20th century example of this is
Igor Stravinsky's The Rite of Spring a piece of music meant to evoke the mating rituals and human
sacrifice of bronze age russia what better way to create the ancient brutal powerful and ritualistic
musical sensibility the ballet called for than with a huge percussion battery we hear the conclusion
of the sacrificial dance that itself ends the rite of spring
the conclusion clearly this investigation of timbre could go on forever but we've new musical
fields to plow perhaps the best thing we can do by way of a homework assignment is to make ourselves
aware consciously aware of the timbre of whatever music we might by chance be listening to this is
especially true when listening to mixed ensembles like an orchestra where if we're not listening
carefully we tend to hear the sound of the ensemble like a puree of its constituent instrumental
parts rather than as a rich and varied composite of its individual instrumental parts my friends
to the degree that we can let's be aware of the instrumental combinations that together
create the sound the timbre of the music we listen to let us pause to revel in the sound
of the music for its own sake as a feast for the ears in doing so we'll hear the voice with which
a composer is communicating his or her ideas directly to us thank you
