Welcome back and welcome to the first of eight lectures in which we'll explore the basic
scientific principles governing the behavior of structural elements, structural materials,
and structural systems.
Now at this point you may be wondering why we're doing science in a course about great
structures.
To address this question I'd like to spend just a few minutes discussing first the role
of science in engineering and then the role of science in this course specifically.
Last lecture we talked about the development of engineering through two great historical
eras, the era of empirical design which began in distant antiquity and progressed all the
way through the Renaissance and the era of science-based design beginning with the scientific
discoveries of the 1600s and continuing to the present day and we saw that 4,500 years
of empirical design produced many magnificent structures without the aid of any scientific
methods at all unequivocal proof that science isn't actually essential for engineering.
Nonetheless, it's instructive to compare one of the most ambitious structures of the
empirical era, the magnificent 142 foot diameter dome of the Roman pantheon by far the largest
of antiquity with a modern equivalent, the 710 foot diameter Houston Astrodome.
It's five times as large.
Based on this comparison we really can't help but recognize that science-based design
methods combined with modern structural materials have opened up vast new realms of structural
possibility.
When engineers had only empirical methods available for design, each new design was basically
based on what had worked well in the past.
It was really only possible to do minor incremental changes from what was already known without
incurring fairly significant risk.
But with modern scientific tools at their disposal, today's engineers aren't bound
by precedent.
They can look to the future.
They can work with any conceivable structural configuration.
They can model that structure mathematically.
They can predict how it will respond to loads and then they can design it so it can carry
those loads safely and efficiently.
In effect, scientific tools allow modern engineers to predict the future with confidence.
Even if that future bears very little resemblance to the present or the past, the result is
the potential for structures of far greater size and complexity.
Now, having said that, I should add that today's near-universal use of science-based methods
hasn't diminished the importance of experience in engineering design.
Many of the modern era's greatest structures, for example, Robert Maillard's beautiful
Salganitobo Bridge in Switzerland, used fundamentally empirical design approaches that were informed
by scientific principles, but they were really guided by experience, by observation, and
by experimentation.
And on the other hand, some of our greatest failures, for example, the infamous collapse
of the Tacoma Narrows Bridge in Washington state due to wind-induced vibration, resulted
at least in part from over-reliance on science and inadequate attention to past experience.
We'll look more at this case in lecture 16.
Still, engineering, as we know it today, simply couldn't be performed without science.
And just as scientific principles are vitally important tools for modern engineers in practice,
so these principles are also a vitally important component of this course.
There are three reasons why it's worth your time to invest in learning in the science
of structures, and more specifically in the science called engineering mechanics.
First, science provides a sort of a shortcut to understanding.
If we wanted to learn how columns work, one approach might be to build a whole lot of
columns, hundreds of columns, and then take them into the laboratory and test each one
and observe how it behaves under load, observe how differing geometry and differing materials
affect the strength of those columns, and then based on all that data, try to generalize
some sort of overall conclusions about how columns work.
That's one approach.
Or we could glean the same level of understanding from a 15-minute introduction to basic scientific
principles governing column behavior.
Given our short time together, I think we'll adopt the latter approach.
Second, science provides universality.
As engineers of the empirical era knew well, experience really only equips us to understand
structures that are more or less similar to the ones we've seen before.
But an understanding of scientific principles allows us to understand and even to design
any structure, even if we have no experience with that structure previously.
And this is true even for the empirically designed structures of the ancient medieval
and Renaissance eras, because the science is always there, manifested in the actual
behavior of the physical structure.
And finally, science equips us to solve problems quantitatively, rather than simply gleaning
a qualitative understanding from behavior.
And often, that sort of quantitative analysis provides higher levels of insight that simply
aren't possible with qualitative methods.
We'll see a number of examples of this phenomenon over the next couple of lessons in this course.
So, let's embark on our journey through the wonderful world of engineering mechanics,
a branch of the physical sciences that deals with the effects of forces acting on bodies.
Ah, two new terms.
When I use the term body, I'm simply referring to some sort of a physical object.
I wish I had a physical object to show you.
Oh, look, here's one.
This is a two-pound piece of steel bar.
When I say that it weighs two pounds, what I'm really saying is that there's a force
of two pounds that's being applied to the object in the downward direction.
So what's a force?
Well, as you might recall from your high school physics course, a force is a push or a pull
applied to an object.
Force always has both magnitude and direction.
When we draw a force, we always represent it graphically using an arrow.
I wish I had an arrow to show you.
Oh, wait a minute.
Here's one.
So when we apply a force to an object, we represent it as an arrow, and the real purpose
of the arrow is to designate the line of action along which the force is applied.
And that's critically important to being able to understand how forces work.
A force also has magnitude, which is expressed in either pounds or tons or a similar unit
in the US system of units, and expressed in newtons in the metric system.
This particular force, again, has a magnitude of two pounds, which is equivalent to nine
newtons metric.
Now, the use of newtons as a unit of force is a most appropriate way of honoring Sir Isaac
Newton, whom we'll meet in just a few minutes later on in this lecture.
In this course, we'll be relying primarily on the US system of units throughout the course,
really just for the sake of simplicity.
So back to engineering mechanics, the study of forces acting on bodies.
It sounds kind of mundane, but actually mechanics is a fascinating subject because it tells
us important things about how the physical world around us actually works.
Leonardo da Vinci, the quintessential Renaissance man, wrote the following in one of his notebooks.
Mechanics is the paradise of mathematical science because here we come to the fruits of mathematics.
So welcome to paradise.
The fruits of mathematics are forbidden no more.
Paradise is a wonderful place, but to make the most of it, you need to be able to find
your way around.
So I'd like to spend a few minutes in this lecture building a roadmap that will help
us navigate our way through the mechanics concepts that we'll be exploring in detail
over the next few lectures.
To illustrate this roadmap, I'd like to use this particular great structure.
It's the Chuto Bridge over the Missouri River at Kansas City.
Not only is this wonderful old railroad bridge a beautiful example of 19th century industrial
technology, it's also an excellent teaching tool for basic mechanics concepts.
So we'll be coming back to it a number of times over the next couple of lectures.
Our roadmap shows the major concepts that are involved in the analysis of the structure.
Let's build it a step at a time.
First, structural analysis always begins with external forces.
And external forces come in two flavors, loads and reactions.
Let's use a physical model of the Chuto Bridge to give these concepts a little bit more physical
meaning.
Here's our model of the Chuto Bridge.
And the actual structure, the actual railroad bridge structure, experiences two principal
kinds of loads.
They're called dead load and live load.
Dead load is load that is permanent and unchanging, and the most important type of dead load is
the self-weight of the structure, its own mass.
Live loads are called live loads because they vary in both magnitude and location.
So typical examples of live load for a railroad bridge like this would be the weight of heavy
trains crossing the span, as well as a variety of different kinds of environmental forces.
For example, when the wind blows on the side of the bridge, it exerts pressure that constitutes
wind loading.
When snow falls and accumulates on the deck of the bridge, it adds weight, which is another
form of live load.
We'll be talking about loads much more comprehensively in a later lecture, but you get the general
idea from this quick summary.
Now my physical model bridge happens to weigh two pounds.
So that's the dead load associated with this structure.
And to simulate the live load of a locomotive crossing the span, I'm going to take this
steel weight, which weighs three pounds, and I'm going to hang it precisely in the middle
of the bridge at mid-span.
So those are loads.
The second type of external force is the reaction, and a reaction is defined as a force that's
developed at a support in response to those applied loads.
A support is just a physical connection between the structure and its physical surroundings,
its foundations.
So the supports are located right here at this point, and at the equivalent point on
the opposite end of the bridge.
It's important to recognize that reactions are caused by loads.
We're going to explore this process and understand how it happens in just a minute.
But first, let's move on to the next step in our roadmap, internal forces.
Internal forces are caused by external forces, but internal forces occur within the individual
structural elements.
We've already talked about the two principal types of internal forces.
They are tension and compression.
When I apply a load to the chuteau bridge, tension and compression are actually generated
within all these individual structural members of the bridge.
You can't see that though.
What you can see though is that when I apply load to the bridge, it does bend downward
slightly, bends downward.
It turns out that a truss is very similar to a beam, and you can see that when I bend
this beam, both compression and tension are occurring within the beam.
When I bend the beam, the top surface gets a little shorter, the bottom surface gets
a little longer, and so we have compression in the top, tension in the bottom, which
occurs as a natural consequence of bending or flexure.
It turns out that trusses work exactly the same way.
When we apply this large load out here at mincepan, we're actually generating a significant
amount of compressive internal force in all of the members that run along the top of the
bridge and a significant amount of tensile or tension internal force along this member
that runs the entire length of the bottom of the bridge.
Next step in our roadmap is stress, which is defined as a measure of the intensity of
internal force.
Stress is actually a distributed force.
It's distributed over the entire cross-section of a member.
When I refer to the cross-section, I'm talking about the view of the member when you look
at it from the end.
The square shape that you see here is the cross-section of the member.
Stress is internal force distributed over that cross-section, so it's always expressed
in terms of force per area, for example, pounds per square inch, or newtons per square meter.
It's really the same as a pressure, the sort of pressure that you experience when you check
the pressure in the tires of your car.
Stress is a really important concept because the strength of a material is defined in terms
of characteristic values of stress.
For example, a standard grade of structural steel fails at a stress of 36,000 pounds per
square inch PSI, so 36,000 PSI is the strength of this material.
It's characteristic failure stress.
Okay, so the final step in our roadmap is to evaluate the performance of the structural
element by comparing stress against strength.
If stress is greater than strength, then the material is going to fail.
If the stress is less than the strength, then we could expect no material failure and the
structure is going to be able to carry loads safely.
This evaluation is the ultimate goal of structural analysis.
And that's our basic roadmap.
And I really have to add that it's a significant simplification of the real-world considerations
in structural analysis.
Practicing engineers are actually concerned with far more than just stress as a measure
of performance.
For example, deformations are also a major consideration in the design of most structures.
But for our purposes in this course, this is a good starting point.
The map will get us where we need to go in paradise.
And most importantly, the map equips us to answer a question that is absolutely essential
to our purpose in this course.
What does it mean for a structure to carry load?
We can now see the answer to this question right here in the roadmap itself.
A structure carries load successfully if the stresses that are caused by external forces
are less than the strength of the associated material.
So that's our roadmap.
Now let's return to the start of that process, the start of this conceptual model of how
structural analysis is done, and take a closer look at the external forces, the loads and
reactions.
With that concept of a reaction a little bit easier to see, what I'd like to do is return
to our model of the Chuteau Bridge.
What we're going to do is replace the physical supports with devices that will allow us to
measure the reactions directly.
Now we've replaced the supports with scales, which will allow us to directly measure the
reactions.
We're going to place the bridge onto the scales.
So that the bridge weighs two pounds, and as you can see from the readings on the scale,
makes sense the two-pound bridge caused the scale to register one pound on one side and
one pound on the other.
Now I'm going to replace that live load that was applied at mid-span, and remember the
live load weighs three pounds, and just as you might expect, when I add the three-pound
load each of the two reactions increases by half that amount, one and a half pounds.
So we now have a total of two and a half pounds of reaction on this side, two and a half pounds
of reaction on the other side, and guess what?
It all adds up.
The total downward load is the weight of the bridge, two pounds, plus the additional three-pound
live load, that's a total of five pounds.
The total upward reaction is two and a half plus two and a half, also five pounds.
All of the forces acting on this system are in balance, and therefore the system is said
to be in equilibrium.
This principle, the principle of equilibrium is without question the most important concept
in all of engineering mechanics.
As best we know, the first person to discover and publish the principle of equilibrium,
as we understand it today, was a brilliant Flemish Renaissance era mathematician named
Simon Stevan.
In 1586, Stevan demonstrated this principle with an ingenious proof, which is shown here.
This is a kind of a thought experiment consisting of a string of evenly spaced circular beads
draped over an inclined plane.
The gist of the proof is that the larger number of beads on the shallower slope exactly balances
the smaller number of beads on the steeper slope, and this shows how forces and equilibrium
balance each other out.
Now this particular proof really isn't critical to the course, but I just had to show it to
you because someday you're going to visit the beautiful city of Bruges, Belgium, and
while you're there, you're going to walk just a few blocks south of the main marketplace
in the middle of town to Simon Stevan Square.
Yes, there is a Simon Stevan Square in the middle of Bruges, and there you'll find this
statue of the great man, and in his hand you'll see a parchment bearing the very diagram
we just talked about, the world's first proof of the principle of equilibrium.
There are many beautiful things to see in Bruges, my friends, but none so beautiful
as this.
Although Simon Stevan's work was groundbreaking though, it really had little immediate impact
either on the world of science or on the world of engineering, possibly because Stevan
published only in Dutch, and Dutch wasn't spoken widely outside of the Low Countries,
but also probably because Stevan was so far ahead of his time.
100 years later though, the time was right, and in 1687 the great Sir Isaac Newton literally
changed the world with his publication of the Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy
or Prankipia for short, one of the most influential works in the history of science.
Newton's Prankipia included his three laws of motion, which formed the foundation of
modern engineering mechanics even to this day.
Over the next few lectures, we'll be using all three of Newton's laws to help us understand
great structures, but today we want to focus on just the first law.
An object at rest will remain at rest unless it's acted upon by an unbalanced force.
Let me try stating that a little bit differently and more usefully for our purposes here.
If an object is at rest, then all of the forces acting on it must be in balance.
So what does it mean for forces to be in balance?
To help us explore this question, I'd like to introduce an important graphical problem
solving tool called the Free Body Diagram.
This tool helps us guide our quantitative solutions to equilibrium problems, but perhaps
more importantly, it helps us see the fundamental characteristics of the systems that we'll
be analyzing.
We'll be using it often throughout the course, and so what I'd ask is, as I talk through
the creation of the Free Body Diagram, you might want to consider drawing on yourself.
It's a great way to experience Isaac Newton's ideas quite directly.
And to help you along, I'm going to simulate drawing a Free Body Diagram of my Chuto Bridge
model in its current loading configuration by actually building the diagram on screen
one graphical element at a time.
We'll start with the object of interest itself, that's the bridge.
We isolate it from its supports.
We remove the physical supports in order to cause the bridge to now become a free body.
That's why it's called a Free Body Diagram.
Now we're going to draw all of the forces acting on the body.
We're going to work systematically to ensure that we cover all the forces that all the
forces are accounted for.
We'll begin with the two-pound load that's applied to the structure right there in the
center in mid-span.
And of course, that's the dead weight of the structure, the self-weight, and so it's oriented
in the downward direction.
Next, we want to add the three-pound live load corresponding to the weight of the locomotive
crossing the bridge.
Again, that's applied at mid-span and it's oriented in the downward direction.
And as we just learned through our experiment involving placing the bridge onto the two
scales, we also have two two-and-a-half pound reactions and they're oriented upward out
at the ends of the bridge.
Now all we need to do to complete the Free Body Diagram is to add some dimensions.
The bridge is four feet long and we want to show that the two loads are precisely located
in mid-span, so we'll show those two two-foot dimensions.
Now it's pretty easy to see from this diagram that all the forces acting on the body are
in fact in balance.
We have a total of five pounds down, we have a total of five pounds up, and this sort of
qualitative equilibrium analysis is quite simple because all the forces happen to be
acting in one direction and that's the vertical direction.
But what would happen on our model of the Chuteau Bridge if the train that was crossing
the bridge suddenly slammed on its brakes?
That would have the effect of applying a strong horizontal load to the structure.
So when the train slams on its brakes and delivers that horizontal load, something has
to prevent the bridge from sliding sideways like this.
And of course that something has to be an additional reaction that has to be developed
at the supports of the structure.
So clearly an additional reaction is required and we need to show that in our Free Body
Diagram.
Here's that additional one pound horizontal load, again applied by the train slamming
on its brakes, and here's the one pound reaction applied at the far support in the opposite
direction counterbalancing the one pound applied load.
This little demonstration shows that having all forces in balance on a body means that
we actually have to separately consider forces in the horizontal and vertical directions.
We have to consider them independently of each other.
All forces in the horizontal direction have to be in balance and all forces in the vertical
direction also have to be in balance.
There are two independent conditions for equilibrium.
But now what happens if the locomotive moves to some other point along the length of the
bridge?
Suppose I move this three pound load from mid-span out to say the one quarter point
along the length of the span.
What does your intuition tell you about how the reactions are going to change in response
to that change in the position of the load?
I won't change the magnitude just the position.
What does your intuition tell you?
Will the reactions change?
If so, will they get larger?
Will they get smaller?
What do you think?
Well, let's give it a try and see how it works.
Remember that the current reactions are two and a half pounds on each scale.
When I move the load out to the one quarter point along the length of the span, what we
see is that the reaction closest to the load increases from two and a half pounds up to
three and a quarter.
Whereas the reaction at the opposite end, farther away from the load, drops from two
and a half down to one and three quarter pounds.
Interestingly, the two reactions still add up to five pounds.
So the vertical balance of forces has actually been maintained.
But how can we explain this change in the relative magnitude of the two reactions when
all we did was change the position of the load, not the magnitude of the load itself?
Well, the answer to this question is that there's actually one more independent condition
for equilibrium in any body.
If you remember when I had the load applied at mid-span, the reactions were in balance.
If I actually try to pick the bridge up from the center in this condition, the effect of
the load applied at mid-span is simply to pull downward to resist my attempt to lift
up the bridge.
But when the load is off center, notice that if I try to do the same thing, if I try to
lift up the bridge from the middle, now we see that the off center load is causing a
tendency to rotate the bridge.
It's really important.
That tendency of a force to cause rotation has a name.
It's called the moment of a force.
In some disciplines it's actually called a torque, but we're going to stick with the
term moment, or moment of a force, because this is the term that's more commonly used
in engineering.
Now a moment of a force is simply force times distance.
If I hold my two pound weight out at arm's length, the force causes a moment, a tendency
to rotate my arm counterclockwise about my shoulder.
That's what a moment is, a tendency to cause rotation.
Notice my arm isn't rotating, it's just tending to rotate.
Let's depict that same situation graphically.
Here it is, and notice that the magnitude of this moment is simply the force times the
perpendicular distance from the force's line of action to the point of interest, my shoulder.
The distance is about two feet, and the magnitude of the moment then is force times distance
two pounds times two feet for a moment of four foot pounds, and its direction is shown
as counterclockwise.
Similarly, in our Chuto bridge model, the off-center load was causing a tendency to
rotate, but in that case there actually was no rotation, no physical rotation of the body.
We did see that rotation when I lifted it up, but when it's in place, the supports
prevent the rotation from happening.
When we moved the load, the reactions changed.
What happened was these new reactions created a counterbalancing moment that prevented the
bridge from rotating, and so what we can see from this example is that there's actually
another condition for equilibrium, an additional implication of Newton's first law, if you
will.
Not only must all horizontal and vertical forces on the body be imbalanced, but all
moments must be imbalanced as well.
That situation is described mathematically here on this slide, and if this notation
is unfamiliar, recognize that it's really just a shorthand efficient way of describing
the balance of forces for an object that happens to be in equilibrium.
The Greek letter sigma that you see on the left-hand side is really just a symbol that
means a summation.
The letter F refers to forces, the subscript X refers to the horizontal direction, Y refers
to the vertical.
Sum refers to moments, and the subscript P refers to the moment about any point on the
body.
And so what the equations tell us is simply that if a body's in equilibrium, the sum
of all forces acting on the body equals zero in the X direction, the sum of all forces
acting on the body in the Y direction equals zero, and the sum of all moments about any
point on or off the body also must equal zero.
All three of these equations must be true if the body's in equilibrium.
Let's see how this amazingly powerful set of equations can be used to predict the response
of a structure to load.
And let's use the specific example of our model of the Chuteau Bridge.
Let's assume for the moment that those two reactions that we just saw on the scale are
currently unknown.
Can we use the principle of equilibrium to actually calculate what those reactions should
be?
Well, let's give it a try.
We'll start our solution by following through with the process that we always do when we
solve an equilibrium problem.
In this case, all we really have to do is modify our existing free body diagram, shifting
the load to show its new off-center location at the one-quarter point along the length
of the span.
We've also now shown the reactions as unknown quantities, r sub l, that's the reaction on
the left-hand side, and r sub r, the reaction on the right-hand side.
With this free body diagram complete, we're now ready to investigate the balance of forces
using our three equilibrium equations.
And as we do this, I suggest that you think of the equations as a bookkeeping tool that
really just helps us keep track of forces in moments.
It's really nothing more.
In this particular analysis, we don't even need to use one of the three equations, the
sum of forces in the x direction, because there are no forces on the body in the x direction.
So we can start our solution by writing equilibrium equations for the sum of forces in the y direction.
And do that summation systematically, working from left to right.
We start by showing the sum of forces in the y direction equals zero.
We assume that upward is the positive direction.
And here's that equilibrium equation.
All we did was account for each force, r l, the reaction at the left-hand end is upward,
so it's shown as positive.
The three pound and two pound loads are in the downward direction, so they're shown as
negative.
And the unknown reaction on the right-hand side is also upward.
We can do a little bit of algebra and determine, just by doing some algebraic manipulation,
that the sum of those two reactions must be equal to five pounds.
And in fact, that makes perfect sense.
It's exactly what we saw in the physical model.
No matter where we move the load, the reaction's added up to five pounds.
Now we have to use our third equilibrium equation, the moment equation, to attempt to actually
calculate the values of those reactions.
The body's in equilibrium, then the sum of all moments acting on it, about any point
has to be zero.
We can select any convenient point to use as the basis for this calculation, and so we're
going to use the left-hand end, annotated as point P on my free body diagram.
And here's what that equation of equilibrium looks like.
I won't talk through it in detail.
I really just want to point out that each term in the equation is the force multiplied
by the corresponding distance from the point of interest, the point P, to the point of
application of that load.
Clockwise moments are shown as positive, and counterclockwise moments are shown as negative.
And when we apply the algebra to calculate the results, we find that the right-hand reaction
works out to be 1.75 pounds.
We can now return to our equilibrium equation for the sum of forces in the y-direction, substitute
that value back into the variable for the right-hand reaction, and solve for the unknown
force in the left-hand reaction, and that turns out to be 3.25 pounds.
And to quote Archimedes, Eureka, this is exactly what we see in our two scales.
So in case you had any doubts, the principle of equilibrium actually works.
Congratulations on having completed what very well may be your very first quantitative solution
to an engineering problem.
I hope you're beginning to see that the quantitative application of scientific principles can help
us see structure in new and exciting ways.
In this lecture, we developed a roadmap that depicts how a structure is analyzed.
And we focused on that first step in the roadmap.
Next lecture, we'll visit all the remaining destinations on the roadmap of how to analyze
a structure.
And we'll see that the principle of equilibrium that we just talked about also has important
implications beyond external forces.
In doing this, we'll equip ourselves with all the tools we need to see and understand
structure in the world's greatest buildings, bridges, and towers.
Thank you.
