Welcome back.
Let's begin today's lecture with a visit to Paris, the city of light.
You know, there are great structures, and then there's the Eiffel Tower.
The iconic symbol of Paris, and probably the most recognizable structure on earth.
Built for the 1889 exposition celebrating the centennial of the French Revolution, the
1063 foot structure was the world's tallest, until the Chrysler building was constructed
40 years later in New York City.
From a distance, we admire the tower's graceful form.
But as we get closer, we can see that this entire structure is actually composed of a
network of members arranged in interconnected triangles.
The Eiffel Tower is therefore a truss, the fourth of the six basic structural element
types that we're learning about in this course.
As we zoom in even closer, we can see that most of the individual structural elements
composing the tower aren't solid.
Rather, they too are built up of iron bars arranged in interconnected triangles.
These individual members of the Eiffel Tower are trusses within a truss.
A truss is a rigid framework composed of members connected at joints and arranged into a network
of triangles.
But what's so special about triangles anyway?
Well, to answer that question, let's look at a simple structure that's not made entirely
of triangles.
At first glance, this simple bridge looks pretty much like an acceptable structure.
It's composed of eight individual elements which are connected together with a single
bolt at each connection, and it spans a reasonable distance, and it appears to be a viable structural
system.
However, when I apply a load to one of these connection points, we see that this is definitely
not an acceptable structure.
If we look closely at what happened when I loaded the structure, I think we can figure
out what the problem is.
Notice that this center panel, which in the original configuration of the truss was rectangular
in shape, is incapable of developing any rigidity.
When we load the structure, the rectangle distorts into a parallelogram, and of course
that parallelogram is incapable of carrying any load, so the structure is incapable of
carrying any load.
Of course, that observation also leads us to a solution to the problem.
In order to stabilize this truss, in order to keep it from failing due to instability,
all we have to do is add another structural element.
If we add a member that runs diagonally across that rectangular panel, we see that the panel
can no longer distort into a parallelogram.
Now when I load the truss by hanging the same weight on the same connection, we can
see now that it carries load just fine.
In fact, it's capable of carrying tremendous load without losing its structural integrity.
What has happened here is that a structure that was formerly not composed entirely of
interconnected triangles is now a stable structure as a result of the fact that it's composed
entirely of triangles.
The unstable structure has now become a truss.
We can see therefore that the triangle is an inherently stable structural configuration,
and it's the principal source of a truss's structural rigidity.
And that, my friends, is what's so special about triangles.
So why then did Gustav Eiffel use trusses as the basic structural element for his Great
Tower?
Three reasons, actually.
First, trusses are inherently strong, stiff, and light.
For a structure of such unprecedented size, Eiffel needed to take full advantage of these
qualities.
And, yes, the Eiffel Tower actually is quite light as monumental structures go.
If we could melt the entire tower down into a pool of liquid iron that covers just the
410-foot square base of the current tower, the depth of that pool of iron would be less
than 3 inches.
Second, trusses can span long distances or reach great heights with many small elements
rather than a few large ones.
This characteristic greatly simplified Eiffel's construction challenges because it's a lot
easier to move and lift small components than large ones.
And by the way, the Eiffel Tower consists of roughly 15,000 individual structural members
connected together at about 2.5 million rivet holes.
So ease of assembly was immensely important to Eiffel.
And third, trusses allow for versatility of form.
Even though every structural member in the Eiffel Tower is straight, Eiffel was able
to arrange those members into that graceful curved shape that's so characteristic of the
Eiffel Tower.
It's clear then that the truss was the right answer for Eiffel's Great Tower at that particular
moment in history, but the use of trusses has varied considerably through the ages.
Like engineering itself, trusses developed in two major historical phases, an empirical
phase extending from antiquity through around the mid-19th century, and then a scientific
phase which continues today.
The truss was developed in antiquity, though we don't actually know precisely when the
first ones were built.
The ancient Greeks did not use trusses, and so the roofs of their temples were constructed
as a grid of wooden beams and propped rafters.
In a later lecture, we'll be looking at these structural systems and we'll actually see
how the Greeks' lack of familiarity with the truss resulted in some very significant
compromises, both in the form and function of their temples.
The Romans, on the other hand, did use trusses.
Here's a carved scene on Trajan's column that shows a multi-span timber arch bridge
that appears to use trusses as elements of the structural system.
We also know from Vitruvius' treatise, Architectura, that the Romans used timber trusses spanning
upwards of 100 feet for the roofs of temples and basilicas.
Little later, early Christian churches adopted the Roman basilica form, so many of these
buildings used truss roofs as well.
This 3D model shows the original structure of St. Paul's Basilica in Rome, built around
324 AD.
Note that that central roof truss is somewhat unsophisticated.
Two of the central panels are not triangles, rather they're rectangular, and so they weren't
quite as rigid or as strong as they could have been.
It seems that the Roman engineers who designed the structure had figured out that trusses
work, but they hadn't yet figured out how they work.
700 years later, essentially the same roof system was still being used in early medieval
churches like San Giovannale in Orvieto, Italy.
But if we zoom in on one of those roof trusses, we can see that now they're fully triangulated.
They're composed entirely of triangles with none of those rectangular or quadrilateral
panels, so there actually has been some progress over that period of time.
During the Renaissance, Andrea Palladio included drawings of several well-detailed triangulated
truss bridges like this one in his four books on architecture.
And he's reported to have actually constructed one of these bridges, a 100-foot span over
the Cimone River.
All of these early trusses were made of wood, and all have relatively heavy, stocky proportions.
A good indicator that they were designed empirically, and that there really was no attention being
paid to structural optimization.
The second generation of truss design arrived with the advent of mass-produced iron in the
19th century.
Among the earliest uses of iron trusses was this roof over the passenger platform at London's
Houston Station, constructed in 1838.
The geometry of these trusses is nearly identical to those wooden roof trusses we saw at San
Giovannale, and yet there's an incredible difference in the slenderness of the structural
members.
It's evident that the unique properties of iron have now provided an incentive for structural
innovation aimed at achieving greater economy in the use of structural materials.
One of the truly great engineering pioneers of this era was an American named Squire Whipple.
By the way, Squire is his first name, not his title.
Whipple patented and developed this unique iron bowstring truss in 1841.
It was later adopted as the standard crossing of the Erie Canal, and many hundreds were
built.
This simple, diminutive structure is actually among the most important we're going to look
at in this course because it was almost certainly the first scientifically designed truss in
the United States, probably in the world.
Although hundreds of these Whipple bowstring trusses were eventually built, all of them
eventually became functionally obsolete, that is they were too narrow for modern automobile
traffic and their load carrying capacity wasn't adequate for heavy, modern vehicles.
And unfortunately, before the modern ethic of historic preservation took hold, most of
them were scrapped.
Today only a few Whipple bowstrings have survived.
This one here, probably the best preserved, was headed for the scrap heap when it was
saved by a conscientious engineering professor who enlisted his students in restoring it and
relocating it to the campus of Union College, where Squire Whipple actually went to school.
Now in 1847, Whipple published a collection of essays on bridge building, and this work
described for the first time ever a fully rational science-based process for analyzing
and designing trusses.
Whipple's great insight was his recognition that all of the structural members connected
together at a truss joint can be idealized as a system of forces in equilibrium.
Today we call Whipple's method the method of joints, and it's still taught in our engineering
schools and used in engineering practice today.
Let's pause this historical survey of truss development to examine Whipple's revolutionary
method a bit more closely.
The method of joints is simply a technique for calculating the internal forces in every
member of a truss structure using the principle of equilibrium.
The method requires two fundamental simplifying assumptions.
First, Whipple assumed that all joints in a real world truss can be represented or modeled
as perfect frictionless pins, similar to the single bolt connections here in my model.
And second, he assumed that all of the loads applied to a truss are applied at the joints,
just like the load we have hanging down here.
If these two assumptions are made, then it's actually very easy to show mathematically that
all of the members in the truss are axially loaded.
That is, they're either in tension or compression.
And so what I'm saying is that as long as the loads are applied out here and the joints
are pins, then this member, for example, which might look like a beam, doesn't carry load
that way.
Now, certainly if there was a load out here in the middle of the span, this would bend
like a beam.
If the loads are at the joints, then the only internal force that this member experiences
is either compression caused by these two joints moving closer together or tension caused
by the two joints moving farther apart.
And it's this insight that allows us to analyze a truss as a very straightforward equilibrium
problem.
To illustrate the method of joints, what I'd like to do is analyze one of the main roof
trusses in that iron storage building at Waterfleet Arsenal in upstate New York, believed
to be the oldest all-iron structure in the United States.
Was designed by Daniel Badger, a pioneer in iron building constructions in the US just
a dozen years after Whipple published his treatise on truss analysis.
So it really represents one of the very early products of the scientific application of
truss analysis.
So let's start with a 3D computer model of the complete structural system.
And here's a single roof truss, which we've now isolated from the system.
First some terminology.
Truss members that run the full length of a structure on top and bottom of the truss
are called cords.
Those that connect the top and bottom cords together are called either verticals or diagonals
depending on their orientation.
In this particular truss we have no verticals, only diagonals.
Note that the bottom cord of this truss is made of slender circular rods, while the top
cord is a more substantial T-shaped cross-section.
Some of the diagonals are cruciform or cross-shaped struts, and these are actually the same ones
that we looked at a few lectures ago when we talked about buckling.
All the remaining diagonals are circular rods, and they're somewhat smaller in diameter
than the bottom cords.
This graphic shows the four different cross-sections drawn to scale so that you can get a sense
of their relative sizes.
The variety of the cross-section shapes in this single truss is actually quite interesting.
Let's explore a little bit about why those differences exist.
But first we're ready to apply Squire Whipple's method of joints to analyze the water-fleet
roof truss, starting with external forces, which as you recall consist of loads and reactions.
This shows the overall geometry of the truss, its members and its joints.
It also shows my estimate of the loads acting on the truss.
We'll be talking about loads in much greater detail in lecture 9.
For now, suffice it to say that this series of downward forces reflects the weight of
the iron roofing that rests up on top of the truss, the weight of accumulated snow load
on the roof, plus the weight of the truss itself.
The total of all these downward loads is 14,300 pounds, and since the loading is symmetrical,
we know that each of the two upward reactions have to be exactly half of this amount, which
is 7,150 pounds.
Now we're ready to determine the internal forces, and this is the challenge that Squire
Whipple solved with his wonderful method of joints.
As we learn in lecture 2, anytime we want to examine internal forces, we do this conceptual
cut through the member to expose that internal force.
In the method of joints, we use this concept to isolate an entire joint.
So let's start this process with joint A on the left-hand side of the truss.
We isolate this joint by cutting it away from the rest of the truss and then drawing
a free body diagram of just that joint.
We know that there's an upward reaction applied at that joint, it's the 7,150 pound upward
load, and so we include this force on our free body diagram.
We also add two internal forces, one in each of the two members that we cut through when
we isolated the joint.
We don't know what these forces are, so let's just call them F1 and F2.
All the members of a truss are axially loaded, so we know that each internal force is aligned
with the axis of its respective member, as you can see here.
If we're not sure which direction a given force is, that is, if we're not sure if a
given force will be in tension or compression, we can just assume a direction initially,
and the mathematical solution will actually tell us whether we assumed it correctly.
We now have a complete free body diagram of joint A. We know that this body is in equilibrium,
it's not moving, and we can use this condition to solve for the two unknown internal forces,
F1 and F2.
At this point, modern engineers would solve this problem by writing the equations of equilibrium
and then solving for the two unknown forces mathematically, but I'd like to solve this
problem as Squire Whipple might have solved it, graphically.
In his book, Whipple applies a graphical concept called the polygon of forces to determine
the internal forces at a joint.
This concept says, if we have a series of forces acting on a body in equilibrium, and
if we draw each force, we plot it on a piece of paper, with the force pointing in the correct
direction, and with its length, as it's drawn on paper, proportional to the force's magnitude,
then if we string all these forces together, they will form a closed polygon.
Now I know this sounds complicated, but it's actually very simple.
Like so many concepts in engineering, you just have to see it.
So let's draw the polygon of forces for joint A in the Waterville Arsenal Trust.
Okay, let's start with the one force on our free body diagram that we actually know the
magnitude of.
The 7150-pound upward reaction at joint A. We're going to begin by drawing that force,
and now we need to add the other two forces, but we don't know their magnitudes.
We do know their directions, so we can sketch in simply the direction of the line of action
of each force, F1 being horizontal, F2 being a diagonal oriented on a 19-degree angle from
the horizontal.
The only way that these three lines can come together in a closed polygon is the triangular
shape you see right here, and because the method of the polygon of forces says that
the forces have to connect together tip to tail, that tells us instantly that we know
the directions of the three forces as well, because the only way that can come together
tip to tail is if F2 is oriented down into the left and F1 is oriented to the right.
Now we have the complete polygon of forces, and all we have to do is measure it to determine
the magnitude of those two unknown forces.
We know the 7150-pound load, and from that we can very easily determine the magnitude
to the other two.
F1 turns out to be 21,000 pounds, and F2, 22,200 pounds.
You may be asking yourself, how could those two internal forces be so large?
The external reaction is only about 7,000 pounds.
The two internal forces are three times as large.
Well, the answer is really just all about equilibrium.
Remember that all of the forces acting on the joint must be in balance.
The external force and the sole external force is that 7,150-pound reaction.
Something has to counterbalance that.
It's an upward force, so one or both of the internal forces have to counterbalance it
by orienting it in the downward direction.
F1 can't do the job because it's oriented purely horizontally.
So F2 has to counterbalance the external reaction.
Now, any diagonally oriented force has both a horizontal and a vertical component, and
in this case, because of the shallow angle of the force, the horizontal component is
much larger than the vertical.
But it's the vertical component, which is oriented downward, that must counterbalance
the 7150-pound upward reaction, and so once we've established that that downward component
of F2 is 7150 pounds, then the horizontal component is automatically determined based
on that 19-degree angle of orientation, and so the magnitude of the force must turn out
to be much larger than 7,000 pounds, and that's why it's 22,200 pounds as you see here.
Now, it's important to recognize that by drawing this simple picture, we've actually applied
the principle of equilibrium.
And just to prove the point, here's the complete solution to the equation of equilibrium for
the y-direction.
The mathematical solution requires some trigonometry, sines and cosines, to deal with that diagonal
force F2, but otherwise it's essentially the same as the equilibrium problem we solved
back in lecture 2.
More importantly, the results of the mathematical and graphical solutions are the same.
The force F2 is 22,200 pounds in compression, though I should add that the mathematical
solution is guaranteed to be accurate while the graphical solution can only be as accurate
as we can actually draw it and measure it on a piece of paper.
Still, you can imagine how valuable this graphical solution technique must have been to the 19th
century engineers who had little formal mathematical training.
Whipple's method allowed them to perform scientifically-based design without having
to master mathematical methods of equilibrium analysis.
And of course, the important lesson for all of us is that we don't need higher-level math
skills to understand how structures work.
Now, at this point, we've calculated just two internal forces at a single truss joint.
To do a complete analysis, we'd need to calculate all of the remaining internal forces by applying
exactly the same process at each remaining joint.
Now, rather than crunching these numbers, let's take a step back and look qualitatively
at the analysis results and see what we can learn about trusses in general and about this
specific truss.
This diagram summarizes the internal member forces calculated using the method of joints.
Instead of numbers, I've used color coding to show the internal forces.
Members highlighted in magenta, that light purple color, are in compression, and those
in blue are in tension.
And the intensity of color corresponds to the magnitude of the internal force that we
calculated in our analysis.
For example, bright blue represents a large tension force, while a lighter blue represents
a smaller tension force.
Note that all of the top-cord members are in compression, and all the bottom-cord members
are in tension.
What this shows us is that a truss behaves exactly like a beam, when it's subjected
to transfer-sloting.
It bends.
And so just as in the beam, the top surface is in compression, and the bottom surface
is in tension, so on our truss, the top-cord was in compression, and the bottom-cord was
in tension.
Recall that these six diagonals are cast-iron cruciform members.
And as expected, our analysis results show that they're all in compression.
These diagonals are the solid-circular wrought-iron rods that we looked at earlier.
And as expected, they're all in tension.
And finally, note that the tension in the diagonals is actually quite a bit less than
the tension in the bottom-cord members, consistent with the fact that the diagonal member's
diameter is actually a bit less than the diameter of the bottom-cord members.
And so we see that our analysis results are entirely consistent with the physical configuration
of this truss.
Indeed, before we did this analysis, we actually inferred most of these results simply by examining
the various members of the truss.
This is a wonderful example of a structure that clearly communicates how it carries load
simply through the shapes and proportions of its members.
We know what to look for.
We can learn a lot without ever actually having to perform the structural analysis.
The analysis really just confirms our intuition about the way the structure carries load.
You can also learn a lot by examining structural connections.
For example, note that each of the connections in the Waterville truss is made with a single
bolt.
Now, viewed in terms of modern engineering design practice, this is actually a very poor
connection configuration because it's non-redundant.
If that one bolt ever fails, for whatever reason, the connection has no reserve strength.
But from the perspective of a 19th-century engineer, this single-bolt connection actually
makes perfect sense because it accurately reflects one of those two underlying assumptions
of Whipple's method of joints, that all joints are represented as perfect frictionless pins.
This is a really fascinating development.
In order to create a usable mathematical model for analysis, Whipple made some simplifying
assumptions, naturally enough.
But subsequent engineers then configured their structures in order to conform as closely
as possible to Whipple's idealized assumptions.
Rather than the mathematical model mimicking reality, reality was mimicking the mathematical
model.
We can see the same phenomenon in the Chuto Bridge, a structure we've looked at several
times in previous lectures.
Now, you didn't know it back then, but this Great Bridge is also a product of Squire Whipple's
genius.
In his book, A Work on Bridge Building, Whipple didn't just outline a science-based process
for designing trusses.
He also proposed this, fundamentally new truss configuration.
He called it a trapezoidal truss because of its overall shape.
A few years later, he won a contract to build one of these bridges for the Albany Northern
Railroad in upstate New York.
That structure was so successful that it quickly became the standard for railroad bridges all
over the U.S.
And today, this configuration isn't called a trapezoidal truss anymore.
It's called a Whipple truss.
And one of the most famous of all 19th-century Whipple trusses was the Chuto Bridge over
the Missouri River at Kansas City, built in 1887.
If we zoom in on one of the joints of this bridge, we can see that it's actually a single
massive iron pin corresponding perfectly to Whipple's mathematical assumption.
And if we look at one of the bottom-core joints, we can see that the loads caused by
vehicles crossing the bridge are directly supported on these heavy transverse floor
beams down here, which connect to the main trusses only at the bottom-core joints.
This arrangement ensures that the loads are applied to the main trusses only at their
joints, again, just as Whipple assumed in formulating his analytical method.
You know, every great structure has a story to tell.
We only need to know how to read it.
In the Chuto Bridge, Squire Whipple's contribution to science-based engineering is right there,
written into the iron connections.
In the century following Whipple's publication of a work on bridge building, trusses were
incorporated into many of the world's great structures.
Because engineers were now equipped to predict the behavior of their designs with greater
confidence, they were emboldened to design larger and more sophisticated trusses and
use them in exciting new ways.
During this era, for example, we see trusses in long-span roofs, like this train station
in Holly Head, England.
Trusses in magnificent arch bridges, like Gustav Eiffel's spectacular Garabit Viaduct,
which really was his training ground for the Eiffel Tower.
We'll talk more about that great structure in a later lecture.
Stiffening trusses in the Brooklyn Bridge and in most of the world's great suspension
bridges of that era, and trusses in cantilever structures like the beautiful Queensborough
Bridge in New York City.
During the same era, we see engineers gaining the confidence to move away from those simple
pinned connections of Squire Whipple's day to a more analytically complex but safer configuration
called the Gusset Plate Connection, made from steel plates joined not with a single pin,
but with multiple rivets or bolts, as you can see here.
Remember earlier that I mentioned that the Eiffel Tower has 15,000 structural members
connected together at two and a half million rivet holes?
Well, the Gusset Plate Connection is one reason why the rivets outnumber the members.
Today, trusses aren't quite as common in great structures.
Even they've been supplanted by new structural configurations and new materials.
Today, for example, the 1,200-foot main spans of the Queensborough Bridge would most likely
be accomplished with a totally different structural form, probably a cable-stage structure like
the beautiful new Milau Bridge in France.
Similarly, the modern equivalent of the Eiffel Tower is the CN Tower in Toronto, which uses
the same general form as Eiffel's masterpiece but is nearly 800 feet taller and is made entirely
of concrete.
The main cause of this change is really economic.
Back in the 19th century, skilled labor was cheap, and construction materials were relatively
more expensive.
Today, the cost of labor is much higher relative to material cost.
Trusses are labor-intensive structures because they have complex connections and large numbers
of members.
Thus, today it often makes economic sense to build relatively less efficient structures
that are simpler and less expensive to construct.
However, the economics of structural design are quite different when many identical copies
of the same structure are needed.
For example, in structures like highway sign supports and cell phone towers, trusses are
often used for these sorts of structures because the efficiencies obtained from mass production
offset the costs associated with fabricating all those connections, and the inherent light
weight of the truss produces significant savings in material cost.
As examples of optimized structures, power towers and highway signs are interesting enough,
though there's certainly nothing about these structures that's there to inspire us.
But if, based on these examples, you're thinking that trusses have become too utilitarian to
be great structures, please think again.
Let's conclude this lecture by journeying back to Paris, where we began.
Now to the main courtyard of the Louvre Museum, and here we'll find architect I.M.
Pei's famous pyramid of steel and glass, which now serves as the main entrance to the museum.
At first glance, you might think that this isn't a truss because the shapes you see
on the outer faces of those pyramidal walls are quadrilaterals, not triangles.
But all we have to do is look inside, and that look shows us that the inner structure of
these sloped walls, the structure that makes the great flat triangle of glass structurally
possible, is indeed an elaborate three-dimensional truss.
The Louvre pyramid is everything we'd want from a modern truss structure.
It's light, strong, geometrically fascinating.
Less than two miles from the Eiffel Tower, which you can even see in the lower right
hand corner of this photo, the Louvre pyramid demonstrates that trusses still have the power
to inspire.
And that, my friends, is what's so special about triangles.
Thank you.
