Welcome back. During the past seven lectures, we've been looking at individual structural
elements, each standing alone with its own external loads and reactions. But in the
real world, very few structures actually work that way. In the buildings, bridges, and towers
that surround us, structural elements are almost always components of structural systems,
assemblies of multiple interconnected load-carrying elements. There are exceptions, of course.
Trajan's column is just a column, and unlike most columns, it supports no other structural
elements above it. No architraves, no arches, no trusses. The St. Louis Gateway Arch. It's
just an arch, at least when viewed from the outside. But on the inside, there's actually
a fairly complex structural system that's used to support the tram or elevator that
transports visitors up to the observation deck on top. So maybe it isn't just an arch
after all. And that's the point. Stand-alone structural elements are rare. Virtually all
of the world's great structures are structural systems. Our purpose today is to learn how
to discern the structural system in a building, bridge, or tower, and then to analyze that
system to understand how it carries load. The typical dictionary definition of the verb
analyze is to examine methodically by separating into parts and studying the parts into relationships.
And that's exactly what we're going to do here. To analyze a structural system, we're
going to take it apart, in our mind's eye, using a methodical sequence starting at the
places where the external loads are applied, and then continuing from element to element
following the transmission of forces all the way down to the structural foundations. Along
the way, we'll be focusing on the connections between those elements because these are the
locations where the force is transmitted from one element to the next. This chain of elements
and connections is commonly called a load path. And understanding load paths is the key to
understanding structural systems. Now, as I said, analyzing a structural system involves
taking a structure apart in our mind's eye. You can't see inside my mind, so let's try
using a model to illustrate how this process works. And I'd like to use a model of one
of my all-time favorite buildings, the beautiful church of San Mignanto, Almonte in Florence,
Italy. So let's analyze the structural system associated with San Mignanto, Almonte. The
principal external loading that's applied to this building would be snow accumulating
up here on the roof, along with a very substantial weight of the timber roof deck itself. What
we're going to do now is follow the load path from that point of application, the roof surface,
all the way down to the structural foundations. First, what supports that roof? Well, the best
way to figure it out is to remove it and see what's there underneath supporting it. Well,
we see at first glance, you might think that the roof is supported by these trusses. But in
practice, there's another structural element intermediate between the roof and the roof
trusses, and that's these longitudinal beams that you see on tops of the trusses. It turns
out that in a typical roof structure like this, the trusses are too far apart to adequately
support the roof. And so we need some elements that are closer together to provide the first
layer of support, if you will. And those are these longitudinal beams. They are beams, so they
carry load in flexure, just as we saw in our lecture on beams. And they generate reactions
out here at the ends in response to the transverse load associated with the weight of the roof
deck and snow above them. Those reactions are transmitted to the trusses at the points of
connection where the beams are actually attached to the trusses. So now let's remove these beams
and focus our attention on those trusses. Remember that the trusses are loaded at concentrated
points where the beams are physically attached to those trusses. And remember from our lecture on
trusses, the trusses carry load essentially like beams as well. In this case, of course,
they're made up of a framework of elements, and those elements are carrying load in compression
and tension. But like a beam, a truss experiences compression on its top members or top cord
and tension on the bottom members or bottom cords. And like a beam, the truss generates
vertical reactions out at its ends, and those vertical reactions are transmitted to the structural
system at the points of support, the connections where the trusses are actually tied to the
vertical walls. So now we can remove the trusses and follow that load path even farther down.
At this point, we're almost ready to talk about these vertical walls, except let's pause for a
moment and note that there's another wall on the structural system, the back wall that you see
back here. Notice that the back wall is peaked and it follows exactly the same alignment as the
roof trusses did. And so as you might guess, this back wall is participating and carrying the
roof loads. It carries the same share of the roof load as any of those trusses that are running
parallel to it. But it serves a much more important structural function. And to understand that
function, we actually have to remove it, as we have with the other elements. So I'm going to start
by removing a couple of connectors that tie it to the structural system. And at this point,
we can lift it away along with the arch that supports it from underneath. And at this point,
I would ask you to note that the side walls that remain are actually quite wobbly. They're now not
too terribly stable from a structural perspective. And based on that, we can see what the principal
purpose of that perpendicular wall was. It was to stabilize the side walls so they're better
capable of serving their principal function of transmitting load vertically down through the
structural system. Now we can take those walls away and look at what's underneath.
As we'll discuss when we talk about the early Christian Basilica form and early Romanesque
churches, Semenyato Almonte actually has two aisles located out here beyond the central
hallway or nave of the church. Of course, to access those aisles, we need openings through
the walls. And those openings are provided for us by this succession of arches that run along
the side walls. We know from our lecture on arches that arches carry load principally in
compression. And in this case, that compressive force is used to channel the weight of the walls
and everything above it around the openings and down into the structural columns. So there's the
function of those arches, which we can now remove. Finally, all that's left are our six
principal structural columns. The columns, of course, now pick up the load from everything that
came from above and transmit it down into the structural foundations in direct axial compression.
And I would ask you to remember that at each stage in this load path, each element was carrying
not just its own weight, but the weight of every other element above it in the path. And so by
that logic, you can recognize that this set of structural columns is actually carrying the entire
weight of the building on its shoulders and transmitting that weight down to the foundations.
And that is how a structural system works. And that general methodology that I just talked
through is the process that we use to analyze and understand how structural systems work.
We'll be revisiting this process a bit more rigorously in the second half of the lecture,
but before we can do that, we need to address an all-important prerequisite for the study of
load paths, the study of loads. Structural systems are heavily influenced by the loads
they're designed to carry. Certain loads dominate the design of certain types of structures. For
example, wind and earthquake loads dominate the design of skyscrapers. Snow load dominates the
design of flat roof buildings in northern climates. But all structures must be designed to resist all
relevant loads. And each different type of load may have its own distinct load path. For example,
this structure here is called a braced frame. We'll be looking at it more closely in our lecture
on iron-framed buildings. Now, when the weight of snow falls on the roof of this building,
it would be carried principally by these roof beams up here. And the roof beams carry load
in flexure, and they transmit their load out to the columns, and the structural columns transmit
the load down into the foundations. This cross-bracing out here is stabilizing the frame, but it's
really not significantly participating in the transmission of load from the roof down to
the foundations, because the loading is principally vertical. On the other hand, if we now consider
the load due to wind striking the side of the building, now those diagonal members, those
bracing members are decisively engaged in carrying those lateral loads. In fact, they're
the most important elements in the lateral load path. And if you don't believe me, all we have to
do is actually take those bracing members out and see that the braced frame in the absence of
bracing could carry no lateral load whatsoever. So let's talk about loads. Back in lecture 2,
we saw that there are two major categories of load, dead loads, which are permanent and
unchanging, and live loads, which vary in both magnitude and location. There are many different
types of live loads, but we're going to focus on the five most important ones, traffic loads,
occupancy loads, and environmental loads due to wind, earthquakes, and snow. First, dead load,
which includes the weight of the structure itself, plus any non-structural elements that are
permanently attached to the structure. Now in many structures, the dead load is very small in
comparison with a live load. This is the roof system of my local building supply store. It's
the place where I go to buy all the materials for these wacky demonstrations. And because the
spans are short and the main structural elements are lightweight trusses, the self-weight of this
system is likely to be less than about 10% of the weight of the snow that accumulates on the roof
above in wintertime. By the way, if you're ever shopping in a building supply store and you need
to get the attention of a sales clerk, try standing in the middle of an aisle and taking photos of
the roof. I guarantee you you'll draw a crowd. Now unlike my building supply store, monumental
structures like the Golden Gate Bridge tend to be dominated by dead load. The total weight of the
Golden Gate Bridge, not including the cable anchorages and the approach spans, is about 840
million pounds, over 20 times larger than the total traffic load. In general terms, dead load is
much more predictable than live load. Standard material property references tell us that steel
waves 490 pounds per cubic foot. Reinforced concrete is 150 pounds per cubic foot and so on.
There's very little variability or uncertainty in these numbers, so we can calculate the weight of
structural components with a very high level of accuracy and confidence. Still, there is a
significant challenge in designing a structure for dead load. At the start of the design process,
the structural self-weight can't be calculated because the structure hasn't been designed yet.
And so the dead load needs to be estimated initially and then checked and updated later in the process
once the sizes of all the structural members have actually been determined. This process usually
requires a couple of iterations because each update of the dead loads can change the required sizes
of the members, which of course changes the dead load again. Now this process is absolutely
fundamental to structural design. My students know that they won't get a passing grade on
their design projects if they don't do it right, and yet this catastrophic collapse of the Quebec
Bridge in 1907 was caused by the engineer's failure to properly calculate dead load in just
this way. He estimated, but he didn't check, and 75 men died as a result. We'll revisit this tragic
story in lecture 17. Next, traffic loads, which include the weight of cars, trucks, trains,
and any other vehicles that happen to be crossing a bridge. In the case of an elevated airport taxi
like this one, traffic loads can even be airplanes. Now when the Golden Gate Bridge was
designed in the late 1920s, it was engineered to carry traffic loads of 5,900 pounds per foot of
span length. That equates to over 38 million pounds of traffic. Designing a structure for
traffic load is challenging because so many aspects of the loading may change over time.
Traffic volume tends to increase over time, as does the weight of trucks using our highways.
Roadways are frequently resurfaced, and the weight of the additional asphalt or concrete
also has to be accounted for. A sad example of this challenge can be seen in the 2007
collapse of the Interstate 35 Bridge over the Mississippi River in Minneapolis.
A major factor in this disaster was the combination of heavy rush hour traffic
and the weight of construction materials that had been temporarily positioned on the bridge
as part of a planned resurfacing. Next, occupancy loads. They include the weights of people,
furniture, and movable equipment, typically in buildings and other kinds of public spaces.
The equivalent for bridges is called a pedestrian load. Both occupancy and pedestrian loads are
very difficult to predict because their functions, the functions of facilities, often change over
time. And well, sometimes people just behave in very unpredictable ways. For example, in 1987,
a ceremony was held to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the completion of the Golden
Gate Bridge. 50,000 people were expected to attend, but instead 800,000 showed up. At one point,
an estimated 300,000 people crowded onto the bridge itself, producing a total load roughly 15%
larger than the maximum traffic loading that the bridge had been designed for.
Fortunately, the structure was never really in any serious danger because even at that
maximum planned traffic loading, the main cables are actually only stressed to about 40% of their
capacity. The factor of safety that's built into the design was more than enough to accommodate
this accidental overload. Nonetheless, this incident clearly demonstrates the inherent
challenge in designing for live loads in public spaces. Next, wind loading. The pressure exerted
by wind striking a structure. Here we have a tall building, which as we've talked about is
particularly susceptible to having its design influenced by wind loading. And here we have
a wind load. And it's pretty obvious that when we switch on the wind load, its principal effect
is going to be to cause pressure on the windward face, the front face of the building, and that
there will be a tendency of the building to overturn as a result. Well, let's verify that
hypothesis. I'm going to turn on the wind. And notice indeed that the pressure on the
front face does indeed tend to cause the building to overturn. What you may not have noticed though
in that demonstration was that pressure on the windward side is not the sole effect of wind
loading. When the wind blows on a structure, it also circulates around the building and actually
creates a vacuum on the backside or leeward side, the side that's away from the direction of the wind.
That vacuum has the effect of causing suction on the backside, which further contributes to that
tendency of the wind to overturn the structure. Watch carefully now as I turn the wind back on
again and watch for the facade of the building to actually pull out away from the structural frame
as a result of that suction. And indeed here you can see that facade slightly pulling away from
the structural frame. Another very challenging aspect of wind load that has to be taken into
account in design. Now throughout history, the effects of wind loading have profoundly influenced
structural design. The great Gothic cathedrals of the Middle Ages reached their ultimate structural
limits as a result of wind loading, as we'll see when we discuss this cathedral,
the Cathedral of Saint Pierre at Beauvais in France. In 1879, the Firth of Tay Bridge in Great
Britain, then the longest bridge in the world collapsed because its designer didn't properly
account for wind load. And in 1940, the collapse of the famous Tacoma Narrows Bridge, also known as
Galloping Gertie, was only the most well known of many wind related suspension bridge failures.
And finally, this New York City skyscraper, the City Corp Tower, was seriously endangered by
inadequate design for wind loads, as we'll see in lecture 19. Next, snow load has a major influence
on structural design in regions that experience significant amounts of snowfall in the winter
time. In these regions, the design snow load can be as high as 100 pounds per square foot of roof
surface. And at that intensity of load, even a modest single family home would have to be designed
for upwards of 150,000 pounds of snow on its roof. Now, if you can't visualize 150,000 pounds of snow,
imagine a fully loaded M1 Abrams tank sitting on the roof of a single family home. That's a lot of
snow. In 1978, the roof of the Hartford Civic Center in Connecticut collapsed catastrophically
during heavy snowstorm. As we'll see in lecture 22, the main reason for this collapse was inadequate
design of compression members in the roof trusses, but the event that triggered the disaster was an
accumulation of snow on the roof, as you can see in this image. Earthquake loading has been the
cause of many tragic structural failures throughout the ages. With the advent of modern tall buildings
and long span bridges, its importance today is greater than ever. Now, if I could clear my
brace frame out of the way and replace it with a different type of structural element called
a rigid frame, which is a bit better suited to demonstrating the effect of earthquake loads,
it's important to recognize that what we call an earthquake loading is not really a force,
but rather an acceleration. In an earthquake, the ground moves rapidly beneath a structure,
something like this. The movement of the ground is primarily horizontal, though some earthquakes do
have a bit of a vertical component. And when the ground moves rapidly, at first the building tries
to stand still. Remember, a body at rest tends to remain at rest unless it's acted upon by an outside
force. Once the ground has moved for some distance, the building has to follow along,
which means it has to accelerate. Newton's second law tells us that force is equal to mass times
acceleration. And so the mass of the building being accelerated laterally is exactly equivalent to a
force. And that's why in designing structures to resist earthquakes, engineers represent the
lateral motion of a building as the equivalent of a lateral force applied to the building structure.
In the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake in California, a section of the upper deck of the San Francisco
Oakland Bay Bridge collapsed onto the deck below. This collapse was caused by the longitudinal
movement of the bridge supports during the seismic event. The pier moved, the bridge deck didn't
follow along, and the unsupported end of the span fell, as you can see here. The nearby
Golden Gate Bridge suffered no damage in this earthquake, but since the epicenter was over
50 miles away, and there was still a lot of concern that the bridge might not survive either a
closer or a larger quake. As a result, a major retrofit of the bridge to increase its seismic
resistance began in 1992, and it continues today. Now that we've examined the types of loads,
let's look a little bit more rigorously at how load is actually transmitted through a structural
system. And for the science we'll need to accomplish this purpose, let's turn once again to the great
Sir Isaac Newton. Thus far in this course we've seen two of Newton's three laws of motion,
published in his Principia of 1687. The first law is the all-important principle of equilibrium.
And we've just seen his second law as the basis for our understanding of earthquake loading.
Now we turn to Newton's third law, which is every bit as important for our understanding of
structures. Newton's third law says, for every action there's an equal and opposite reaction.
This principle might sound similar to the principle of equilibrium, but it applies more
specifically to the point of contact between two bodies. If I push on this table with a force of
five pounds, the table pushes back on me with an equal force of five pounds, but in the opposite
direction. The application of Newton's third law occurs right here at the interface between
my hand and the table, where that transmission of force is occurring. Similarly, we'll use Newton's
third to understand what happens at the interfaces between the elements that compose a structural
system. To illustrate this principle, I'd like to return to a great structure that we've already
seen a number of times in our discussion of engineering mechanics. Daniel Badger's iron
storage building at Waterville Arsenal in New York built in 1859. This is a great subject for our
analysis of structural systems, not just because of its historic character, but also because the
structural system is so beautifully configured, it's so easy to see, and by the way, it's also very
well documented in the historical record. This 3D computer model shows the structural system of
Waterville in just about any orientation we'd like to look at it. Note that the exterior
walls are all solid cast iron, and within these walls are a series of 15 parallel iron frames,
spaced 12 feet apart. Now let's focus on a single frame, and as you can see, this frame includes
two main interior columns and two exterior columns, which are actually built into the cast
iron exterior walls, so they're called engaged columns. Up at the second floor level are two
cast iron beams that support galleries on either side of the building, and on top is a roof system
composed of three trusses supporting a series of lightweight roof beams, just like the ones we
saw in the roof of San Minato Almonte earlier in this lecture. The beams support the roof deck,
which is made of iron sheeting. Now as we saw earlier, to examine a structural system, we follow
the load path from top to bottom. In this context, top means the place where the external loads are
applied to the structure. The structure's principal external loads are snow on the roof,
plus the occupancy load that occurs on that second floor gallery. Let's start with the roof.
Here the snow load is applied directly to the iron roof deck, which is directly supported on
those roof beams shown here. Each beam spans 12 feet from truss to truss, and each carries its
fair share of the snow load and the weight of iron roofing immediately above it, as well as its
own weight. These three components of the loading are modeled as uniformly distributed loads on
my free body diagram, and this total downward loading is then counterbalanced by upward reactions
out at each end. I've labeled them as R for roof reactions. Based on the principle of equilibrium,
each of these reactions then equals half of the total load applied to the beam. We could easily
calculate this number, but we don't need to hear. To understand the structural system,
we only need to recognize that these reactions incorporate all of the dead and live loads associated
with the roof. Now these reactions occur at the connections between the roof beam and its
supporting trusses at either end, so we can think of the reaction R as the force of the roof truss
pushing upward on the beam to keep it in equilibrium. Now let's shift our focus from the
roof beam to the main roof truss. The roof beams are attached to this truss at 14 points along
its top member, which you'll recall we call the top cord. And here's where we'll use Newton's
third law. For every action there's an equal and opposite reaction. If the truss is pushing upward
on each beam with its reaction R, then Newton's third law tells us that each beam is pushing
downward on the truss with that same force. This downward force is applied at the point where
the beam connects to the top cord of the truss. And since one beam frames into the truss from
either side, the total downward force applied at each of these connections is two times R.
These 14 forces plus the self-weight of the truss generate reactions at the ends of the truss,
which I've designated as T for the truss reactions. And because the trusses are actually
supported by columns, we should think of these two reactions as the upward forces applied by the
columns to keep the trusses in equilibrium. And now let's look at that second load path,
the one that originates with the occupancy loads on the second floor gallery. These loads are applied
to a wooden floor, which in turn transmits load down to the iron floor beams. The floor
beams carry load in essentially the same way as the roof beams. Each one carries its own self-weight,
the weight of the wooden floor, and the occupancy load. These loads generate beam reactions, which
I've designated as B on my free body diagram. And finally, we consider the columns. Since the
top of each main column supports the ends of two different roof trusses, Newton's third law tells
us that the column experiences a downward force associated with each of these reactions.
I've shown it here as T1 plus T2 for the sum of the two truss reactions.
Lower level of the column supports a beam, and so the reaction B is applied as a downward
force at this point. These two downward forces plus the weight of the column itself
generate the upward reaction C at the base of the column. And according to Newton's third law,
this same reaction force is also the downward force applied by the column down into the building
foundations. Now notice that two different load paths, one originating with a snow on the roof,
and one with the occupancy loads on the gallery, both merge together, sort of like a highway
on ramp in the lower part of this column. And in the water fleet building, this merging of load
paths is beautifully illustrated by the unique configuration of the column itself. It's called
a Siamese column because the two parallel elements are connected together like Siamese twins.
But they remain visually distinct, and so they do a wonderful job of communicating their respective
load paths. The longer main column carrying the roof loads, and the shorter twin carrying the
gallery loads. And by the way, that physical connection between the two columns, it's relatively
light because the load is transmitted down through the columns on two parallel vertical paths,
so the horizontal links between the columns really don't carry any significant force.
So let's recap the structural system analysis we've just completed. We started by breaking a
complex assembly of structural elements into its component parts. Then working from the top of each
load path, we constructed a free body diagram of the structural elements that directly support
the building's principal loads. In this case, the roof beams and the floor beams. Then based on
Newton's third law, we took the upward reactions of these beams, and we flipped them around,
and we flipped them around, and applied them as downward loads on the supporting structural
elements. We continued this process step by step through successive elements from beams to trusses
to columns to the foundation, and at each step, successively greater loads accumulated. The
weight of each element was reflected in its reactions, and then passed along to the elements
below. Ultimately, those reactions at the bottom of the columns, the ones that were designated C
on my free body diagram, incorporate the total weight of the building, plus any total external load.
This cumulative chain of action and reaction is the load path, and as you can see, the load path
is not some vague or theoretical concept. It's a real physical pathway that we can visually trace
through the structure from top to bottom. Structural engineers often talk about the
flow of forces through a structure, and indeed, it's helpful to visualize internal force as if
it were water flowing through pipes, combining with other flows at pipe junctions, and finally
emptying out into the earth beneath the foundations. If it works for you, use it.
Our study of the scientific principles of engineering mechanics has now come to an end,
but the best is yet to come. As Lord Kelvin once said, the life and soul of science is its
practical application. Over the past eight lectures, I've given you a taste of practical
application to illustrate the power of those scientific principles that we've been talking
about as tools for understanding structural elements and structural systems. But now we're
entering the true life and soul of this course, 15 lectures in which we'll apply the principles
more systematically in a series of thematic case studies of great buildings, bridges, and towers.
And so it's time to leave the laboratory. It's time to leave these great experiments
designed to demonstrate how the scientific principles of engineering mechanics work
and head out into the built environment where the world's greatest structures are waiting for us.
Next lecture, ancient structures from the pyramids to the Parthenon. Until then, thank you.
