Welcome back. During this lecture we'll be examining the development of great Roman structures
that use the arch as a principal structural element. We'll see how the arch was integrated
into these structural systems and how the structural systems in turn were influenced by the unique
structural characteristics of the arch. Now when I think of Rome, the first image that comes to
mind is an arch. And I don't think that's just because I'm an engineer. While the Romans probably
borrowed this technology from their Etruscan neighbors, the arch has come to be closely
associated with many characteristic aspects of Roman civilization. It's present in bridges
that carried the famous Roman roads to the far-flung corners of the empire. It's present in
monumental aqueducts that brought fresh water to the cities and in the sewers that carried away
the effluent. It's there in the triumphal arches that celebrated the victories of the legions
and in the city gates that kept enemies at bay. Arches circumscribed the Colosseum, providing
convenient public access to the spectacle of the day, and in the form of vaults they enclosed
grand baths and basilicas, public gathering places that provided for the needs of the people
while reinforcing the Roman political and social order.
But the arch wasn't just present in these structures, it enabled them. In earlier civilizations,
the principal technology for spanning long horizontal distances was the beam. And as we've seen,
the length of a stone beam is fundamentally limited by the need to span that full distance
between supports with a single stone, and by the low tensile strength of that material.
But the principal structural characteristic of an arch is that it carries load entirely in
compression. So as a result, the span isn't limited by the low strength, the low tensile strength
of the material, or by the sizes of the individual stones that make up the element. It can be built
up of many, many smaller stones or bricks like my model here. And as a result, greater spans are
possible than could even be conceived of with stone beams. As a result, the Roman's use of the arch
opened up a whole new realm of structural possibility. But an arch can only carry load if it's adequately
supported. The critical requirement for the stability of an arch is its lateral restraint.
As you remember from lecture eight, under load, an arch has a natural tendency to flatten and to
spread out laterally. That lateral spreading of the bases of the arch is called thrust,
and thrust must be resisted. It has to be restrained by some sort of physical device,
by some physical mechanism that supports and prevents that lateral movement of the bases of
the arch. On my model, that support is provided by these two wooden blocks at the base. And as we
know, if those blocks are removed like this, the arch is no longer capable of carrying any
significant amount of load, as you can clearly see here. With that little demonstration as review,
now let's begin our study of Roman arched structures with one that we've already encountered
in a previous lecture, the Pont Saint Martin, a beautiful stone bridge constructed in northern
Italy in the first century BC. Now this is just about the simplest form of art structure one can
possibly imagine, a single semicircular arch supporting a single lane roadway. Yet this
103 foot span is actually among the largest of any Roman arch that survived from antiquity.
So let's examine the structural system of the Pont Saint Martin. We'll begin by constructing
the bridge virtually using this 3D computer model as a way of identifying the main structural elements
in this bridge. First, these foundations are cut into the rocky slopes of the river banks
and then reinforced with stone masonry. The foundations provide both vertical support to
hold the bridge up and lateral support to resist the thrust. Note that a steep river valley is
actually particularly conducive to this type of support because the steep bank provides something
for the arches to react against. Now we add these two stone projections just above the
foundations on either side of the arch. These are ledges that were actually used to support
the temporary wooden centering that was used to hold the arch up during construction.
It's quite noteworthy that these ledges were actually engineered right into the structure of
the bridge. Clear evidence of a skill that even modern engineers often find challenging,
accounting for constructability requirements while the project is actually still being designed.
Now we add the single stone arch ring which extends across the full width of the bridge
on top of the centering and then once the arch is in place it becomes self-supporting
and the centering can be removed. On top of the arch ring are two spandrels. These are stone walls
that form the sides of the structure. Next, we fill this entire space between those two
spandrels with concrete and finally we add the road surface which the Romans called pavimentum,
a layer of granular material like crushed stone and tile mixed with lime or cement.
So now that we've identified the principal elements of this structural system,
let's figure out how it works by following the load path starting at the point of application of
the loads and following it all the way down to the structural foundations. The principal live loads
acting on the structure are pedestrians, vehicles and snow accumulation in the winter. Let's start
with a snow load which would typically be uniformly distributed along the full length of the bridge.
The snow's weight is applied to the road surface and then transmitted down through that concrete
fill to the main arch ring and then the arch ring then works exactly as we saw in lecture eight,
transmitting internal force in axial compression all the way down through the individual
voussoirs out to the foundations. The pedestrian and vehicular loads aren't quite so simple.
As we've seen, an arch is best suited to carry uniform loading like snow load and the bridge's
self-weight. But pedestrians and vehicles are concentrated loads. They're applied at discrete
points along the length of the roadway. And as we know, concentrated loads tend to cause
instability in an arch. The worst case situation involving concentrated load applied to an arch
occurs when a very large concentrated load is applied precisely at mid-span, like this.
If the magnitude of that concentrated load is relatively small in comparison with the self-weight,
well, then all's well. But as the concentrated load gets larger, as you can see here, the shape
of the thrust line changes. It tends more toward a triangular shape. And as the thrust line moves
progressively closer and closer to that lower boundary of the arch, the arch tends toward
greater and greater instability. When the thrust line reaches the outer edge of the arch,
we're going to see a tendency of the outer ends of the arch to bulge outward. And when that bulge
occurs, the arch will become unstable and it will collapse, just like this.
So how did the Romans handle that concentrated load applied to the arch and the instability that
results? Well, the structural system of the Pont Saint Martin actually has a very effective
mechanism for preventing this failure mode. Those roughly triangular-shaped masonry walls built on
top of the arch rings, the elements we call spandrels. And if all's well, our crew here at
the teasing company should have the arch rebuilt by now. And there it is. Who says you can't find
good help anymore? So let's see how these spandrels work. Here they are. And all we need to do is put
them in place on the arch, which has already been rebuilt for us. And you can very clearly see that
at this point, that failure mode, which consisted of the outer ends of the arch bulging up and outward
in response to the concentrated load in the center, is virtually impossible now. The spandrel
preserves the shape of the arch so that when we press down, that bulging can't occur.
And by the way, the spandrels also have considerably more weight out here near the ends of the span,
where that additional stability is needed to keep the bulging from occurring.
So the system is simple, yet it works extraordinarily well, as evidenced by the excellent condition
of the Pont Saint Martin 2,000 years after it was built. And many more structures very much like it.
Now let's visit another Roman bridge, which is actually a few decades older than the Pont Saint
Martin, but adds a few new structural features that we haven't had a chance to look at yet.
It's called the Ponsfabricius, located in the heart of Rome, connecting the east bank of the
Tiber River to an island out in the middle of the river. It's built in 62 BC, and as such,
it is the oldest fully intact Roman bridge in Italy. The structural system of the Ponsfabricius
is essentially the same as the Pont Saint Martin, except that there are now two main arches.
In the Ponsfabricius, the outer ends of each arch react against the foundations on the river banks,
just as we saw at the Pont Saint Martin, but now the inner ends of the arch are supported,
in part, on that large pier in the middle of the channel. Now I say in part because the inner
ends of those arches also support each other. Let's draw a free body diagram to clarify this point.
We'll start with the two individual arches isolated from their surroundings. Note that
each support has a pair of reactions, one upward and one inward, just as we saw back in Lecture 8.
Now let's examine that pier in the middle of the river. Here's the body, which is the starting
point for our free body diagram, but what forces act on it? Well, remember Newton's third law,
for every action there's an equal and opposite reaction. So the arch reactions can be just
flipped around and applied as loads on the pier, just like this. We know the pier is in equilibrium,
so in the vertical direction there must be an upward reaction down at that bottom surface where
the pier rests on the riverbed, which is counterbalancing the two downward forces that are
delivered to it by the two arches. But in the horizontal direction, notice that the pier is
already in equilibrium. The horizontal reactions from the two arches, when we flip them around and
apply them to the pier as loads, oppose each other, and so in effect they cancel each other out.
The pier doesn't need to resist any horizontal thrust because the two arches support each other
laterally. This is a fundamental characteristic of an arcade. That's an arrangement of multiple
arches placed side by side. The outward thrusts of adjacent arches counteract each other, and as
result interior arch supports typically don't need to be as substantial as the supports that we see
on the outer ends of the arcade. So you may be wondering then why the central pier of the
Ponce Fabricius is so massive. Clearly the pier doesn't need to be all that massive simply to
support the arches, but it does need to resist water pressure in a flood. We know that flooding
was a major factor in the design of this bridge because of that small arched opening right above
the central pier. No, it's not there just because it looks cool, though it certainly does look cool.
It's there to provide a channel for water to pass through during flooding. This opening significantly
reduces the water pressure on the side of the bridge, and so significantly reduces the likelihood
that that structure will be washed away in a flood. And once again, the system works. The
Tiber has flooded many times since 62 BC, and the Ponce Fabricius has handled the pressure
without complaint. Now, if two arches are good, then 64 arches must be really good.
We've journeyed now from Rome to southern France, where we find the magnificent Pont de
Gard aqueduct. Built in the first century BC, it's over 900 feet long and 160 feet high.
And as you can see in this video, the lowest level of the Pont de Gard carries a roadway
across the Gardal River Valley, but its most important function is up there on the top level,
the water channel, that formed a critical link in the 31-mile aqueduct system supplying over
9 million gallons of water per day to the city of Nîme. All three levels of the Pont de Gard
are wonderful examples of arcades, a row of adjacent arches. And as you can see, those arches
are constructed entirely of stone, with individual blocks fitted so closely that no mortar at all
was required to hold them together. Here's a free body diagram of the first level of the Pont de
Gard isolated from the rest of the structure. And as the diagram shows, the bases of the interior
arches have only vertical reactions because the adjacent arches cancel each other out,
and as a result, no horizontal thrust remains at those intermediate supports. But the outermost
arches still generate a horizontal reaction and must be laterally supported with substantial
foundations built into those riverbanks. Now, if you love the Pont de Gard, you'll love the Roman
Aqueduct at Segovia, Spain. Built around the year 100 AD, the Segovia Aqueduct isn't as tall as the
Pont de Gard, but it's considerably longer, 167 arches in all. Its most salient feature is the
placement of those arches on tall, slender stone columns, giving the entire structure an almost
impossible lightness. This structure dramatically demonstrates that within an arcade, the lateral
thrust of each interior arch is counterbalanced by the adjacent arches, even when the arches are
supported on tall columns. But what would happen if we elevated a single arch on a pair of columns
with no adjacent arches to counterbalance the thrust? We see this arrangement, for example,
in triumphal arches, like the Arch of Titus in Rome, constructed in 81 AD to commemorate the
Emperor Titus' successful suppression of the Jewish Revolt 12 years earlier. Let's see if we
can't build a model of this great structure and see how it works. We'll start by building two columns,
just like the columns that support the Arch of Titus, and we'll build them out of a series of
stone blocks. Now,
just as we saw in our Roman bridges, we have two ledges or shelves that are actually built into
the structure specifically for the purpose of holding the wooden centering to be used as the
support for construction of the arch. And now we can construct the arch proper by adding our stone
visoire all the way up the side of the centering until we're ready to place the keystone in the
middle. Now we have the complete arch and we're ready to remove the centering.
For some reason, it's a little harder to remove the centering in this configuration than it was
when I built the arch down on level ground. What's going on? What's interesting here is
that the arch is standing up. It's stable, but the difficulty I had in pulling out the centering
resulted from the fact that the arch is already starting to sag in the middle. The ends are trying
to push outward as they always do, but because now they're standing on tall columns, the lateral
thrust of the arch is actually tending to tip the columns outward slightly. That causes the
arch to flatten, and that's the reason there was less space between the arch and the centering,
and it was more difficult for me to pull it out. What that would suggest is that this arch is
probably not capable of carrying very much load. It's actually probably pretty well through the
process of failing due to instability, and so if I add just a little bit of additional load on top,
it may very well collapse. Let's see how that works. Indeed it did. Very clearly,
when a single arch is placed on top of two columns, the outward thrust of the arch tends to cause
those columns to overturn. Let's use the principle of equilibrium to investigate this instability.
This is a free body diagram of a single column from the model that I just used in my demonstration.
The forces acting on it are the vertical reaction from the arch, which is oriented downward,
the horizontal thrust of the arch, which is oriented laterally, and of course the weight
of the column. These loads generate two reactions at the base, one horizontal, one vertical.
But why have I positioned these reactions at the lower right hand corner of the column?
Well, let me use a model to explain. Let's actually reconstruct one of those columns,
use a stack of our stone blocks here, and note that we're modeling the condition of the column
at the instant before it overturns, and notice that at that instant, just before it overturns,
the entire weight of the column is balanced on this corner, the one that's on the bottom side
and opposite the direction of the application of the load. And that's why both the vertical and
horizontal reaction are concentrated at that point. Now, at this point, I could use equations of
equilibrium in order to solve this problem. Write the equation of equilibrium for the sum
of moments about this point, and then solve for the unknown thrust applied up here at the top,
and then use that as the basis for figuring out what we might have to do in order to stabilize
the column. But rather than using an equation, I'd like to actually use the model itself to talk
about how equilibrium works in this situation. In this situation where the column is just on
the verge of tipping over, it's useful to think in terms of two different moments acting on this
body. The first of those is an overturning moment. Now, remember what a moment is. It's a tendency
of a force to cause rotation, and it's calculated as force times distance. So the overturning moment
associated with this column is the moment caused by the lateral thrust tending to tip the body over,
and the magnitude of that moment is force times distance. So it's the magnitude of the lateral
thrust multiplied by the perpendicular distance from the line of action of that force down to
the point that we're summing moments about. That's just the height of the column. So the
overturning moment is thrust times height, and it's tending to rotate the column in the clockwise
direction from your perspective. There's another moment acting on the column, though, and that's
a stabilizing moment, one that's preventing it from overturning. That stabilizing moment is associated
with the weight of the body, which I'll represent by simply placing a force up here. The stabilizing
moment, again, about this point is simply this force, the weight of the body, multiplied by the
perpendicular distance from that line of action to the point I'm summing moments about, and that
perpendicular distance is just one half of the width of the column. So the stabilizing moment
is weight times half of the width. The overturning moment is thrust times height. What we want to
do in order to make the column as stable as possible is to minimize the overturning moment
and maximize the stabilizing moment. How can we minimize the overturning moment? Well, we can't
change the thrust. It's associated with the arch. The arch is what it is, and so we can't control
it, but we can certainly control the height. So if thrust times height is to be minimized,
one way to do that is simply to make the column lower. So we can make a column more stable by
making it less high. The other way to stabilize the column, of course, is to maximize the stabilizing
moment. That's weight times half the width, and therefore we can maximize that quantity by either
increasing the weight or by increasing the width. So in summary, we have three different
potential ways to stabilize a column that's being acted upon by the lateral thrust of an arch
that's resting on top of that column. We can either make the column shorter or we can make
the column heavier or we can make the column wider. And amazingly, the Arch of Titus exhibits
every one of these characteristics. The piers are wide, they are heavy, and they're relatively short,
at least in comparison with those incredibly tall slender columns in the Segovia aqueduct.
And in addition, there's another layer of stone placed above the piers in order to further
increase stability by adding even more weight to the columns. Roman engineers didn't know the
principle of equilibrium, but their structures suggest a keen qualitative understanding of
both equilibrium and stability. Now, once the arch had proved itself as an effective way to
span horizontal distances, it wasn't long before it was adapted to the purpose of enclosing space.
When an arch is extended to form a roof or a ceiling, it's called a barrel vault, shown here.
A barrel vault carries load exactly the same way as an arch does, and requires the same sort of
lateral support for stability. Like the arch, the vault is not a Roman invention. There's archaeological
evidence that ancient Sumerians, Egyptians, Greeks, and Etruscans all used them. But as with
arches, the Romans exploited the possibilities of this structural form like no one before.
The most famous vaulted structure in Rome is the Flavian amphitheater, also called the Colosseum,
built during the period 70-80 AD. This video will give you some sense of the extraordinary
scale of this structure. Viewed from above, as you see here, the Colosseum is an ellipse,
measuring over 600 feet by 500 feet. It probably seated 50,000 spectators,
tight is the equivalent of a 16-story office building, and this intricate layout of entrances
and passageways and stairways and all those chambers down below the floor of the arena
that are now exposed to the open air are masterpieces of architectural design.
From an engineering perspective, the fundamental structure of this building is a series of 80
barrel vaults arranged radially around the first level. These form the main entrances to the
amphitheater and also the foundations on which those upper arcades and the concrete seating area
were supported. Like the arcades of the Pont de Gard, the barrel vaults of the Colosseum
support each other laterally, but unlike the Pont de Gard, the vaults require no additional
external lateral support because they're arranged around the perimeter of an ellipse.
Every arch is laterally supported by the arch on either side of it. There are no ends in the arcade.
Perhaps the most surprising aspect of this building is that it's structurally unremarkable,
at least in historical context. The spans of these vaults are not particularly large,
and all other aspects of the structure reflect techniques and technologies that were quite
well established at the time. In a paradoxical way, this says a lot about the advancement
of Roman construction technology. Compare the Colosseum with, say, a theater of the classical
Greek era. The seating areas of these Greek theaters were built down into a curved hillside
because the Greek's beam on column construction wouldn't have been practical for building on
the Colosseum's scale. That this monumental structure, the Colosseum, the model for all
modern stadiums, could be built with no significant technological innovations suggests that the
Romans have come a very long way since the 4th century BC. The only truly novel aspect of the
Colosseum was actually the unique rope and canvas awning that was stretched over the seating area
to provide shade for spectators. But we'll save our discussion of this feature for our
lecture on tension structures. Now, if the Colosseum was structurally unremarkable,
then the bands of Caracalla represent the polar opposite. Built as a palace for the people
in the early 3rd century AD, the bands of Caracalla were built on a scale that wouldn't be exceeded
until the late medieval period. This vast complex included a double pool tepidarium,
that's the medium temperature bath, a circular domed calderium, the hot room,
and that calderium was only slightly smaller than the pantheon.
Two gyms for exercising and a swimming pool with bronze mirrors mounted overhead to direct sunlight
into the room. Many rooms had large glazed windows to retain hot air and to use the greenhouse effect
for heating. The entire building was elevated on a 20-foot raised platform to accommodate
furnaces, hot air ducts, and water distribution. At the heart of this complex was the frigidarium,
the cool water bath. At 79 feet wide, this cavernous hall was nearly twice the width of
most Gothic cathedral naves of a thousand years later. The 108-foot height of its vaulted ceiling
was only exceeded by the ill-fated Beauvais Cathedral, which collapsed twice and was never
completed. Unfortunately, not much of the frigidarium has survived to the present day,
but we can get some sense of its grandeur from a 20th-century building,
Penn Station in New York City, which was actually modeled on the baths of Paracala.
Perhaps the most impressive aspect of the structure is the expanse of groin-vaulting
that forms the ceiling. Now, a groin vault is formed by intersecting two barrel vaults at
right angles to each other like this. The use of groin vaulting in ceilings resulted in the
subdivision of the interior space into square or rectangular bays when viewed from above.
Each transverse vault corresponds to one bay. This arrangement was so successful that it was
ultimately adopted as one of the fundamental characteristics of both Romanesque and Gothic
cathedral architecture 1,000 years later. As we'll see, the beautiful vaulted ceilings
like this one at Laon are direct descendants of the baths of Paracala. Note also that the groin
vaults in the baths and even in these cathedrals allow for larger window openings higher up in
the enclosed space, a feature that profoundly affected Gothic architecture and one that was
also vitally important to the function of public buildings like the Roman baths and like Penn
Station that you see here. Now, like any arch or vault, a groin vault can only remain stable
if its lateral thrust is restrained. For massive concrete vaults like those used in the baths of
Paracala, the thrust would have been immense. Roman engineers met the challenge in two ways.
First, they lightened the vaults by casting into them a grid of octagonal indentations called
coffers, which you can see here in the vaults at Penn Station. The coffers might appear to be purely
decorative, but they actually serve a vital structural purpose. In our lecture on arches,
we saw that the lateral thrust of an arch is directly proportional to the magnitude of the
downward load. Since the largest downward load on these vaults is their own self-weight,
reducing the weight of the vaults causes a corresponding reduction in thrust.
The second technique that Roman engineers used to restrain the thrust of the vaults
was an ingenious system in which smaller lateral barrel vaults were added perpendicular to the
central space and used to prevent the central vaults from spreading laterally. This system of
buttress vaults, as they're called, required a keen understanding of the flow of forces through
a complex three-dimensional structural system. This innovation, yet another indicator of Roman
engineering savvy, would be would be adopted in many future buildings, from Hagia Sophia in
Constantinople to Philippo Brunelleschi's Church of Santo Spirito in Florence. You can see an example
of these lateral buttress vaults in the ruins of the Basilica of Maxentius in the heart of the
Roman Forum. This basilica was built in 310 AD and used essentially the same structural system as
the frigidarium of the Baths of Carcala, except it was larger. The vaulting over the main hall of
this basilica spanned 82 feet and was 118 feet high. This small segment of the structure that
remains today is so immense that you might think it's the main hall, but no. These three bays are
actually the lateral buttress vaults that stabilize the much larger and taller vaults of the main
hall. The scale and sophistication of this structure truly proclaims the glory of Rome, yet it also
hints at Rome's demise. As Maxentius, the emperor, was the last emperor before Constantine, his
successor, moved the capital of the empire to Constantinople. Fortunately, when the emperor
moved to Constantinople, Roman construction expertise accompanied him. We'll see the happy
outcome of that historical event when we examine the Basilica of Hagia Sophia in Constantinople,
two lectures from now. Today we've seen a steady progression in the development of Roman arch structures
from the simple bridges of the 1st century BC to monumental vaulted public spaces of the 3rd and
4th centuries. The early structures were so well conceived and so well suited to the available
structural materials that many of them have survived to this day and are still in use.
The long span bridges and great vaulted halls tested the limits of masonry and concrete construction,
but succeeded because their designers had developed a deep understanding of structural
behavior. And in every instance, the most important aspect of these structural systems was a well
conceived mechanism for restraining the lateral thrust caused by the arches and vaults under load.
After the fall of Rome, much of this know-how would be lost, but over time it would be painstakingly
restored and then finally surpassed in the great churches of the Middle Ages. Thank you.
