Welcome back. Several times in this course I've talked about the innate human aspiration
to build up and to build across. For the better part of two centuries, the suspension bridge
has been the most effective means of building across vast distances. Welcome to the first of
two lectures in which we'll explore the historical development of the suspension bridge and look at
a series of great structures that represent important milestones along this developmental path.
More than any of our previous lectures, this story is not just about structures.
It's also about human events, about conflict, tragedy, and triumph.
But our ability to appreciate this story depends on a basic understanding of how a suspension bridge
works as a structural system. So to illustrate this discussion, let's use the George Washington
bridge over the Hudson River between New York City and New Jersey. The GWB, as it's often called,
opened in 1931. At that time, not only was it the world's longest span, but it nearly doubled
the previous record held by the Ambassador Bridge in Detroit. Now let's look at how this great
structure carries load. The George Washington Bridge's huge traffic loads are applied on two decks,
a top level carrying eight traffic lanes and a bottom level carrying six more.
Both decks are supported by a stiffening truss shown here. Some suspension bridges use stiffening
girders rather than stiffening trusses, as we'll see next lecture. The stiffening truss hangs from
these vertical cables, which are called suspenders, which carry load primarily in tension.
Thus, suspenders transmit the full weight of the traffic and the weight of the stiffening trusses
up to the main cables, principal load carrying elements of the bridge. The GWB has four main
cables, but many suspension bridges have only two, and one we'll see in a few minutes has 16.
Cables can be made of either chains or wire, and indeed, the historical competition between
these two configurations lies at the very heart of the battle of the cable I'll be recounting shortly.
The cables are held aloft by two towers. On top of each tower, the cable passes over this
massive curved steel guideway. It's called a saddle. The saddle's job is to transmit the
cable's internal tension straight downward into the towers. Here's how that works.
Let's assume that I'm the tower and that my head is the saddle, and this piece of rubber tubing
will represent the cable. Now, when the cable is in tension like this, the only direction that it
can transmit any load at all is axially along its length. What it takes to cause the cable to
transmit load in a different direction, in this case directly downward, is to wrap the cable around
something. And so it's the change in the cable's direction as it passes over the saddle that causes
all that tremendous tension to be transmitted straight downward into the tower and then on
downward into the structural foundations. By the way, kids, don't try this at home. And it's not
that it's dangerous, it's just that you'll look very foolish standing there with a large rubber
band stretched over your head. So, continuing on with the cable, I'll be showing you how to
So, continuing on with the structural system. At the end of each main cable is an anchorage,
a massive structure that effectively attaches the cable to the earth. And it needs to be massive
because it's counterbalancing tens of millions of pounds of tension for each cable. Here's the
interior of the GWB's anchorage housing. What you're looking at is two of the four main cables
separated out into smaller bundles of wire. Each of these bundles is called a strand, and it's
actually composed of hundreds of individual wires. Each strand, then, is connected to a chain of
steel anchor bars. You can see the uppermost links of these anchor chains at the bottom of the photo,
but recognize that you're only looking at the uppermost links. Most of the length of each of
those chains is actually deeply embedded far down below the surface of the earth in a large,
massive concrete. Now, throughout the history of suspension bridge development, intensive
engineering efforts have been aimed at overcoming two persistent challenges that are in general
terms related to the structural system we just talked about. The first of those challenges
is constructing the main cables and the anchorages. The second is controlling the suspension bridges
inherent susceptibility to vibrations caused by wind. Some efforts to address these challenges
have been quite successful, but many have not. Indeed, as we study the early years of suspension
bridge development, we'll see at least as many failures as successes. At some point,
you may start to wonder why engineers even persisted with suspension bridges at all.
After so many failures, it would have been entirely reasonable to just give up and try
something else. The answer, I think, is that suspension bridges represent extraordinary
potential for greatness. Because of the inherent structural efficiency of that draped cable,
the world's longest span has been a suspension bridge for over 150 of the past 200 years.
More than one of these world's longest spans has blown down in a windstorm or collapsed when an
anchorage failed. Yet when one fell, another inevitably rose to take its place. During today's
lecture, we'll focus on the first of those two great challenges, the development of cables and
anchorages, during the first 50 years or so of suspension bridge development. Then next lecture
we'll discuss the more protracted struggle to control wind-induced vibrations. In each case,
we'll see some great structures that succeeded and others that failed.
The history of the modern suspension bridge begins with a very unlikely pioneer. In 1801,
an American named James Finley built the very first suspension bridge capable of carrying
vehicular traffic, Jacobs Creek Bridge in western Pennsylvania. Finley was a justice of the peace,
not an engineer, and there's no evidence that he had any technical training at all.
But he built bridges nonetheless. All of Finley's suspension bridges used cables made of
conventional iron chains. The bridges were apparently quite successful, at least for a while.
Finley patented his system in 1808 and he went on to build, or in many more cases, to license the
construction of, about 40 bridges throughout the northeastern United States. Here's a typical
example, the Chain Bridge in Washington, D.C. Finley's longest span was a 308-foot pedestrian
bridge across the Skookle River in Philadelphia. That bridge collapsed during snowstorm,
only eight years after it was first built. And several other Finley bridges are known to have
collapsed as well. At some point, people may have begun questioning whether it was really a good idea
to have a justice of the peace designing long span bridges. The only Finley bridge that has
survived to the present day is this span over the Merrimack River at Newburyport, Massachusetts.
And quite frankly, it's a stretch to call this a Finley bridge, since virtually every component
has been replaced at various times since it was built in 1809. But it does give you a general sense
of what those first-generation suspension bridges actually looked like. Clearly then, James Finley
lacked the expertise and the experience to design enduring structures. Yet his idea did endure.
His bridges were widely publicized, and the concept of a chain suspension bridge quickly
spread to Britain. Their engineers, with a more rigorous tradition of empirical design,
set about the task of making the idea work. The Royal Navy had recently been doing experiments
to determine if they could replace the rope rigging in their ships with iron chains.
These experiments produced an invention called the I-bar chain, which turned out to be far
superior to traditional chains made of individually forged oval-shaped iron links.
The links of an I-bar chain are flat iron bars with holes drilled in the ends, as you can see here.
Those I-bars are then connected together with iron pins in stacks, as you can see in this
illustration. If this arrangement looks vaguely familiar, it's probably because the chain on your
bicycle is actually a pretty good representation of an I-bar chain. Here's just such a chain.
You can see how it drapes. But more importantly, if you look very closely, you'll see that the
individual links of the chain are each composed of two small I-bars, which are in fact connected
together with small pins. I-bar chains were very effective as structural elements, because each
link could actually be constructed of multiple parallel I-bars, where your bike chain has only
two of those I-bars per link, a full-size I-bar chain might very well have five or six. And so
this system was structurally redundant. If one individual I-bar failed, the chain itself wouldn't
necessarily fail. And it was this characteristic that inspired British engineers to begin experimenting
with the I-bar chain as a structural element in suspension bridges. In 1817, a Royal Navy officer
named Samuel Brown developed and patented a system of I-bar chains and incorporated that system
into the very first British suspension bridge capable of carrying vehicular traffic,
the Union Bridge over the Tweed River at New Waterford. This 430 foot span used six I-bar chains,
three on each side. And notice from this photo that the three chains are actually stacked,
one on top of the other, with the suspenders then connected at the pins that join the links
together. This general arrangement worked so well that it established the general pattern for British
suspension bridge development for the next 50 years. Incredibly, the Union Bridge still stands
and it still carries vehicular traffic today. In 1818, a Scottish engineer named Thomas Telford
was employed to build a bridge across the Manai Strait in Northwestern Wales. In response,
Telford created the world's longest span and an enduring monument to British empirical engineering.
The Manai Strait Bridge has a 579 foot span suspended from two massive limestone towers.
Those approach spans you can see out on the ends are actually heavy stone arcades.
They're not suspended from the chain and therefore only that center span between the two towers is
actually the suspended structure. The main cables in this bridge were 16 rod iron I-bar chains,
each composed of over 900 individual I-bars. Note that these very robust chains are arranged
in vertical stacks of four chains each following that same precedent that was established by
Samuel Brown's Union Bridge. Now, Telford was a typical British engineer of this era.
He disdained math and scientific theory. A contemporary of Telford's once remarked that
the stability of a building is inversely proportional to the science of the builder.
But Telford was also a strong believer in experimentation. He conducted extensive laboratory
tests on the chains that would be used in his Manai Bridge, and then he designed the structures
such that the chains would never exceed one-third of their ultimate strength. In this respect,
it's useful to compare Thomas Telford with his American predecessor, James Finley.
Both designed empirically, yet their approaches to structural design couldn't have been more
different. Finley's approach was largely ad hoc. Telford's was both rigorous and well-grounded in
a qualitative understanding of structural behavior, even if he didn't draw upon scientific theory.
It's no wonder then that none of Finley's 40-plus bridges remain intact today,
while Telford's Manai Straight Bridge is still in service over 180 years after its construction.
It has seen a few modifications to accommodate modern traffic loads,
but the structure has endured, and it's considered to be among the finest of all
early suspension bridges. It also firmly established the I-bar chain as the preferred
configuration for suspension bridges in Britain. Meanwhile, across the channel,
the French were trying to catch up. During the late 18th and early 19th centuries,
as Americans and British were developing that first generation of suspension bridges,
the French were quite slow to adopt new structural technologies. The turmoil of the recent French
Revolution had disrupted industrial development and driven many engineers out of the country.
Recognizing the need to catch up, the French government founded a coal
polytechnique in 1794, and among its first generation of graduates was Cloud Navier,
whom we've already met in our discussion of beams. In the early 1820s, Navier traveled to the U.S.
to study American developments in suspension bridge design. His 1823 report on this visit
was the world's first theoretical treatment of suspension bridges. It stimulated tremendous
interest in this new structural configuration throughout France. So, in the 1820s, French
engineers began experimenting with the use of wire cables rather than iron chains for suspension
bridges. Building upon their efforts, a Swiss engineer named Guillaume Algrie Dufour constructed
the world's first permanent wire cable suspension bridge in 1823. In Dufour's system, the cables
were composed of hundreds of parallel wires, each about one-eighth inch in diameter bundled
together. Now, many people think that the suspension bridge cables are actually twisted like rope,
but in fact, the wires are all straight and parallel, just like a bundle of spaghetti,
as we see here. Now, the reason that when you look at suspension bridge cables, you don't see
these parallel wires is that after the wires have been fabricated, after they've been bundled
together into a cylindrical shape like this, then they're bound together with very fine wire,
very tightly, and then coated with a thick layer of paint in order to protect them from the elements.
But underneath, what you'll find are parallel wires.
Now, in theory, wire cables are far superior to I-bar chains. Because of the manufacturing
process, the iron or steel in a wire is actually a lot stronger than in a thicker bar. And wire
cables have significantly greater redundancy than I-bar chains, because there are so many
parallel elements, one or two or even 10 or 20 that happen to break won't compromise the strength
of the cable. However, in practice, the effectiveness of a wire cable depends entirely on two aspects
of its construction. First, the wires need to be arranged such that they can all carry
approximately the same tension. And second, the ends of the cables have to be suitably
anchored at their ends. Now, I've used the words in theory and in practice very deliberately here.
By 1820, thanks to a whole polytechnique, French engineers had become world leaders in
science-based design. They were, in fact, the masters of theory. The British, exemplified by
Thomas Telford, disdained theory and took pride in their practical, empirical approach to design.
This immense gulf between the two approaches was manifested in the development of suspension bridges.
Theoretically adept French engineers advocated the theoretically superior wire cable configuration,
while practically minded British engineers held to their robust, time-tested iron chain system.
The stage was set for an epic contest. Let's call it the Battle of the Cable.
Now, in France, based on Dufour's success and Navier's newly developed design theories for
suspension bridges, there was an explosion of wire cable bridge construction. By one estimate,
over 500 such bridges were built between 1823 and 1850. In 1834, a French engineer named Joseph
Chaley built a wire cable bridge at Freiburg in Switzerland that surpassed Telford's Menai
straight bridge as the world's longest, nearly 900 feet in length. And in 1849, an American named
Charles Ellet, who had been actually educated in the French system, surpassed Chaley's record
with a 1,010-foot wire cable span at Wheeling, West Virginia. At this point, the Battle of
the Cable appeared to have turned decisively in favor of wire cables. The early French bridges,
as well as Ellet's, were all built by prefabricating the cables on the ground
and then installing them on the bridge. A very difficult process that could compromise
the strength of the cable by stretching some of the individual strands too tightly
while leaving others slack. But in 1844, the American bridge pioneer John Robling devised a
far superior system for fabricating cables in place on the bridge. Robling had been
born in Germany and educated at the Baal Academy in Berlin. He emigrated to the U.S. in 1831
and established his very successful wire rope manufacturing business, which clearly was his
lead into suspension bridge design. In 1844, he won a contract to build his very first bridge,
an aqueduct to carry a canal across the Allegheny River in Pittsburgh. And it was on this project
that he developed and perfected his system for fabricating wire cables. Let's see how Robling
system worked. I've taken my suspension bridge model and removed the cables and configured
it to try to demonstrate how Robling system for fabricating cables in place on the structure
worked. First, the setup. At this point in the construction process, we have two towers and two
anchorages already constructed, but obviously no cables in place. The builders have constructed
these two temporary towers on top of the actual suspension bridge towers. And we'll talk about
what those do in just a moment. We have also placed a large spool of either steel or iron wire,
and that's going to be the raw material that the cables are built up from. That spool is located
near one of the anchorages. The first step in fabricating the cable is to simply get a cable
across the river. It's not the actual cable that's going to be built, but rather a cable that's used
to facilitate construction. Now, John Robling actually used a very inventive technique to do
this on his Niagara Falls Bridge project. He actually asked a bunch of kids to fly kites,
and he announced that he would give $10 to the first child who was actually able to fly a kite
across the gap. When a kite successfully made it across the gap, that kite string was used to pull
a somewhat larger string across, and that was used to pull a somewhat larger string across,
and that pulled a rope across, and that eventually pulled a wire rope cable across the gap.
That wire rope cable is represented by the white string that I currently have stretched across my
bridge. That cable, once it was in place, passed over the tops of these two temporary towers,
and at each end was attached to a powered winch that would be used to move the cable back and
forth across the gap. The gray wheel you see on either end is representation of that winch,
and then permanently affixed to this cable, which is called the haul rope, there was a device called
Traveler, and the Traveler is really just a wheel that was permanently attached to the cable.
Now the process of fabricating the cable worked like this. First, that strand of iron wire,
this is a single strand, about one-eighth inch in diameter on the actual bridge, was temporarily
attached to a device called a strand shoe, which is just a means of temporarily holding
the wire in place, and then it's passed around this device that we call the Traveler, like this.
Recall that the Traveler is actually physically attached to the haul rope, and so now at this
point we give the signal, the operator of the winch on the far shore starts up the winch,
and the haul rope begins to pull the Traveler across the gap. When we get to the first tower,
the Traveler passes over the top of that little temporary structure, just like a cable car or
a ski lift would, and continues on. Up here there's a worker who is actively engaged in laying each
wire precisely in the right position as it passes by. Now the Traveler keeps moving, it passes over
the second tower, and then on down the far side. At this point we stop the winch, a worker removes
the loop of wire from the Traveler, places it over another strand shoe located on the far shore,
and we have our first loop of wire across the bridge. Now at this point we reverse the direction
of the winch. The Traveler now is pulled back across the gap in the other direction, returned to the
first anchorage, and we begin the process all over again. We start by once again passing the cable
over the top of the Traveler. We have to loop the cable down over the strand shoe once again,
so it's appropriately anchored. We start up the winch, and once again the Traveler passes over
the top of the tower, continues on across the span, peeing out wire as it goes, passes over
the second tower, continues on down the side, and once again when we reach the end the winch is
stopped, worker removes the loop from the Traveler, places it over the strand shoe, and now we have
two loops of wire, which is actually four individual wires. We pull the Traveler back
and continue this process. In fact we continue this process hundreds of times to create a bundle of
wires called a strand. I mentioned the strand earlier when we looked at the George Washington
Bridge, and the key characteristic of this process is that the strand, even though it actually consists
of several hundred wires, is actually one single continuous unbroken wire, and it's that way because
we fabricated it, as you saw in my demo, by dragging loops of wire across the gap rather than individual
wires. Now here's an engraving of the actual system as it was used by John Robling and by his son
Washington Robling on the Brooklyn Bridge 30 years after it was first developed. Up at the top you
can see the Traveler attached to the haul rope, carrying a loop of wire toward the top of a tower.
There's that workman positioning the wire as it passes by, and below on the left is that large
spool that's supplying the wire, and over here is the strand shoe that holds the loops of wire
in place during fabrication. Once the required number of wires were in place on the strand shoe,
the shoe was then relocated and permanently connected to the anchorage, which is located
over here on the opposite side of the picture. We'll talk more specifically about how the
anchorage works shortly. Now on the Brooklyn Bridge, each strand has 278 individual wires,
and 19 strands are then bundled together in this pattern, shown here, to form one single
main cable of over 5,000 wires. With all strands in position, each of the four main cables was then
compacted with a circular clamp and then wrapped tightly with fine wire, as I showed you earlier
with my bundle of spaghetti, and that fine wire bound the entire assembly together as one unit,
and after it's coated with paint, protected it from the weather.
John Robling patented this system in 1847, and it has been used with only minor modifications
on every major suspension bridge project since then. For example, here's a cutaway of the cable
of the Golden Gate Bridge, and as you can see from the sign, it's fabricated from Robling Wire,
and it was fabricated using Robling's method. By solving the challenges of fabricating wire
cables, John Robling firmly established the supremacy of wire over Ibar chains for suspension
bridges. But when Robling received his patent in 1847, the battle of the cable had by no means
been decided. In 1850, a wire cable suspension bridge in Auge-Refrance collapsed when one of its
main cables tore away from its anchorage during the storm. 226 soldiers who were crossing the
span at that time died. The bridge had been designed by Joseph Chaley, France's most
accomplished bridge engineer. It was only 11 years old at the time. The configuration of the anchorage
system on this bridge was the same as had been used on most French bridges built since 1831.
In this system, shown here, the ends of the cable were split into multiple strands,
just like in Robling's system, but here each strand itself was anchored inside of a shaft cut
into bedrock and then sealed with lime mortar to protect it from the elements. The post-collapse
investigation showed that the mortar sealant that was supposed to protect it from the elements
had cracked over time, allowing water to penetrate into the anchorage and corrode the wires of the
cable. Corrosion reduced the strength of those individual wires until ultimately the cable
failed. An immediate inspection of other French bridges showed the same problem was occurring
in most of them. Many of them had to be torn down or rebuilt. This disaster ended the careers of an
entire generation of French suspension bridge designers. It also effectively stopped suspension
bridge development in France for the next 20 years. Meanwhile, in the U.S., John Robling had
developed a fundamentally different anchorage system and was already using it for his bridges
in the United States. This is an original drawing of Robling's anchorage design. It uses a series
of massive wrought iron i-bar chains, one for each strand of the main cable. Each chain was
anchored at the bottom of a deep pit, which was then filled with enough stone masonry to
counterbalance the largest tension force that that strand of cable would ever carry.
The uppermost link of each anchor chain is then attached to that strand shoe that we saw earlier
during our discussion of the cable spinning process. Each shoe holds all the wires belonging to one
strand of the main cable. If this looks like the GWB anchorage system that I showed you earlier,
well, that's because the George Washington Bridge and virtually every other modern suspension bridge
uses some minor variation on Robling's system. John Robling's system succeeded where the French
system failed because its underground elements are robust corrosion resistant i-bar chains
rather than the fragile wire strands that were underground in the French system.
Robling's system keeps all that wire above ground and fully accessible for inspection
and maintenance, yet protected from the elements by a roof over the anchorage structure.
And so Robling's cables are far less vulnerable to the corrosion problem that ultimately doomed
those French bridges. So the irony of this development is that the battle of the cable
turned out to be a draw. The system that emerged from this contentious 50-year development process
was actually a hybrid of the two competing alternatives. Highly redundant wire cables above
ground supported by corrosion resistant iron i-bar chains embedded in the anchorages.
As a result of Robling's ingenuity, leadership in the field of suspension bridge design passed
from France to the United States. That leadership came to fruition in Robling's magnificent
Brooklyn Bridge, which we visited briefly in lecture one and we'll see yet again next lecture.
The story of early suspension bridge development reads like an adventure novel,
a human drama characterized by colorful characters, conflict, plot twists, tragedy and triumph.
The suspension bridge was pioneered by an American justice of the peace who had no technical training.
The concept was adapted by British engineers who used i-bar chains because they saw an analogy
between bridge cables and ships rigging. They disdained theory, but they used their practical
know-how to create many successful and enduring structures. Yet ultimately they saw their favorite
technology, the i-bar chain, rendered obsolete by theoretically trained French engineers.
The French started the race far behind, but caught up quickly by developing and promulgating
science-based methods through a revolutionary technical education system. However, they implemented
their favorite technology, the wire cable, in hundreds of bridges before they had worked out
all the practical details. The 1850 collapse of the Angeur Bridge ended their dominance of the
field, practically overnight. Americans then seized leadership, but only because of one man,
a theoretically trained German immigrant who succeeded because he conceived ingenious
practical solutions to the daunting problems of fabricating and anchoring wire cables.
His success depended in part on his innovative use of those same British-style i-bar chains
that appear to have been rendered obsolete by the wire cable.
So what should we learn from this amazing story? First, technological development is often a messy
business. Second, science-based design is not a panacea. Indeed, science in the absence of practical
know-how can be disastrous. But most importantly, in complex engineered systems like suspension
bridges, details matter, often enough to cause entire systems to fail. The loss of hundreds
of French suspension bridges to a seemingly minor problem with cracked sealant foreshadows
modern technological disasters like the explosion of the space shuttle Challenger due to a failed
O-ring and the failure of a relief valve at the Three Mile Island Nuclear Power Plant in 1979.
All are cautionary tales that evoke the old proverb, for want of a nail.
Next lecture, our saga of the suspension bridge continues as engineers battle the wind to finally
establish this structural system as a safe and durable means to realize the dream of spanning
great distances. Until then, thank you.
