Welcome back.
In this lecture, we'll see the ultimate manifestation of that natural human aspiration to build
upward.
We've encountered this aspiration in pyramids, cathedrals, and towers.
Today we'll see it in the tallest of all great structures, the modern skyscraper.
Last lecture, we learned that the precursors of the skyscraper were utilitarian buildings,
textile mills, ship sheds, and the like.
These structures were extraordinarily innovative, largely because they were utilitarian.
In the British textile industry of the Industrial Revolution, the economic benefits of structural
efficiency provided a powerful stimulus for innovation, and the industrial context ensured
that the engineering innovations wouldn't be constrained by aesthetic considerations.
A very similar set of conditions arose in Chicago during the 1870s.
There the need for large-scale commercial development after the Great Fire provided
the same sort of economic stimulus.
And the need to build quickly favored the design of simple, unadorned structures.
So it's not surprising that many commercial high-rise buildings of this period were extraordinarily
innovative yet simple and utilitarian in appearance.
The man most responsible for these structural innovations was William LaBaron Jenny, whose
first lighter building of 1879 exemplifies the utilitarian character of these first-generation
skyscrapers.
As we look at the first lighter, there's no doubt where the structural columns and beams
are located on the exterior of the building.
Indeed, the exterior consists of little more than beams, columns, and windows in between
with a modest decorative cornice up at the top.
Form follows structure in this building.
Jenny's work, and that of his Chicago contemporaries, Daniel Burnham, Louis Sullivan, John Roode,
and others, was so influential that it came to be branded the Chicago School of Architecture.
In general terms, the buildings of the Chicago School were characterized by iron or steel
frame structural systems, non-structural facade walls, large windows, and relatively
little external ornamentation.
Over time, though, the buildings of the Chicago School would acquire a more sophisticated
architectural character.
A principal developer of this form and its most eloquent spokesman was Louis Sullivan.
Sullivan's philosophy of design was encapsulated in his famous phrase, Form Ever Follows Function.
And there's no finer illustration of this philosophy than Sullivan's Wainwright building
in St. Louis, constructed in 1891.
Like Jenny's home insurance building, built six years earlier, the Wainwright building
used a true skeleton frame.
It was the first all-steel building frame in the United States, so it certainly qualifies
as an engineering landmark.
But this building is best known as a perfect illustration of Sullivan's architectural
philosophy.
Here's how he articulated this philosophy in his 1896 essay, The Tall Office Building
Artistically Considered.
He noted that every tall office building is functionally organized in essentially the
same way, and that the exterior appearance of the building should directly reflect these
internal functions.
On the first two stories, shops and other businesses are located, and those entities
require open access and natural light.
And so the external appearance of these first two stories should be visually connected to
each other.
Their public function demands larger windows and more elaborate decorative treatments.
The first story also provides public access to the building, and so it should have a very
prominent main entrance that signals openness.
Now from the third floor up are a series of identical commercial office floors, subdivided
into identical cubicles on the inside.
To reflect this interior arrangement, the exterior should present a grid of identical
window openings with identical decorative treatment.
And then finally, on the top level is the attic, which is not subdivided into offices
and which really doesn't need substantial lighting.
And so, according to Sullivan, its exterior appearance should be a broad expanse of masonry,
a heavy cornice with few windows or none at all, signifying that the vertical stack of
office levels has now come to an end.
This tripartite division of the exterior is actually reflected in most Chicago school
skyscrapers.
It's often likened to a classical Greek column.
The first two floors represent the column base.
The ornate attic level represents the column's capital, and then all the stories in between
represent the fluted shaft of the column.
And so we see, in a very interesting way, the world of ancient Greece writ large upon
these modern buildings.
From an engineering perspective, it's noteworthy that the vertical subdivisions of the Wainwright
buildings façade do not all correspond to structural columns.
Every second vertical rib actually has no structure at all behind it.
It's all façade.
And so, in the Wainwright building, form does not follow structure, at least not in the
clear manner of Jenny's first lighter building.
The Wainwright illustrates a trend we've seen before, that higher aesthetic aspirations
tend to push structure into a more subordinate and less visible role.
The purpose of those fake columns is very clear from Sullivan's essay about tall buildings.
It must be tall.
Every inch of it tall, he wrote, the force and power of altitude must be in it.
It is a unit without a single dissenting line.
Sullivan's emphasis on the vertical line not withstanding the Wainwright building isn't
really all that tall.
It's just ten stories high.
More important from an engineering perspective, it's only about as tall as it is wide.
Many characteristic aspects of the skyscraper don't really come into play until the height
of the building significantly exceeds its width.
At that point, the effect of wind loading begins to dominate the behavior of the structure
and requires significantly more attention on the part of the engineer.
It seems strange to us today, but the Wainwright building and its contemporaries weren't designed
for wind loads at all.
Only vertical loads, dead load, live load, occupancy load.
But don't worry, none of these buildings is going to blow over anytime soon.
Because the riveted connections between the beams and columns of structures like the Wainwright
building are relatively rigid, that building carries lateral load sort of like a rigid
frame.
And because the exterior masonry walls work like shear walls, the building also carries
lateral load sort of like a brace frame.
Yes, this system for resisting wind loads is something of a muddle, but it does work
if only because the demands of wind loading on a ten-story building are relatively low
in comparison with a taller building.
But this situation changed dramatically as buildings did grow taller and as facade walls
tended more toward added glass and less masonry.
And so a suitable delineation of the transition from the first generation to the second generation
of skyscrapers is this point at which engineers began explicitly considering the effect of
wind loads in their designs.
One of the first buildings to use a fully integrated, scientifically designed system
for resisting wind load was the Metropolitan Life Tower on Madison Avenue in New York City.
At 50 stories, the MetLife Tower was the world's tallest building when it opened in 1909, and
so a coherent system for resisting wind loads was absolutely essential.
From the ground level up to the 12th floor, this system consisted of deep girders riveted
firmly to structural columns.
It was a rigid frame.
At the 12th floor, it used lightweight knee braces in the configuration shown here.
This type of braced frame isn't as stiff as the cross bracing that you saw in my model
earlier, but it was very effective architecturally because the braces don't interfere with the
large window openings on the outer walls of the tower.
And using lighter bracing above was appropriate.
At any given level, the bracing system has to be capable of carrying all of the wind load
above that level.
And so the cumulative load due to wind actually decreases with height, even if the actual
magnitude of the wind force increases with height.
The MetLife Tower is famously modeled on the Campanile of San Marco in Venice, a design
decision that was made personally by the president of the Metropolitan Life Insurance
Company.
And here we see a significant difference between the first and second generations of skyscraper
design.
The buildings of the first Chicago school attempted to define an original architectural
vocabulary for tall buildings.
And their form was driven by their function as commercial spaces.
But the skyscrapers of the early 20th century in New York City often borrowed architectural
styles from earlier ages in an effort to satisfy the egos of corporate titans who saw the
other headquarters buildings as symbols of power and as repositories of culture.
Of course, the ultimate expression of corporate power was height.
During an amazing 23-year period, sometimes called the Great Skyscraper Race, the title
World's Tallest changed hands six times.
From the 1908 Beaux Arts-styled Singer Building, 612 feet tall, to the 700-foot MetLife Tower,
modeled on the medieval Campanile of San Marco, to the 792-foot Woolworth Building, a neogothic
wonder that earned the title Cathedral of Commerce at its opening in 1913, to the 927-foot
Bank of Manhattan Trust Building of 1930, to the Chrysler Building, a 1046-foot Art Deco
icon decorated with automotive embellishments like winged radiator caps.
The competition was intense.
Within months of the Bank of Manhattan's completion, the Chrysler Building stole the
title World's Tallest with a stainless steel spire that had been secretly assembled inside
the building and then installed on top in just 90 minutes.
But glory was fleeting as Walter Chrysler saw his World's Tallest record fall to the
1250-foot tall Empire State Building when that building grabbed the title just one year later
in 1931.
The Great Skyscraper Race might well have continued, but the Great Depression brought
all the fun to a crashing halt.
From an engineering perspective, the most important aspect of all these buildings was
that they actually represent no significant structural innovations.
Despite their astonishing height, they were designed as mainstream structures, direct
applications of the skeleton framing system pioneered by William LaBarenjeni in the 1870s,
with only the addition of purposefully designed systems for resisting lateral wind loads to
distinguish them from the earlier structural systems.
In 1st century Rome, emperors constructed grand public buildings to win the favor of
the masses and to symbolize imperial power.
In 12th century Europe, the Catholic Church built grand cathedrals to glorify God and
to place religion at the very center of everyday life.
In early 20th century America, corporations built grand skyscrapers to demonstrate the
power of capitalism and to symbolize national aspirations for world leadership.
For the next great innovation and structural design, we now shift our focus back to Chicago,
where it all began.
There in the 1960s, an engineering innovation produced such a distinctive new generation
of buildings that it was branded the 2nd Chicago School.
The hero of this story is Fosler Kahn, a Bangladeshi American structural engineer with
the firm of Skidmore, Owings and Merrill.
Kahn recognized that the traditional system for resisting wind loads had become too expensive.
The traditional system, exemplified by the Woolworth building, consisted of a forest
of columns rigidly connected to a grid of beams at every floor, with each element contributing
a tiny fraction of the overall load carrying capacity of the structure.
Fosler Kahn's insight was to view a high-rise structure holistically, as if the entire building
were one huge structural element.
And the most logical structural element to use as an analogy was the upright cantilever
beam, with the lateral wind load acting on the structure as the equivalent of a transverse
load applied to a cantilever beam.
And because Kahn knew, as you do, that a hollow tube is far more efficient than a solid bar,
in both bending and axial compression, he chose the hollow tube as the model for his
innovative structural system.
Kahn's innovation is often called the framed tube.
In this system, a rigid external shell of beams and columns provides the building's
lateral load carrying capacity.
Now remember, it's a hollow tube, and so that rigid shell is hollow in the center.
All of the strength is in the outer perimeter of the frame.
A framed tube is analogous to a major automotive innovation that happened right around the same
time.
Prior to the 1950s, most cars had a load-bearing chassis with a bolt-on non-structural body.
But by around 1960, this traditional configuration had been replaced by unibody construction,
featuring an integrated chassis and body welded together and working as a single structural
shell.
And just as unibody construction was initially used only for passenger cars, not for trucks
or buses, so Fosler Kahn's framed tube is used exclusively for tall buildings.
This system would really make little economic sense in a low-rise building where wind loads
are much less significant concern.
The framed tube has the added advantage of opening up more interior space for commercial
use.
In the Empire State Building, the forest of interior columns impede space throughout
the building.
In a framed tube building, like the World Trade Center shown here, that forest of columns
has been replaced by large expanses of uninterrupted space.
The introduction of Fosler Kahn's framed tube system initiated a renaissance in skyscraper
design.
Since 1970, many structures have adopted this same big-picture structural concept, but their
designers have implemented it in a delightful variety of ways.
The 100-story John Hancock Center in Chicago was designed by architect Bruce Graham with
Fosler Kahn serving as structural engineer.
It was completed in 1970.
The building's exterior tube is composed of rigidly connected columns and beams crisscrossed
by huge X-braces, each 18 stories high.
This very distinctive system is sometimes called a trust tube because the diagonal bracing
does indeed function like a truss in carrying those lateral loads.
And the trust tube system proved to be very efficient, as well as distinctive.
In comparison with the Empire State Building, the John Hancock Tower used 30% less steel
per square foot of floor space.
By one estimate, this innovation saved $15 million in building cost.
The partnership between Graham and Kahn also produced the striking 109-story Sears Tower
in Chicago, now called the Willis Tower.
It was the world's tallest building for over 20 years.
In this building, Kahn used only rigidly connected beams and columns, no diagonals, to create
a square tube, and he then bundled nine of these tubes together as a single integrated
structural system.
The result has been appropriately called a bundled tube.
In the Willis Tower, the bundled tube system has been used to create a really interesting
architectural effect.
Two of those nine tubes terminate at the 49th story.
Two more terminate at the 59th story.
Three more at the 89th.
And then the remaining two continue all the way to the top.
The terminations of these tubes are arranged such that the building presents a different
shaped profile in all four directions.
Thanks to the bundled tube system, the skyline of Chicago received four buildings for the
price of one.
The World Trade Center was a textbook example of the framed tube system.
Until 1972, each tower was a hollow tube composed of 47 heavy steel box columns on each side.
These columns were welded to steel beams at each floor, forming a rigid lattice.
The entire outer shell was assembled from modules consisting of three column segments
and three beam segments as shown here.
This shell carried all the building's lateral wind load and a portion of its dead and occupancy
loads as well.
The remaining gravity loads were carried by internal columns, which were all clustered
in a central core that housed the elevator shafts, the stairwells, and the utility's
ducts.
As you can see here, the space between that outer shell and the inner core was uninterrupted
to provide maximum flexibility for the building's occupants.
This open space was spanned by lightweight trusses supporting concrete floor decks.
In addition to supporting the floors, these trusses also had the critically important
function of providing lateral bracing to the columns at each floor level.
This configuration was architecturally successful, structurally efficient, and highly functional.
But it would prove to be unexpectedly vulnerable to the terror attacks of September 11, 2001.
We'll return to that story in a moment.
But first, let's move ahead to 1977, when a dramatic new 59-story high-rise was completed
in Midtown Manhattan.
It's the CityCorp Tower, designed by architect Hugh Stubbins and structural engineer William
LeMezier, known today as CityCorp Center.
It's a truly unique building.
To preserve a church located on the project site, the tower was actually built over the
church.
This was accomplished by placing the building on stilts, huge super columns located at the
center, not the corners of each face of the square tower.
The four corners of the building are actually cantilevered out from the four super columns,
114 feet above street level.
Let's look at a model of the CityCorp Tower.
As we look at the model, we see, first of all, that distinctive slash-shaped top of
the tower.
And as we look down below, we see that my model represents those four super columns.
And obviously, I've exaggerated the slenderness of the columns just to make the point of this
unique structural geometry.
Another critically important aspect of the structural system is the bracing system.
Recognizing that somehow the tremendous weight of this tower had to be transferred to these
four super columns located in the middle of each face of the building, LeMezier designed
a unique chevron bracing system.
And here you can see those chevron bracing members forming a series of V-shapes up the
face of the building.
The chevron bracing then is designed to channel the tremendous weight of the building and
all of its occupancy loads down to the center, where it is then transferred down into the
super column.
When LeMezier designed this building, New York City building codes required only that
wind-low design for tall structures be based on winds striking the sides of the building,
the perpendicular faces of the building.
LeMezier, however, because of the unique character of the bracing system that he had designed,
was convinced that this building was also particularly resistant to winds striking it from a 45-degree
angle.
These are typically called quartering winds, that is, winds now striking the building directly
from the direction that you're facing it.
And LeMezier was convinced that the structure was particularly optimum with respect to those
quartering winds, though he actually never checked that assumption as an integral part
of his design process.
While in June 1978, a year after the building opened, LeMezier got a phone call from an engineering
student who was curious about the structural system.
In response, LeMezier explained how the building was put together and how it was built and
in general terms how it was designed, and he also explained how well-configured the structural
system was to resist those quartering winds, striking the building at 45 degrees to the
major perpendicular faces of the structure.
After that conversation, he decided that he would actually do some analysis to determine
exactly how much more resistant to those quartering winds the structure actually was.
The results of this analysis were both surprising and frightening.
They indicated that the structure actually was much more sensitive to quartering winds
that he had ever expected, and as a result, the building's chevron bracing would actually
experience 40% higher stresses than he had calculated in his design when he designed
for perpendicular winds.
Now, there was a significant problem and LeMezier dove into the problem and tried to
figure out what he could do and the extent of the problem.
Upon further investigation, he discovered that the building had actually been constructed
with bolted connections rather than with the welded connections that he had specified.
The bolted connections weren't as strong as the planned welded connections because whenever
you make a bolted connection, you actually have to take away some of the steel at the
connection location because you're drilling holes through the steel member.
So now the situation was even worse than he had previously thought.
LeMezier then consulted with a wind engineering expert who conducted a series of wind tunnel
tests on a model of the City Corp Tower.
Those results showed that because of the building's position with respect to other midtown towers,
the wind force was actually even greater than anticipated.
A cumulative result of all these unanticipated conditions was that the critical Chevron bracing
connections in the City Corp Tower were actually being stressed at about 160% higher than LeMezier's
original design had predicted.
According to LeMezier's revised calculations, this building could be expected to blow over
in a modest windstorm, one occurring on average every 16 years.
In response to this impossible situation, William LeMezier did an amazing thing.
He blew the whistle on himself.
He reported the problem to the City Corp and then they initiated a highly secretive series
of emergency repairs to restore the integrity of the structural system.
Disaster was averted and despite LeMezier's culpability for the faulty design, he was
lauded as a hero for his integrity and his aggressive efforts to rectify his own error.
Today, this story is often used as a case study in engineering ethics classes, including
my own.
And it's a wonderful illustration, not just of engineering ethics issues, but also of
the incredible challenges that engineers face in balancing innovation with public safety,
particularly in ambitious tall structures like the City Corp Tower.
Now let's head downtown from the skyscraper that almost fell down to one that was brought
down by an act of terrorism, the World Trade Center.
September 11, 2001 was not the first occasion when an airplane flew into a tall building.
In 1945, a B-25 bomber collided with the 79th story of the Empire State Building in
a heavy fog.
14 people were killed, but the structural integrity of that building wasn't significantly
harmed and the incident raised awareness of the need to consider aircraft impact in
the design of skyscrapers.
Indeed, the World Trade Center design did consider aircraft impact, but only from the perspective
of structural strength.
And as it turns out, this design analysis was entirely accurate since the building did
survive the aircraft impact.
However, the structure proved to be incapable ofwithstanding the effects of the fire that
followed.
Because the tubular system places so much critically important structure on the outer
perimeter of the building, the aircraft impact probably caused significantly more structural
damage than would have occurred in a building like the Empire State Building, where columns
are distributed throughout the width of the building.
Still, the Trade Center's frame withstood the impact, though the loss of numerous exterior
columns caused the remaining columns to be more heavily loaded.
The impact also dislodged much of the fireproofing from the steel structural elements in the
vicinity of the impact.
As the intense fire burned, the lightweight floor trusses lost their strength and sagged
under the weight of the concrete floors.
They then fell onto the floors below, causing the lower floors to sag and collapse as well.
Still, at this point the failures were localized.
However, with the loss of each successive floor, the effective length of those intact columns
increased.
Now, recall from Lecture 5 that bracing has a significant effect on the strength of columns.
The addition of lateral bracing to a column can significantly strengthen it.
But in the case of the World Trade Center, the bracing was already in place.
And recall that the bracing we're talking about here is that system of floor trusses
and floor slabs, which were attached to the columns at various points along their lengths.
So here we see a case where the column with the bracing in place is presumed to have a
certain strength in the design process.
And as a result of the fires and the loss of those intermediate level floors, the bracing
is removed.
And now the strength of the column is significantly reduced because the buckling mode changes
consistent with the longer effective length of the column once the bracing is gone.
In the World Trade Center, loss of the floor trusses on several adjacent floors reduced
the column strength to the point where they could no longer bear the weight of the entire
building above them.
They buckled and a progressive collapse ensued.
The World Trade Center tragedy showed, sadly, that a perfectly adequate structural design
can be compromised when new conditions arise.
The engineering profession understands this dynamic.
It's continually attempting to anticipate and respond to these sorts of changing conditions.
Today, protective design has become an important consideration in the design of all major structures.
And perhaps the best example is the World Trade Center's replacement, informally known
as the Freedom Tower.
Trying to top out at 1,776 feet, this will be the new tallest building in New York City
when it's completed in 2012.
The structural system of the Freedom Tower is still a stiffened tube.
It's still that structural form that was developed by Fosler Kahn.
But it directly addresses the concerns raised by the World Trade Center collapse by using
a more redundant outer steel shell and a heavy concrete core to protect the elevator shafts
and stairwells.
Throughout this lecture, we've seen the symbolic importance of the tall building.
But none of its predecessors can approach the symbolic importance of the Freedom Tower,
which will stand as a memorial to those lost on 9-11 and as a symbol of national resilience.
During this lecture, we've examined three generations of skyscrapers.
Next lecture, we'll see a surprising fourth generation, one that has produced new buildings
of world record height.
These buildings exemplify the extraordinary possibilities offered by our most versatile
and underappreciated structural material, reinforced concrete.
Until then, thank you.
