These lectures are part of the Great Courses.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university-level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in
just weeks.
Browse our catalog or website at TheGreatCourses.com and imagine how much you could learn if you
spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lectures are university professors carefully selected by The Great Courses and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
These lectures are titled Turning Points in Medieval History.
The lecture is Dorsey Armstrong.
Professor Armstrong is Associate Professor of English and Medieval Literature at Purdue
University.
She received her A.B. in English and Creative Writing from Stanford University in 1993 and
her Ph.D. in Medieval Literature from Duke University in 1999.
She specializes in Middle English Language and Literature, Arthurian Literature, Anglo-Saxon
Language and Literature, and Gender and Feminist Studies.
Dr. Armstrong is the author of Gender and the Chivalric Community in Mallory's Mort
Darther and Sir Thomas Mallory's Mort Darther, a new modern English translation based on
the Winchester manuscript.
She is editor-in-chief of the academic journal Arthuriana and is at work on a critical study
of geography in the late medieval Arthurian legend.
Lecture 1 The Fall of Rome
Welcome to this lecture series on Turning Points in the Middle Ages.
If you're listening to this course, you may be someone who already knows something about
the medieval period, which scholars define as roughly 500 to about 1500 A.D., and you're
looking for a little more depth or a little more understanding as concerns the details
of this fascinating period.
If you're new to the study of the Middle Ages, this is also a great course for you as by
following along with these lectures, you'll be exposed to many of the uniquely fascinating
elements of this epic in history and gain a nice feel for the period as a whole through
the study of key moments or turning points.
What makes the approach of this course unique is that every one of the turning points discussed
here point us toward or are aiming us at what many scholars have chosen to call the Renaissance
or the early modern period and then beyond toward the present day.
The seeds of the Renaissance or early modern are sown deep in the medieval period and
the examination of key turning points in this lecture series underscores how this is so
and why it is important.
What such an approach reveals is how all human history is ultimately interconnected.
By recognizing and appreciating those connections and turning points, we better understand ourselves
and the world we live in.
It's appropriate, I think, to begin any exploration of the Middle Ages and subsequent periods
like the Renaissance or the early modern with what is arguably the most significant turning
point in the Western world and this is the fall of Rome.
Now as most of you probably know, the Roman Empire was one of the greatest institutions
created by humans ever to exist on this planet and at its apogee, which is somewhere around
the early third century AD, the Roman Empire extended across Europe all the way into what
today we call the Middle East, across the Mediterranean into North Africa and all the
way west to the edges of Britain.
No other entity or idea is as key to our quest to understand the medieval world and its turning
points than the Roman Empire is.
Its art, its culture, engineering, systems of governance and bureaucracy, religious influence,
philosophies, road building and military, to name just a few of its key elements, profoundly
influenced the medieval societies that succeeded Rome in all sorts of ways.
Some of these ways are obvious and some are quite surprising, as we'll see throughout
this course.
And as we talk about this turning point and the others to follow, you always should be
asking yourself the so what question.
So the Roman Empire ceased to exist.
So what?
What is at stake in understanding how and why this happened?
Some French scholar in the 12th century was forcibly castrated.
So what?
What has that got to do with understanding the Middle Ages and what came after?
In the case of Rome, the so what question is easy to answer.
When the Roman Empire fell apart, it fractured into the very culturally different political
entities that would make up the nations of the medieval world.
But each of these countries retained some idea of what Rome had meant.
That's why we need to understand it.
When exactly Rome fell is and was up for debate, especially among its former citizens.
Because the Empire was so huge, and of course there are no telephones or internet or fax
machines, sometimes people living in remote regions of the Empire didn't even realize
what had happened for months or years.
And this is a long time after they had effectively ceased to be citizens of the most glorious
Empire in the West in at least an official sense.
But for all practical intents and purposes, they were no longer Roman.
In the days of English historian Edward Gibbon, who wrote his history of the decline and fall
of the Roman Empire in the 18th century, it was popular to see Rome as a glorious institution
that had a sudden and cataclysmic fall.
Today, it is much more common to see the decline as gradual, as a downward motion that was
punctuated and accelerated by several events.
One of those events occurred on December 31st in the year 406 on the Rhine River near the
city of Mainz.
The Rhine had long been one of the Roman Empire's natural boundaries.
Those people living on the south side of the river were Roman citizens.
Those people on the north were part of what the Romans considered Germania, a territory
with which Rome traded, from which Rome drew people to serve in the military and tax for
certain services, but who were not considered true Roman citizens.
The river was an effective and natural boundary, and those on the Roman side probably gave little
thought to those on the German side.
But on the last day of the year 406, in what scholar Jeremy Ducanay Adams has accurately
described as, quote, possibly the worst New Year's Eve on record, the far banks of the
Rhine were lined with thousands upon thousands of desperate people who were cold, hungry,
and probably fleeing ahead of marauding huns and goths.
These people did not want to attack the Roman Empire.
They wanted to get in.
They were refugees, not invaders.
The small band of Roman military forces stationed on the Roman side were probably glad that
the main bridge was easily defensible, and they could more or less ignore the barbarians
on the far side.
But in one of those surprising moments of serendipity that we find scattered throughout
history, the world changed in an instant.
The Rhine froze that night, froze solid, and the desperate refugees charged across the
river.
The Roman soldiers tried to push them back, but even the military discipline of Rome
was no match against thousands of people desperate for their lives and angry at being excluded
from the glory that was Rome.
They pushed west and south into Gaul, and being met with some resistance began a war.
The event for those who lived through it on both sides would seem to be both traumatic
and definitive.
One day, you were a tradesman in a community that lived by the rules of Roman order.
You could rely on protection, a steady supply of food and water, and the freedom to practice
your trade.
The next day, instead of opening the doors of your shop and calling hello to the merchant
across the way, you had bolted the door from the inside and were cowering with your family
under a table while the barbarians from the other side of the river terrorized your town.
The Roman Empire for these people was gone.
It had failed to protect its citizens in the territories of Gaul and beyond, and almost
overnight, Romans in this area found that control of their lives now resided with dirty,
pagan, illiterate people who must have seen just a step above animals.
To be sure, the crossing of the Rhine in 406 was not the first or the last significant
moment in the historical turning point that was the fall of Rome.
By the third century, Rome was overextended and simply unable to manage its empire efficiently.
Even stopgap measures, the division of the empire into halves and the appointing of two
emperors who were to be aided and succeeded by junior officials known as Caesar's and
other measures, did little to deal with the problems plaguing the empire.
Rome needed labor and people to serve in the military and pay its taxes, and in order to
increase its tax base and its pool of able-bodied men fit to serve, it began to conscript and
indeed invite various non-Roman groups, among them various Goths, Gauls, Vandals, and others,
to become part of Rome.
What happened, however, is that more often than not Rome was happy to take taxes from
these people and use their labor, but the empire refused to recognize them as full citizens
and in some instances couldn't or didn't pay them.
This seems to be part of what contributed to the crossing of the Rhine in 406.
But while that night the empire ended for some, in other parts of the world Roman citizens
kept calm and carried on for another several years.
In the far west, in Britain, for example, the crossing of the Rhine was barely a blip
in the consciousness of the people living there.
Now as many of you know, wherever the Roman Empire went, it attempted to recreate itself
in a phenomenon scholars like to call Romani tas, which translates roughly as Roman-ness.
What this meant is that even if it was a Roman outpost at what at first might have seemed
like the ends of the ends of the earth, so not just the ends of the earth, but beyond
that, there would be a mini-Rome built in astonishingly short time.
Such was the case in Britain, which had come firmly under Roman control in the first century
AD.
The Romanized Britons there lived in Roman villa-style houses.
They attended spectacles at the local Colosseum, socialized in the baths, enjoyed hot and cold
running water, indoor heating systems, and a bureaucratic, in the best sense of the word,
government.
They had efficient military protection against the barbarians living in the realms of modern-day
Scotland and Ireland, and to help get those famed Roman legions where they needed to go,
there was a carefully constructed network of roads that moved people and goods as efficiently
as possible from place to place.
In fact, 1,000 years after Rome had left Britain, the Roman roads were still the best
in the land, and many modern highways in Britain followed the route of the original
Roman roads so cleverly were they laid out.
But everything about this changed in 410, even though the Roman citizens living in Britain
didn't even realize it at first.
As I noted a moment ago, Rome had been in an ever-expanding crisis since the third century,
which, cleverly, scholars refer to as the crisis of the third century.
And in the late fourth and early fifth centuries, more and more legions were pulled out of Britain
to try and shore up the empire at its heart.
The Romano-Britz were probably concerned with this, but they had been citizens of Rome
for nearly 400 years, longer than the U.S. has been a country.
Of course, reinforcements were coming back soon.
This was Rome, after all they surely thought.
But then, the capital itself was sacked by the Goths and their leader, Alaric, put himself
on the throne as emperor.
Like those barbarians on the far side of the Rhine in 406, the Goths wanted to be a part
of the empire more than they wanted to conquer it.
They paid taxes, served in the military, and were understandably upset at not being accorded
the full rights of Roman citizens.
As was probably the case with the legions stationed on the Rhine, those senators and
soldiers in the empire's capital found it hard to imagine an attack on the heart of
the empire itself.
So when the attack did come, it was profoundly unsettling, both physically and psychologically,
and it affected those living on the edges of the empire as much or more than those living
in the capital.
The historian Amianus Marcelinas describes how Alaric cleverly planted his own men as
servants in the houses of noble Romans, and the citizens, lulled into a sense of false
complacency, are completely off guard when a coordinated attack is launched from within
the city itself.
With the city gates being thrown open, fires set, and unsuspecting senators slaughtered
while sitting at table.
It was an unimaginable event, but the Romans quickly found themselves having to not just
imagine it, but also cope with the aftermath.
For a brief while, the Romano Brits carried on as before.
While the legions were pulled out of Britain in the face of this attack, they seemed to
be certain, at least for a while, that they would be back.
The Britons' enemies of many centuries, raiders from Scandinavia, the Scots, the Picts, and
others, were quicker than they to realize the weakness of the undefended communities
left behind.
Soon, these and other non-Romanized groups began a systematic campaign of plunder, raiding,
and destruction.
This prompted what was left of the Roman bureaucracy in Britain to send a letter to the closest
Roman consul, a certain Aetius, who was in Gaul, or modern-day France, at the time.
They began their letter by telling him that they sent to him, quote, the groans of the
Britons, end quote, and further, that they needed protection for, quote, the barbarians
drive us to the sea, the sea to the barbarians, and between the two, we are either killed
or drowned.
The answer that came back was, you're on your own.
No help would be coming.
Imagine what it would be like in your town if, overnight, every police officer suddenly
disappeared.
For a time, life might proceed as normal, but soon the less-savory criminal elements of
society would begin testing boundaries.
With no law enforcement to curb their activities, chaos would quickly become the norm rather
than the exception and survival the most important consideration of all.
Not question, then, 410 was the fall of the Roman Empire for the British, and this moment
would profoundly affect Britain's development throughout the medieval period.
But the turning point that was the fall of Rome had not yet completed its turn.
Much of what was familiar about the empire remained, especially in its center and other
urban locales.
Then 40-some years after a Larrix attack, Rome would be sacked yet again by another
barbarian group.
And finally, a fellow by the name of Otto Acer, a barbarian who had risen through the ranks
of the Roman military, declared himself king of Italy in 476.
This would seem to mark the final collapse of the empire.
When he describes these events about 75 years later, Procopius of Caesarea pointedly explains
how the fall of Rome gave shape to the Italy that arose from its ashes, quote, the barbarians
finding that they had no hostile force to encounter them, became the most cruel of all
men.
For they destroyed all the cities which they captured, and they killed all the people,
both old and young alike, sparing neither women nor children.
Wherefore, even up to the present time, Italy is sparsely populated.
They also gathered as plunder all the money out of all Europe and most important of all,
they left in Rome nothing whatever of public or private wealth when they moved on to Gaul,
end quote.
Thus, the fall of Rome was both a long transitional period during which citizens of the empire
looked to a glorious past to help them cope with present-day problems, and it was a singular
turning point that would affect, shape, and indeed create the Middle Ages.
The fall of Rome is a perfect turning point to begin this lecture series for many reasons,
not least of all because it serves as a mirror image, a companion illustration, and complement
to the major theme of this lecture series, that the turning point of the Middle Ages
into the Renaissance is not really a turning point at all, but rather the seeds of the
Renaissance or early modern period were sown at key moments during medieval times.
Ultimately, what considered this way, the movement from the medieval to early modern
period is really neither surprising nor unexpected, just as the turning point in which Rome becomes
the medieval world is more a gradual transformation than a clear singular moment of transition.
As we work through these lectures, you'll see that the legacy of Rome and a sense of
mourning over its destruction or desire to recreate or restore it in some sense can be
found in almost every significant turning point moment in the medieval world.
When I use the term Middle Ages or medieval world as I indicated at the beginning of this
lecture, I'm talking about roughly the years 500 to 1500, and I'm focused primarily on
Europe.
1000 years is a nice round figure to work with, and it's true that it does conveniently
mark when there were some significant changes taking place in Europe, but it would be wrong
to assume that things were one way in say 499 and then completely different in 500, or that
in 1500 people stopped being medieval all at once because they had discovered new texts,
new knowledge, instituted new forms of religion and government, and all of a sudden they became
early modern or renaissance overnight.
While radical shifts certainly do happen in many times and places within what we think
of as the European Middle Ages, I will be arguing throughout this lecture series that
the transition to what has been dubbed the early modern period is not one of them.
Rather, the movement from medieval to early modern had been happening all along for hundreds
of years.
As you'll come to see over the course of these lectures, some turning points are literally
points.
A single moment, a discrete event, a solitary decision made, or command executed in a particular
instant of time.
This would be something like the moment the Britons get the reply from the Roman Consul
in 410.
Once Aetius tells them that the legions are never coming back, everything changed for
those people who have been Roman citizens for nearly 400 years.
Other turning points are perhaps a bit broader with what we might call a more stretched definition.
This would seem to be nicely illustrated by the fall of Rome as a whole, as the crossing
of the Rhine, the sack of the capital, another sack, and the rise to power of Odoacer cover
around three quarters of a century, a point in the grand sweep of time, but a longer transitional
period for the people who lived through it.
Similarly, I devote a lecture to the climatic warming trend known as the little optimum,
which lasted for about 400 years.
But I define that as a turning point because its existence, and indeed its continuation
and then rather abrupt termination, had a profound impact on medieval society.
The turning points I discuss in this series are different in some other ways as well.
Some of them had immediate and strong repercussions.
The Norman Conquest of England in 1066 is a good example of this.
That event, when William of Normandy claimed the throne of England for himself, marks one
of the few instances when we can say that one day, things were this way, and essentially,
on another day, the whole world was changed.
Other turning points had a gradual impact, like the little optimum, which I just mentioned,
or the adoption of the horse collar over time, which eventually produced greater efficiency
and production when it came to agricultural practices.
And some turning points seemed utterly unimportant at the time, but would prove to have huge
significance decades or even centuries later.
The signing of the Magna Carta in 1215, for example, is routinely hailed as the beginning
of common law and the triumph of the citizens over their leader or monarch.
But to be honest, at the time the Magna Carta was signed, it was significant only for King
John and the 25 barons who forced him to accept it.
In fact, almost as soon as he agreed to it, King John got its clauses rescinded, so at
first it would seem to be a turning point that, in fact, was not one at all.
In its immediate aftermath, nothing much really happened.
Much later, centuries later, in fact, that first impulse and insistence on the acceptance
of the document at Runny Mead by the King would have huge implications for England,
the United States, France, and eventually the United Nations.
Now the turning points I'll be discussing in the lectures ahead can be broken down into
three categories, those with an immediate moment of occurrence and tangible impact of
some sort, those that gradually altered the society of the Middle Ages, and those the
impact of which would not be felt or recognized for many ages to come.
To these three categories we might add a fourth that we will touch on from time to time, the
false turning point.
These are moments that medieval people, and some modern ones, have pointed to or celebrated
as marking some significant shift, but when you get right down to it, they didn't really
have any impact at all.
One of the clearest examples of these might be the coronation of the Emperor Charlemagne
by Pope Leo III in the Christmas service in Rome in the year 800.
Some people then and now have hailed this moment as the creation of the entity that
has come to be called the Holy Roman Empire, or as marking the rebirth of the Roman Empire
of the late antique period.
But really, all the coronation did was put the Maraschino cherry, as it were, on top
of the fantastic concoction that Charlemagne had already established through an astute
combination of state building, military conquest, educational programs, and religious reform.
At most, the coronation of Charlemagne was simply an acknowledgement of everything he
had already done, and it didn't really mark a discernible turning point per se, although
it certainly is and was convenient to think of it as one.
The fall of Rome would seem to fit all three of our main categories nicely.
In many places within the Empire, the impact was immediate and strongly felt.
In others, the alteration was gradual, and in a few places, the former eastern half
of the Empire, for example, the impact wouldn't be truly felt for centuries to come.
In fact, for the eastern half of the Empire, the so-called fall seemed not to have mattered
at all.
For the citizens in Constantinople, which had been the eastern capital, the Roman Empire
still existed.
They were still its citizens, and the language they spoke was Romish.
As far as they were concerned, the troubles in the West would be dealt with eventually
and the Empire restored to its former glory, all in due time.
It was not until the year 1054 that the fall of the Empire would be considered as relevant
to them, or even as having happened at all, as we'll see in a future lecture.
So we have different kinds of turning points, but they are all similar in that they profoundly
altered the shape and direction of society, whether or not those alterations come early
or late.
And as we explore the turning points in this course in a little more detail, we're going
to come across some common themes that seem to recur.
In this first lecture in particular, we've seen the theme of looking to the past to shape
the future.
The Roman Empire was the political entity that immediately preceded the creation of the various
states that come to make up medieval Europe, and again and again in this course, we'll
see how people look to the past and the model of the Roman world as they attempt to navigate
their own existence and create their own realities.
The past always has a claim on the present in the Middle Ages, and repeatedly, we will
see people and societies attempt to harken back to a particular idea or political construct.
This happens with Charlemagne, King Alfred the Great, the calling of the First Crusade,
the Magna Carta, the flourishing of Italian art, and others.
Quite obviously, many of the turning points we'll discuss in this lecture series will
be related to one another by the ideas of crisis or necessity.
The saying that necessity is the mother of invention is most definitely true, as we'll
see in lectures that detail the shift from Roman to Arabic numerals, advances in agriculture
like the heavy plow, horse collar, and three field rotation, Gutenberg's printing press,
and more.
Hand in hand with necessity comes crisis, and many crises push society in one direction
or another.
The Black Death, which wiped out up to one half of the population of Europe, would certainly
seem to be an example of this.
The Viking attacks throughout the medieval European world also seem to fall under this
heading.
Without a doubt, the fall of Rome is an excellent point to demonstrate this idea, as it was
both caused by, and in turn precipitated, a series of crises.
As we'll see in our next lecture, the withdrawal of the Roman legions from Britain created
a necessity for a strong leader in the face of barbarian attacks.
Into the vacuum of leadership and military might strode the figure who is most likely
the historical basis for the legendary King Arthur.
But if you want to know more about him, you'll need to come back for lecture two.
The other side of the coin of necessity and crisis might be termed serendipity, an unexpected
and unlooked-for event that altered life in profound ways.
For those on the other side of the Rhine in 406, the freezing over of the river was exactly
that.
Some events that don't seem serendipitous at first glance later turn out to be.
King Alfred's burning of a peasant woman's cakes, the aforementioned Viking onslaught
of the late eighth and early ninth centuries, the onset of the little optimum, even the
Black Death and the castration of the scholar Peter Abelard, could fit into this category.
Obviously, as just the few points I've touched on here suggest, many turning points of history
were the result of individual personalities, people like the Gotha Leric in the case of
the sack of Rome, and in other examples, as in the case of William of Normandy, Alfred
the Great, Charlemagne, the Italian poet laureate Petrarch, Eleanor of Aquitaine, and
Peter Abelard, the force of will of these individuals was so great that the world around
that person was profoundly affected by their personal beliefs and desires.
At the other end of the spectrum from individual personality are turning points which come
into being because a series of forces have worked together to produce a particular crisis
moment or opportunity.
The moment in 1341 when Petrarch crowned himself the first poet laureate since the days of
the Roman Empire would seem to be one example of this.
For while Petrarch's act marked a definite turning point when it came to literature and
the arts, the situation that made this possible arose from a number of social forces that came
together in exactly the right way and exactly the right moment to produce this event.
Obviously, as the example of Rome suggests, none of these categories or themes are really
mutually exclusive and many of them overlap or work in tandem to produce a particular
moment or turning point in the history of the medieval world.
If we keep these themes in mind throughout the progression of this course, if we are
continuously aware of the power of the past, necessity and crisis, serendipity, individual
personalities and impersonal broad historical and social movements, we are better able to
get a handle on, as it were, the key events, ideas and people that shaped the medieval
world.
We will be better able too to understand the intricate interworkings of these thematic
elements.
Let us go back now to the year 410 in the former Roman territory in Britain.
In the tumultuous years that followed the withdrawal of the legions, the Romano Brits
did their best to cope with an onslaught of invaders from Ireland, Scotland, Scandinavia
and the continent.
Things were chaotic until one man, the historical basis for the legend of King Arthur, rose
to prominence and in a decisive military victory at Mount Badden, changed history forever.
His victory was a turning point not only for British history, but for medieval literature
as well, and the impact of this turning point was felt both in the moment and also down
through the centuries until the modern period.
The ideals of the Arthurian world gained renewed vigor and popularity as the medieval
world segwayed into the early modern Renaissance and arguably the legend of Arthur is more
powerful today than it ever has been as we will see in our next lecture.
I hope you'll join us.
