Welcome back. In our last lecture, we discussed and defined the idea of the turning point,
as we'll be using it in this course, identifying three types of turning point.
Those with an immediate impact, those the effects of which were felt gradually,
and those the impact of which was not felt at all until years or perhaps centuries after the fact.
To these three categories, we can add a fourth.
Those turning points that were not really turning points at all,
events to which people in the medieval world attached great importance at the moment of their occurrence,
but in the end proved really to be rather insignificant in the greater scheme of things.
In our last lecture, we talked about how the Roman Empire and the collapse of it
is the most important turning point if we're going to understand anything about the medieval world,
and we saw how the collapse of Rome fits nicely into all three of our major categories
and how it demonstrates many of the key themes we'll be discussing as this course progresses.
For example, we discussed the idea of the power of the past, as the medieval world shaped itself,
its people and societies constantly looked to the past, usually to Rome,
for models on which to base and with which to justify their actions and beliefs.
Perhaps even more significantly, Rome looked to its own past as a means of trying to cope
with its many crises during the course of its decline.
In the crossing of the Rhine in 406 and the sack of the capital in 410,
we saw how crisis can make a turning point.
We saw too, especially in the first instance, how serendipity can play a role.
The freezing over of the Rhine on New Year's Eve 406 is one such serendipitous moment
in that it suddenly made it possible for the people on the other side of the river to cross over,
creating a significant impact on the Roman world.
All of these events together demonstrate how broadly impersonal trends in history
can sometimes come together in unexpected ways to produce unexpected results.
What we didn't see much of last time is how the desires of one individual can shape the entire world.
We're going to rectify that today when we discuss the historical basis for the figure of King Arthur.
From time to time in this course, we are also going to see how one major turning point
arguably produces another, and that is certainly the case here.
It is the fall of Rome and its impact on Britain, a territory on the margins of the empire
that produces the circumstances that made King Arthur.
If there's no collapse of Rome, there's no reason for a rather obscure war leader
of 500 or so Celts and Romanized Britons to become a leader straight out of mythology,
whose story captured the medieval Western world's attention 1500 years ago
and continues arguably to inspire the entire world today.
I challenge any of you to come up with a single heroic figure, besides maybe Jesus Christ,
that is as well known and who saturates the cultural consciousness
in the same way that Arthur does and has for over a millennium.
So here's a partial answer to the question, so what?
And you'll remember I suggested you ask yourself this question as we go along in this course, so what?
Why should I care about a grubby military leader from the late 5th century
who won a major victory for his people, but who ultimately lost the war?
The answer is, because over the centuries that figure would have a hugely significant impact
on the cultural consciousness down to the modern day.
So let's go back now to the south of Britain, where people had been living comfortably
in all the glorious Romanitas of the empire for almost 400 years
until the Goths sacked the Roman capital in the year 410.
Although this event certainly had a real physical and psychological impact
for those living in and close to the capital,
for the Romano-Britz living on the far western edge of the empire,
the effect was ultimately absolutely devastating.
As we discussed last time, almost overnight, the bureaucratic, economic, political,
and military infrastructure of Rome was suddenly gone from Britain
and various non-robinized, non-Christianized peoples that had lived beyond the borders of the empire,
the Scoti in Ireland, the Picts north of Hadrian's Wall, Germanic peoples from the continent,
saw this as an opportunity for invasion, looting, plundering, and worse.
For a time, the former Roman citizens were certain that the legions would be coming back,
hence their letter to the consul in Gaul in which they sent to him, quote,
the groans of the Britons, end quote.
When word came back that they were on their own, Britain was plunged into a period of chaos.
And while medievalists generally hate the descriptor Dark Ages, if ever there was one,
fifth century Britain was it.
In the face of ever more violent incursions, civilized pleasures and activities,
going to the baths, attending events at this or that coliseum,
travel along the excellent Roman roads, educational activities, artistic endeavors,
and record keeping, all of this pretty much disappeared.
In the fifth century in Britain, it was all about survival.
The records obviously are spotty, and what we have to rely on in order to piece together the events
of the late fifth and early sixth centuries are some suspect sources that purport to be recording
historical events centuries after the fact, some archaeological evidence,
and scant literary references to a leader who brought peace to the realm for a time.
That leader was Arthur, or if you prefer, an Arthur type figure.
His defeat of Saxon invaders at the Battle of Mount Badden is the turning point that launched his fame
into the stratosphere and produced the idea of an ideal British monarch to which generation after
generation would turn for inspiration and guidance.
So what brought us to this turning point?
While the fall of Rome is an obvious and easy answer, it's a little more complex than that.
According to the medieval historian known as Neneus, whose Historia Bretonim,
or History of the Britons, is dated to around the year 800,
about 40 years after the Roman legions withdrew from Britain,
one of the many territorial rulers of the island, Vortigern, whose name shall live in infamy,
makes a deal with the devil.
He hires Anglo-Saxon mercenaries from the continent to help the Britons fight the various peoples who were attacking them.
According to tradition, sometime around the year 449,
the marvelously named brothers Hengast and Horsa land on the shores of Britain
with three boatloads of warriors, fight off the Britons' enemies, and it looks as if all will be well.
But as you can probably guess, the troubles are just beginning.
After doing the job for which they were hired, the Saxons apparently looked around,
liked what they saw, and sent word back home for the cousins and friends to come on over.
The land is great and the people living here don't stand a chance against us.
I mean really, one cannot expect the Britons to fight off the people they hired
to fight off the people they couldn't fight off.
And so begins what we have called the Anglo-Saxon invasion.
Over the course of the later 5th century, waves of continental invaders flooded into the island,
and here is where Arthur comes in.
Many early chronicles describe this Arthur figure as being either descended from a noble Roman family
or to have considered himself to be a Roman citizen.
This would mean that he probably spoke Latin in addition to whatever his native British language was.
The number one contender for this might be Welsh, but Cornish is another possibility.
This Arthur figure could read or even write Latin perhaps, and he would be a Christian,
as were all citizens of the empire by this point, at least officially.
The Anglo-Saxons, the enemies against which this Arthur type figure would have fought,
were illiterate, pagan, and polytheistic.
In short, the antithesis of what a Roman would have found appealing or ideal in a citizen.
According to Neneas and other chroniclers early in the 6th century, at the Battle of Badden Hill,
Arthur and his warriors dealt the Saxon invaders a decisive blow.
It was a defeat so significant that some evidence suggests that certain groups of Angles and Saxons
actually left Britain and returned to the continent.
Like the fall of Rome itself, this turning point fits all three of our main categories perfectly.
It was, first of all, a turning point whose impact was immediate.
The Saxon incursion immediately stopped and the invaders stayed east of territory controlled by Arthur and his followers.
We know this in part from the archaeological evidence.
Anglo-Saxons had very specific burial practices, and this fact makes it easy to see where the Saxons were and when.
All you have to do is find a burial ground and examine the remains,
and you can tell pretty quickly if this was a Saxon community or a native British or even a Romano-British one.
About midway across Britain, in a very clear line running north to south down the middle of the island,
there is a border that becomes dramatically obvious when you plot Saxon burials around the year 500.
To the east, the land is Anglo-Saxon, and to the west, it is not.
Someone managed to create a boundary and keep the invaders behind it, at least for a time.
The Battle of Mount Badden also fits our second category of turning point in that although it was a decisive event itself,
its impact was significant and felt long beyond the initial event.
Again, archaeological evidence shows that around the year 500 in the south of Britain,
a chaotic period of burning and pillaging and looting comes to an end, a temporary end,
but at least it was an end for a couple generations.
It's quite clear that for a few decades after this period, the population enjoyed relative peace,
communities remained stable and firmly rooted in one place,
crops were planted and harvested successfully in several successive years,
and a general aura of calm seems to have replaced the chaos following the Roman withdrawal and the Saxon invasion.
Imagine what it must have been like to be someone living during this time in the realm of Arthur.
Basic survival was the order of the day, and hordes of invaders might descend upon your community at any time
with little warning and destroy your property and kill you and your family.
Your existence would be marked by fear, your thoughts running ahead only until tomorrow,
as it would have seemed absurd to even hope that you might get the next harvest in
without marauding bands setting fire to your fields.
Hard scrabble, nasty, brutish, short, and it was made all the worse
because there were certainly those who had heard stories or indeed even remembered
what it had been like not too long ago when you and your people have been part of Rome.
The emergence of Arthur as a leader and his ability to achieve some measure of peace and stability
would have seemed a little short of a miracle.
No wonder such marvelous stories sprang up in the aftermath of his victory at Mount Badden.
Our third category also applies to the circumstance,
because even though Mount Badden was a decisive moment, a true turning point,
some of its effects were most strongly felt years or even centuries later.
In fact, one could argue that the moment when King Arthur claims victory against the Saxons at Mount Badden
has had a greater cumulative effect on modern society than it did on those who actually lived through it.
For indeed, King Arthur has become, well, I was going to say a cottage industry,
but it is much more than that, a mansion industry, an industry industry.
If you were to tally up the films, documentaries, short stories, novels, photographs, paintings, comic books, cartoons,
and other media associated with the Arthurian legend that had been produced since the early modern period,
they would easily approach the seven figures when it comes to the final tally.
Any way you slice it, the Battle of Mount Badden fought sometime around the year 500 was a true turning point.
The frustrating thing for those of us interested in the Arthurian legend
and the historical figure behind that legend is that details are maddeningly scanty.
In fact, we can't even be sure where Mount Badden is or was,
although most Arthurian and early British scholars tend to agree that it was somewhere in the south of Britain,
probably near one of the sites in the region of Somerset that has long been associated with Arthur's story.
So what do we know about this turning point?
How did it happen that one man managed to so dramatically shape not only history,
but also literary production, the arts, mythology, and even politics?
Certainly this Arthur figure rose to prominence because of the twinned situations of necessity and crisis.
In the face of the Saxon invasions, the British desperately needed a leader.
The documentary evidence as we have it suggests that there were several of what we might call regional kings
who attempted to address the Saxon threat, but none of them were able to do what Arthur did.
Although most of our evidence concerning him is circumstantial, anyone who examines what we do know about Mount Badden
can tell immediately that in order for a leader to pull this off,
he must have been a unique man of extraordinary character, intelligence, and charisma,
not to mention military prowess as both soldier and leader.
His very name, Arthur, bears out the idea that he or his family in some way was connected with Rome,
or at the very least remembered the Roman past and perhaps looked to it as a way of planning future actions.
Arthur is a name that we do not see at all before this period,
and it most likely is a celticization of the Roman name Artorius.
In other words, the Britons who were in many ways culturally Welsh or Cornish took the Roman name
and transformed it according to the rules of their own language, producing Arthur something new.
A further testament to the impact Arthur had on British society is made evident in a remarkable occurrence
just a generation or so after the victory at Mount Badden.
In four royal houses of Britain, we have the birth of firstborn sons,
all of whom would have been heirs presumptive to their respective thrones, and all four of them are named Arthur.
So pretty quickly, this name goes from being one not recorded anywhere
to being one that is seen as fitting for a future king to bear.
And if we turn back to the archaeological evidence again, we can see why this might be so.
In 1966, a team of archaeologists began excavation of a site in the Somerset region
known as Cadbury Hill, and which, in local tradition, going back time out of mind, have been called Camelot.
What the archaeologists discovered was very interesting.
First, it was clear that initially this site had been an Iron Age hillfort,
or a pre-Roman stronghold that was occupied by groups of native Britons, people who culturally were Celts,
and they had fortified this hilltop seeking a safe haven from the kind of skirmishes and warring
that were a fact of life in Britain at this time.
In Roman times, the hillfort was abandoned,
because when Rome was in control, there's really no need for such defensive measures.
But after Rome withdraws from Britain, there is stunning evidence of a massive re-fortification of this site.
Although there are no buildings remaining, when seen from the air,
it is clear that this was a place where people had gone to great labor to create a defensible site.
Ascending the hill are several levels of earthen ramparts and ditches
that would have made storming the hilltop next to impossible.
During the second half of the 5th century, when the site was reoccupied after an almost 400 year gap,
we find evidence of additional defences.
Embedded into the top perimeter of defences was a 16 foot thick dry stone wall
that runs around the whole site, so about three quarters of a mile.
And within that, we find the remains of timber walls, gatehouses, and other structures.
These are no longer visible, as the wood has rotted away,
but the post holes and other traces remain.
And among these is what would have been a great hall.
At the time of its initial excavation, most experts felt that what was discovered here was not all that surprising.
The Romans are gone, barbarians are attacking,
and it makes sense that the Britons would retreat to ancient sites of defense in order to protect themselves.
So the feeling was that if you went and examined other Iron Age hill forts that existed in post-Roman Britain,
you would find something similar to what you had found on Cadbury Hill, massive re-fortification.
Only, this is exactly what researchers did not find.
In other words, Cadbury Hill, long identified in local tradition as Camelot, is, as far as we can tell, utterly unique.
Not a single other hill fort in this area shows evidence of this kind of defensive activity.
And if we examine the evidence still further, this seems to be really compelling evidence
that whoever the leader was who organized and led this community, he must have had amazing powers of persuasion and charisma.
It's estimated that a population of several hundreds of people, including families, warriors, their horses, etc.,
lived on Cadbury Hill at the end of the 5th century.
And this is at a time when the average Celtic warband numbered around 30 to 50 people.
So it's a huge jump in numbers.
So in the midst of the crisis precipitated by the Saxon invasion, one man, one individual with power and status and charisma,
unlike that found anywhere else at this time, rallied his people to fight off the invaders, invoking, according to the stories,
ideals of Roman civilization as a means to that end.
He turned back the Anglo-Saxons at Mount Badden, securing a lasting peace for a couple of generations before, according to the legends,
he fell at the Battle of Camelon, which many scholars think occurred in 539, although some listed as having taken place in 542.
Now, it might seem that in some ways, although this was a turning point for the Britons and that it brought them a period of peace and prosperity,
two generations of getting the crops in and not getting slaughtered on a regular basis by Saxon-rating parties would seem to be pretty significant, obviously.
But in the long run, it seems that perhaps this event wasn't that significant.
One could point to the fact that I'm speaking English, the language the Anglo-Saxons brought to Britain,
and not some form of Welsh, which Arthur probably spoke, as evidence that this is a turning point that is not one.
Yet, when seen from another perspective, it definitely marks a watershed moment not only in history, but in literature, the arts, and indeed,
as I suggested at the beginning of this lecture, cultural consciousness.
As the evidence of the four firstborn sons named Arthur suggests, pretty quickly after Mount Badden, Arthur's fame and reputation became widespread.
While literary tradition is thin, we do have clear moments that show that his name had become a watchword for what we might call political and military awesomeness.
In a Welsh poem called Igododin that dates from around the year 600, a great warrior is praised, but that praise is qualified by the statement that, quote,
he was no Arthur, end quote.
Other similar moments in surviving texts point to such a widespread knowledge of Arthur and his exploits that no one needs bother to explain who he is and what he did because everyone already knows.
Most of the stories about Arthur probably circulated in oral form for some centuries, and interestingly, they were probably told and retold on both sides of the English Channel,
for in the face of the first wave of Saxon invasions, many Britons fled across the channel to the part of modern France that today is called Brittany, which just means little Britain.
Even though the two populations were separated, it seems clear that there was still interaction and communication between Wales and Brittany throughout the medieval period,
and both groups remembered their shared ancestry.
This would seem to explain why, at least in part, in the 12th century there was an explosion of literary works that focused on the stories of King Arthur, both in England and in France.
Around 1136, a cleric from Wales called Geoffrey of Monmouth produced his History of the Kings of Britain, which he claimed to have translated into Latin from an ancient text in the British language.
On the French side, writers such as Waas and Chrétien de Troyes composed stories about Arthur and his knights that quickly gained in popularity.
In some cases, it seems likely that these works were based on long-standing oral traditions, and the 12th century, marked by a rise in literacy and the development of the university system,
seems a logical time for these stories to make their way into written form.
Geoffrey's text in particular was the equivalent of a blockbuster bestseller.
Over 200 manuscripts of his history survived from the medieval period, which is an enormous amount.
Consider, we only have 80-some manuscripts from Geoffrey Chaucer, the father of English poetry, who was writing much later.
Geoffrey of Monmouth was the one who gave the Arthurian legend its shape, as most of us know it today.
He is the one who adds the magician Merlin into the text, makes Arthur's knights eager to perform in order to win the love of ladies,
and he is the one who actually makes Arthur a king.
You heard me right.
Arthur is not called king during his own period, or even the centuries immediately following.
Rather, his early titles are Dukes Bellorum, or Comes Britanniarum,
both of which are Roman military titles and mean something like war leader, or count of the Britons.
But they definitely do not mean king.
From Geoffrey's text, the main thread of our Thurian narrative and art has progressed over the centuries,
producing the situation that we have today, where Arthur and the themes and ideals that have attached to his legend are some of the best known in the world,
especially the Western world.
When I teach our Thurian literature to undergraduates, I regularly begin by asking them to tell me, on the first day, what they know about Arthur.
We are able to fill up the chalkboard, and what is most interesting to me is that very often, they don't even know how they know all this stuff.
It seems to have filtered into their brains by some kind of cultural osmosis.
Thus, while some might see the composition of Geoffrey Amon this History of the Kings of Britain as a turning point in the development of the Legend of King Arthur,
it is still the earlier turning point, the Battle of Mount Badden, that has produced this moment.
Similarly, it is the turning point of the fall of the Roman Empire that produces the situation in Britain that makes Arthur necessary, that demands a response to the crisis.
What is important to recognize here is how this really is a case of a single individual, a unique man in every sense of the word that shaped this turning point.
For decades, the Britons had desperately needed a defender, a protector, someone who could unite them and get them to work together against the Saxons.
They didn't find that person until Arthur appeared on the scene.
His victory at Mount Badden produced both an immediate change in his historical and social context,
but it also affected a change that has been felt down the centuries until the present day and has impacted history, politics and the arts around the globe.
And although Arthur was definitely a medieval king, writers and thinkers in the early modern period repeatedly looked to him for inspiration.
Edmund Spencer, writer of the Fairy Queen, that definitive work of Renaissance England, spends much of his text concerned with the character of Prince Arthur and the ideals espoused in the Arthurian world.
Dante, who arguably helped usher in the early modern period in Italy, was similarly inspired by Arthur.
And later on, John Milton, when he set out to write the greatest epic poem conceived since antiquity, turned to the Arthurian legend as a source.
In the end, he decided on a more transcendent topic and abandoned the idea of writing the story of King Arthur in favor of composing the poem that has come to be called Paradise Lost.
In government as well, various entities in the early modern period and beyond throughout Europe would cite King Arthur as a source of inspiration or as the reason for a particular judgment.
It doesn't matter that on most occasions these claims or ideas were made on the basis of wildly inaccurate information.
What matters is that the power of Arthur was felt strongly enough that an appeal to his example, even when the facts cited were erroneous, was often a powerful and effective strategy.
If Arthur's victory over the Anglo-Saxons demonstrates how a single personality can change the shape of history, our next lecture moves to the other extreme
and explores how various broad social movements intersect at a key moment to produce a result that reverberates throughout the medieval world.
In this case, we're talking about the Muslim conquest of Spain in the year 711, an event that profoundly affected medieval Europe's conception of itself as a Christian land
and would ultimately contribute to other key turning points, such as the calling of the first crusade that we'll discuss in later lectures.
As was the case with Arthur's rise, the transformation of Spain into the Islamic society known as Al-Andalus owes something to the legacy of the past and the traces of the Roman world that lingered persistently throughout the Middle Ages.
Join us next time as we explore how the Islamic conquest of Spain occurred, what dramatic ramifications resulted from this event, and how in many ways this turning point might seem to have been inevitable, but also was accidental.
