Lecture 3, Spain Becomes Al-Andalus
Welcome back.
In our first two lectures, we've explored the idea of the turning point in the medieval
world by focusing both on what we might call big picture and local events.
We started with the fall of Rome because the collapse of this empire is what produced
the medieval world.
And the idea of Rome, the power of the past, was so compelling that it influenced myriad
aspects of life in the Middle Ages across time and space and culture.
We saw an example of this impact in our second lecture with the figure who was the historical
basis for King Arthur.
When confronted with the crisis of the Anglo-Saxon invasion in the former Roman territory of
Britain, this man, who must have been an amazing combination of war leader and statesman and
soldier and politician, rallied the Britons to fight off the invaders and create a period
of peace the inhabitants of Britain had not enjoyed since they had been citizens of Rome.
While the impact of Arthur's victory at Mount Badden had an immediate and tangible effect
in a local sense, the power of his character and significance of his victory has resonated
down through the ages and is arguably more significant for a greater part of the world
today than it ever was in the Middle Ages.
Today, we're going to explore a turning point that is in many ways diametrically opposed
to the kind of change that the force of will of one man, Arthur, affected in late 5th and
early 6th century Britain.
I'm talking about the transformation of the area we think of as Spain today into the society
medievalist call Al-Andalus.
This was a turning point in the history of the medieval world that few could have predicted
that no one, including the major players involved, really expected and that produced a culture
utterly unique in the medieval world.
In this case, it was the confluence of broad trends in religion, politics and military
conflict with a dash of serendipity thrown in that came together in surprising ways to
produce the most multicultural and tolerant society in the Europe of the Middle Ages.
In the year 711, an army of around 7,000 men, led by a man by the name of Tariq ibn Zayed,
who was a follower of a relatively new religion known as Islam, set off from Gibraltar and
landed on the southern coast of the Iberian Peninsula.
Conquest, religious or otherwise, does not necessarily seem to have been their goal.
Indeed, while the leaders of this expedition were Muslim, the bulk of the men making this
sortie were Berber tribesmen from Africa, most likely participating because of a desire
for material wealth.
Pillaging was profitable, and word had filtered south and east from Iberia that the territories
there were in a state of disarray.
It seemed like a good opportunity to both accrue some wealth and do some reconnaissance.
Maybe, the leaders thought, someday the Ummah, the Muslim community of the faithful, could
extend its reach into continental Europe.
It seems pretty clear that they did not expect that it would be this day.
It seemed like a good opportunity to both accrue some wealth and do some reconnaissance.
Pretty clear that they did not expect that it would be this day.
But as matters turned out, it was to the surprise, it seems, of just about everyone involved.
In other lectures in this course, we'll spend considerable time discussing what life was
like for the average person who lived through a particular turning point.
In our first lecture, we saw how Rome and its Romanitas had provided a relative sameness
of experience for citizens living in the Middle East, to the Roman capital, to the far western
edges of Britain.
In our second lecture, we saw how the disappearance of Rome from Britain had dramatically affected
the people living there, altering every aspect of their lives.
What is interesting about our lecture today is that trying to define the average person
in pre-Muslim Spain is incredibly difficult.
For that matter, the word average, or typical, is arguably even more difficult to pin down
when we talk about Al Andalus.
You see, because of its particular geographic location, as well as its status as a former
territory of the Roman Empire, the Iberian Peninsula was a veritable melting pot of
people from different cultural backgrounds.
There were Christians, of course.
One of the most famous was Isidore of Sevilla, whose 7th century encyclopedic work known
as the etymologies had led more than one of his contemporaries to describe him as, a man
who knew all there was to be known.
A sizable population of pre-Muslim Spain was Jewish.
Again, part of the legacy of the Roman Empire, when Rome had extended its reach into the
East and thus made it possible, and in fact, easy, for groups of Jews to move west, where
many of them seemed to have established trading communities on the Iberian Peninsula as early
as the first century.
While Christianity had been an issue for Rome during its pagan centuries, the Empire had
long had a policy of accommodating the Jews, as their communities tended to keep to themselves
and didn't engage in active proselytizing.
Jews was also a community that traditionally valued knowledge and education, and they were
seen frequently as being positive contributors to society for these and other reasons.
On the eve of the Muslim incursion in 711, Jews and Christians were living rather peaceably,
but also rather unhappily, in Spain under the rule of the Visigoths.
Now you'll remember from our first lecture that the Visigoths were major contributors
to the fall of Rome, when their leader Alaric sacked the capital itself and installed himself
as emperor in 410.
By the 8th century, the Visigoths had pushed their way into Spain, taken over, and become
Christians, at least nominally.
Up in the north were the Basques, last of the original Neolithic peoples of Europe, many
believe, isolated between mountains and the sea and stubborn, intransigent, persistent
thorns in the sides of the Visigoths.
The Visigoths themselves were not exactly the most popular of groups on the peninsula.
Prone to infighting and lacking any sort of traditions or laws when it came to rights
of succession, their rule was marked by violence and instability.
Their particular brand of Christianity was not popular with those Christians living there
before their arrival either, as they had embraced the Aryan heresy, which held that Jesus could
not be fully divine.
So what the average person in pre-Muslim Spain, Christian, Jew, even some Pagans, had was
an unhappiness with the general state of things under the Visigoths.
But the Jews were perhaps above average in their unhappiness.
While the full-blown persecutions that were coming in the 12th century hadn't yet reared
their ugly heads, there was still plenty of prejudice and persecution to go around.
Jews were forbidden from publicly practicing their religion, from intermarrying with Christians,
from circumcising their sons, and a whole host of other restrictions that were clearly
intended to either force the Jews to convert or to leave.
Most often, however, it seems that officials turned a blind eye to enforcing these laws.
They were mostly busy with inter-Visigothic squabbling of one kind or another.
But sometimes for some reason an official would suddenly decide that these laws must
be observed, and the result was a period of violent persecution that usually ended as
abruptly and unexpectedly as it had begun.
So when Tariq ibn Zayed arrived, the Jewish population, at the very least, thought that
things couldn't get much worse, and might actually be better under these new leaders.
They were right.
Because although Islam differed from Judaism and Christianity on very important tenets
of faith, Muhammad and his followers recognized and explicitly stated that Jews and Christians
should be accorded a certain amount of respect and tolerance because they were, like followers
of Islam, people of the Book, whose faith sprang from the traditions of Abraham.
But to return to that initial occursion in 711, Tariq ibn Zayed must have been surprised
when his army met so little resistance.
This was in part because of a serendipitous occurrence.
The Basques in the north were acting up again, and the king, Roderick, had traveled there
to deal with him.
He could not have been still within the borders of Spain and further away from the Islamic
invaders than he happened to be in the spring of 711.
When he finally tried to head south and counter Tariq's forces, he discovered that the nobles
who were by law supposed to answer the call were unwilling, uninterested, or both.
The Spanish nobles were tired of the constant fighting under their Visigothic leaders.
The Jewish population obviously had no inclination to come to the aid of the people who had so
persecuted them, and so Tariq ibn Zayed found himself leading a conquest in spite of himself.
As city after city quickly capitulated, Tariq just kept going on.
For a long time, however, he kept to the south, as if waiting for the Iberian forces to mount
an all-out resistance as he surely expected them to.
It must have seemed prudent to keep close to the sea in case he needed to retreat back
to North Africa, but it never happened.
By the end of 711, the Iberian Peninsula had accepted Muslim rule.
Further evidence of how this was an accidental conquest comes from the fact that when Tariq
reported his success back to his superior, he was promptly disciplined and removed from
the leadership position that had devolved to him by chance more than anything else.
The Muslim conquest of Spain happened so surprisingly easily, in part, because of the generous terms
of surrender.
The treaty with a Christian prince, a Theodomer of Mercia, notes explicitly that for the Christian
leader and his people, quote, there will not be any change in his situation, nor in that
of his people.
His right of sovereignty will not be contested.
His subjects will not be injured, nor reduced to captivity, nor separated from their children
nor their wives.
They will not be disturbed in the practice of their religion.
Their churches will not be burned, nor despoiled.
He and his subjects will have to pay each year a personal tribute of one dinar in speci,
four bushels of wheat, and four of barley, four measures of malt, four of vinegar, two
of honey, and two of oil, end quote.
In short, while non-Muslims would have to pay a tax for their difference of belief,
not much else seemed as if it had changed.
But in the end, change it did, and it changed for the better.
While Jews and Christians were, at least initially, second class citizens in Al-Andalus, it was
a pretty nice second class to be in.
Until Islam arrived, the rather arid landscape of Spain made eking out an existence difficult
for a population accustomed to trying to emulate the labor-intensive, heavy-on-water demands
agricultural practices the rest of Europe used to produce cereal grains.
The Muslim rulers, long accustomed to dealing with a lack of water, introduced more efficient
irrigation systems and crops better suited to the climate of the Iberian Peninsula.
Asparagus, oranges, watermelons, lemons, all of these were introduced to Muslims'
bane from the Arabian Peninsula and North Africa.
Almost overnight, the newly named Al-Andalus went from being a land barely able to provide
subsistence to one overflowing with abundance.
Jews and Christians had to pay a tax for being non-Muslims, but they were permitted to hold
government offices, to practice their trades, and they were exposed to new knowledge and
learning that would profoundly change their society.
As we'll discuss in much greater detail in lecture 14, it was via Muslim Spain that
innovations such as Arabic numerals were first introduced to Christian Europe.
Compared to the living conditions of the Europeans just to the north of the Iberian Peninsula,
Andalusian society must have seemed to have come from a distant planet, or for those who
were knowledgeable about such things, to recall the glory days of the Roman Empire.
This was a world where things like architecture, elaborate fountains, incredible gardens, and
fashionable clothes made from luxurious fabrics that changed from season to season, and gasp,
even day to day, were the norm rather than the exception.
To the north, the Christian Europeans were described by citizens of Al-Andalus as existing
in what seems to be a never-ending trudge toward basic survival, with the same bland
clothes that were worn until they fell apart.
Limited conception of hygiene, they only take two baths a year when Andalusian commentator
noted with horror.
They wear their clothes until they fall off, noted another.
Interestingly, as Andalusian society developed, in some ways we might say, devolved into smaller
regional principalities that often squabbled with one another, the luxury high society
factor just increased, with each principality trying to prove that their appreciation of
the finer things in life was superior to that of the neighboring region.
It was a world very different from the Christian north, but a world which heavily influenced
that Christian realm.
Those living on the borders with Andalusian Spain, even those religious leaders and monasteries,
recognized that to the south one could have access to important works of philosophy, science
and medicine that were simply unavailable in the Christian world.
Plenty of monks and scholars made the trek south to make use of the Andalusian scholastic
resources.
While there, the uniquely tolerant features of the Muslim societies on the Iberian peninsula
must have made an impression.
In a couple centuries of the Muslim conquest of Spain, there is clear evidence of intermarriage
among Muslims and Christians, Christians and Jews, and even some Jews and Muslims.
The tolerant attitude, along with the clear educational, agricultural and political superiority
of the Islamic leaders, also led to many conversions to Islam among the population.
What is interesting is that even while Andalusian Spain was developing this tolerant attitude
and commitment to the arts, the rest of the Muslim world, especially in North Africa,
had gone through a series of upheavals that had led to a change in ideals of living.
The Islam beyond Spain's borders had, after 300-some years marked by impressive multicultural
tolerance and respect, in many places become much more aesthetic, much less tolerant as
a community.
In part, this was due, no doubt, to the unforgiving landscape of North Africa, where lived many
new Muslim communities, such as Berber tribesmen.
Adherents to Islam there began to return to a stricter, simpler interpretation of the
faith, one that had much less room for tolerance of people of other faiths and what many regarded
as the excessively opulent lifestyle that was the norm in Andalusian Spain.
Other Muslim communities considered the Iberian communities as soft, prone to sin and error,
due to the luxurious and coddled lifestyles they led, and regarded also the tolerant treatment
of Christians and Jews, an inclusion of them in the highest offices of public life, as
a great error against Islam.
So Islam-Expain was truly a unique island of tolerance, sophistication, education, and
artistic sensibility between the backwater world of Europe to the north, and the increasingly
rigid forms of Islam coming to the fore in the south.
As unique as this situation was in medieval Spain, it was still very changeable, as we
can see from the example of one man, a Jew named Samuel Ha-Nagid.
Now remember, the Jewish communities had been on the Iberian Peninsula at least from the
first century AD.
Long before those Visigoths, sackers of Rome, believers in Christian heresy, and all around
unpleasant guise, made their way south into Spain and conquered it.
The Visigoths were endured, and sometimes actively resisted by Orthodox Christians and
Jews, and proved to be their own undoing when, having alienated everyone who was supposed
to help them, they fell to the reconnaissance forces of Tariq ibn Zaid when he landed on
the southern shore in 711.
As the Muslims continued to push north into Spain, they adopted a very interesting policy
of conquest.
Once a town or community had yielded to them, and they had accepted the terms of surrender,
they moved on, leaving local native leaders in charge to oversee the day-to-day ruling
of the territory.
Most often, when they had to pick a local leader or leaders to put in charge, they selected
members of the Jewish community.
Sometimes there would be a backlash on the part of the Christians of that community,
and those Jews momentarily in power would leave and make their way to another town,
but very often, at the top of any community in Andalusia and Spain, you had a mix of Christians,
Muslims, and Jews who were ruling, making laws, and overseeing the life of the society
in concert.
Samuel Hanagid, member of an upper-class Jewish family who had skills in bureaucracy, abilities
in fighting, and a talent in the arts, was living in Córdoba in 1013 when it was attacked
by a contingent of Berber Muslims.
Quite sure that these conquerors would be not half so tolerant as the previous rulers,
Samuel and his family fled to Granada, where his wit and intellect quickly brought him
to the attention of the then heir and soon king of the territory, Badis.
Samuel quickly became the second most important man in the region, Badis' vizier, military
commander, sometime court poet, and more.
In fact, Samuel went so far as to describe himself as, quote, the king David of my age,
end quote.
While some of this is arrogance, most of it was true.
Even the Muslim chronicler Ibn Hayan grudgingly acknowledged Samuel's unique talent even as
he expressed his belief that a Jew should not enjoy such prestige, quote, this cursed
man was a superior man, although God did not inform him of the right religion, end quote.
And indeed, Samuel was a superior man.
For twenty years he served as captain of the leader Badis' grenade and army and with
great success.
A renowned warrior on the field, he composed moving poetry off it.
These poems were traditionally Jewish in the subject matter, but full of Islamic stylistic
flourishes.
He spoke Arabic and mingled with those at the top of the social and political elite,
but recognized still that prejudice existed and thought of himself, at least in part,
as the protector of the Jews who lived within his community.
Many of his fellow Jews enjoyed protection because of Samuel's high status, but also
because they had proved to the Muslim leaders again and again that they were educated and
reasoned and thus made excellent administrators and civil servants.
In the words of scholar Chris Launey, the Jews, quote, blessed Spain's broader society
with a disproportionate share of literate citizens.
As Spain's non-threatening minority, well-educated Jews were valuable and safe additions to the
civil service, end quote.
Launey also notes that fortunes of Jews and Christians and Muslims in some instances could
be, quote, wildly gyrating, end quote.
In later Al-Andalus, as smaller kingdoms rose up, petty fights broke out, and from time
to time religious prejudice reared its head.
The Christians in the north were attempting to reclaim Spain for themselves and in various
instances engaged in outright warfare with Jewish and Muslim factions.
The Jews and Muslims sometimes fought back, sometimes fought each other, but it was a
strange effect of this conflict that, while in almost any other society in the world at
this time such infighting would have caused the people involved to hunker down and close
the hatches, all three groups in Spain seemed to regard the construction of glorious religious
buildings or administrative offices or the addition of spectacular and luxurious elements
to gardens, fountains, and libraries as a part of how one waged these various wars.
It is thanks to these conflicts that we have such architectural treasures today like the
columns of the prayer hall of the great mosque of Córdoba.
If you want to talk about the power of the past, one of our recurring course themes,
well here it is.
The stones for the mosque were quarried from Roman ruins and Visigoth churches and then
used to make portions of the great mosque.
We see all kinds of these architectural reminders both of how tolerant and unique the society
was, but also how that tolerance ultimately could not last.
A structure known as El Transito in Toledo was originally a synagogue, but one designed
by Muslim artists and builders, so it is full of what we might call Moorish touches and
flourishes.
When the Jews were ultimately and finally expelled from Spain, this space was made into
a church.
Similarly, Sevilla's great cathedral stands in the spot where the mosque was once.
To make the church tower, they simply co-opted the mosque's minaret and put a bell tower
on top of it.
Designed by ever more eager Christian forces in the north and groups espousing a more Spartan
and less forgiving brand of Islam in the south, Al-Andalus became subject to more and more
infighting among Jews, Muslims, and Christians, even as many among those groups continued to
try and work together and indeed intermarried, formed business relationships, and served
the government.
Once again, we see how a series of social, historical, religious, and political forces
came together and no one group or person could prevent them from taking their course
and sweeping all those caught up in it along with them.
It is these large forces that made Al-Andalus, which almost came into existence in spite
of itself, and it would be these large forces that would bring it to its end.
But when the end of Muslim Spain did come, many, many traces remained and influenced
the way Spain thought of itself in relationship to the rest of the world, then and down to
the present day.
What is interesting is that for a turning point that pretty much came about by accident
and exerted its influence by any number of actors taking the path of least resistance,
in later years this history would be rewritten so that one of the most singular personalities
of the medieval world, Charlemagne, whom we will meet very soon, plays a role in the
events that unfolded.
In our upcoming lecture on Charlemagne, you'll learn that he was many things, one of which
was a great war leader and defeater of Islamic forces, or moors, as his people called them.
The poem The Song of Roland was written sometime in the 12th century and belongs to that special
category of poetry known as the chanson de geste, or songs of great deeds, and it tells
the story of the battle of Rancival in 778, during which Charlemagne's rearguard was
attacked while going through the past at Rancival, a rare military defeat for the great
leader and one that became impressed upon the cultural consciousness of the time.
The poem is quite clear in asserting the rightness of Christians over all other religious groups.
The key line of the poem is, quote, pagans are wrong and Christians are right, end quote.
What's fascinating about this poem is that it has rewritten the story of what really
happened.
After campaigning in northern Spain, Charlemagne and his troops withdraw and he leaves his
nephew, Roland, in charge of the rearguard.
According to the poem, Roland, his best friend Oliver, and all of their company are attacked
due to some treacherous double dealing on the part of Roland's evil stepfather, Ganylon.
Roland has a horn that can be heard from miles away, but despite urging on the part of Oliver
that he blow it to summon his uncle Charlemagne and his troops back to save them, Roland refuses
to blow the horn until it is too late.
Roland and all his troops are slaughtered and Charlemagne is brought low, weeping about
the cruelty of fate.
In the poem, it is Saracens that attack the rearguard.
This was the medieval word for followers of Islam.
But in history and reality, it was those Basques.
Remember the people who were occupying the Spanish king's attention when Tariq ibn Zayed
landed in the south?
It was the Basques who attacked Charlemagne's army in real life.
In a bizarre and ironic account of history repeating itself and attempts to rewrite it, and one
that many scholars have pointed to, in 2004 in Madrid, several bombs destroyed four commuter
trains in a terrorist attack.
In the aftermath, while people scrambled to assign blame, many fingers first pointed
to the Basque separatist group, Etta, which had long agitated to be independent of Spain.
When it was all sorted out, it was discovered that this had been a radical Islamist attack.
So in the 12th century, Basque attackers had been replaced with Moorish ones in the cultural
consciousness, and several centuries later, Moorish, or more properly Islamic attackers,
had first been replaced with Basques.
Tragic as these events may be, they do point up a way of being and thinking in Spain that
has, since the early Middle Ages, made it utterly unique among European societies.
And for that matter, among Islamic societies.
It also helps us answer the so what question.
Although the Jews and Muslims were formally expelled from Spain in 1492, a subject we'll
discuss at greater length in another lecture, the multiculturalism and tolerance that had
prevailed at all levels of Andalusian society could not be wholly undone.
It is from Spain that so many of the events that seemed to herald the early modern age
would come, and these could not have been had it not been for the existence of the society
of Christians, Jews, and Muslims that was known as Al Andalus.
In our next lecture, we'll turn our attention to the main subject of the song of Roland,
the Emperor Charlemagne, and see how he and his career were shaped by his experiences
in Muslim Spain.
