Lecture 5, The Scandinavians' Goa Viking.
Welcome back.
Over the last four lectures, we've explored examples of each of the different kinds of turning points in this lecture series.
Those whose impact was immediate, those that weren't fully appreciated at first by those who lived through them,
and those the impact of which was much greater years or even centuries after the fact.
All of our previous four lectures actually managed to belong to many of these categories at once.
The fall of Rome is certainly all of these things, and Arthur's defeat of the Anglo-Saxons was definitely important in the moment,
but the ripples from this event continue down into the present day.
The period in which the Iberian Peninsula was Muslim-controlled was long, stretching from 711 to 1492,
but it too radically changed the European world in both the short and the long term.
And Charlemagne's Palace School at Aachen was a radical medieval innovation for which scholars today are still grateful.
In this lecture, we will be talking about one of the most abrupt and startling turning points in the medieval world,
the moment when some Scandinavians decided to go a Viking.
On June 8th of the year 793, a monk at Lindisfarne Abbey in the area of England known as Northumberland
looked out to sea and thought he saw something, a sail perhaps?
But who would be at sea and why would they be heading toward this community of monks
who had long resided on this tidal island largely removed from the rest of the world?
When he looked up at the horizon again, the sail was gone.
He probably shrugged and went back to whatever he had been doing the moment before,
tending to the monastery's garden, minding the community's sheep,
or if the bells had chimed for one of the many hours of prayer scattered throughout the day,
he had most likely laid down his spade or trowel and headed into the chapel,
perhaps for the prayer period of Tirse, Sext, or Nones.
The life of a monk in 793 involved manual labor to provide for the community artistic work,
such as the copying and illustration or illumination of important texts, and prayer.
On that day in June, the monk probably didn't give it a second thought
as he rose from the garden beds, brushed the dirt off his cassock, and headed toward the chapel.
But he had been right. He had seen a sail.
As they had gotten close to shore, however, the Scandinavian raiders manning the vessel
had probably taken the sail down from its stepped mast, the better to blend into the horizon,
and so the monk had dismissed it as his eyes playing tricks on him.
An hour or so later, when the low, eel-like Viking craft scraped ashore on the beach below the abbey,
the monk would wish he had paid more attention to what he had seen.
Although, in the long run, it might not have made much difference,
as nothing could have prepared him for what was to come.
What happened next is perhaps the most bloody, brutal, and horrifying couple of hours
in living memory for those who experienced it.
The Vikings who came ashore discovered that the community they encountered
was both full of treasures, gold, silver, and jewels,
mostly adorning book covers or religious items such as chalices, crosses, etc.
And this community was also full of men who either wouldn't or couldn't fight back.
In the space of a few hours, they killed many of the monks, took more of them hostage,
slaughtered a lot of the livestock, and looted the chapel and library.
This sacrilege would have seemed all the more horrifying to Christians
who would have regarded such bloodshed and thievery in a supposedly sacred place
as the ultimate in profanity.
To the Viking raiders, however, as polytheistic non-Christians,
monasteries to them were just big, unprotected storehouses of loot, waiting to be pillaged.
In the eyes of the Vikings, they were no different from other strongholds
or repositories of wealth they would target,
except for the fact that these seemed to be easier to conquer.
The scholar Alcuin of York, whom you may remember as the man Charlemagne recruited
to head his palace school at Aachen, famously wrote of these events in a letter,
quote,
Never before has such a terror appeared as we have now suffered from a pagan race,
nor was it thought that such an inroad from the sea could be made.
Behold, the Church of St. Cuthbert, spattered with the blood of the priests of God,
despoiled of all its ornaments, end quote.
Alcuin's horror and despair comes through in this and several others of his letters
to the King of Northumbria and to the Bishop of Lindisfarne.
But so too does his sense that this must be a punishment sent from God.
The Lord, he seems to reason, would not have let heathens attack such a holy place
if the people living there hadn't done something to deserve it.
The sheer audacity, violence, and unexpected quality of the attack on Lindisfarne
makes its meaning clear when we think of turning points in the medieval world.
With this attack, the age of the Vikings had begun.
When they pillaged, the Vikings were only interested in things that were of value to them
and since at this point they were an illiterate or more accurately pre-literate society,
the covers of books were of great interest to them
while what was between those covers was not at all interesting.
This fact was and is particularly distressing, especially for scholars,
as medieval books were and are in so many ways more precious than gold or jewels.
Repositories of knowledge and wisdom, they had to be laboriously copied by hand
and were carefully guarded and preserved until, of course, the Vikings got there,
ripped off the jeweled covers, and tossed the pages aside.
One story that strikingly demonstrates the devastation the Viking raids had
while also being a feel-good story with a little bit of serendipity thrown in
is the story of the Book of Kells.
This manuscript is one of the most gorgeously and intricately illuminated texts of the medieval period
and when you see it for the first time, and you can't see it today,
it's on display at Trinity College Library in Dublin,
when you see it today, it literally takes your breath away.
The textual contents are rather unremarkable for the time and place.
It includes the four gospels of the New Testament,
but the decoration is unlike just about anything that the world had ever seen.
Illuminated in what we call the Hiberno-Saxon style, the so-called carpet pages,
and these are pages that have only decorations but no text,
these carpet pages are elaborate, dizzying displays of swirls and knots and curly cues
that fold back and over and twist around one another
with ever smaller and more intricately rendered details,
along with some whimsical touches.
There's the representation of a cat and a mouse, for example,
each nibbling the edges of a communion wafer in one scene,
presumably this wafer had been dropped by a priest while performing the mass.
The most stunningly beautiful of these pages is the so-called Cairo page,
and Cai and Rho are the first two letters of Christ's name in Greek,
and it's these two letters that are the centerpiece of this particular page, hence its name.
This page seems to explode with lines and colors and shapes,
and the closer you look, the more detail you see,
and then you look at it a little closer, and you see more detail.
I once had a student for his final project in my medieval world class
try to recreate the Cairo page of the Book of Kells.
He was a studio art major, and this seemed something within his grasp.
Using modern pens, inks, and paper,
he told me that the project had taken him over a month of sustained work every night,
and at the end of it, he had a headache, blurred vision, and felt close to madness,
and he said he still couldn't get it quite right.
And what happened to this manuscript?
Well, it almost was destroyed in the Viking raids.
An entry for the year 1007 in the annals of Ulster notes that,
quote, the great gospel, the chief relic of the western world,
was wickedly stolen during the night from the western sacristy of the great stone church at Cananus, end quote.
It was the Vikings who stole it, most likely because of its magnificent cover
that was reportedly worked gold decorated with numerous jewels.
The Vikings ripped the covers off and tossed the pages themselves into a bog.
And in one of those fortunate, serendipitous moments we find throughout history,
by choosing to throw it into a peat bog, the Vikings actually saved the pages,
as peat has long been known to operate as a preservative,
hence those bog bodies that regularly turn up in Ireland and Scotland
when people are cutting the peat for sod.
Although many of these bodies have proven to be hundreds and sometimes thousands of years old,
they are so perfectly preserved, down to the very fingernails,
that locals have often surmised that they must be people known to the community
who have recently gone missing.
They couldn't possibly be relics of the medieval or the Iron Age,
but in fact they are, and the peat bog has preserved them right down to the smallest detail,
including the contents of their stomachs and the calluses on their fingers.
But back to the Book of Kells.
Somehow, sometime in the face of the Viking invasions,
it was thrown into a bog,
and sometime later seems to have been found and returned to its proper home.
Its stay in the bog was relatively short,
and there's one school of thought that holds that it may have been a monk who did this
in order to protect the text from the Vikings.
It seems even then that people knew of the preservative power of the bog.
In the year 2006, a peat digger in Ireland uncovered a Book of Psalms,
still readable, that had lain in a bog for 1200 years.
The story of the survival of the Book of Kells demonstrates both the tragedy that was the Viking raids
and the great good luck that sometimes smiles upon history,
preserving fragments here and there that help us better understand the past.
In recent years, it has become popular in some scholarly circles
to downplay the impact of the sack of Lindisfarne.
Some researchers have pointed out that Lindisfarne was certainly not the first contact
between the 7th and 8th century Scandinavian world and the Christian realms beyond,
nor was it the first incidence of pillaging and slaughter on the part of the Vikings.
And as far as we can prove it, these claims are true.
At the same time, however,
Lindisfarne does seem to mark a clear shift in the way the Scandinavian world
interacted with the rest of Europe.
And while there's evidence that Scandinavian peoples moving through Europe
during the period of what we call the Viking diaspora of the 8th and 9th centuries
do engage in peaceful activities, and by peaceful activities,
I mean basic things like trade, farming, raising families and the like,
research suggests they were still more brutal than not.
Scholar Richard Kemp argues for a more measured view of the Vikings,
but he also notes, quote, let's not run away with the idea.
He wasn't called Eric Bloodaxe because he was good with children, end quote.
And so many Viking leaders have names like Eric Bloodaxe.
There's Thorfinn Skull Splitter and Ivor the Boneless.
These two stand out along with Eric's name.
What is interesting is that as dramatic as this event, the sack of Lindisfarne, was,
it doesn't necessarily seem to be the case that people in the medieval world
saw this as a real turning point, as a moment when things shifted
and everything would be different from that moment on.
Did they find the raid horrifying?
Yes.
Did they think that this effectively marked a turning point in the relationship
of the Scandinavian world to the rest of Europe?
No.
It seems as if those who lived through this horrific event
seemed to believe that this was something unusual, a one-off,
unlikely to be repeated.
In other words, the average person living in the area
might have been shocked and saddened at what had happened,
but probably didn't feel any fear for him or herself.
In the way that many of us today read the news of a terrible car accident,
shutter, and then turn the page, thinking that this probably won't happen to us,
people living in England at the end of the 8th century
probably didn't worry too much for themselves, at least not right away.
That might explain why it took almost a century for the monks of Lindisfarne
to leave the place and take the bones of their beloved St. Cuthbert with them.
It took repeated attacks of Viking war parties on the monastery
over many decades before the monks finally threw in the towel and fled.
But after a century, it was finally clear to those living in the medieval world.
The Vikings were here, they would keep coming,
and their power and influence had spread throughout the known world almost overnight.
As if a light bulb had turned on,
people a century later looked back to the sack of Lindisfarne
and saw it for what it had really been, a dramatic change in the way of the world.
So why, in the late 8th century, did so many Scandinavians
suddenly turn away from their relatively peaceful lives as farmers and traders and craftsmen
and set their sights on Christian Europe and its monasteries with such a bloodthirsty determinedness?
Well, this is one of those interesting questions to which no one truly knows the answer,
although there are many theories that have been floated.
And it seems that the answer is not a simple thing, it's not one thing,
but it's a series of occurrences in the spheres of the political, the social, and the climatic
that happened to coincide all at once that produced what we have come to call the Viking Age.
Now I should pause here and note that the word Viking is Germanic in origin,
and it first appears in English sources.
But it seems likely that Scandinavian cousins of the English,
they all had a similar idea of the meaning of this word.
The goal of Viking was to put down your plow or spade or blacksmith's tongues and go raiding.
People from around the North Sea have been going Viking intermittently for some time.
It's just at the end of the 8th century that this seems to become a habitual rather than occasional activity.
Scandinavian culture at this time was rural, agrarian, and based on gift exchange.
Person cemented bonds with other people and especially with leaders or members of other tribes
by exchanging weapons, gold, horses, and similar objects.
What seems to have happened is that there was an upsurge in population
that coincided with a particularly inhospitable shift in the climate,
which meant that farms were producing fewer crops at exactly the same time
that there were more people around who needed them.
Such a situation meant that establishing bonds of friendship and loyalty with powerful leaders
was now more important than ever, simply to ensure survival.
And with more and more people attempting to do this, there were fewer and fewer local resources.
And this meant that once these pressures reached a certain critical mass,
the easiest thing to do was to leave your community, travel just a little bit south,
and take the treasure you wanted and needed from people who were not expecting you.
And once they got going, the Vikings spread throughout the European world of the Middle Ages
at what seems to have been an absolutely breakneck pace.
They harried England, about which more in our lecture on Alfred the Great.
They barreled through Charlemagne's Carolingian Empire.
They moved south into the Mediterranean and east into modern-day Poland, Hungary, and Russia.
One reason for their quick movements throughout the medieval world
was due to the unique nature of their ships and their sailing abilities.
Viking long ships were low to the water, flexible,
moving with the impact of waves rather than attempting to combat or resist that energy,
and these ships had a supremely shallow draft,
meaning they could move easily with a full crew in just three feet of water.
The stepped mast I mentioned in the opening of this lecture
meant that they could employ wind power when it suited them,
but switch to oars when greater maneuverability and stealth were required.
All of this in combination meant that rivers that emptied into the sea
were navigable by Viking ships.
In other words, they could go where other boats could not
and could sneak up on riverside communities
who might be expecting hostility from the land but not the water.
In Carolingian France in particular, the inhabitants pretty quickly figured this out
and began mounting defensive systems on bridges and along river banks.
Sometimes good-sized rocks dropped from a great distance
were enough to convince a band of marauders to turn back
and leave a particular community in peace.
The movement of Viking peoples throughout the medieval world
would profoundly change it in multiple respects.
In the 10th century, the king of France was smart enough to realize
that he might as well cede some land to these invaders,
give them titles, and have them fight for him rather than against him.
The result of this diplomacy was Normandy, the land of the Northmen,
and that legacy would be felt centuries later
when the scion of the Norman lords, William the Bastard,
would conquer England in what is perhaps the most profound turning point
of any in the medieval period.
But we'll talk about William and his conquest in a later lecture.
In year 874, a Norseman by the name of Ingleford Arnerson
was banished due to a blood feud, and really that should come as no surprise.
Blood feuds were quite common in Scandinavian world.
He and his followers decided that they would settle on the uninhabited land mass we call Iceland.
Before they beached their ships there, however, they stopped in Dublin,
which by this point had become an important Viking outpost for both trade and raiding.
They picked up a bunch of female slaves, Dublin was also a slaving depot,
and then headed on up to Iceland.
DNA analysis has recently confirmed what the stories and sagas had long held to be true.
If one tracks descent through both patrilineal and matrilineal descent in Iceland,
you can see that three-quarters of the males bear prominent Scandinavian gene markers,
while three-quarters of the women bear markers in their mitochondrial DNA
that show that the women were of Irish or other Celtic descent.
And apart from Iceland, the Vikings kept going,
establishing a community to the east of Poland and north of the Black Sea along the Dnieper River.
What had started out as raiding headquarters in the 8th century
became an honest to God principality by the end of the 9th.
The Vikings had conquered the native Slavs, established government,
farming communities, and trading centers,
and in the process they created a land that would come to be called Kievan Rus.
It is from the word Rus that we get the name of the larger territory
that eventually evolved out of it, Russia.
For a time, the Rus were at odds with the Byzantine Empire to the south,
but so feared and skilled were these Vikings as fighters
that eventually the Byzantine Emperor thought, like the King of France,
that it might be a better idea to invite these people in instead of trying to keep them out.
Thus was born the Varangian Guard, an elite storied military order
that acted as the Emperor's personal bodyguard
and whose fearlessness and skill with weaponry became legendary.
Eventually, out of this relationship with Byzantium,
the Viking settlers in the east, the Rus,
were persuaded to give up their pagan polytheistic beliefs and convert.
The 10th and 11th centuries are the periods I like to refer to as everyone pick a mono-theism,
which is what seems to be happening to all the polytheistic peoples
who had been hanging on to their belief systems.
The Khazars in the east picked Judaism.
The Bulgars along the Volga River converted to Islam.
And the inhabitants of Kiev and Rus opted for Christianity,
but significantly they opted for what would become Eastern Orthodox Christianity,
not Roman or Latin Catholicism.
This choice was hugely important because it meant that while the Viking settlers here
were in some way connected to their cultural cousins in the west who had also chosen Christianity,
they were also always separate from them and oriented toward the east and the south.
It is a choice that would have huge repercussions, as we will see.
But before they converted, what were these Viking invaders slash settlers like
in terms of culture and religion?
We are fortunate in that we have an eyewitness account from a man named Ahmed Ibn Farlan.
He was a Muslim sent from Baghdad in the year 921 to act as ambassador to the Bulgars,
who are living in what is today Bulgaria along the Volga River.
As you'll remember from our lecture on Muslim Spain,
during this part of the Middle Ages, Islamic society was far superior to anything in the European west
in almost every area.
Arts, architecture, education, medicine, hygiene, all of these areas.
And Baghdad was arguably the greatest city in the world,
evoking something of the glories of the height of the Roman Empire,
but in a decidedly Middle Eastern key.
We can imagine that if the Vikings seemed like demons sent from hell to the peoples
who endured their raids in France, Ireland, England, and elsewhere on the continent,
they must have seemed impossibly barbarian to a civilized scholar, poet, and diplomat
like Ahmed Ibn Farlan, when he encountered them on his trip to the north and west.
Ibn Farlan begins his observation with what seems like admiration and praise.
Quote, I have seen the Rus as they came on their merchant journeys and encamped by the Volga.
I have never seen more perfect physical specimens, tall as date palms, blond and ruddy.
But then he goes on to add, quote, they are the filthiest of God's creatures.
They have no modesty in defecation and urination, nor do they wash after pollution from orgasm,
nor do they wash their hands before eating.
Thus they are like wild asses, end quote.
He goes on to give a fascinating description of a Viking ship burial,
in which he describes the pagan tradition of burying a king with goods and weapons and wealth
to take with him to the afterlife.
He describes how the body of the king is laid in a ship,
and then a girl from among the king's household, usually a slave,
volunteers to accompany her lord to the afterlife.
Ibn Farlan describes the process of the slave girl's selection, the drinking and sex,
and adorning with jewels she enjoys in the ten days or so between the death of the king and his burial,
and then how she is drugged, garaded, and stabbed on board the burial ship, which is then lit on fire.
The difference between the customs and beliefs of the monotheistic Islamic tradition
and the pagan polytheistic culture of the Vikings is, according to Ibn Farlan,
a dress directly at one point, quote,
One of the roosts was at my side, and I heard him speak to the interpreter who was present.
I asked the interpreter what he said. He answered,
He said, you Arabs are fools. Why? I asked him.
He said, you take the people who are most dear to you and whom you honor most
and put them into the ground where insects and worms devour them.
We burn him in a moment so that he enters paradise at once, end quote.
Ibn Farlan's account of his experience is a fascinating eyewitness account
of what pagan Germanic culture must have been like.
Because the Vikings were a preliterate society
and did not adopt the practices of reading and writing until after their convergence to Christianity,
we have almost no textual evidence of what this world must have been like.
Once converted, they understandably, perhaps, turned their backs on their non-Christian pasts
and didn't bother to keep any record for the sake of posterity.
Thus, we have to rely on outsider accounts of people like Ibn Farlan.
While his view was certainly biased by his own cultural customs and traditions,
his document is a fascinating and seemingly faithful account of the very real events he witnessed in the 10th century.
At the other end of the world, we have additional eyewitness accounts from England,
where at the end of the 9th century, the Christian king of the West Saxons, Alfred the Great,
was having his own Viking problem.
If the turning point that was the Viking diaspora was one of those events
that occurred because of multiple factors coming together in random fashion at just the right time,
then the end of that movement in England is an illustration of the opposite.
Alfred the Great stopped the Viking incursions
and, in the process, laid the foundation for what would become the nation of England.
In today's lecture, we've seen how climate change, population pressures,
social and cultural values, and skill in a particular ability, shipbuilding,
all combined at exactly the right moment to make Viking raiders a force
that changed the medieval world from Britain to France to Russia to Iceland and beyond.
In our next lecture, we'll see how the will of a single individual altered
what seemed to be an unstoppable flow of change, altering the course of what we might call the Viking River.
