Lecture 7. The Battle of Lechfeld.
Welcome back. In our last lecture, we discussed how a single man, through the force of his
own will and ambition, pulled himself up by his bootstraps out of the direst of situations.
Alfred, king of Wessex, found himself on the run, forced to hide from marauding vikings
in the swamps of Ethelny. Never had the nation of England come so close to not existing.
Taking much of his inspiration from another singular figure of history, Charlemagne,
Alfred went on to reclaim his throne, make peace with the vikings, expand his borders,
implement an educational program, and lay the foundation for his grandson to become king
of England. This turning point was intensely personal, as it had to have happened when
Alfred was at his lowest point, perhaps as he let those infamous cakes burn.
If the story of Alfred and his turning point was about the attempt to achieve peace, then
today we are looking in the other direction, to a turning point that ultimately was all
about making war, and which would affect how wars were fought throughout the medieval world
from this point on. Given the pervasively violent nature of the medieval world, this
turning point arguably affected the whole of medieval society.
The Middle Ages was, without question, a violent time. When disputes were most often settled
through armed conflict, and indeed, the entire social hierarchy was rooted in a system of
loyalty paired with the promise to commit or to protect someone from violence. Seen from
this perspective, it might seem counterintuitive to talk of one particular battle as marking
a turning point. But the focus of our lecture today truly was a watershed moment in history.
So what, you might be asking, was so important about the Battle of Lechfeld in 955 that we
should devote a whole lecture to it. How did this conflict differ from so many others,
and what made it a real turning point? Even if you're not familiar with the history of
the Middle Ages, there are probably a few battles the names of which you know. The Battle
of Hastings, the Battle of Agincourt, these might ring a bell if only vaguely. For most
people, though, the Battle of Lechfeld doesn't even register as the merest hint of a blip
on their radar. So why talk about this fight? The answer is that this event was one of the
most remarkable expressions of that violence so endemic to the medieval world, and it
was significant both in its immediate outcomes and its long-term effects. After Lechfeld,
boundaries that had been fluid were firmly drawn. The idea of the Holy Roman Empire
became more concretely entrenched in the way that medieval people imagined their world,
and the way that medieval people waged war was forever changed. But there's more. With
this change in approach to armed conflict, some scholars have argued that the entire
social order was changed as well in ways that still influenced society to this day.
In the 9th and 10th centuries, a new force began to threaten the medieval world from
the east. These were the Majars, nomadic horsemen from the steppes of Asia who began to push
west in a series of frightening raids, especially along the borders of what we think of as modern
Germany. One reason these groups of raiders were so terrifying is because they could shoot
arrows off the back of a moving horse with deadly accuracy. And the thing that allowed
them to do this was a simple yet radical technological innovation, a small loop of metal known as
the stirrup. Stirrups didn't come into common use in Europe until quite late around the
8th century. The Majars, or Hungarians as they came to be called by medieval Europeans,
had been using stirrups for some time prior to this, and they were formidable foes for
any who encountered them. The innovation of the stirrup allowed men on horseback to balance
themselves better, stay mounted more easily, and absorb impacts more efficiently.
Several scholars have suggested that this simple piece of metal is in fact what produced
high and late medieval society. They say that without this technological advance, the hierarchy
of nobility, as it persisted from about the year 1000 into the early modern period and
beyond, could not have come into being. And without the nobles in power at the top directing
medieval society, the Renaissance and the modern world that grew out of that society
would have looked considerably different. This assertion has become part of what is
called, I kid you not, the great stirrup controversy. There are plenty of scholars who assert that
the stirrup was really not that big a deal, that it's still possible to ride and fight
effectively from the back of a horse even without this bit of extra stability, and while
this innovation certainly made warfare on horseback easier, it was not at all essential
to its development. In fact, these scholars assert the effect of the stirrup is really
negligible. I fall somewhere in between the two camps, and that I think the stirrup definitely
made a difference in the way medieval leaders thought about warfare and what they might
be capable of on the battlefield, but I also agree that it was not quite the revolutionary
development that some have argued it is. As I've said before, for much of the medieval
period when you went to war, you rode your horse to the battle, got off, fought, and
if you were lucky enough to survive, you got back on your horse and you rode home. If there
was something that made it possible to fight in a different way, then that something would
certainly be a game changer. But it turns out it was one that was not fully appreciated
at first, at least in part because once people have gotten used to and proficient at doing
something a certain way, they tend to stick with what works and what they know. As I said
before, the stirrup had come into use well before 955 in the Battle of Lechfeld, but
this was the first time that someone had put a few essential facts concerning this technology
and warfare together. Because the innovation of the stirrup made it less likely that you
would fall off your horse, it suddenly made the idea of doing more of one's fighting
on horseback a compelling one. The reason for this is a simple matter of physics. It
takes a lot of effort to get a fully armored man up on his horse. In some cases, mounting
blocks and even winches were used to help the knight get his heavily armored self on
the back of his weary steed. So a knight who falls off his horse in battle has lost much
of his power and presents a problem when he's standing in the middle of a field of battle
with mounted armored warriors around and especially above him. This would be why Richard III
of England, when knocked from his horse at the Battle of Bosworth Field, reportedly went
down flailing furiously with his sword and yelling, a horse, a horse, my kingdom for
a horse. If a horse could have been found for him, he might have been able to remount
himself with the aid of that little piece of metal and who knows how that battle then
might have ended. But as it was, Richard died there on the field and a new era was ushered
in, the reign of the tutors and all of this because there was no horse for the king.
But to return to Lechfeld, the Majars were formidable in their fighting abilities on
horseback and they had been harassing the people of the Atonian dynasty and offshoot
from the faded memory of Charlemagne's Carolingian Empire for several decades. Matters were not
helped by the fact that in this particular area of the medieval world, the local inhabitants
were strongly divided and usually fighting amongst themselves. Indeed, just prior to
the Battle of Lechfeld, King Otto had been spending his time putting down various rebellions,
including one spearheaded by his own son-in-law and son. Then, in late June 955, he received
word that the Majar forces were invading again and he rallied his various legions, contingents
of Franks, Saxons, Bavarians, Swabians, Bohemians, and more, to join him in marching eastward.
In early August, they made it to the town of Augsburg, where the invading forces were
inflicting heavy losses on the population who would garrison themselves inside a stronghold.
When the fighting began, it looked as if the quick, light, sporadic tactics of the Majars
would carry the day, flee on their horses, they could hurry and retreat, hurry and retreat,
and shoot arrows from a great distance, which meant they could inflict great damage while
risking little chance of the same thing happening to them. But by nightfall on August 10th, the
Majars would have been defeated, Otto acclaimed as the new Holy Roman Emperor, and medieval
warfare would never be the same. When Otto and his troops arrived at Augsburg on the Lech,
they found a scene of chaos. Somewhere between 15,000 and 20,000 light Majar cavalry were
laying siege to the fortress near the banks of the river, although by all accounts the Germans
barricaded within were doing an impressive job defending themselves. When Otto and his legions
numbering around 7,000 arrived, the Majars pulled back, but must have thought, given their
numbers, they would still emerge victorious. Even with the arrival of Otto's son-in-law,
Conrad, Duke of Lorraine, the German ranks swelled to just about 8,000, half of what the Majars
had, and yes, this is the same son-in-law who had just weeks earlier rebelled against Otto.
Apparently, he had had a change of heart, switching his allegiance away from the pagan
Hungarians and back to the Christian Atonians. Truth really is stranger than fiction sometimes.
When the fighting started up again, it seemed at first that the superior numbers and agile
fighting tactics of the Majars would win out. Imagine how it must have seemed to those on
the Hungarian side. These Germans, their ranks swelled with Bohemians, Bavarians and who
knew what other groups, were slow moving, weighed down by armor and swords and a baggage
train that accompanied them wherever they went. Supremely self-confident, the Majars crossed
the river and immediately attacked the contingents of the Swabians and Bohemians. After inflicting
heavy losses, they soon retreated, possibly laughing at the fact that the opposition forces
had lost control of their baggage train, which contained so many pieces of equipment vital
to the style of warfare, particular to the German-led army. Otto ordered his son-in-law,
Conrad, to get the baggage train back at all costs. This he did, but by the end of the
day, Conrad would lie dead. It seemed almost certain that this would be another victory
for the Hungarians. It was after this that Otto made what may have been the single most
important decision of a military leader in the Middle Ages. During the lull in the fighting,
he told his men to arm and mount their horses. Defense was done. They were going on the
offensive now. He deployed all his men in a single straight line, holding nothing in
reserve. And then, he ordered them to charge and keep going, holding the line, no matter
what. And so, the German line moved forward. The Majars fired volley after volley of arrows,
expecting this would at least slow the Germans down. It did not. They fired again. Still,
Otto's forces came on. And they kept coming, maintaining ranks all the way to the enemy
line. For most of those in the Majar contingent, the final view of what they saw must have
seemed like a giant, armored, bewelled, metal wave about to break over them. The Atonian
forces bore down on the Hungarians, rode over them, and then, once in this position, turned
back and began hand-to-hand combat. The Majars were now at a serious disadvantage. The field
was crowded, and there was no space for them to move, no place for them to deploy their strike
and retreat tactics. They were effectively tracked. What is even more important is that the
German ranks did not dissipate or give in to premature celebration as they had been known
to do in the past. For once, they were disciplined and followed orders. When the Majar leader
Bullschuh attempted to feign a retreat in order to draw some of the German forces away from
their formation, the plan failed. None of the German forces took the bait. When a Majar contingent
managed to flank the German allied Swabians and attack them from both sides, the Swabians
maintained discipline, fought off panic, and rearranged themselves quickly to be fighting
on two fronts. Time and again, something could have gone wrong. Something could have caused
the German line to break and the Majars to emerge victorious. If this had happened, then perhaps
no one in later days would have paid much attention to the heavy cavalry charge that Otto had
mounted. If the Germans had lost, it might have taken years or decades longer for someone
to recognize what an effective military weapon Otto had deployed that day. Here, the stirrup,
the lance, the sword, and the saddle, on their own seemingly rather simple pieces of equipment
would combine with a newly achieved military discipline to affect one of the most stunning
and decisive victories of the medieval era. Otto lost around three thousand men in the attack
and the Majars lost something like five thousand. What was more important than the numbers, however,
was the emphatic means with which Otto asserted his victory. When the Majars realized they were
losing, they tried to retreat across the river only to be cut down from behind by the Atonian
forces as they tried exhausted their horses flailing to climb the steep opposite bank of the river.
Those that survived this initial pursuit fled into the countryside where thousands of them met
their ends at the hands of furious locals who were tired of the constant pillaging, looting,
and killing they had endured for so long, for the better part of a century really. Otto sent
reserve forces after any survivors and those Majars who were found were either summarily
executed or sent back east with their noses and ears cut off. The message Otto sent was clear
and it was clearly received. After 955 and the Battle of Lechfeld, the Hungarians, or Majars,
stopped all efforts to push westward. This was in part due to the fact that Otto had
hanged many of the Hungarian leaders he had captured, a move that quickly created a power vacuum
at the top of the Majar social structure. For a time, no one was sure about who was in charge
and in this period of uncertainty and regrouping, the attention of the Hungarians turned inward.
But we shouldn't underestimate the dramatic impact that that cavalry charge had had on those who
witnessed and survived it. Otto, satisfied with his victory, ceased any military efforts toward
the east. For close to 100 years, the Majars had been considered the most impressive fighting force
in Europe. After 955, that reputation disintegrated and Otto's example of the heavy cavalry charge
with mounted armored knights on horseback would become the gold standard in military tactics.
For almost 500 years after Lechfeld, this was how people went to war. In fact, this became how people
needed to go to war. As I've suggested earlier, some scholars have gone so far as to argue that
Lechfeld is the original moment of what we have come to call feudal society, a social system that was
hierarchical, founded on bonds of personal loyalty and which had as its most important component
a warrior class that the ruler could call upon at need and would reward with lands, titles and wealth
after the fighting was done. Obviously, at first, this system might have had much that would lend it to
meritocracy. In other words, the most valiant and capable fighters were the ones who moved up the ranks,
who found favor and reward. At the moment of its inception, it was theoretically possible for almost
anyone to advance in society, provided they could fight and had occasion to prove it. So for the common man,
there was a window of opportunity to move up the social ladder, even if most didn't fully recognize this
moment for what it was. Because pretty quickly, that window shut. The class that consisted of the
mounted knight on horseback and their relatives and retainers wanted to close off access and keep the
spoils for themselves. Soon, instead of the best fighters becoming members of the aristocracy, the
aristocracy worked hard at producing the best fighters, the better to maintain their power and position.
By the 15th century, the military classes had become entrenched as a key component of medieval society.
It is either ironic or appropriate, or perhaps both, that this is also just about the time they started
to become obsolete. If technology had made the warrior class an intrinsic part of the medieval world,
then technology is what would undo that reality. Most famously, perhaps, the battle of Agincourt
between the French and English in the year 1415 demonstrated a new shift in the technology of warfare
that would also have repercussions for society as a whole, but not on the scale of Lechfeld.
At Agincourt, the French contingent, supremely confident, mounted a traditional charge with heavy cavalry.
It was, after all, the way battles had been won since, well, the Battle of Lechfeld.
But King Henry V of England had crossed the English Channel with a new weapon in his arsenal, the longbow.
While the longbow had been used in medieval conflicts back into the 14th century, it was at Agincourt
that this weaponry reached its apogee and had its most dramatic demonstration.
Although the Majars had been impressive archers, they had had nothing like this.
The Welsh longbow that Henry's archers used had a much longer range than traditional weaponry,
and this meant that any number of arrow volleys could be launched at the enemy long before any physical
or hand-to-hand combat happened. Henry's forces had seriously undermined
or killed a huge portion of the French forces before a single English sword was even drawn.
But the ball doth turn. Just a few years after Agincourt, the longbow fell out of use,
in part because of further developments in military technology.
The trebuchet, cannon and gunpowder came into much more common use around the middle of the 15th century,
tactics that all allowed for maximum impact and damage with minimum risk.
This created a problem for all those hereditary knights and other nobles whose titles and reputations
and indeed existence had come about because of encounters like the one at Lechfeld.
Suddenly, they found themselves obsolete. By the 15th century, armor, weapons and horse
had become incredibly expensive when compared to the new battle techniques.
Perhaps more to the point, horses and men needed care and feeding, demanded honors and reward for their service,
and needed substantial funds in order to keep on serving.
Cannon and gunpowder did not, and just about anyone could easily be trained to use them.
But the nobility of Europe was not going to let go of their status so easily.
As the medieval world transitioned into the early modern one, ideals of medieval chivalry and knighthood
were cherished and clung to and then transformed so that the social order was still about status and service,
but service of a different sort.
Courtiers, government officials, cabinet ministers, they came from the noble houses of Europe
who looked to the past as a basic model for shaping something new out of their heritage and traditions.
And that heritage had arguably come into being on the day when Otto I, later called the great,
he had had enough of the majeure incursions and was going to make a definitive and innovative stand against them.
The creation of an entire social order based on the need for a warrior class might, you would think,
be enough of a reason to consider the battle of Lechfeld a turning point.
Indeed, you could go so far as to say that the development of the United States itself was, to some degree,
a reaction against this very same entrenched social order that had come to be so solidified after the 10th century.
But the battle of Lechfeld marked a turning point in other ways, ways that we should keep in mind
when we consider how the events of the past shaped the future.
For one, it immediately stopped majeure incursions toward the West and finally drew a solid boundary line
on the other side of which the Hungarians would remain.
In other words, it helped shape the Germany that we know today.
It also, like so many of the turning points we have discussed in this lecture series so far,
owed much to the lessons of the past, in particular the past created by Charlemagne.
As you'll remember, Charlemagne looked to the Roman past for inspiration as he forged his great Carolingian Empire
and it was the most expansive, best governed and most enlightened political entity in Europe since the fall of Rome.
But as you'll also remember, within 60 years of Charlemagne's death in 814,
this glorious creation had been undone by infighting among Charlemagne's heirs,
the once enormous pie divided into smaller and smaller pieces until really all that were left were crumbs.
Prior to Lechfeld, Otto had started trying to gather some of these crumbs together.
His father had made a start uniting many of the disparate German tribes into a more or less coherent whole.
When Otto's father died in 936, Otto became king of Germany and Duke of Saxony.
In a shrewd move that demonstrated his political acumen,
Otto had his coronation ceremony held at Aachen and during it he sat on Charlemagne's throne.
You'll remember that while Charlemagne had united a kingdom that included people who thought of themselves as German,
he himself had considered himself to be ethnically a Frank.
Otto, in a deliberate attempt to link himself with Charlemagne, were distinctively Frankish dress at his coronation.
Then in a move that Charlemagne himself would certainly have approved of,
Otto marched south into Italy and took the throne of the Lombard Kingdom by force.
The echoes of the Roman past were resounding with greater frequency and much more loudly.
After his victory at Lechfeld, contemporary reports indicate Otto's men made a flat surface of their shields,
held them together and then raised Otto up above their heads on those shields, proclaiming him emperor.
Seven years later, in 962, Otto went south to Rome itself, where he had himself crowned Holy Roman Emperor by the Pope.
Some historians hold that Otto, not Charlemagne, is in fact the first Holy Roman Emperor.
This may be a technicality really for Charlemagne was crowned by the Pope and declared emperor,
but of what he was made emperor, it's a little less clear.
Charlemagne preferred the title King of the Franks, and it's really with Otto that we first get people using the title
Holy Roman Emperor on a regular basis.
What is certain, however, is that Charlemagne's coronation, while a rather meaningless act in its immediate historical context,
a grand flourish or a grace note, harkened back to the glory days of the Roman past,
and Otto was harkening back to the days of Charlemagne.
The idea of a new Roman Empire had been planted.
It would carry heavy weight well beyond the medieval period,
although over the centuries the position of emperor would be transformed from an hereditary office to an elected one,
and the territory over which this emperor ruled was ever shifting in terms of the definitions of its boundaries and extent of its authority.
But still, the idea was potent, even into the modern period.
So Lechfeld as a turning point fits several of our course themes.
First, in the fact that in its immediate aftermath, Otto and his people looked to the past, to Charlemagne and further back to Rome,
as guidance for their present circumstances.
It fits our course themes also, and that it was a turning point that came after a period of crisis,
a century of invasion and raiding by the Majars to be specific.
It was also a turning point that came about at least in part because of one man's will or desire,
specifically Otto's vision of restoring the Empire of Charlemagne.
But more than that, Lechfeld had a certain quality of serendipity about it,
and that multiple factors converged here to produce the final outcome.
Technological advances in warfare and weaponry combined with a brilliant idea of how to use them
and even more critically, at the crucial moment the German ranks did not break,
but held firm to turn back the tide of Majar invaders.
Armor-made knights heavy and powerful, stirrups and high-backed saddles meant they could better stay on their horses during fighting,
and lances and swords meant that they could wreak more deadly havoc on their foes.
This they did, and then they followed through, chasing down and destroying the leaders of the enemy forces.
The impact of Lechfeld resounded throughout the medieval world,
and kings and military leaders, the length and breadth of Europe, took note of this novel approach that had produced such amazing results.
In more ways than one, the Battle of Lechfeld was a turning point in the medieval world.
What is really interesting, though, is how by making this great change,
the major impact for the average man in the centuries to follow was that very little for him was likely to change.
Lechfeld had defined and solidified social positions in ways that hadn't been quite so rigid before.
Peasants were going to stay peasants, and nobles were going to stay noble,
and those at the top of the social order were going to strive mightily to keep it that way.
Our next lecture explores one of the turning points in history that seems at once hugely significant in some senses,
while at the same time being relatively unimportant in some other respects.
This is the religious schism between the eastern and western halves of the former Roman Empire.
While we can point to a moment that clarifies this issue,
the moment in 1054 when the patriarch of Constantinople and the representative of the Roman Pope
excommunicated one another in what appears to be the mother of all temper tantrums,
at the same time this act only illuminated a fact that had been true for centuries,
namely that there were two different branches of Christianity and they did not play nicely together.
The moment of the schism codified what had been true in general practice for some time,
but after this moment there was no going back,
and the two branches of Christianity would remain stubbornly unreconciled until the 20th century
when tentative overtures of friendship were cautiously made.
Join us next time to see how a dispute that hinged on the lingering idea of the Roman Empire
would firmly split the medieval world along religious lines.
