Lecture 8 – The Great Schism
Welcome back.
In our last lecture, we explored how the Battle of Lechfeld marked a turning point in
multiple areas of the medieval world.
In its immediate impact, Lechfeld put a stop to the Hungarian or Mažar incursions into
the West.
A combination of developments in military technology came together on August 10, 955,
to allow the German ruler Otto to mount the most successful heavy cavalry charge the medieval
world had ever seen.
Thousands of armored B-weapon knights on horseback, bore down on the lightly armed
Mažar forces, broke over them like a wave, and totally destroyed them.
The success of this tactic would mean that many other rulers were eager to imitate this
approach to warfare, and indeed, after 955, it became the standard mode for military conflict.
Some have gone so far as to suggest that the effectiveness of the charge at Lechfeld helped
shape the very nature of medieval society, developing the system of hierarchy, loyalty,
service, and violence that some scholars refer to as feudalism.
This system would become firmly entrenched and persist well beyond the medieval period
and into the early modern, and indeed, its imprint can still be seen in many western
societies today.
Also having an immediate impact on the medieval world was the fact that after 955, the border
between Germany and Hungary was made solid, and it helped to define the contours of what
would become the modern nation of Germany.
This was particularly meaningful to the peasants and farmers who had lived near this poorest
frontier for the previous century, and it is a mark of what their lives must have been
like when, after the initial success of the German army, the common people hunted down
Mažar survivors and hacked many of them to death with farm implements.
In the wake of his success, Otto traveled to Rome and had himself crowned Holy Roman
Emperor by the Pope, a move that was a deliberate attempt to connect with the past and the legacy
of Charlemagne.
This move had another impact, which would ultimately lead to the turning point that we're discussing
today, the great schism of 1054, when Christianity splintered into two main factions that remain
estranged from one another down to the present day.
As the examples of Charlemagne and Otto have demonstrated, once the idea of a Holy Roman
Empire began to take shape, the Popes and the emperors began to have a much more intricately
connected relationship, to the point that the man who occupied the secular office of
Emperor considered it his right to appoint the head of the major religious institution
in the West, the Pope.
This is exactly what happened in 1049 when Otto's descendant Henry III named a new Pope,
Leo IX.
Little could he have known that just five short years later, the most significant religious
dispute of the medieval Christian world would occur because of Leo's ambition and desire
to increase the status and the position of the papacy.
Leo was a zealous reformer, and almost from the moment he became Pope, he sought to shore
up and expand the power of the Church in the West.
It just so happened that his papacy coincided with the surfacing of doctrinal and theological
concerns in the East.
Church leaders there were increasingly dismayed at certain practices and changes in the religious
traditions of the West, and they felt that it was their job to voice their opposition
and correct their brothers.
As you might imagine, the scolding from the East did not go over well, and it especially
did not sit well with the Pope's most important advisor in the matter, one Humbert of Silva
Candida.
As we'll see in our discussion today, the great schism occurred because of what was
essentially a temper tantrum on the part of the two most important religious leaders
in the medieval world.
But it would be fair to ask, what did an argument centered on matters of theology so far removed
from the day-to-day lives of 90% of the people living in the medieval world matter in the
grand scheme of things?
Because it is certainly true that for most of the people living in 1054, the great schism
changed not one thing about their daily lives.
Indeed, many people in the medieval world might have been completely unaware that anything
had even happened.
The answer to the so what question here is that, in the long term, as a result of this
conflict, Western Europe and its neighbors to the East drifted further and further away
from one another in a move so gradual as to be relatively unremarkable at the time.
But in the long run, it has produced a rift, indeed, yes, a schism between peoples who
once thought of themselves as having much in common and sharing a cultural bond.
By turning their backs to one another, the two former halves of the Roman Empire created
a shift in the balance of geopolitical power that still manifests itself in myriad forms
today.
While individual personalities certainly played a role in bringing this turning point about,
it was not a single person who changed the shape of history here, rather, what we have
is a kind of perfect storm or confluence of beliefs, attitudes and conflicts that are
suddenly brought to a head in 1054.
This is a turning point, the origins of which stretch all the way back to the days of the
Roman Empire and the makings of which simmered slowly in the saucepot of religious belief
and tradition from the 5th century on.
In the east, the heat of change was increased with events like the iconoclasm controversy
that erupted in the 8th and 9th centuries.
In the west, the dating of Easter and the appearance of various heresies affected how
the faith took shape.
But in some sense, one can trace the ready-set-go moment of this turning point, the great schism,
to a disagreement about bread.
But let's back up for a moment and try to get a handle on the major underlying causes
here.
In the west, after the fall of the Roman Empire, the popes initially had very little power
in authority.
Over the centuries, this began to change, in part because Rome was always considered
the seat of the church, superior to all others.
In the east, there were several religious districts, called patriarchates, so religious
power there was not only diffuse, it was considered suspect by those in the west, because the
emperor in the east had for centuries practiced what is known as cesaropapism, that is, the
secular leader was regarded as the representative of Christ on earth, and he had the right
to appoint religious leaders.
While in the west, this also happened in practice, in theory, the papacy began attempting to
assert its independence from worldly concerns quite early on.
As we've already discussed, when Pope Leo III placed the crown on the head of Charlemagne
in the year 800, it was a turning point that was not really won.
Nothing changed because of it, as it seemed simply to be an acknowledgement of all the
awesome stuff Charlemagne had already accomplished on his own without the help of the church.
Thank you very much, but Leo's move could be seen as an attempt to claim some measure
of power and authority for the church.
With that move, he was trying to say that the religious office was superior to the secular,
and it was the papacy that could create emperors, and not the other way around.
In practice, of course, not much changed after 800.
Charlemagne even resisted the title of emperor, because to use it would be to suggest that
he had received it because of the pope, and not because of his own impressive deeds.
So this desire for social supremacy on the part of religious leaders in the west had
been simmering for some time, but it really came to a boil under Pope Leo IX, who became
pope in 1049.
Ironically, he was one of those popes actually appointed by the emperor, but once he took
office, he set about reforming the papacy and asserting the authority of the popes over
secular leaders.
His reforms got the attention of religious leaders in the east, which led to an explosive
confrontation.
Here once again we see one of our major course themes cropping up, the power of the past
to shape the future.
In this case, what is really interesting is that both parties involved in this dispute,
the popes representative, Humbert of Silver Canada, and the patriarch of Constantinople,
were both looking back to the same past for guidance.
They were looking to the Roman Empire as a model, but they were viewing that past through
very different eyes.
As you may remember, one thing that the Roman emperor did in response to the crisis of the
third century was to divide the empire in half.
There were now two emperors, one in Rome and one in Constantinople, and while each was
responsible for his half of the empire, importantly, it was the eastern emperor who was considered
supreme.
At this time, the eastern half of the empire was much more stable politically and economically,
so it would make sense that the senior emperor would claim that portion for himself.
In our first lecture, we described how the sack of Rome in 410 and the eventual fragmentation
of the western half of the empire into the medieval European world was considered a disaster
for those who lived through it.
But in the east, life went on much as before, and as far as the eastern emperors and citizens
were concerned, the Roman Empire was still alive and well.
It was just experiencing some technical difficulties in the west, but those it was thought would
be rectified soon, and the former unity of the empire restored.
So this is why, when the position of pope in the Roman church began to gain in power
and prestige, the emperors in Constantinople thought it was only right that they should
have some say over who was appointed to the papacy and what they did.
Over time, however, Christian practices in the east had developed their own personality,
just as those in the west had.
The two branches of Christianity began to become distinct from one another, not because
they consciously sought to distinguish themselves, but simply because the different cultural
traditions of each developed in their own rather organic fashion.
The distinction between the two was further emphasized by language differences.
In the west, Latin was spoken.
In the east, it was Greek.
This made communication between the two branches, even when they wished to confer over matters
of doctrine and the like difficult at best.
In the 11th century, there were enough inconsistencies between the two Christian practices that one
arm of the church sought to critique the other.
At first, this was over what might seem to be trifles.
Should the communion host be made of leavened or unleavened bread?
Some disputes were more serious.
Prime among these is what's known as the Filioque dispute.
This has to do with the line in the Nicene Creed that in the west asserts that the Holy
Ghost, quote, proceeds from the father and the son, end quote.
Fil is son in Latin and que on the end of a word means and, hence Filioque or and son.
In the eastern tradition, the Holy Ghost is described only as proceeding from the father.
Also of concern was the matter of marriage, as the official expectation in the west was
that all members of the church would be celibate.
In the east, priests and even a few bishops had wives.
While in practice, plenty of church officials in the west had marriages or sexual relationships,
the theological point was what mattered here.
But it was not the issues of doctrine or clerical celibacy that provoked this rift and effectively
created two separate Christianities.
No, as I said at the opening, the fight really began with a letter about bread.
Seriously.
So here's what happened.
A high ranking official in the Byzantine church sent a letter and he most likely did
this at the request of the patriarch of Constantinople, Michael Celerius.
This letter was not sent directly to the pope in Rome, but it went first to the bishop of
Trani and Apulea.
In this letter, the writer, Leo, who held the title of Metropolitan of Archaeta, went
on a rant about what he saw as corrupt practices in the Roman church.
Among them, fasting on Saturdays, miscalculating the date of Easter, adding a line to the
Nicene Creed without checking with religious authorities in the east first, and yes, using
unleavened bread for the consecrated host.
In particular, the last practice, he argued, was dangerously close to Jewish practices
and marked the Western church as corrupt.
Here is where the fabulously named Humbert of Silva, Canada, enters the picture.
Humbert was one of the greatest minds of his day, and by all accounts, he knew he had a
prodigious intellect and intelligence.
He spoke multiple languages, including Greek, and was well read on all aspects of Christian
theology and doctrine.
And indeed, contemporaries seem to agree that Humbert not only was a brilliant and educated
scholarly authority, but also that he knew it, and further, he also enjoyed rubbing that
fact in people's faces.
Abrasive, arrogant, and hardly diplomatic, he seems like a poor choice as ambassador
to Eastern Christendom.
The events that followed proved just what a poor choice he was.
At the time the first letter was sent from the east to the west, Humbert seemed the
right choice to help sort the matter out.
The letter was written in Greek, but very few people in the west knew that language.
So Humbert was a logical person to translate the missive into Latin and then make sure
it was circulated.
We should remember that while Latin was the language of learning in the west and every
church official could converse and write in it easily, finding a Greek speaker in the
west was no small feat.
Charlemagne's Pala School of Achin had helped to cement Latin's authoritative position
as the language of scholarship in that Charlemagne had believed that translating texts into
this language and then educating future scholars to speak, read, and write it was the way to
preserve that knowledge for future generations.
Greek texts were also considered important, but often translations into Latin were made
so that they would be more accessible.
Humbert did the task he was assigned and more.
He brought the letter to the Pope, Leo IX, and made sure that Leo understood all of
the charges it contained.
Given that he had just been treated like a naughty schoolboy in need of correction, it
is no surprise that Leo immediately and angrily fired off a response that not only responded
to each of the accusations leveled against the Western Church, but also in no uncertain
terms declared that the Western Church and thus the Pope was the supreme authority in
all matters of doctrine and Christian religion.
Furthermore, he added, the church in Constantinople was corrupt, prone to sin and vice that comes
with too much wealth and luxurious living, and it was also filled with heretics.
So there.
As you might suppose, the patriarch was displeased with this reply, and he sent another letter,
which only added fuel to the fire.
In this instance, the real insult was that Michael Celerius deliberately addressed Pope
Leo as brother rather than father, and he styled himself the ecumenical patriarch.
It was a clear attempt to assert the primacy of the East over the West.
In response to this exchange of letters, both sides made efforts to suppress the languages
of the other, so the Pope in Rome sought to suppress the use of Greek, while the patriarch
of Constantinople positioned himself as discouraging the use of Latin.
This made very little difference in the everyday lives of the people living in these areas,
as most of them were speaking their vernacular tongues anyway.
It was only in the hushed confines of ecclesiastical buildings and libraries that such edicts could
hope to have any impact.
So again, the population truly affected in any tangible way was limited.
The Pope decided he had had enough of the letter writing, and chose to send a delegation
to Constantinople to assert his authority and bring the Eastern patriarch to heel.
One way that Leo sought to affirm his right to act as the authority in this matter was
by citing something called the donation of Constantine.
This was a decree issued by the Roman Emperor Constantine himself that granted authority
over Rome, the Church, and indeed the secular governance of the former territories of the
Roman Empire to the Pope.
You may remember that it was under Constantine that the Roman Empire converted from paganism
to Christianity.
In what is most certainly a turning point from a pre-medieval time, the Christian religion
went from being the most persecuted religion in the Roman Empire in the third century to
being the most favored religion of the empire by the middle of the fourth, a dramatic change.
When looking to the past in terms of matters of Christian doctrine, Constantine was definitely
an important figure, and a decree from him hugely important.
And this decree was absolutely clear.
In no uncertain terms, it gave power over both religious and secular matters to the
head of the Church, and it specifically identified the head of the Church as being the Pope
in Rome.
The only problem was the decree was fake.
Scholars disagree on when and why exactly it was faked, but a good guess would be that
it was dummied up sometime in the eighth or ninth centuries when popes were starting
to be concerned about the range and limits of their powers.
While some scholars, theologians, and kings in the Middle Ages had their doubts about
its authenticity, plenty of others seemed to accept it as a valid document.
Pope Leo seems to have been one who believed that in fact, Constantine had granted the
popes in Rome extraordinary powers, and he asserts this vehemently in his letter to Michael
Celerius.
Not surprisingly, Celerius rejected this.
Pope Leo the Ninth decided that the matter needed to be settled once and for all.
So he composed a response to this response to a response to what was really just a cantankerous
scolding in the first place, and then determined that the letter needed to be delivered by
a papal delegation to the patriarch in person.
Given that Greek was the language of the East, again, it made sense that Humbert should go,
although his temperament might not have had much to commend him.
Humbert arrived in Constantinople with a papal delegation in 1054, and then he waited,
and waited.
The patriarch refused to give him an audience for several weeks, a decision that, it seems
obvious now, was not going to turn out well for anybody.
When finally the two sides did meet, Michael Celerius refused to address any of Pope Leo's
charges against the Eastern Church, forcing the papal delegation to essentially drop the
message off.
This they did, and then by all accounts, stormed out of the palace in a huff.
Everything might have ended there when Pope Leo died unexpectedly not long after the delegation's
arrival in Constantinople.
Almost anybody else would have called it quits and headed back to Rome, but Humbert of Silva
Candida was not anybody.
By the patriarch's dismissive treatment of the delegation from Rome, Humbert did something
truly audacious.
He marched into Hagia Sophia, the main cathedral of the Byzantine Church, while Mass was being
celebrated, and he slapped a bowl of papal excommunication down on the altar.
To understand the significance of this beyond what is obvious, one has to understand that
Hagia Sophia was and is one of the most amazing pieces of architecture in the world.
With its massive soaring dome, it has been described as a structure that, quote, changed
the very history of the entire field of architecture, end quote.
Not only was it beautiful, impressive, and awe-inspiring, it was especially holy, as
it also housed an extensive collection of religious relics.
For Humbert to enter Hagia Sophia in order to confront the patriarch during Mass and publicly
present him with a bowl of excommunication at the altar, well, it was just about as
shocking a move as was possible in the circumstances.
At this point, it doesn't seem that Humbert was actually terribly concerned anymore with
carrying out his original mission.
One doubts that he thought this would be the action that would move the patriarch to acknowledge
the error of his ways and meekly submit to Western authority, especially when the major
defender of the idea of that authority, Pope Leo, had just died.
No, this was the action of a man who was interested in making a statement.
Humbert most certainly also believed his position on the theological matter at issue was correct,
but one could imagine more politic ways that he might have expressed his displeasure.
One can also guess that the patriarch decided at this point to stop ignoring the papal delegation
and acknowledge their position and respond to it, so he did.
He excommunicated them right back.
The result was that both sides, based on appeals to the past and the model of the world of
the Roman Empire, refused to give any ground or move toward any kind of reconciliation.
The papal delegation saw the donation of Constantine, a document from the distant past, as giving
them in the Church in the West supremacy over all matters religious and secular.
Never mind that the document was a forgery.
The patriarch and the rest of the Eastern Church believed that while the western half
of the empire had splintered into a variety of different cultural and political entities,
the Roman Empire had continued to exist without interruption in the East.
Thus, any appeal to the Roman past, they argued, gave them the edge when it came to matters
of authority.
In the immediate aftermath and for the average person living in the medieval European world
and the Byzantine Empire, nothing really changed.
People in the West continued to fast on Saturdays, use unleavened bread for the Communion host,
and celebrated Easter and Christmas according to a different method of reckoning dates than
their Christian cousins in the East.
For their part, Eastern Orthodox Christians kept leaving Filio Que and Son out of the
Nicene Creed and continued to allow their clergy to marry.
And in fact, for some decades after the events of 1054, no one, not even the players at the
top of the religious hierarchy, imagined that the split would be so definitive and so long-lasting.
Indeed, the descriptors I've been using throughout this lecture, referring to the Western Church
or the Latin Church and the Eastern Church or the Byzantine Church, none of these were
in common use or even in the minds of medieval people.
They thought of Christianity as the Church, full stop.
There was only one, no matter if some people over here celebrated Mass in Greek and some
people over there celebrated it in Latin.
It was only in hindsight as it became clearer and clearer that the breach between the two
strands of Christianity would not be healed, that the two factions began to think of themselves
as distinct from one another and describe themselves and the other guys in the terms I've been using.
The Church in the West became the Catholic Church and the Church in the East, the Eastern
Orthodox Church.
This was a turning point, the impact of which was not immediately felt beyond the particular
circle of figures involved, but there can be no doubt about the long-term, far-reaching
impact of this action.
For almost a thousand years, the two major branches of Christianity have been at odds
and unable to seal the breach.
In 1965, Pope Paul VI and Patriarch Athenagoras issued a joint edict which rendered null those
mutual excommunications of 1054.
But as of today, the Western Catholic Church and Eastern Orthodox Church could not be called
unified.
Fundamental theological and practical differences remain, although relations between the two
major strands of Christianity are warmer and more cordial now than they have been for
the last thousand years.
In the immediate aftermath of the Great Schism, the Western Latin Church felt more compelled
than ever to justify its existence and establish its authority.
In 1095, Pope Urban II would see a way to assert the Western Church's primacy and strike
a blow for Christendom in general.
This was the idea of the crusade of quote-unquote taking back the Holy Land, Jerusalem and its
environs, for Christendom.
By calling on the nobles of the West to travel across the medieval European world, past Byzantium
and into the Middle East, Urban hoped to establish the papacy's authority and claim to supremacy
on all things doctrinal, theological and generally religious.
He also hoped, it seems clear, that the activity of crusading might help unite the Eastern and
Western branches of the Church together in what he saw as the fight against Islamic power
in the Middle East, in territories wholly not only to Christendom but to Judaism and
Islam as well.
As we'll see in Lecture 11, the moment when Urban II called upon the Christians of Europe
to take up arms in a religious conflict marked a dramatic shift in terms of the relationship
of the Church with warfare, the West with the East and Christian with Muslim.
The contact between the crusaders and the Muslim world would have profound impacts in
multiple areas, impacts that have lasted down to the present day, and we can point to the
great schism as the turning point that in some ways led directly to this other turning
point.
In our next lecture, however, we are going to turn our gaze back to the West and to a
different matter that had concerned Pope Leo IX.
When he initially responded to the East's charges concerning Unleavened Bread, the
Filio Cui dispute, and the matter of clerical marriage, he had also asked the Patriarch for
support in standing against what he saw as a new threat in Italy.
This threat was the existence of many Norman settlements in the south of the land, colonies
staked out by people of Germanic descent who hailed from a small area of France.
Who were these people?
Where did they come from?
And what had put them on the map all of a sudden?
The answer traces back to one man, William of Normandy, who in 1066 crossed the English
Channel and changed the shape of medieval Europe forever.
Join us next time to learn about this most remarkable conqueror who created an empire
through his sheer force of will.
