Welcome back. As our lectures up to this point have demonstrated, the shape of medieval history
was dramatically affected by each of the turning points we've discussed so far. We've seen
examples of our four categories of turning point, the turning point that occurs in a
rather precise moment of time with immediate impact, like the sack of Lindus Farnabi by
the Vikings, the turning point the impact of which was felt more gradually, like the
development of the society of Al-Andalus in what is today modern Spain, and the turning
point which arguably has had the greatest impact decades or even centuries after the
initial event, like the development of the legend of King Arthur. We've even seen a
turning point that really wasn't one, the coronation of Charlemagne as Holy Roman Emperor.
Several of the lectures so far have also demonstrated our key themes of this course, the power of
the past, for example, as multiple peoples and events looked backward, especially to Rome,
for guidance or example, serendipity in the moment that the Rhine froze over on New Years
in the year 506. Crisis or necessity, a theme we've seen repeatedly as in Arthur's response
to the Anglo-Saxons and Alfred's response to the Danes. We've seen too how individuals
like Arthur, Charlemagne and Alfred the Great created significant turning points and dramatically
shaped history through their amazing force of will. They teach us lessons about charisma
and drive and ambition and are rather breathtaking in the way they demonstrate that one person
can change the world. At the opposite end of the spectrum are those points that occur
because of larger forces, those that arose from a number of social currents that came
together in exactly the right way and in exactly the right moment to produce this change.
Something we could say about the formation of Al-Andalus or the factors that came together
at the Battle of Lechfeld. But while all these categories and themes have clearly been played
out and on display in other lectures, our discussion today is about perhaps the most
singular and clearly defined turning point in all of the medieval world and that is William
of Normandy's conquest of England in 1066. There are very few moments to which you can
point in a historical discussion and say for example on October 13th things were one way
and October 15th they were completely different. Very few moments indeed but the battle of
Hastings in 1066 is one of them. It's also an event that demonstrates so many of the
issues we've been discussing. Serendipity plays a part here as does the power of the
past to shape the future and of course the individual personality of William of Normandy
is perhaps the most profound reason that history took the course it did. Perhaps no single
event in the history of the Middle Ages shaped the European world as this one, its impact
both stunningly immediate and rippling on down through the centuries. So what happened,
how did it happen and why did it matter so much? To understand this we need to remember
how Alfred the Great had paved the way for the creation of that entity known as England.
He was the first to really conceive of the Anglo-Saxon peoples living in Britain as potentially
all belonging to one community as all being Anglish or Angokun and he had affected this
group identity formation in part through treaties with the Vikings and through the creation
of the region known as the Dane Law, a territory controlled by Scandinavian invaders and their
descendants. What this meant was that for the next two centuries England was a part of the
Germanic Scandinavian world that had as its defining space the North Sea. While there was
certainly contact with continental Europe England was not a part of it in the way it later would
be. The English were oriented toward the North not the East or the South. What precipitated
a shift was the settlement of some Germanic invaders, Northmen, in what is today France
in the 10th century. Unlike those settlers in the Dane Law who maintained their Germanic
culture and heritage the peoples who staked a claim to Normandy pretty quickly shrugged
off the Germanic cloak and became for all intents and purposes French. At the same time
however they remembered some cultural and family ties so that in the 11th century there
were by that point long-standing links between the royal houses of England and Normandy through
multiple intermarriages. The last truly born Anglo-Saxon king of England was Edward the
Confessor, a ruler whose lack of legitimate offspring meant that the throne would be effectively
up for grabs come his death. There were three main claimants, Edward's brother-in-law Harold
Godwinson who was a scion of the most powerful noble house in Anglo-Saxon England, King Harold
Hardrada of Norway who had a claim via his descent from the former King Knut who had
for a time ruled both England and Denmark. His claim served as a reminder of how bound
up England was with the Scandinavian world at this time. The third claimant was Edward
the Confessor's cousin across the channel, William, the bastard son of Duke Robert of
Normandy who according to several chroniclers had at one point been named by Edward as his
legitimate successor. According to Harold Godwinson however Edward had changed his mind just before
his death, naming Godwinson his wife's brother as the next king of England.
We could spend this lecture and several more just picking apart the wise and wherefores
of this event and there are several of the great courses that do just that. As I said
the conquest of 1066 is a major and unique event so of necessity it gets discussed quite
a bit but let's turn now to the moment itself because it is one of the most fascinating
and gripping stories to come down to us from the annals of history. On the morning of October
14th 1066 two armies faced one another at a place called Sennlach Ridge on the high ground
was the English army led by Harold Godwinson. Although they occupied what would seem to
be the position of advantage they were also completely exhausted. This was because just
two and a half weeks earlier they had been 240 miles north at a place called Stamford
Bridge. They had been there because in the aftermath of the death of Edward the Confessor
King Harold Hardrada of Norway had decided it was time to claim the English throne for
himself in what we might accurately call the last Viking invasion. Harold Godwinson
had ascended the English throne immediately after his brother-in-law Edward the Confessor's
death in January and then he had spent the next few months waiting for both William across
the channel and Harold to the north to attack and press their own claims. Godwinson had
fully expected William to attack first. Indeed it seems that William had thought that he
would attack first and he had gathered an army of Norman nobles and Breton infantrymen
who were descendants of those Britons who had fled across the channel in the face of
the 5th century Anglo-Saxon invasion of their island. William was ready to sail for England
but the weather did not cooperate. He was forced to remain on the continent while his
assembled men chafed at the delay. Some of them apparently headed on home because Harvest
was going to be coming soon. But as we'll see, what must have seemed like a setback
at first turned out to be serendipitous good fortune. While Harold Godwinson was in London
waiting for William's arrival, he suddenly received word that Harold Hardrada had landed
in the north with an invading army. Momentarily torn, Godwinson then made a decision, assembled
his army and marched to Stamford Bridge in Yorkshire covering an astonishing 185 miles
in just four days. There, on September 25th, he won a decisive victory over the Norwegian
forces in what by all accounts was particularly brutal and bloody fighting. Godwinson's brother
Tostig was killed, as was Hardrada and most of the invading army. It seems that the weather
that day was unusually hot and most of the Norwegian forces had opted to forgo heavy
armor, leaving these items on their ships. It was a fatal mistake on the part of the
and it must have seemed like a sign from God for Godwinson. In his first real test as king
of the English, he had won and he had won decisively.
This was most certainly why, when word reached him that William had finally landed in the
south and the accounts are a little confused here. Some say September 28th, some the 29th,
some the 27th. To be safe, we'll say somewhere around September 28th. When he got news of
their landing, Godwinson decided to attack immediately or as immediately as possible.
As soon as he had landed at Pevensey, William and his troops had begun a systematic destruction
of the countryside in the area, burning villages and homesteads, looting food and other resources,
all in a clear effort to provoke Godwinson into attacking. It would have been wiser for
Harold Godwinson to wait and let William and his forces run out of supplies and patience.
But Harold had just pulled off something miraculous and he seemed to think that if he could do
it once, he could do it again. So he sent his men on another forced march. His troops,
already exhausted from the first march and the brutal battle, had had no time to recover.
Harold pressed them, however, making them cover hundreds of miles in the space of just
a few days. On the way, he lost several men who, like many William soldiers, had headed
home to bring in the harvest. He tried to make up the difference by recruiting replacements
on the way. One can imagine that these were more like orders than requests and most new
conscripts did not join Harold's army with much enthusiasm.
On October 13, Harold's exhausted forces reached the south where William was waiting.
On the next morning, the two armies faced each other. Harold's forces on top of Sennlach
Bridge, William's forces below. Harold certainly thought that once again he would manage to
pull off a stunning victory.
Before the battle proper began, however, occurred one of the most interesting footnotes in history.
A Norman minstrel, by the name of Tyfer, moved into the open space between the two armies.
While juggling his sword, he recited passages from the epic poem The Song of Roland, a movement
to inspire the Norman forces by recalling to them the glory days of the past and reminding
them of the exploits of another French king, Charlemagne, who had been as impressive a warrior
and military strategist as the world has ever seen.
Tyfer was not the only one on this invasion who had invoked the power of the past. According
to numerous accounts, Breton Bards sang songs of King Arthur's defeat of the Anglo-Saxons
at the Battle of Mount Badden, a move seemingly intended to suggest that William, in conquering
England, would be writing what had gone wrong after Arthur had died.
The Anglo-Saxons had driven the Bretons from their homeland to the area now known as Brittany.
As part of William's invading army, the Bretons were coming to take Britain back. Never
mind that William was by blood and marriage and culture a part of that Germanic group
that had fought against Arthur. Such details were conveniently obscured in the desire to
invoke the past and inspire a desire for glory.
At some point in his performance, Tyfer seemed to get carried away by the power of his own
words. When an English soldier confronted him, he killed that man and then, in what seems
either a supreme act of foolishness or bravery or both, Tyfer charged the English front line
all by himself. Suffice it to say, he was quickly engulfed by herald's enraged soldiers
and disappeared from view for all time. And then the battle began. William sent contingent
after contingent, charging up the hill where they were decisively and repeatedly slaughtered.
The Breton troops broke ranks and fled. The Norman flank was exposed and it seemed like
the battle was about to end. The Norman line wavered and a rumor began to spread that William
was dead. Here is where the battle hung by the thinnest of threads. Without William, without
the singular character and power and this one individual, all would have been for naught.
If he did not live to claim the throne of England, then it was all a waste of time, of energy,
of money, and of life. Without a doubt, William was a singular individual. And he was even
less likely to have become a ruler of one territory, let alone two, than even Alfred
the Great, fifth son of the house of Wessex had been. For at least Alfred was an acknowledged
ethylene, a prince of the royal house, from the moment of his birth. William was the bastard
of Duke Robert of Normandy by a peasant girl named Erev, the daughter of a local tanner.
The story has it that Robert looked out his castle window one day and saw her at the river
below, washing clothes, and was immediately besotted. The offspring of their union was
William. If his bastard status made it seem unlikely he would ascend to the dukedom, then
the death of his father, when he was just seven years old, would have seemed to have
concluded the matter. Although Robert had officially proclaimed him his heir before his death,
in 11th century Normandy there were any number of cousins, older, more experienced, perhaps
able to shrug off the death of a child, willing to stake a claim to the dukedom. Seven year
olds could meet with any number of accidents or diseases. After all, medieval childhood
was notoriously dangerous. Against the odds, William survived his childhood, claimed his
dukedom, and then set his sights on England. What's more, he persuaded his nobles and
their vassals, and their vassals, that his was a just cause. He managed to keep most
of them from deserting when the wind and weather kept their ships anchored on the continental
side of the English Channel. He did this in part by cleverly currying favor where it needed
to be curried with the church. It didn't hurt that his half-brother, Otto, son of his mother
by her next relationship, became bishop of Bayeux and brought the church's support with
him when he crossed the channel with William. But apart from the family relationship, William
had worked hard to support the church, a move that recalls similar actions by Charlemagne
and then Alfred, and he had the church on his side when he crossed the channel in late
September of 1066. And now, for a moment, it all looked likely to end. If his troops
thought William was dead, the battle was as good as over. According to the chronicler
William of Poitiers, when this rumor reached the ears of the Duke of Normandy, he knew
he had to act quickly and with daring. From his command post on nearby Tellam Hill, William
charged into the thick of battle, pulled off his helmet, thereby precariously exposing
himself to a mortal sword blow or arrow shot with every passing moment, and he cried out,
quote, Look at me well, I am still alive, and by the grace of God I shall yet prove
victor, end quote. At this, the Normans rallied and renewed their assault on the Saxons, who,
despite their exhaustion, had held the line bravely. Their shield wall held firm, but
according to the chronicles and depictions in the famous biotapestry, this might have
been in the end because there was nowhere for the dead to fall, so tightly packed were
the English forces. William, clever tactician that he was, unleashed a strategy that turned
the tide. He ordered his flanks to follow the Breton example and flee the battle. The
English could not resist the sight of the Norman invaders turning tail and fleeing.
Many of them broke ranks to pursue the deserters, intending to cut them down and make this battle
an even more decisive victory than the one at Stamford Bridge, but the Normans were only
pretending to flee. They turned and fought back, catching the relatively few English
who were chasing them by surprise and quickly cutting them down, and then they did it again.
The tide was turning. Even when we allow for exaggeration on the part of those chroniclers
loyal to William, by all accounts the Duke continued to show remarkable bravery and skill.
William of Poitiers goes on to tell us that, quote, Thrice his horse fell under him, Thrice
he leapt upon the ground, and Thrice he quickly avenged the death of his steed. His sharp
sword pierced shields, helmets, and armor, and not a few felt the weight of his shield,
end quote. Then William instructed his archers to aim high and shoot into the heart of the
Saxon forces. Harold Godwinson, recently anointed King of England, lord of the most powerful
house in the land, and victor over the Norwegians in a stunningly decisive victory less than
three weeks prior, fell dead because of an arrow through his eye. It was around four
o'clock in the afternoon of October 14, 1066, and England, Europe, and arguably the world
would never be the same. Well I perhaps exaggerated a bit when earlier I said this was one of
those rare instances when we can say things were one way on one day and completely different
on another, when we think in terms of the passage of history the change that followed
the Battle of Hastings occurred in the equivalent of the blink of an eye. By the end of that
day in October most of the English nobles and what some chroniclers described as quote
the flower of her youth, end quote, lay dead on the battlefield. Those that survived were
either executed or simply stripped of land and titles. Their widows and daughters fled
to convents or to relatives on other parts of the continent or they married into the
new Norman nobility. Within four years only two Anglo-Saxon noble houses were still in
existence and those because they had pledged fealty to William. The lands and titles of
some 4,000 Anglo-Saxon lords were divvied up among just 200 or so Norman barons. Overnight
minor landholders in France became great lords in England. The wealth and power that came
with possessing land in the medieval period cannot be overstated. This was a rural agrarian
world and wealth was measured in acres, in crops harvested, in peasants who were bound
to one's manner and required to work the land and pay taxes in the form of livestock and
beasts and bodies to serve the Lord. While it's true that for a time the day-to-day lives
of peasants may have gone on unchanged, the dramatic shift at the top of the social order
would ultimately have serious repercussions all the way down the strata of society. England
was now firmly bound to the continent and to France, a relationship that on down the
line would provide more conflicts and turning points. The creation of the Angevin Empire
by Henry II and the Hundred Years War to name just two, but no later turning point would
be as dramatic as this one. For that matter, no previous turning point had had quite the
combination of immediate dramatic and also long term impact due to a combination of serendipity,
a particular idea of the past, both French and British, and the power and will of a singular
individual. And it was not just to France that England was connected.
William gave a quarter of all the land he conquered over to the Church, bringing Britain
back into a relationship with Rome the likes of which it had not had since the days of
the Empire. It is a relationship that would last almost half a millennium until a few
centuries later, Henry VIII decided he needed a divorce and a new wife and established the
Church of England so that he could get it. William changed the countryside. His followers
filling the land full of castles that, like Alfred's burglary heightage almost three
centuries before, gave the new rulers of the land firm defensive positions and prevented
further raiding or invading by others. He is responsible for introducing many elements
into society that today we tend to think of as quintessentially English, a hierarchical
system of lords and vassals, the organization of the countryside into carefully defined
manners and fireplaces. Yes, that's right, before William, Hartheson, England were in
the center of the room and the roof had a hole to let out the smoke. Before the conquest,
it was notoriously difficult to breathe and see any time you were inside.
William also introduced the idea of hunting as the particular domain of the crown. Before
the conquest, any inhabitant of Britain could head into the woods and kill some dinner.
After 1066, such actions were punishable by death as forests were decreed to be the
private property of the king. Another effect was the impact that the Norman presence had
on the language spoken in Britain. While the peasants and what was left of the Anglo-Saxon
nobility spoke a clearly Germanic language, simplified, as you'll remember, by the proximity
of Viking settlers and what became the Dane Law, the new aristocracy spoke a language
much closer to modern French. French, of course, is one of the Romance languages, along with
Spanish, Italian, and others, that ultimately descend from Latin, which is on an entirely
different branch of the Indo-European language tree than the one that includes Germanic languages
like Danish or Swedish, Dutch, of course German, and the original form of English.
To say the least, these differences in the language made communication across social
strata more than a little difficult. Southerner, who has done courses for the great courses
on Chaucer and the history of the English language, has pointed out that a phrase in
the marriage ceremony of the church in England, to love, honor, and cherish, essentially just
repeats the same thing three times in three different languages. Love is the original
English word. Honor is roughly its Latin equivalent, and cherish is a French origin.
It's as if in a wedding that united a Norman nobleman with an Anglo-Saxon woman, officiated
by a priest schooled in Latin, the goal was to make sure that all three parties involved
understood exactly what was being pledged. Although the two languages eventually blended
into something called Anglo-Norman, which ultimately became Middle English, for centuries
the cradle language of the aristocracy was French. This is why so many of our modern
legal terms ultimately come from French, as that was the language spoken in the courts.
This is also why English has such a huge vocabulary. Some words came into the language once in
their Germanic form, another time in their Latin form due to the influence of the church,
and then yet again in their French form. Instead of just picking one form, sticking with it,
and discarding the others, English seems to have welcomed all the linguistic variations
and used them to create nuances of meaning that don't exist in other languages. As writers
such as Bill Bryson have pointed out, the idea of a thesaurus, a book for helping you
look up synonyms, is unheard of in many other linguistic traditions. For example, we have
a mouth, which is a word of English origin, but we refer to things relating to it as oral,
a word ultimately Latin, rather than using the word mouthy. We have teeth, but they
are tended to by dentists. Hens, chicken, poultry, they are all roughly the same, although
they're called by different names. Lambs are mutton, pigs are pork, deer is venison.
In a rather delightful quirk, when animals are still alive, they tend to be called by
their old English names. When they are cooked and on the table, they are transformed into
their Norman-French counterparts. The Norman conquest of 1066 then was a turning point
in just about every sense of the word for just about everybody remotely involved. England
became inextricably joined to continental Europe. Scandinavia lost some of its connection
to the medieval European world. France and its neighbor across the channel could, for
the first time, be considered to be part of the same realm. Anglo-Saxon values and social
structures were replaced almost overnight by Norman ones, a shift that would eventually
trickle down to the lowest levels of the peasantry. Customs concerning hunting and cooking
and building were transformed. New legal concepts were introduced to English society and a hierarchical
social structure based on personal loyalties known as vassalage or feudalism formed the
backbone of the national identity. And the very language in which people spoke, thought,
loved and dreamed was altered.
Alfred the Great may have been the first to imagine an England, but almost three centuries
later it was William the Conqueror who laid the foundation for what would become the greatest
part of its identity down to the modern day. He looked to the past beyond Charlemagne and
Arthur to the Roman world for an inspiration and justification for this fusing of the Norman
and English territories. The crisis of English succession and the serendipitous occurrence
of bad weather delays helped produce his victory. But make no mistake, ultimately England as
we know it was forged in the crucible of William's power, ambition and will.
In our next lecture we'll see something perhaps even more surprising than William's conquest
of England. We'll see how one man changed the world but did it using his mind, rhetoric,
logic and impressive skills of argumentation rather than with a sword or by commanding
an army. Join us next time to see how the greatest scholar of his time was provoked
into affecting dramatic social and religious change, provoked as the result of an act of
horrific violence perpetrated upon him as he slept.
