Lecture 10 Peter Albalard is castrated.
Welcome back.
In our last lecture, we saw how the will of one man, William of Normandy, led to the
conflict known as the Norman Conquest.
In 1066, he crossed the channel, defeated the last Anglo-Saxon king of England, and
radically reshaped the political and cultural contours of the medieval European world.
It was an event with a profound impact in both the immediate and the long term.
Every age since then, from the end of the Middle Ages through the early modern period
up to the present day, has recognized and understood the profound significance of this
event and how it marked a turning point in the identity not just of England, but the
identity of all of Europe, from Scandinavia to southern Italy, and all points in between.
In today's lecture, we will be discussing a turning point that was recognized as crucially
significant at the time of its occurrence and for some centuries afterward, but for
most people today, it rings no bells at all.
It should, however, because this event reveals some important truths about medieval education,
philosophy, and theology, and the writings of the main character in this little drama
have profoundly influenced the development of all of these areas of study.
One night in the year 1118 in the city of Paris, a man named Peter Abelard, arguably
the greatest thinker, scholar, philosopher, teacher, and practitioner of rhetoric and
disputation of his day, went to sleep.
In the middle of the night, he was awakened by a group of intruders who burst into his
room, held him down, and forcibly castrated him.
Years later, writing an autobiographical account of this event in his Historia Calamitatum,
or History of My Calamities, he described the aftermath.
Quote,
When morning came, the whole city flocked to me, and it is hard, yes, impossible, to
describe the astonishment which stunned them, the wailing they uttered, the shouting which
irritated me, and the moaning which upset me, the clerics, and especially my students,
by their excessive lamentation and wailing, paint me, so that I endured more from their
expressions of sympathy than from the suffering caused by the mutilation.
End quote.
Just exactly who was this Peter Abelard, who had not only provoked men to mutilate him
horribly, but also inspired such public mourning in response to the act?
The simple answer is that Peter Abelard possessed one of the most astounding intellects the world
had ever seen, and when I say, the world, I am not limiting myself to the medieval world.
I mean, the world, full stop.
This fact concerning Abelard was well known and accepted.
Indeed, the man himself noted that in the period just prior to his castration, quote,
I thought myself then to be the only philosopher in the world, end quote.
He was a man who, by all accounts, possessed a dizzying amount of knowledge concerning
the classical world and its literature.
He delighted in argumentation and public displays of rhetoric and disputation, nimbly
arguing both sides of a particularly thorny issue for his students and other interested
parties on several occasions.
He could be by turn serious, crass, funny, and pious.
He attracted eager students, adoring admirers, and implacable enemies.
This historian, Michael Clanchy, notes, quote, there is no record of anyone being indifferent
to him, end quote.
Given all this, the moment of his castration might seem in some cases like a non-turning
point.
While it was certainly a traumatic and dramatic event for Peter Abelard, it did not affect
his beautiful mind.
That was still working just fine.
But this moment is a turning point for the rest of the medieval world, in that it compelled
Abelard to turn his attention away from the matters of pure philosophy and rhetoric and
toward religion and theology.
It is this event that also brought to the attention of history the remarkable woman
Eloise, Abelard's lover, secret wife, and mother of his child.
Without this calamity, we might never have known of her existence, but because we do
know of her through this event, our understanding of education in the Middle Ages, and especially
the possibility of education for women, has been dramatically altered.
If we don't understand how Abelard's castration was a turning point, then we fail to understand
how education, the university system, and philosophy was changing in the Middle Ages,
and we fail also to understand the possibilities of romantic love during the same period.
Plenty of people have tried to claim that romance is an invention of the modern age.
Abelard and Eloise's story shows that it was not.
And while these two were certainly not the first people to fall in love and suffer negative
repercussions for it, their story is certainly the most dramatic.
After Abelard was born in Brittany in the 11th century, the son of noble parents, but
from an early age, he was consumed with a desire for knowledge.
So deep was this desire that he renounced his right to the title and inheritance that
were due to be his when his father died, and he set off for Paris with the goal of becoming
the preeminent scholar in the known world.
One thing you can say about Abelard, he certainly did not lack for ambition.
And Paris is the place where he could fulfill that ambition, where the greatest minds of
the age had clustered together in what would ultimately become the university system.
Now, previously, if one wanted an education in the medieval world and to pursue learning
as a career, the church was the only option.
Or if you happen to be a person of status and means, private tutors were a possibility.
In the 11th century, this started to change, and a rather informal system, whereby masters
in certain subjects would agree to take on students for a set fee, began to become formalized
and regularized.
Teachers currently teaching in centers of learning came together to establish standards
to determine who got to be called master in a certain subject, and to establish also
general practices for giving instruction in various subjects.
By a general law of attraction, others interested in education began to cluster together in
hubs of knowledge and learning, Bologna in Italy, Oxford in England, Paris in France.
While these educational systems were still deeply intertwined with the church, and indeed
most masters held church appointments, at just the moment that Abelard was unleashing
his genius on the world, this started to shift.
Knowledge was available for a price for any young man who wished to learn and could afford
to pay.
It was still a deeply exclusionary system, but it was more inclusive than what had existed
in the immediate past.
In Paris, Abelard quickly distinguished himself as a master of rhetoric and logic.
By all accounts, the man loved to argue, often just for the sake of arguing.
And he enjoyed needling other masters and pushing his students, once he became a teacher
himself, to investigate all sides of a matter.
Although he had several setbacks, including a period when he returned to his home in Brittany,
suffering exhaustion from studying, he eventually became the most sought after teacher in the
medieval European world.
His fame spread so far that people from regions as diverse as England, Germany, Italy, and
more flocked to his side.
He taught future church leaders who came from Rome to study with him.
He instructed John of Salisbury, one of the greatest minds to emerge from England.
Other English students brought some of Abelard's books back across the channel to stock the
libraries of cathedral schools in Britain.
His intellect and skills of argumentation so affected people who had witnessed them
that they couldn't help but write about him.
Even in text that had nothing to do with Paris, logic, rhetoric, or education.
Otto of Friesen, for example, sticks the story of Abelard's life into a text about the Emperor
Frederick Barbarossa, even though the one had nothing to do with the other.
So great an impression had he made that Otto had to write something about him somewhere.
Peter Abelard was the rock star of the medieval academic world.
In the year 1117, Abelard took lodgings in the household of one Fulbert, canon of Notre-Dame.
It was a good situation, near where he held classes and disputed and discussed with other
masters in the midst of the power network of church officials who still held sway over
the infant world of academia, and it was affordable.
All he was expected to do in return for this plum housing situation was act as tutor to
Fulbert's niece, a girl named Eloise.
Eloise was some years younger than Abelard and had been raised in a convent for most
of her life.
It seems likely that she was illegitimate and never knew her father.
In the convent, she had impressed the nuns with her intellect and facility for learning.
It is an interesting check against the usual impression we get of the medieval world as
so inhospitable to women that not only was Eloise able to procure a first class education,
but also several people thought it was a good idea that her education continued beyond what
the convent could provide.
We get an idea of the extent of her learning when, at one point in their correspondence,
Abelard refers to the fact that Eloise can read Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, which would
have been a stunning achievement for any man at that time.
Yet, while her situation is exceptional, she cannot be the only medieval woman to achieve
such heights of learning.
Eloise offers us a glimpse of a world of women's possibility that official history can only
hint at.
So Fulbert brought Eloise to Paris to continue her education and brought Peter Abelard into
his house to serve as his niece's tutor.
We can all imagine what happened next.
The pair fell in love.
Abelard, in his account, tells us specifically it was her mind that seduced him and not her
physical appearance.
While she was not unpleasant to look at, he seems to suggest that beauty was not among
her many remarkable qualities.
Apparently, however, he found in her a true kindred spirit, a mind that loved knowledge
for knowledge's sake, an intellect that reveled in disputation and the application of logical
principles to a variety of questions and problems.
Fulbert even wonders why the possibility of a relationship between the two did not seem
to occur to Fulbert and why he apparently left them alone, completely unshaperoned,
on multiple occasions.
After a time, nature took its course and Eloise discovered she was pregnant.
Fulbert, understandably, was incensed at the insult done to his family.
Now, the life of a true scholar at this time was meant to exclude such earthly concerns
as love, lust, marriage, and children, as they were seen as distracting scholars from
the time they should be spending reading, ruminating, teaching, and adding to the store
of knowledge in the world.
For Abelard, the pregnancy of Eloise would have been a double blow.
He was an insult to Fulbert and would have incurred ill will in the very social and academic
circles where he wished to carry favor, and it would have diminished his reputation as
a scholar.
Abelard took what must have seemed like a wise course of action at the time, and this
he apparently did with Eloise's full consent.
He brought her home to his family in Brittany where she gave birth to their son, Astrolabe,
who was named for a scientific instrument used by astronomers.
They turned the child over to Abelard's sister to raise, and Eloise entered a nunnery, although
she did not take holy orders at this time.
Fulbert, as you might imagine, was having none of it.
When Abelard came back to Paris, Eloise's lover offered Fulbert a deal.
He would marry his niece, but the marriage would need to be kept secret in order to
protect Abelard's career.
Fulbert agreed, and Abelard returned to Brittany to collect his bride-to-be.
But her reaction to this news was fascinating.
She was opposed to the marriage.
Arguably one of the most modern thinking women of her day, she saw the marriage as unnecessary
and expressed concern that word would get out and damage Abelard's career.
Later, in one of her letters to him, she says, quote,
I wanted simply you, nothing of yours.
I looked for no marriage bond, no marriage portion, and it was not my own pleasures and
wishes I sought to gratify, as you well know, but yours.
The name of wife may seem more sacred or more binding, but sweeter for me will always be
the word mistress, or, if you will permit me, that of concubine or whore, end quote.
But more than the damage to Abelard's career, Eloise saw marriage as something that was
unnecessary for those who truly embraced the higher ideals of philosophy.
No institution of man was necessary when two people were joined in mind and spirit.
To agree to the marriage would be to reject many of the principles she had learned to
embrace in her studies, and which both she and Abelard held so dear.
Eventually, however, Eloise was persuaded to return to Paris, where she and Abelard
were married with Fulbear and a few other church officials as witnesses.
Fulbear did not keep the marriage secret, as he had agreed, and rumors started to circulate
about the couple.
In an ill-considered move that seemed to be based on the idea of out of sight, out of
mind, Abelard stashed Eloise in a convent again, the same one in Argentina where she had grown
up, in the hope that, with her out of the city, the rumors of their relationship would
die down.
It seems clear, though, that his affection for her was as strong as ever.
We know from their letters that he came to visit her in the convent on more than one occasion.
Apparently, on one memorable day, they snuck into an unused corner of the convent refectory
and had sex as they could find no other place, understandably, in the Abbey complex.
Although Eloise had not taken holy orders and was simply a guest in the convent, Fulbear
became convinced that Abelard was trying to get rid of her, causing him further shame
and rage.
And so it was that he arranged for a group of his kinsmen, among them one of Abelard's
former friends, to break into the scholars' rooms and forcibly castrate his niece's husband.
As Fulbear saw it, Abelard had stolen his niece's virginity, so he would now steal that
with which he had accomplished the theft.
Given time and opportunity, Abelard surely could have refuted the logic in this thinking,
but he was given neither.
As we saw earlier in this lecture, the aftermath of this event was dramatic not only for Abelard,
but also apparently for all of Parisian academic society.
Even at his lowest moment, Peter Abelard still saw himself as the figure around which so much
of the world revolved, and he was worried about the grief his own mutilation was causing
for his adoring followers.
In his autobiography, he writes of how he was unsure what he should do next with his
life, but at this point in the narrative, it's pretty clear that Abelard would prevail
in the end.
We get a clue about this given the fact that when he wrote the Historia Calamitatum, he
wrote in the first person plural.
Yes, as he's narrating the tragic event of his life, Peter Abelard uses the royal we.
After the castration, it didn't take long for Abelard to decide to embrace the life
of a monk.
He was, after all, a guaranteed celibate now, so that particular temptation would not afflict
him.
Eloise, denied the earthly love of her husband, followed him into religious life, becoming
a nun and, by all accounts, a very good one, eventually rising to become abyss of her own
religious house.
But she doesn't seem to have gone entirely willingly, and some historians have argued
that she was a competent nun and abyss because she was, in her heart, dead from the moment
of Abelard's castration.
The world held no more joy for her and no more temptation, so a life of contemplation
and prayer was not a difficult choice for her to make.
Indeed, in another of her letters to Abelard, written after they had both entered religious
houses, she says as much, asserting that she only became a nun because it's what Abelard
wanted, and further, she states, quote, I would not have had the least hesitation in
following you to hell if that was your command.
Indeed, I would have gone in front, end quote.
After a period of uncertainty, Abelard returned to teaching implored by former students eagerly
to study with him again, and given his new position as a monk, eventually he became an
abbot.
He embraced wholeheartedly the study of Christianity, and he applied his beloved logic to matters
of theology and religious practice.
It is clear, however, that the loss of his genitals had not impaired his mind or, even
more significantly, mellowed his temperament.
He still loved to argue, he still loved to provoke.
He famously harassed the monks at his first monastery, goading them into debate, and also
holding them to a stricter standard of living than that to which they had become accustomed.
After they tried to poison him, and this is a true story they did, he decided, wisely,
I think, to leave that monastery and look for quarters elsewhere.
He provoked the church establishment further by writing the work that would bring the first
accusations of heresy against him.
This was the text called Sieg et Nuln in Latin, which translates to yes or no.
Abelard believed that of all religions, Christianity was the most logical, and he sought to prove
its superiority to other faiths by analyzing many of its contradictions.
What Sieg et Nuln did was collect statements made by church fathers that on many points
contradicted one another.
Some might have seen this as a move that would undermine Christianity, but Abelard saw absolutely
no problem with this approach.
The examination and study of these contradictions and the sorting out of them would only strengthen
the Christian faith in his view.
He was utterly convinced that by using logic, he could explain the nature of God, the trinity,
in short, he thought he could explain everything using logic.
He sought to explore and expound on the nature of the trinity in other writings, many of
which caused alarm among church officials.
The Council of Soissant in 1121 didn't agree with Abelard's positions, and he was condemned
for practicing heresy and forced to publicly burn a copy of his book.
This he did, and he also seems to have agreed publicly to stop writing.
As you might have guessed, based on what you know about his character so far, he did no
such thing.
Abelard was nothing if not stubborn, nothing if not convinced of the rightness of his own
position.
It was not because of his pleasant disposition that he earned the nickname rhinoceros indomitus,
the indomitable rhinoceros.
He returned to the writing of treatises, particularly a work known as the Theologiae.
In the 1130s, he became embroiled in a bitter debate over theology, and in particular, this
work of his, with none other than Bernard of Clairvaux, the man who was a major reformer
of Christian monasticism and a future saint.
Bernard seems to have found Abelard's arguments both dangerous and offensive, and he quite
clearly had no great fondness for the man himself.
Bernard complained of Abelard to the papal curia and had him brought to trial again in
1140 as sans.
There he sarcastically demanded, quote, tell us, tell us whatever it is that has been revealed
to you and to no one else.
I listen to the prophets and the apostles.
I obey the gospel, but not the gospel according to Peter Abelard.
Are you writing a new gospel for us?
The church has no place for a fifth evangelist, end quote.
Yet, when Abelard came face to face with Bernard at sans in 1141, for once his intellect,
his genius, and his nerve seemed to have failed him.
He refused to respond publicly to the charges of heresy brought against him, a move he might
have made because he had learned ahead of time that the curia had already been convinced
to side with Bernard.
Whatever Abelard argued, he and his works were going to be condemned.
Still, this reaction, a non-reaction, does not sound at all like Abelard, who apparently
was always ready for a good argument.
A better answer might be that at this point, Abelard was in failing health.
He would die in 1142 in the monastic house at Clooney, where Peter the Venerable had
given him shelter in his last days.
On his deathbed, Abelard is reputed to have spoken as his last words the sentence, I don't
know.
Today, Abelard is more famous for his relationship with Eloise than for his groundbreaking works
on theology, philosophy, and religion.
Much of what we know of both of them comes from a series of letters that have survived
from the period after Abelard's castration and the circulation of his Historia calamitatum.
In just the last few years, however, a series of letters of somewhat dubious provenance have
been attributed to the lovers.
These are fascinating because they come from the period before Abelard's castration and
show a very different side of the pair's relationship.
When we examine the sets of letters side by side, there is a stunning difference.
The letters before the castration show a couple deeply in love and also in lust.
In the post-castration letters, the relationship has changed dramatically.
Abelard seeks to establish a relationship with Eloise much like that of a father to
a daughter or a brother to a sister.
He revises the rule of St. Benedict, that definitive guide to medieval monastic life
for Eloise and her nuns, rewriting it to address the particular situation of a convent.
He corresponds with her regularly concerning spiritual matters and urges her to turn her
heart and mind away from the past and her sorrows and instead focus on a new life in
Christ.
She seems, in the end at least, to have done this, becoming a well-respected religious
leader.
The nuns under her charge were also some of the very best educated in the medieval world,
a fact that should come as no surprise.
Upon Abelard's death, his body was first buried in the priory of Saint Marcel, but
later his remains were brought to Eloise at her religious house, the Paraclete, for reburial,
and upon her death, she was buried with him.
Today, their bones supposedly lie together in the Perlauches Cemetery in Paris.
Young lovers make pilgrimages to their graves to this day.
The castration of Abelard was a turning point for the medieval world because arguably the
greatest mind that that world had ever known shifted his focus and directed his energies
toward religion.
Abelard's writing treatises so earth-shattering in their conclusions that he was twice accused
of heresy.
It was a turning point as well for many later thinkers and church leaders, centuries on
down the line.
In the early modern period, when there was a new impulse to reconcile faith with reason,
Abelard stood as a shining example of how this could be accomplished.
His writings, well over a million words in all, found a new audience at the end of the
Middle Ages, or perhaps one could say, his writings had produced a trend that slowly gathered
steam between the 12th century and the 16th.
Later developments in this area so often attributed to thinkers of the early modern
period should really be attributed to the innovative thought and genius of Peter Abelard.
His castration marks a turning point in another sense, in that when scholars look back over
the correspondence between Eloise and her lover after the fact of his mutilation, careful
examination reveals a lively and quick wit, a deep intelligence, and what we might call
a progressive self-awareness that deepens our entire understanding of what the medieval
world was like for the women who inhabited it.
So often they are silenced by circumstances and by social customs, but I and many other
scholars like to imagine that lurking just beyond the edges of the official picture that
comes down to us through literature, edicts, wills, treatises, and other documents authored
predominantly by men, there was a world in which women enjoyed much more equality on
what we might term a day-to-day basis, and they had also significant impact and influence.
Eloise's writing makes this plain.
Other medieval women writers, like Christine de Pizon, Marjorie Kemp, Angela Foligno, and
Julian of Norwich, would affirm this fact.
In a later lecture, we will see how one woman in particular, Eleanor of Aquitaine, would
impact medieval society not on the margins or behind the scenes, but front and center
for all the world to witness.
But what did Peter Abelard's castration mean for the average person in the medieval world?
At the time, not much, but over the centuries, as more and more the average person was able
to be educated to study complex theology and philosophy, Abelard would stand as a shining
example of how the use of intellect could make of the world what you wanted.
It was a stunning prospect that would inspire countless people, at all levels of society,
to make their own contributions to the debates of their day.
But in our next two lectures, we will turn back to the world of men for a moment.
We'll see a dramatic shift away from the rationalism so dear to Abelard, from the logic he sought
to apply to theology and religion, that he thought would help him prove that Christianity
was the best of all faiths, and would further help him in clarifying and improving its tenets
and practices.
Next time, we'll explore the turning point that was the calling of the first crusade
by Pope Urban II, a moment that is breathtaking in the way that it defies and twists Abelard's
beloved logic, uses rhetorical strategies to persuade men to take up arms against a
defo that posed no real threat to the medieval European world, and appeals to emotion and
passion rather than reason.
