Lecture 12 The Battle of Hattah
Welcome back.
In our last lecture, we discussed how the calling of the first crusade by Pope Urban
II marked a turning point in medieval thinking and action when it came to matters of religion
and war.
Many have argued that the idea of traveling thousands of miles to fight an enemy who
really hadn't made any threats toward most of Western Europe had to have been accepted
and embraced enthusiastically because of mostly cynical reasons.
Younger sons were looking for land, wealth, and titles unavailable to them in the West.
A growing population was running out of space and needed to expand.
A social structure founded on hierarchy, loyalty, and violence needed a pressure valve to direct
those martial energies away from the West and prevent allies from becoming enemies.
And the Pope saw this as an opportunity to try and heal the rift between the Latin Catholic
and Eastern Orthodox churches that had occurred during the events that led up to the Great
Schism in 1054.
Urban II made this appeal by cleverly invoking the compelling idea of the past glories of
the Roman Empire, suggesting that Christians in the West needed to come to the aid of Christians
in the East.
All of these factors certainly played a part in the crusading fervor that gripped Europe
in the late 11th century.
But the most important factors were two that were the result of sincere belief.
A spreading religious devotion and a burgeoning zeal for persecution.
Both of these social currents had been building since the mid-10th century when we have the
beginning of what scholar R.I. Moore has called, quote, the formation of a persecuting society,
end quote.
But it was these factors in combination with the other pressures mentioned a moment ago
that caused the rise of a religious militarism that had only been occasional up until then.
Men in the West were eager to serve Christendom and even more eager to kill non-Christians,
particularly Muslims, in pursuit of this goal.
And so the turning point of the calling of the first crusade is incredibly important because
it affected all levels of medieval society, peasants, knights, kings, merchants.
Everyone seemed to have some sort of investment in this event.
Thus, what happened far away in the Holy Land would also resonate, especially psychologically,
for those who wouldn't or couldn't join in themselves.
In response to Urban's call, several waves of crusaders, although they were not called
that at the time, headed to the Holy Land.
Along the way, they slaughtered Jews in the Rhineland, endured disease, drowning, starvation,
and cannibalism, and most men staggered into the Levant considerably poorer than when they
had left Europe.
But then came a stunning and affirming victory.
The crusaders captured Jerusalem itself in July 1099 and then proceeded to carve out
four Christian kingdoms, which they managed to hold on to with varying degrees of success
for the next 200 years or so.
The life of crusaders in Uttramere fired the imagination of those friends and relatives
left behind in Europe, and successive waves of settlers came to take advantage of what
this new land might offer, as well as to provide assistance in shoring up Western positions
in Tripoli, Edessa, Antioch, and Jerusalem.
Always under threat, the crusader kingdoms in the east came under greater pressure in
the late 12th century when the Islamic leader Saladin rose to power, uniting thousands of
troops behind him in the cause of resisting the Christian infidels.
As we will see, Saladin was helped considerably in his efforts by infighting and bad behavior
among the Western leaders.
At the Battle of Hatin, a few stupid decisions by the crusader army and clever strategy on
Saladin's part resulted in the most significant blow the crusading movement would ever suffer,
and one from which it would never recover.
Psychologically, this was arguably a turning point for all of Christendom, as its relationship
with the Islamic world and the city-states of the Middle East would never be the same.
In the year 1187, problems were plaguing the crusader kingdoms.
Several uneasy truces had been established with Muslim leaders, including Saladin, but
fate and treachery seemed to be conspiring to undo them at every turn.
First, there was the problem of the kings of Jerusalem, who, while supposedly superior
to all other Christian leaders in the land, were completely ineffective for a variety
of reasons.
King Baldwin IV of Jerusalem sought to make peace with Saladin, but he died young, horribly
disfigured by the disease of leprosy, and he was unable during his lifetime to restrain
some of his more hot-headed vassals, including Reynald of Chatillon, Lord of Karak, who liked
to attack caravans of Muslim pilgrims to goad Saladin into action.
Baldwin was succeeded by a child, also named Baldwin, and then by his sister, Cebilla,
and finally Cebilla's husband, Guy of Lucignan.
Guy had the crown of Jerusalem planted on his head by the corrupt patriarch of Jerusalem,
and the coronation seems to have been as much a surprise to Guy as it was to other Christian
leaders in the area, and this moment was arguably the beginning of the end.
Guy was a newcomer to Utromer, and those whose families had lived in the area for generations
resented his sudden rise to power, hopscotch-ing over men who were much more established, and
it must be said, much more qualified to rule.
Although he had made several treaties with the Christians, and showed much restraint,
Saladin was understandably angry when yet another treaty was broken by the actions
in 1187 of Reynald of Chatillon who attacked a caravan, slaughtered dozens of people and
livestock, and then took the rest as slaves back to Karak.
Enough was enough, and Saladin declared jihad or holy war.
In the face of this, Christian unity disintegrated still further.
The Christian leader Raymond of Tripoli turned his back on the other crusader states and
made a treaty with Saladin for himself and his own interests.
But one day, in accordance with that treaty, a representative of the Muslim leader came
to Raymond asking permission for a hunting party to engage in peaceable activities on
the borders of Raymond's land.
Raymond granted this, and probably at the time didn't think much of it.
One can only imagine what he must have thought when he wrote out to take a look and discovered
forces numbering around 7,000 men encamped in his territory.
This was no ordinary hunting party.
Certain that Saladin was about to break their treaty, Raymond renounced his earlier agreement
and rejoined forces with the other leaders of the Christian crusader states, meeting
up with them in Akra.
While he was there with the other Christian leaders, Saladin's forces surrounded Raymond's
home city, Tiberias, making Raymond's wife, family, and subjects prisoners.
And then Saladin waited.
Most of the crusaders argued that they needed to go to the rescue of Tiberias immediately.
The one person who argued most vociferously against this was the one whom we might least
expect to do so, Raymond.
This is a trap, he told his fellows.
I know Saladin.
He will not kill my wife or children or totally destroy my city.
He will hold them for ransom, and I will get them back safe and sound at a later date.
To head out now from Akra to Tiberias, a march of some 40 miles would be sheer insanity.
Our troops number in the thousands, the weather during the day is scorchingly hot, there is
only one spring between the next outpost and Tiberias, and there's no way that spring
could water all our men and horses.
No Raymond apparently argued, we should stay right where we are.
But the rest of the men didn't listen, and those with cooler heads were outvoted or outshouted
by the others.
So on July 3rd, 1187, the Christian army started out through the hills of eastern Galilee.
Some, like Reynaldo Chatillon, wrote eagerly to confront their enemy.
Others, like Raymond of Tripoli and Balian of Ibelien, went reluctantly and under protest.
Some, like the bewildered King Guy of Jerusalem, just went, not quite fully understanding what
lay ahead.
But the most important thing that went with them on that day was the relic of the true
cross, a sliver of the wood that had made the cross on which Christ was crucified, or
so it was believed by the crusaders.
As long as the relic was with them, most were supremely confident of victory.
God was on their side.
In order to inspire the Christian troops in battle and remind them of the cross's presence,
the army also carried what looked like a giant flagpole.
This was the crusader's standard, and it was visible to all when the relic of the cross
was not.
Recognizing this as a source of inspiration, enemy combatants had repeatedly attempted to
attack it, knock it down, destroy it, anything to demoralize the Christian army.
But so far, the standard and the relic of the cross had come through every conflict intact.
All that was about to change.
Although it had been chilly when the army sat out in the morning, by midday it was sweltering.
Men and horses were thirsty, and scouts were sent out to check the known springs in the
area.
Saladin had anticipated this, and those that he had not already purposefully blocked up
were swarming with Muslim warriors.
There would be no relief for some time.
As they drew closer to the hills of Hatin, also known as the horns of Hatin, for from
a distance they did look like horns, the thirst and suffering of the crusaders grew in intensity.
And this is precisely when Saladin upped the ante.
He sent parties of advanced raiders out, specifically instructed to ride within range, fire arrows
into the advancing Christian forces, and then flee.
The Christians would take losses and move further toward exhaustion as they would attempt
to pursue their attackers, expending precious energy and losing precious water with no return
on their investment of exertion and fluid.
By the evening of July 3, 1187, the crusaders halted, looking out toward the hills of Hatin
and their enemy.
And the space between them was a formation known as the Hill of the Multiplication of
Pains.
It was, as we will see, aptly named.
In the few remaining moments of daylight, the crusaders made their charge, desperate
more than anything one imagines, for a drink of water.
By the time it was full dark, a third of the Christian army was either killed or had surrendered.
On the morning of July 4, the fighting continued, but it did not last long.
Exhausted, dying of thirst, outnumbered, plagued still by disagreement over which tactics to
employ, the crusader armies were quickly routed.
Muslim chronicler Imad Adin described in unflinching detail the aftermath, quote,
I passed by them and saw the limbs of the fallen cast naked on the field of battle,
scattered in pieces over the sight of the encounter, lacerated and disjointed, with
heads cracked open, throat split, spines broken, neck shattered, feet in pieces, noses mutilated,
extremities torn off, members dismembered, parts shredded, eyes gouged out, stomachs
disemboweled, hair colored with blood, fingers sliced off, the thorac shattered, pupils liquefied,
livers crushed, end quote.
I could go on and on, and trust me, Imad Adin certainly does.
After the battle, every Templar and Hospitaler was executed on the spot, and the Christian
warriors who survived were held for ransom.
In the fighting, the crusader standard was felled, causing what must have been a supreme
loss of morale for the Christians.
Then, the relic of the true cross was wrenched from the hands of the bishop who carried it
into war.
Imad Adin's account of this offers a fascinating glimpse of how the Muslims viewed the Christian
faith.
He states that Islam was, quote, face to face with unbelief, monotheism at war with
Trinitarianism, the way of righteousness looking down upon error, faith opposing polytheism,
end quote.
So clearly what we see here is that the three-personed God of Christianity was interpreted by Islam
as signifying that Christians were polytheistic rather than monotheistic as they themselves
held.
Further, in the eyes of Adin, they were idolaters, worshiping images.
He states, quote, the true cross was captured, and the idolaters who were trying to defend
it were routed.
It was this cross, brought into position and raised on high, to which all Christians prostrated
themselves and bowed their heads.
When the great cross was taken, great was the calamity that befell them, and strength
drained from their loins, end quote.
Here it seems that Imad Adin has conflated and confused the Crusader's standard with
the relic of the true cross, an understandable mistake.
Later reports tell us of the relic of the Holy Cross being paraded through the streets
of Damascus, either affixed to an upside-down lance or tied to the tail of a donkey and
dragged through the dirt and mud.
In any event, after the immediate aftermath of Hatin, it was never seen again and passed
out of recorded history.
When the fighting was over, Saladin ordered that the leaders of the Christian army be
brought to him in his tent, among them the King of Jerusalem, Guy of Lusignan, and Reynald
of Chatillon, who had deliberately broken so many treaties, attacked and killed so many
innocent Muslim pilgrims, destroyed so many merchant caravans, and who had provoked Saladin
on so many occasions.
Guy and Reynald must have been surprised when Saladin offered them cushions to sit on.
According to Muslim chronicler Baha Adin, Guy then indicated that he was thirsty.
Saladin ordered that ice cold water be brought and offered some to him.
Then Saladin, quote, the king, having drunk some of it, handed the cup to Reynald of Chatillon,
whereupon the sultan said to the interpreter, Say to the king, it is you who give him to
drink, but I give him neither to drink nor to eat.
By these words, he wished it to be understood that honor forbade him to harm any man who
had tasted his hospitality.
He then struck him on the neck with his own hand to fulfill the vow he had made, end quote.
Reynald of Chatillon, red wolf of the desert, was dead.
There can't have been too many on both the Christian and Muslim sides, who considered
his death anything but a relief.
But if this internal threat to the kingdoms of Uttramer was dead, so too was the dream
of a Christian empire in the realm known as Uttramer.
Having defeated such a significant number of the Christian forces, Saladin found it easy
to sweep through the rest of the Crusader kingdoms and conquer almost all of them.
A few fortresses, such as the massive Crac de Chevalier, withstood his attacks for a
time, but for all intents and purposes, Christendom was losing its tenuous foothold in the Holy
Land.
On October 2, 1187, Jerusalem fell to Saladin's forces.
It would have been well within his rights and within the norms of warfare at the time for
him to execute those who surrendered the city to him.
But Saladin was no ordinary man and no ordinary warrior.
After beheading Reynald of Chatillon, he had let Guy of Lucignan go.
Prior to this, in 1183, he had laid siege to the fortress of Kerak, unaware that the
castle was full of guests celebrating the marriage of Reynald of Chatillon's stepson
to the princess Isabella.
When informed of these matters during the attack, Saladin politely inquired as to the
location of the newlyweds.
And when told that they were in the North Tower, he instructed his troops to aim elsewhere.
He further guaranteed the bridal couple safe passage out of the fortress.
And after ceasing his siege of Tiberius, the trap that he had laid to draw the crusaders
to him from Acre across a dry desert land with little or no water, he sent Raymond of
Tripoli's wife on her way with her passage paid and an escort to assure her safe conduct.
Raymond himself had not fared so well.
At some point during the last hours of fighting at Hatin, he seems to have either fled from
the battle or somehow made his way through the enemy lines only to find that they closed
behind him and he had no way back in.
He died shortly after the battle.
So given his earlier generous and chivalrous behavior, it is perhaps no surprise that when
he finally captured Jerusalem, Saladin acted in similar fashion.
Since the resistance forces led by Balian of Ivaline agreed to surrender, he allowed
thousands of them to ransom themselves, giving them a month to come up with the money.
The city was full of refugees, many too poor to come up with even the meager ransom he
asked and he permitted 7000 or so of the poor inhabitants to be paid for with money from
the hospital or treasury.
We see that King Henry II of England had deposited there in anticipation of a future
pilgrimage he intended to make.
We'll see more of Henry in our next lecture, which focuses primarily on his wife, Eleanor
of Aquitaine.
After these generous gestures, Saladin then allowed a further several thousand inhabitants
of Jerusalem to simply go free as a wedding gift to his brother, who in turn returned
the courtesy and freed several thousand other citizens that he had taken as hostages.
There were some, however, for whom no ransom could be raised and they were taken as slaves.
As cruel as this fate must have seemed for those on whom it fell, all in all, Saladin's
victory and the aftermath was remarkably civil and free from the retribution one so often
sees in military and religious conflicts.
But followed must have seemed a surreal sight.
Three long columns of refugees walking away from Jerusalem in the hope of finding shelter
in some territory that was still Christian or Crusader controlled.
One column was led by the remaining Knights Templar, another by the Hospitallers, and
the third by Balian of Ibelien and the Patriarch of Jerusalem.
The latter was allowed to carry with him a number of sacred Christian relics and some
other valuables.
Some of these refugees would return to Europe.
Some would join Christian communities still holding on in the Middle East.
Still others would convert to Islam and yet others would die or end up as slaves.
After the events of 1187, Jerusalem, sacred city to the three major monotheistic faiths
of the medieval world, became a symbol that was dramatically rewritten for both the Christian
and the Muslim faithful.
For the former it was a symbol of loss and for the latter it became a new symbol of unity.
Saladin recognized the tremendous power that Hatan and the capture of Jerusalem presented
and he pressed his advantage to make the most of this new opportunity to unify many of the
previously warring factions of the Muslim world.
For example, he deliberately timed his entry into the captured city to coincide with the
anniversary of the Prophet Muhammad's legendary night journey to Jerusalem and he commissioned
sermons, poems, and many chroniclers to record the importance of this event.
He himself composed and sent numerous letters detailing what had taken place there.
The impact of the battle of Hatan and its immediate aftermath sent tremendous tremors
through the medieval world.
When the current Pope, Urban III, received word of the fall of Jerusalem, it is said
he immediately fell ill and died of grief shortly thereafter.
His successor, Gregory VIII, immediately sent out a new call for crusade.
In this call, the appeal of Urban II less than a century before, that sermon that had
ultimately resulted in the capture of Jerusalem, was revised with a new appeal in mind.
In his papal bull of 1187, Gregory VIII renewed Urban's promise that all those who died in
pursuit of the Christian cause in the Levant would receive full remission of sins, but
this time, instead of encouraging the faithful to take up arms by appealing to the ideas
of salvation, material gain, and the opportunity to kill infidels, he upped the ante by suggesting
that the victory of Saladin had come about because of the sinful nature of those to whom
he preached, arguing that it was incumbent upon any Christian to take up arms in this
cause.
He states, quote, far from allowing ourselves to be cast down or to be divided, we ought
to be persuaded that these reverses are only to be attributed to the anger of God against
the multitude of our sins, and that at last, appeased by a repentance, the mercy of the
Lord will raise us up once again, more glorious for the abasement into which he has plunged
us, end quote.
The plea seems to have worked.
In the immediate aftermath of the turning point that was the Battle of Hatin, the kings
of France, England, Germany, and the Holy Roman Emperor vowed to take the cross and
recover the Holy Land for Christianity.
Not all of them would make it.
Holy Roman Emperor Frederick Barbarossa set off on crusade with all necessary pomp and
piety, but fell off his horse while attempting to cross the Salaf River.
The currents say that he was impatient with the time it was taking everyone to file across
the single bridge, so he attempted to ford the river himself.
The current was too strong for the horse.
His armor was too heavy for Frederick, and before anyone could pull him out, he had drowned.
His army was thrown into chaos, but someone at least recognized that they should try to
get his body back home, and he was essentially kept pickled in a barrel of vinegar.
For other crusaders who died well en route, the luxury of an entire barrel could not be
spared.
Many corpses were boiled down until the flesh came off, and the bones could be scooped out
for easy, and stench-free, transport back to Europe.
Or in some cases, the heart would be cut out and preserved, taken home to be buried by
a grieving family.
But in plenty of cases, the bodies were simply left where they had died.
At least the Holy Roman Emperor had made it part way there.
Henry II of England died before he could even set out.
His son, Richard the Lionheart, would make up for this oversight by not only going on
crusade, but by going on crusades so emphatically that he essentially spent his entire reign
away from his kingdom.
The time Richard spent in the Holy Land would take the increasing interest in literature
having to do with Islam and the crusades, which we've already discussed a bit in Lecture
3, when we explored Muslim Spain and the Song of Roland, and it would take this interest
and blow it up into a bona fide phenomenon.
Stories of Richard and Saladin's interactions with one another became the stuff of legend
and fired the imaginations of poets and writers back in Europe.
In 1191, Richard managed to recapture the cities of Tir and Akra, and then pushed on
to Jerusalem.
He was unable to recapture that city, but during the years that he laid siege, Saladin
once again demonstrated a remarkable degree of courtesy to the one who was attacking him.
Upon hearing that Richard was sick at one point, Saladin sent his own physician and some
choice selections of food to the English king.
When Richard's horse died, Saladin gave him one of his own prized stallions.
Richard himself often spoke admiringly of the Muslim leader, and at one point seems
to have considered marrying his sister off to him.
The two finally forged a treaty, the Peace of Ramla, that would allow Christian pilgrims
access to Jerusalem without their having to pay a tax for the honor.
It was becoming clear at this point that the Battle of Hatan could not be undone.
The decisive victory there had driven one of the last nails into the coffin of the crusading
dream, which would finally crumble in 1291 when Akra left Christian control for the last
time.
The Battle of Hatan was a turning point for many reasons.
It marked a shift in Christian fortunes and the unity of the Muslim world, and it created
the crisis that brought European heads of state into the Levant for decades to come.
At the same time, it became for some writers and thinkers in the West a source of inspiration,
as it was more thrilling to tell stories of Christian warriors against valiant and capable
foes than it was to write of their victory over mere brutes.
Their restraint, chivalry, and measured responses of Saladin provoked a new interest in the Muslim
world.
While in other factions of medieval Europe, the persecuting mentality was taking hold
with a new and frightening force.
This was a turning point that came about due to crisis, yes, but it was in many respects
a crisis of the crusader's own making.
Not the work of any one man, it was a turning point born of religious belief and social
pressures, one that occurred despite the best efforts of so many to avoid it.
As I've already noted, two of the most famous supporters of the crusading movement were
Henry II of England and his son, Richard the Lionheart.
In our next lecture, we are going to discuss them in greater detail, but only insofar as
they relate to the most remarkable woman of the age, Eleanor of Aquitaine, wife to Henry,
and mother to Richard.
But it's not in those roles that her life stands out as a turning point for the medieval
world, but rather in the most unconventional positions that a woman could hold in Europe
in the Middle Ages, as heirs to a great duchy and divorcee of the king of France.
Join us next time as we discuss this remarkable woman and the way her life changed the very
shape of Europe.
