Welcome back. In our last lecture, we discussed the Battle of Hatin, an event that in 1187
proved the disastrous turning point for European crusading dreams in the Middle East. The Crusader
kingdoms that had been established in the Levant in the late 11th and early 12th centuries were,
for all intents and purposes, conquered, destroyed, or captured by the great Muslim leader Saladin,
who had been thorough in his military efforts, but had shown great mercy to those he had conquered.
Hatin was the conclusion to a decades-long struggle, as the European Christian territories in the
Holy Land, or Utremer, had been under threat from the very moment of their creation.
In 1145, 40-some years before Hatin, the second crusade had been called in an attempt to shore
up the crusader position in the Middle East. Those who heeded the call this time around included
an even greater array of very high-ranking nobles than had participated in the first crusade.
Those heading out for the Holy Land on this occasion included several heads of state,
among them King Louis VII of France, who was accompanied by his wife, Eleanor of Aquitaine,
the subject of today's lecture. As you might imagine from the title of today's lecture,
the turning point under discussion here has to do with the theme of personality,
which we've explored in a number of lectures so far. Eleanor of Aquitaine was a key figure in
the medieval world, first because of her status as the heiress to the largest duchy in the region
we today think of as France. Aquitaine was in the south, which had a very different personality
than the north. In the south, women had more power and influence than they did in the north,
and they lived in a world of greater sensual pleasures, especially when it came to music,
poetry, and romantic love, than did the more austere, piously Christian people to the north.
In part, this may have been due to long contact between the south of France and Muslim Spain,
or Al-Andalus, which we've already seen was a most unusual society in terms of its religious and
cultural tolerance, emphasis on education, and appreciation for the arts, music, literature,
art, fashion, architecture, and the like. So as the eldest child of her father, lacking brothers,
being heir to a huge swath of territory and being raised in the rather liberal culture
of the Occitan, another word for the south of France at that time, Eleanor seemed bound to play
a role of some significance in the medieval world. For one thing, she was very desirable as
a spouse, as any man who married her would gain significant status and power by attaining control
over Aquitaine. So it was no surprise that when still a young girl, she was wed to Louis,
son of King Louis VI of France. What was a surprise is what happened next.
Unhappy in her marriage, she did something about it. She obtained a divorce, giving up her position
as Queen of France and the care of her two young daughters. She then married Henry Plantagenet,
a great grandson of William the Conqueror, and son of the Empress Matilda, who for years had been
struggling to secure her right to rule England in the face of opposition from her cousin Stephen,
who claimed the throne for himself. Eleanor's actions before, during and after her second marriage
caused quite a scandal and were regarded as quite astonishing at the time.
However, Eleanor's divorce, shocking as it was in many respects, was not at the time
recognized for what it really meant, the turning point it would really turn out to be.
It was only some years later that the world began to appreciate what her decision to leave
her first husband had set into motion. If Eleanor had not initiated a divorce with Louis VII
and then chosen Henry Plantagenet as her next husband, the history of the medieval west,
particularly in France and England, would have been much different.
I've used this metaphor before, but it really is appropriate to use it again in this instance.
Eleanor's divorce set off a ripple effect that was still being felt centuries later.
It changed not only the shape of nations and affected later military conflicts,
but it also impacted the cultural traditions of these countries as well, literary traditions,
royal inheritance customs, and more. And while this was indeed first in large
measure because of an accident of birth, Eleanor was born in Aquitaine and became heir to those lands,
it was secondly and more emphatically because of Eleanor's personality and force of will.
Another personality born into the same circumstances might well have done nothing,
or at least done what was typical in a royal marriage at this time, keep quiet and accept one's
lot. But there was absolutely nothing typical about Eleanor. One could say with some authority
that there had never been a woman like her in all the medieval world, and there wouldn't
be any other woman who would come close until Elizabeth I of England came to the throne in
the 16th century. So how did this remarkable woman arrive at the moment that would cause her to create
one of the most dramatic turning points of the Middle Ages? And why, with all the shock and
scandal her behavior caused at the time, did the rest of the medieval world not glimpse the full
potential of her actions until much later? To understand that, we have to go back a bit
to Eleanor's grandfather, William the Ninth of Aquitaine, also known as the Troubadour Duke.
The Troubadour tradition arguably plays a very large role in Eleanor's story,
so we need to understand what that tradition is. Simply put, it was a genre of musical poetry
that emphasized not only romantic love, but also the idolization of women. Also sometimes known as
fan amour, it was a tradition in which poets sang songs of their utter devotion to a particular lady.
In some cases, this was to curry favor with a woman who happened to be ruling over a certain
territory, something that wasn't so unusual in the south of France. In other instances,
the declaration of love and devotion to a lady was a way to try and get close to a particular
lord, the lady's husband. The idea here was that the devotion, while absolute, was also chased.
Attainment of one's object of affection would be endlessly deferred, the better to inspire poets
to create more songs and knights to fight more valiantly to impress their chosen ladies.
Some scholars refer to this phenomenon as courtly love, the placing of a lady on a pedestal
so as to make her utterly unattainable and thus endlessly inspirational, or, as one of my students
once commented, a really big waste of time. But this was the culture of the Ducal Court of Poitou
in Aquitaine, where Eleanor grew up, and though she never knew her grandfather,
his fame as a glamorous warrior and lusty composer of love songs would certainly have been known to
her. Known to her too was that he was a famous adulterer. He crossed the line and turned his
words of love into deeds openly committing adultery. He was also, even more significantly for the time,
not terribly religious. Some might say, in fact, that he was anti-clerical. He seemed to have little
use for religion and even less respect for the church's moral edicts, making William the Troubadour
Duke one of the most unusual nobles of the time. Like father, like son. Eleanor's father, Duke William
the Tenth, regularly found himself embroiled in battles with important figures in the church hierarchy,
and, like his father before him, the new Duke had large appetites and was perfectly comfortable
flouting church strictures. William's brother, Raymond, was one of those younger sons we discussed
in our lecture on the first crusade. Desiring to keep the Duchy of Aquitaine and the power that
came with it intact, the Troubadour Duke left everything to his eldest son, William the Tenth,
and Raymond had to find his own way in the world. He did this by joining the crusades and carving
out his own territory in the Holy Land. This would turn out to be a significant factor in Eleanor's
divorce, as we shall see. Now, it's important to remember that France in the 12th century
little resembled the France of today. In effect, the French kings ruled directly over territories
closest to Paris, the Île de France, and most other lands, such as Brittany and Normandy,
were largely independent, even if nominally held by dukes who were officially vassals of the French
king. The acquisition of the Duchy of Aquitaine by the French crown meant that France practically
doubled in size overnight. Thus, it was no surprise that Eleanor ended up married to the
future king of France. It was also no surprise that the marriage did not go as smoothly as one
might have hoped, although on the surface of it, it probably seemed like a better match than many
among the royals of Europe, who always married for political and economic advantage. If love
happened in a royal marriage, it would be an unexpected benefit. But in the case of Louis VII
and Eleanor of Aquitaine, it really did seem like a possibility. In a significant departure
from many royal marriages, in this case, the parties were of similar ages when they wed,
both were teenagers. But although the marriage seemed initially successful,
there were simply too many obstacles to its ultimate success. Eleanor was a southerner
and regarded with some hostility by many of the members of the court in the north.
They found her manners unbecoming for what they considered a pious Christian queen. Eleanor,
for her part, was accustomed to a world in which women could speak their minds,
and in which church teachings condemning women as the source of original sin
were blithely ignored in favor of troubadour love lyrics. At first, it seems that Eleanor's strong
personality would be what directed the marriage. But Louis could never shake or overcome the deeply
religious upbringing and education he had had. For you see, Louis, like Eleanor's uncle Raymond,
had been a second son and thus destined for the church. He only became the heir to the throne
when his older brother Philip was killed in a freak horseback riding accident.
Deeply pious, it seems that Louis got little joy out of life. Although Eleanor provided him with two
children, both daughters, he came to see the lack of a son as a condemnation from God for having a
wife so out of step with the mores of the very Christian French court. It is this piety, it seems
clear, that led Louis to join the second crusade to the Holy Land, which set out in 1147. It is
Eleanor's appetite for adventure, it also seems clear, that led her to decide that she would come
along for the ride. Now, it was not unheard of for wives to accompany husbands on their military
pilgrimages to Outremer, but it was unusual and Eleanor's experience as a woman on crusade
was perhaps the most unusual of all. For it was while engaged in this religious activity
that she decided she wanted out of the marriage. Not only did she decide, she announced it to her
husband and suggested they appeal to the Pope for an annulment on grounds of consanguinity
immediately upon their return from the Middle East. What happened is this. After a long journey to
the Levant, which included a stopover in Byzantium, the royal party arrived in Antioch, which was now
ruled over by Eleanor's uncle, Raymond, who had done quite well for himself. Just nine years older
than Eleanor, Raymond was reportedly delighted to see his niece. Indeed, very soon after their arrival,
the gossip was that he was a little too delighted. The rumor quickly spread that the French Queen
and the ruler of Antioch were engaged in an incestuous affair. Whether or not this rumor is true
cannot be verified one way or another, and in some respects, it doesn't matter whether or not it
actually happened. What mattered is that plenty of people in Louis' entourage thought it did.
Raymond had attempted to recruit Louis and his followers to a particular plan of attack to support
Christian interests in the Middle East. Louis didn't like Raymond's plan of retaking the
county of Edessa. He thought an attack on Jerusalem, a direct approach, was the way to go.
Another woman, another queen, might have neatly bitten her tongue, shook her head, and seathed
silently inside, all the while keeping to herself the opinion that her husband was making a horrible
mistake. Eleanor was not any woman. Fed up by this point with a husband she found at once too
meek when it came to politics and too overbearing and cold when it came to marriage, she told him
to take himself off to Jerusalem while she would remain behind and plan the annulment of their
marriage. But for all his faults and his grating piety, Louis did love Eleanor. In fact, he loved
her so much that many in his entourage found it troubling, concerned that Louis too often had
been swayed by Eleanor's desires. The experience, while on crusade, would prove to be the nail in
the coffin of the royal marriage, and it was not long after the return to France that the pope
granted the couple a divorce, an annulment really, on the basis that they had been too closely related
to Mary in the first place, a common technicality used by nobles to escape unpleasant, inconvenient,
or childless marriages. The end of the marriage was shocking enough. One could imagine that all
the medieval world was a gog that a woman like Eleanor wouldn't want to be queen of France,
and stunned equally that Louis wouldn't have done everything possible to keep Eleanor as his wife
and thus acquitain as part of his possessions. But what was even more shocking was what Eleanor
did next, and here we come at last to the turning point which, while noteworthy at the time, was
not fully appreciated for its full significance until much later. For within just a few weeks of
receiving confirmation of her annulment, Eleanor herself wrote a letter to young Henry Plantagenet,
the Duke of Normandy, declaring herself free to marry if he would have her. Eleanor,
almost a decade older than the young Duke, had previously been married 15 years, producing only
daughters and no sons. From a political standpoint, she seemed not a wise match for an ambitious
young noble like Henry, but he said yes with alacrity. Some scholars have attempted to explain
the haste of Eleanor's remarriage as a necessity. As the greatest single heiress in the land,
she was likely to be the object of attempted kidnappings and forced marriages, and so,
many reason, she needed to make a strong marriage and quickly to protect herself and her interests.
But it seems more likely, as unbelievable as it might be in the medieval world,
that this was in fact a love match. Eleanor and Henry had met during treaty negotiations between
Henry's father, Geoffrey of Anjou, and the French crown in 1151. It seems that they both made an
impression on one another at this initial meeting, and when she was free, Eleanor went after what
she wanted and she got it. The marriage between the two greatly increased Henry's holdings,
and more importantly, greatly increased his holdings along the border with Louis VII's kingdom.
It must have been galling to Louis to have his difficult bride, whom he had certainly loved,
leave him, and then remarry a man whose family had been at odds and at war with his own.
But no one knew just yet how significant, what a turning point, this marriage would be.
Because although his mother had long claimed her right to the English throne,
it looked not at all certain that she would prevail. Henry, it seemed likely, would live out
his life as Duke of Normandy and co-ruler of Aquitaine with his new wife. But then King Stephen,
who had long claimed the throne of England in opposition to Henry's mother Matilda,
suffered a blow when his eldest son Eustace died. He had a second son, William,
but he was far too young to rule on his own. Stephen reached an agreement with his cousin
and her family. He would remain King of England until his death, but he would name Henry Plantagenet
as his heir. And in 1154, Henry, Duke of Normandy, Count of Anjou, and Duke of Aquitaine became King
of England as well. Henry was now ruler of a huge collection of territories that scholars have come
to call the Angevan Empire. Over time, he would expand his holding still further, adding Brittany,
Ireland, Scotland, and Wales to the domains over which he held sway. The power shift that had
occurred between France and the Plantagenet line with Henry's marriage to Eleanor suddenly became
even more pronounced, and Louis's status in the medieval theater of politics was much diminished.
It was a shift that would sow ill will and conflict between the two neighboring countries
for centuries to come. Ultimately, we can trace the Hundred Years War between France and England,
which lasted incidentally 116 years, back to the turning point of Eleanor's marriage to Henry.
The Wars of the Roses, which consumed much of England in the later 15th century,
also can be traced in some of its elements back to the moment when huge territories in France and
England were united on the occasion of the union of Henry Plantagenet and Eleanor of Aquitaine.
And again, these ultimate results, these ripples down through time, were due to the remarkable
nature of Eleanor, not just in her personality, but in her physical person as well. During her
marriage to Henry, she would bear him no fewer than eight children, and possibly as many as 10 or
more. This was at a time when pregnancy and childbirth were the most dangerous of experiences for
women. Eleanor survived at least 11 pregnancies, and what's more, she was busy traveling back and
forth across the channel and overseeing matters in her realm of Aquitaine during most of it.
What's even more astonishing is that almost all her children not only made it out of early
childhood, but grew up to marry and have children of their own. This at a time when infant mortality
rates were hovering anywhere between 50 to 80%. Eleanor of Aquitaine was not only a most unusual
personality, but she was also arguably the healthiest person in the medieval world.
The fact that she seemed to pass this quality on to her children was both good and bad.
As we saw earlier, Louis had been concerned with the fact that Eleanor had been unable to
provide him with the desperately needed son and heir. When it came to Henry, Eleanor provided him
with a few too many, a fact that would come back to trouble the Plantagenet line in the future.
Henry had learned the lesson that Eleanor's grandfather, the Troubadour Duke,
had also known. Breaking up land diminishes power. Better to leave one son immense power, wealth,
and status, and the other son nothing, than to give each child an equal but diminished portion.
Henry and Eleanor had four sons who survived into adulthood. To the eldest, also named Henry,
the throne of England was to go. The elder Henry wanted to assure this, so he actually had his
son crowned as quote unquote the young king while he was still alive. The second son, Richard, would
receive the Duchy of Aquitaine whole and entire, a solution that would preserve the bulk of English
power and status, and also give Richard a respectable inheritance and significant territory to govern.
For Geoffrey, the third son, Henry and Eleanor arranged a marriage to the heiress of Brittany,
another solution to the problem of providing for multiple sons. But to the youngest, John, nothing.
The kingdom could not be divided further without significantly diminishing its power.
Soon John was giving the taunting nickname Lackland. To Henry's credit, this seems to have been of
some concern to him, and may in fact, be why he pushed so aggressively into Ireland later in his
reign. He wanted to have something to leave each of his sons, and if he could acquire Ireland,
he could then give it away again. For a while, all seemed well. There was clearly genuine affection
between Henry and Eleanor, and they ruled well together, with Henry trusting her to act in his
stead, particularly when it came to territories such as Aquitaine. The marriage began to go south
around 1168, however. As she had demonstrated in both her marriages, while you could take the girl
out of Aquitaine, you could not take the Aquitaine out of the girl. Eleanor and her southern ways
had been the subject of much scandal and gossip in the court of France, and she met with a similar
reaction at the English court when she crossed the channel and became Henry's wife. Still,
her impact on English society was mostly positive, especially culturally speaking.
She is often credited with bringing troubadour culture and a joyful sensual literary tradition
with her across the channel, and she brought with her too many French customs that seemed foreign
and strange at first, but which were quickly adopted by her new subjects.
Putting tapestries on the floor of her chambers seems to be one such innovation many commented
upon, but in the cold, draughty palaces in an English winter, this began to seem like a rather
good idea. After the birth of their last child, John, Eleanor returned to Poitou in Aquitaine
and spent most of the next five years there. It seems that her time there brought back pleasant
memories of her childhood, and she found herself identifying more and more with her subjects
there, many of whom had been at odds and in open conflict with Henry at one time or another.
The marriage began to fray. There were several factors adding to the stresses on the union
of these two powerful individuals. It seems clear now that while Eleanor believed that Aquitaine
should always go its own way and not simply be absorbed into Henry's empire, Henry himself
had not always thought this way. Richard, Eleanor's favorite son, was being groomed for the position
of Duke of Aquitaine, and Eleanor intended to keep his inheritance intact. Henry seemed to
favor John above his other sons, and his desire to procure some holding or inheritance for the
youngest irritated John's older brothers. Henry, the young king in particular, was finding his
life increasingly intolerable. Although crowned as king to be, he had no real duties, no real
responsibility, and increasingly chafed at the fact that his younger brothers, Richard and Jeffrey,
were ruling their own realms while he wild away his days in tournaments and jousting,
having nothing else to do. And in 1170, Thomas Beckett, formerly Henry's best friend and also
the Archbishop of Canterbury, was murdered in the cathedral itself, chased down by four of Henry's
knights who thought the Archbishop's death was what the king wanted, a fact which brought
negative feeling against the king. Things were not going well for Henry, and here, once again,
is where Eleanor's divorce from Louis VII would have such dramatic repercussions.
In 1173, Eleanor's sons decided they were dissatisfied with their father's behavior,
and with Eleanor's blessing and urging, took up arms against their father. Henry the young king
went to Paris to seek the support of his father-in-law, who was none other than Louis, his mother's
former husband. The French king must have taken some delight in acting as a new father figure to
his rival's son. When Henry sent messengers to call his son back, Louis told them, quote,
the king of the English is here. The former king should correct his habit of conducting himself
as king after having resigned his kingdom in favor of his son as all the world bears witness, end quote.
Such a statement was tantamount to declaring war between France and England.
Furious that Eleanor had supported their sons against him, Henry had her captured and held
under house arrest for the next 16 years. During this time, Henry struggled to control his vast
territories and sought to resolve tensions with his sons. In 1183, the young king, Henry's namesake,
died of dysentery, begging for his father's forgiveness on his deathbed and asking also
that Henry be kind to Eleanor. After this, Eleanor's house arrest seemed to have eased somewhat,
although she was still closely monitored. When Henry II finally died in 1189, Richard,
now his heir, gave orders for his mother to be immediately released from her captivity.
One might think that after all she had lived through, Eleanor of Aquitaine
would be happy with a quiet widowhood, far from it. She spent her time negotiating Richard's
marriage, dealing with additional threats from France, and securing Richard's release from
the prison of Philip II of France, who had captured the English king as he was returning from the
Third Crusade. The bad blood between the two countries would remain. Eleanor outlived almost
all her children, including King Richard the Lionheart. She died in 1204, aged around 80,
well into the reign of her youngest son, John, he who had once been called Lackland.
As we'll see in a later lecture on the Magna Carta, John's nickname would prove to be prophetic,
as even though he surprisingly ended up inheriting control over the whole Angevan Empire,
poor political decisions on John's part would mean that he would lose almost everything his
father had won and more, and ultimately he was forced to accept the Magna Carta, drawn up by a
group of disgruntled barons. Perhaps if Eleanor had not been so fertile, and had not had so many
surviving children, the events of the Magna Carta would never have come to pass. Eleanor's divorce
and remarriage and the power and status she had brought to bear in arranging marriages for all
her children dramatically reshaped the European political scene. If Eleanor had not divorced
her first husband, France would have been a much more significant power in the 12th century than
it was, and England a much lesser one. The shift of power that her marriage affected sowed the
seeds of conflict that would have repercussions well into the modern period. If Eleanor was larger
than life, casting everything around her into shadow, the main player in our next lecture
introduced to medieval Europe an innovation so astonishing and profoundly significant that his
story was quickly overshadowed by the knowledge he shared with the medieval world. In 1202,
an Italian merchant named Leonardo of Pisa translated a text out of Arabic and into Latin.
The Libre Abaci, or Book of the Abacus as it was called, introduced Arabic numerals and basic
algebra to the Italian peninsula. From there, it was swiftly adopted by those in banking, trade,
and commerce, and any profession in which working with numbers was essential. The cumbersome Roman
numeral system was out, and the economy of the medieval world was given a significant boost
by a more efficient and reliable system of keeping accounts and doing math. Join us next
time as we examine this remarkable text and its origins in greater detail.
