Lecture 14, No More Roman Numerals, the Lieber Abici.
Welcome back.
In our last lecture, we explored how the unique personality and incredible force of will of
one woman, Eleanor of Aquitaine, dramatically reshaped the borders and power structure of
Western Europe, especially when it came to France and Britain.
Wife to two kings and mother to three more, Eleanor's influence had an impact on matters
as diverse as literature, fashion, politics, and religion.
Today's lecture might at first seem to be similar in terms of its theme, as we'll be
discussing how a text written by one man dramatically altered the medieval world of business, banking,
and commerce.
But in this case, the occurrence of this turning point really turned out to be due to serendipity,
or rather, one of those moments of confluence when the needs of a group of people were unexpectedly
met by information from an unlooked-for quarter, in other words, a number of larger social
movements intersected at exactly the right moment to produce dramatic change.
In the case of Eleanor of Aquitaine, the turning point that was her divorce was not fully recognized
for just how important it was at the moment of its occurrence.
In the case of the subject of our lecture today, the moment when Roman numerals were
replaced by the Hindu-Arabic number system so familiar to us now, the dramatic significance
of this turning point was immediately recognized for what it was by the people who would be
most affected, bankers, merchants, and tradesmen of all types.
This turning point caused the economy of the Middle Ages to take off, which in turn had
an impact throughout the European medieval world and well beyond its borders.
In order to understand the impact of this turning point, we have to first explore how
mathematical problems, banking, and money exchange were performed before this most significant
moment in time.
Most of us are familiar with how Roman numerals work, but a very quick review might be in
order here.
In the Roman numeral system, certain numbers are assigned a letter, I for 1, V for 5, X
for 10, L for 50, C for 100, and M for 1,000.
And then a number is represented by putting those letters in sequence.
So for example, the number 1,127 would be MCXXVII.
At first this seems pretty straightforward.
Things get more complicated when it comes to representing numbers that are close to
and less than one of those major letter symbols.
So for example, 9 is not VIIII, but rather IX.
The rule is the number is given from highest to lowest symbol, but when a lower symbol
is to the left of one that is higher, you subtract the lower from the higher.
So if C is 100 and X is 10, then the sequence CX means 110, but XC means 90.
Anyone who has tried to figure out dates, especially at the end of modern movies, which
all seem to give the date of production in Roman numerals, has come across the problem
of having to stop and do both addition and subtraction before arriving at an answer like
1989, which would be MCMLXXXIX.
The first M is easy enough, 1,000.
But then we hit that C, which puts us at 1,100.
And then because that C is followed by another M, we need to stop for a moment and subtract
100 from 1,000 and then add that to the first M.
Now we have 1,900.
Meaning after that is L, so 50, so now we're at 1950.
Then come three X's, so 60, 70, 80, 1980.
Then we see next in sequence an I, which at first would suggest 1981, but because it is
then followed by a symbol for a larger number, X, we have to pause and do subtraction again,
X minus 1 is 9, and finally we arrive at 1989.
Obviously, this would be much easier if you were accustomed to working with these symbols
every day, and addition and subtraction would be pretty straightforward.
Multiplication and division, however, would obviously be much more complicated, and in
order to complete these actions, multiple occurrences of adding and subtracting would
have to be executed, and higher orders of math, well, forget it.
For most medieval people, this was not such a big deal when it came to their everyday
lives.
In the 12th and 13th centuries, our main focus today, roughly 90% of the medieval world was
rural and agrarian in nature.
People traded for, bartered for, and produced much of their own food and clothing, and those
purchases that did involve monetary transactions were relatively simple and could be accomplished
by doing some basic mental calculations.
Those who had actually studied math in cathedral schools would have learned a system of finger
counting.
This was a way to hold your fingers in a certain position as a kind of physical placeholder
to help you keep track when performing complicated sums in your head.
Someone who was adept at the finger counting tradition could deal with all kinds of calculations
up to about the number 10,000.
The drawback, of course, was that there was really no way to check someone else's math
short of having another person perform all the calculations all over again.
In the case of a large estate or a manor that was overseen by a manager such as a Reeve
in England, tally sticks that kept track of numbers of livestock, rents paid, and bushels
of grain harvested by using a system of notches were the preferred means of keeping accounts.
For those people dealing in trade and customs who needed to keep accounts in a ledger, the
usual means of doing this would be to put down the quill, perform some addition, subtraction,
etc. using finger counting, and then pick up the pen again to write down the amounts,
taxes paid, etc.
Again, there was no good way to check this math.
But as you might imagine, if one was a merchant who dealt in trade, especially in trade with
communities that used a variety of different currencies, the Roman numeral system and finger
counting just wasn't going to cut it.
Given that in Europe, Italy had long been one of the major centers of trade, it made
sense that it was a man from the then bustling trading center of Pisa who would help introduce
a more efficient number system to the medieval world.
That man was Leonardo Pisano, literally Leonardo of Pisa, and as a member of the Bonacci family,
he was sometimes referred to as Filius Bonacci, which is where the name we commonly use for
him, Fibonacci, comes from.
Although it might interest you to know that he wasn't actually called that until the 19th
century.
Today Leonardo of Fibonacci is most famous for what are called the Fibonacci Numbers.
These numbers are part of the solution to a theoretical math problem he posed about
how to calculate how a population of rabbits would grow if one started with one pair who
reproduced another pair every month as did their offspring once they were two months
old.
So the sequence begins with the number one, as in the beginning there is one pair of rabbits.
In the second month there are two pair.
In the third month there would be three pair, the original rabbits, their first offspring
who are not yet fertile, and the next pair of offspring from the original rabbits.
If we continue, then the next month there would be five pair.
If we lay the numbers out in sequence, you can see pretty easily how the formula works.
One, one, two, three, five, eight, thirteen, twenty-one.
Every number in the Fibonacci sequence is the result of adding the previous two together.
I should note here that while Leonardo introduced this sequence to the medieval world, he was
by no means the first person to conceive of it.
We find it in Sanskrit writings going back several centuries BC.
People have long been fascinated with Fibonacci numbers as they seem to pop up with unusual
frequency in nature.
Numerous species of flower, for example, tend to have petals that are the same in number
as one of the Fibonacci numbers, three, five, eight, thirteen, twenty-one, etc.
What is even more interesting is that much of nature demonstrates an adherence to the
so-called golden ratio, first recognized by the ancient Greeks.
Also called Phi, it is, like Pi, a number whose decimal expansion continues without
ending and without ever repeating.
While Pi, which is usually given as twenty-two divided by seven, or three point one four
one five nine and on and on, Phi begins with one point six one eight.
Its importance lies in the fact that using Phi has long been a way to determine the most
aesthetically pleasing shapes and structures to the human eye.
And the Greeks, for example, frequently made use of it when it came to architecture and
the laying out of civic centers and roads.
So for example, for most people, if you measure the distance from your head to your feet and
then divide that number by the number you get when you measure from your navel to the
floor, you get Phi.
And if you start doing that with Fibonacci numbers, you discover that the further into
the sequence you get, the closer and closer you get to Phi.
So if you start early on and divide five by three, you get one point six six six, pretty
close to Phi.
Go to the next Fibonacci pair and divide eight by five, and you're closer still, one point
six.
Thirteen divided by eight is one point six two five.
Keep going up to fifty-five divided by thirty-four, and you arrive at one point six one eight.
Like Fibonacci numbers, Phi, or the golden ratio, is also found all over the natural
world from the shapes of seashells to the length of flower stems.
And we wouldn't even appreciate this fact if we didn't have Arabic numerals with which
to make these calculations.
Now what we call Arabic numerals today, which is one through nine plus zero, seem to have
originated on the subcontinent of India and been in general use around 700 BC.
From India, this numerical system spread into the Arab world and had been used there for
some time before Leonardo Pisano introduced it to Europe.
In fact, Leonardo was not the first to do this.
Arabic numerals seem to have come into Al-Andalus, Muslim Spain, sometime in the 10th century,
but here they seem to have been a subject for scholars working on math issues and really
didn't make it into general and popular use.
As we noted in our lecture on Al-Andalus, those in the scholarly elite in medieval
Europe recognized that this was the place to go to have access to new learning and information.
In fact, a young Frenchman by the name of Gerber Dorhilaak learned of the Hindu Arabic
system when he traveled to Catalonia to study mathematics in the year 967.
Later on, Gerber would become Pope Sylvester II and he would use what he had learned while
in Spain to try and improve the current systems for learning and teaching math.
But while his system was somewhat of an improvement over what had been in place before, it never
really caught on because the way he executed it involved a lot of physical activity, moving
different types of counters around a board and then swapping out some counters for others.
It also required an enormous number of counters, over a thousand separate pieces, in order
to do lots of calculations.
I should back up here for a moment and describe in a little more detail the system that Gerber
was trying to improve on and which would be completely replaced by Leonardo Di Pisano's
introduction of Arabic numbers to the medieval banking and merchant world.
Most of us are familiar with an abacus, a kind of accounting system that has a certain
number of markers per column that can be moved up and down a string.
Although many of you listening might have learned how to do simple math with an abacus
while in elementary school in the United States, as I did, this is not the kind of abacus that
was used in the medieval period.
What medieval merchants and bankers used was a table abacus, which looked rather like
a backgammon or other similar game board.
When Leonardo was a young man in Pisa, he would have seen these in action on a regular
basis.
Down on the banks of the River Arno, all kinds of trade and exchange was taking place.
Given its position on the Mediterranean, it is no surprise that it was one of the first
places in the medieval world to become a true center of commerce.
In Pisa and other Italian cities, goods from the east and south came in on a regular basis.
Spices, dyes, certain kinds of grain, animal hides, furs.
And once the ships were unloaded, in Pisa and other major Italian trading centers, like
Venice, they would be reloaded with items like barrels of wine or precious metals.
Leonardo would have seen a stunning variety of people, many of whom spoke multiple languages,
conducting various kinds of trade and exchange.
It must have been a lively and exotic place, but perhaps most interesting to Leonardo would
have been the bankers who had set up shop down by the river.
Banking as an industry had really only come into existence in the 12th century, when groups
of people got together to pool resources, make loans, and even issue insurance policies
for vessels heading out to sea on trading voyages that were routinely fraught with many varieties
of peril, from shipwreck to piracy and more.
In the beginning, bankers did not have permanent structures from which to conduct business.
Rather, they were itinerant, moving around with sacks of different types of currency
and setting up shop on the benches near the river, or on the banca, hence their name.
In Italy alone at this time, at least 27 different types of currency were in use.
And if you factor into this the fact that Italian ships were sailing all over the Mediterranean
and conducting trade in places as far flung as Morocco, Hungary, Russia, Egypt, Constantinople,
Jerusalem, and more, you can see how essential it was to have access to different types of
money and be able to exchange one for another.
When Leonardo was a boy, he would have seen bankers, merchants, and their bookkeepers
using a table abacus.
A form of this was used throughout Europe, and in some backwater places it was used as
late as the 16th century.
And to a modern person transported back in time, it probably would have looked something
like a craps table in Las Vegas, with the accompanying flurry of activity and movement
of pieces into different positions on the board.
In Italy, the table abacus had seven rows arranged horizontally, not vertically, as
is the case with the Chinese abacus.
The bottom row represented the lowest denomination of currency, the denari.
Twelve denari made a solidus, the next row up.
20 Solidi made a libra, which would be denoted in the third row up, and then the rows up
from that denoted higher numbers of librae, with the top row representing 10,000 librae.
As transactions were made, different colored counters were moved around the board to keep
track of how money was changing hands.
Those who wanted to learn bookkeeping would begin their apprenticeship by simply standing
next to the master bookkeeper and watching what he did.
Over time, they might be allowed to handle counters, passing them to the master bookkeeper,
and then they would be allowed to perform simple transactions themselves.
As you can imagine, this still required a lot of mental calculation, and it was hard
to check someone's work.
The entire operation would have to be re-performed in order to make sure a calculation was correct.
What changed everything for Italian bankers and merchants was when Leonardo traveled
with his father to the North African city of Bucia, where his father had been sent to
serve as a customs official on behalf of the merchants of Pisa.
In Bucia, Leonardo and his father would have had regular contact with Muslim merchants
and traders.
Just spending time in the marketplace in Bucia would have been a revelation to both Leonardo
and his father.
There they were exposed to people who regularly used the Hindu-Arabic system, and it would
have been obvious what advantages this system held.
Although we cannot prove it definitively, it seems likely that Leonardo learned to
read and speak Arabic, and thus a whole new world of mathematical learning was open to
him.
He was certainly not the first European to come in contact with Hindu-Arabic numerals,
but he was the first to recognize what impact it could have on his own community, and his
desire to share that information would create one of the most important turning points in
economics the medieval world had ever experienced.
The use of what we call Arabic numerals is so all-pervasive now, it's hard from our
modern perspective to understand what a revolution it was.
When it came into use, the symbols one through nine were all that were in play.
They represented specific things, but this itself was a breakthrough.
These symbols were much easier to manipulate than clumsy Roman numerals.
But because the number one was thought to represent one thing, it was a while before
people figured out that for the system to work well, it needed a way to represent nothing
or zero.
As such, for a long time there was no zero.
If there was nothing, why would you need to represent it?
The recognition of the need for zero, somewhere in India in the first few centuries BC, is
what makes this system so useful.
While zero, there was no easy way to differentiate among, say, 15, 105, or 150.
So Hindu Arabic used just nine different symbols to indicate endless combinations of numbers,
and it had zero to indicate when there was nothing, or a blank spot.
What makes these two things work so well together is the concept of place value.
In other words, the number on the far right always represented itself.
One place to the left was the tens column.
Another place to the left was hundreds, and so on.
So the number sequence 287 stands for two hundreds, eight tens, and seven ones.
With a consistent place value system and the use of zero as a place holder to differentiate,
say, ten from one, suddenly multiplication and division were easily executed to say
nothing of addition and subtraction.
In 1202, Leonardo de Pisano decided to share this knowledge with his fellow Italians, and
he wrote in Latin the language of learning and education, the Lieber Abici.
In his prologue to the second edition, which he produced in 1228, Leonardo describes why
he has composed this book, stating explicitly that he wants to share this information with
all people, especially, quote, the Italian people above all others, end quote.
And it was quite clear that as a child of someone deeply engaged in commerce, he was
directing this at merchants and the newly emerging category of bankers who had started
to take their first steps onto the stage of the medieval world.
What is most interesting about the Lieber Abici, or book of the abacus, is how full
of practical information it is.
Over 600 pages, Leonardo not only explains the theory behind the Hindu-Arabic numeral
system, but he also provides page after page of hypothetical situations and math problems
that he then works to show how the Arabic numeral system could make previously complicated
matters of mathematics relatively simple.
Further evidence that he intentionally directed this to merchants comes from the large numbers
of math problems that he works that are based in the world of buying and selling.
One simple problem, if two pounds of barley are worth five soliti, how much should seven
pounds cost?
He presents hundreds of similar problems, almost all of them drawn from practical reality.
He didn't stop there, however.
For the end, he starts to demonstrate a class of math problem that today would be classified
as algebra.
Here he laid the foundations for the later importation of this branch of mathematics,
which would, once again, come into Europe from the Muslim world.
Without the Libra Abachi and the revolution it started, mathematicians in the medieval
world would barely have been able to grasp this new order of math.
Given the relative speed of innovation in the medieval world, the shift from Roman to
Arabic numerals happened in the blink of an eye, with most merchants and those nascent
bankers recognizing at once what benefits this could bring to them.
The real evidence of how quickly this caught on, however, comes from where we see any resistance
to it.
This came from the class of bookkeepers who were trained to use the table abacus to calculate
transactions, and these people suddenly found that almost overnight they would all be out
of a job.
Several city-states, under pressure from members of various guilds who had a vested interest
in doing things the old way, explicitly forbade the use of the new number system, insisting
that Roman numerals continue to be used.
One argument they made that had a little validity was that it was harder to falsify Roman numerals,
whereas when it came to Arabic numerals, a one could become a seven or a zero turned
into a nine with the stroke of a pen.
But these laws against Arabic numerals couldn't stand in the face of the widespread adoption
of the system by those who needed it most and who had the most to gain from it.
Within just a few decades, entire schools devoted to this new learning sprang up throughout
Italy, and from there it was just a matter of time before it made its way into the wider
European world.
Leonardo became famous, and the Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II, who had a keen intellectual
and academic mind, called for Leonardo to give a demonstration of this new system, which
was a resounding success.
Soon, so-called abacus books and arithmetic schools were everywhere.
And Italy suddenly became the banking capital of Europe.
Today, if you go to the city of Siena in Italy, you can see at one corner of the city's famous
campo, the Banca Monte de Paschi, founded in the late 15th century and still operating
today, although in the last couple of years they've run into a few problems.
Guidebooks to Siena never fail to mention that here is the world's oldest bank still
in operation.
But the success of the Banca Monte de Paschi was built first upon the innovation of Leonardo's
Liber Abacchi in the 13th century, and then by the way, in which a family by the name
of Medici hit on a minor revolution when it came to using those numbers to keep track
of accounts.
This was double entry bookkeeping.
The Medici's came to power as great landholders in the 13th century, but shifted into trade
in the 14th century.
Thanks to the widespread use of Arabic numerals, their trade networks were able to extend throughout
the known world.
They founded their bank in 1397, and within a hundred years they had eight major trading
houses in all the great commerce centers in the European world.
As I'm sure most of you listening know, the Medici's would become hugely important forces
not only in business but in politics and religion, arguably reshaping Italy, the church, and
the rest of the medieval world.
The Medici's and their bank were part of a huge explosion of commerce that would sweep
through the medieval world.
With trade extending further and further, and with a need for a safe and reliable system
to transport letters containing important information about debts, credits, insurance
policies, and trading contracts, several entities discovered they needed a courier system.
The Holy Roman Empire in the 15th century decided to use the services of a man named
Ruggiano de Tessis, who had set up a postal system in Florence.
Ruggiano and his descendants recognized this opportunity for what it was, and quickly moved
beyond the borders of Italy, setting up postal centers in Innsbruck, then Brussels, and eventually
they had headquarters throughout Europe.
They regularized and standardized fees for courier services, in the process becoming
the noble house of Thern und Taxis, and creating our modern postal system.
And none of this would have been possible if Leonardo had not written his book.
To be sure, although he was clearly a mathematical genius of some talent, Leonardo was mostly
a repackager and a marketer of the Hindu-Arabic system.
Scholar Keith Devlin puts it best when he notes that, even without Leonardo, eventually
the new number system would have worked its way into the medieval world somehow.
But as Devlin also points out, the writing of this book in 1202 was a huge turning point.
Quote,
The greatness of the Libra Abachi is due to its quality, its comprehensive nature, and
its timeliness.
It was good, it provided merchants, bankers, business people, and scholars with everything
they needed to know about the new arithmetic methods, and it was the first to do so.
It was a true turning point, and it came about because of the serendipitous fact that a boy
with a head for numbers and an interest in the merchant world was exposed to Arabic learning
while on a trip to North Africa with his father.
To be sure then, this turning point was one that almost everyone recognized for what it
was the moment it happened.
But shortly after it happened, Leonardo Albert disappeared from common knowledge.
One way to explain this is to say that his new system caught on so quickly, within a
short space of time no one could conceive of ever having done it any other way.
In our next lecture, we're going to discuss an event that world leaders and human rights
activists have long hailed as a milestone in the development of ideas of freedom, equality,
law, and justice.
But when it happened, it mattered really to just the 26 people directly involved, King
John of England and his angry barons.
In our next lecture, we'll explore how the creation of the document known as the Magna
Carta in England in 1215 was a turning point that had little impact when it occurred, but
the significance of which has grown ever greater in the centuries following that moment.
