Lecture 15, King John Accepts the Magna Carta.
Welcome back.
In our last lecture, we saw how Leonardo Di Pisano, also known as Fibonacci, caused
a dramatic shift in the fields of mercantilism and banking in the medieval world, with the
writing and circulation of his liber Abachi.
Recognizing the benefits of this new system of doing math, almost overnight Roman numerals
were replaced with the Arabic system, numerals 1 through 9 plus 0, that we use today.
In the blink of an eye, relatively speaking, the medieval economic world was transformed
and Leonardo was hailed far and wide for his contribution to the worlds of commerce, scholarship,
banking and more.
It was a turning point that was recognized for what it was at the very moment it occurred.
In today's lecture, we are going to talk about a turning point that really had no immediate
impact in the weeks, months and arguably even years after its occurrence.
This is the signing of the Magna Carta in June 1215 in the meadow outside a place called
Runnymede.
Although the Magna Carta is today hailed as a landmark moment in the development of justice,
law and equality, and two of its original clauses are included in the United Nations
Declaration on Human Rights, at the moment King John of England agreed to its clauses,
it really mattered only to the king who was being forced to accept it and the 25 nobles
who were doing the forcing.
A few short weeks after the events at Runnymede, King John rescinded his actions and held the
document to be invalid.
He even got the pope to back him up.
For a time it looked like the Magna Carta would be, at best, a footnote in history.
But the ideas enshrined in that document proved to be ideas for which more and more people
were hungry and that later generations recognized as being an important articulation of certain
key values.
Eventually, those ideas would come to serve as the basis for what we call English common
law and eventually the legal system of the United States.
Many others of its key elements would be incorporated into the constitutions and charters of other
governments in the modern period.
So how did such a non-event turn out to be such an important turning point in the history
of the world?
That's what we're going to find out today.
In order to understand how it could come to pass that a king of England in the 13th century
might be compelled to do anything, we have to think back to our lecture on Eleanor of
Aquitaine.
As you remember from our discussion, when she divorced Louis VII of France and married
the future Henry II, she brought with her the massive Duchy of Aquitaine.
In combination with the lands already possessed by Henry and those he conquered later on,
this union helped lay the foundation for what we have come to call the Ange of an Empire,
which included almost all of Britain, including Ireland, and most of what we think of as France
today.
Desiring to keep the power that came from having such lands intact, initially Henry II
had planned on leaving nothing to his youngest son, John, who came to have the nickname Lackland
because of this.
It might seem ironic that John would outlive his brothers and come to the throne itself,
but as King of England, his early nickname proved to be prophetic, and pretty quickly
he managed to lose most of the lands he had inherited.
On top of that, he so enraged the Pope that all of England was put under interdict for
six years, which meant no sacraments or masses could be performed.
One can imagine that this might be upsetting to a deeply religious populace.
Eventually, the Pope went so far as to excommunicate John.
The youngest son of Henry II and Eleanor of Aquitaine also leaned far too heavily on his
nobles as he tried desperately to reclaim the empire that had been left to him and which
was quickly slipping away.
He needed money to fight his wars, and the financial situation of the kingdom was dire,
as every time he lost a duchy or other territory, he also lost all the revenues that would have
come from those lands.
Though he did what many kings of England had done in earlier days.
When he needed money, he levied attacks on his nobles.
Technically speaking, it was the king's right to do this whenever he had need.
While nobles had always grumbled at the sudden announcement of the levy of attacks, John
went to the well far too often.
Additionally, he charged some of his nobles outrageous fees to confirm their inheritances
of family lands to which they were entitled.
One poor noble, Nicholas Distutefil, was told by John that in order to lay claim to the
lands that were to come to him after his brother's death, he would have to pay the crown 6,666
pounds, a sum that poor Nicholas could only come up with by taking out loans, selling off
other property, and giving some of his inheritance to John outright.
By 1215, his nobles had had enough.
Suddenly it seemed like not a bad idea to invite the king of France to cross the channel
and claim England for himself.
The two countries had been linked for centuries, and as you recall from earlier lectures, such
a thing had been done before.
In the face of outright rebellion, John had no choice after months of resistance to meet
with his barons and agree to their terms.
This was definitely a turning point in the medieval world, but not a turning point in
the way that so many people today imagine it.
What John agreed to in 1215 was a series of articles that severely limited the power of
the monarchy in a way that it had not been affected anywhere in the medieval world before
this time.
But was this the cornerstone of democracy, as some would have it?
Is it a triumph for the common man over the runaway power of the nobility?
The answer is no, not in the slightest.
The Magna Carta, as it only came to be called much later, was first and foremost about protecting
the interests of the 25 nobles who drafted and presented it under threat of rebellion
against the crown.
It helped some other folks at the top of the social hierarchy as well.
But for the 90% of English society, living life as farmers or traders, the signing of
the Magna Carta was a complete non-event.
You can tell this by taking a look at the clauses it contains and also by noting what
order they come in.
There are 63 articles in the Magna Carta.
The three that are most often hailed as a great leap forward for humanity as a whole
are clauses 38, 39, and 40.
Clause 38 reads, quote, in future no official shall place a man on trial upon his own unsupported
statement without producing credible witnesses to the truth of it, end quote.
Clause 39, which is a bit longer, reads, quote, no free man shall be seized or imprisoned
or stripped of his rights or possessions or outlawed or exiled or deprived of his standing
in any other way nor will we proceed with force against him or send others to do so
except by the lawful judgment of his equals or by the law of the land, end quote.
Read from a modern vantage point, these two clauses seem to be articulating the right
to trial by jury and many have read it that way.
But what it meant at the time was that none of John's nobles should have to put up with
his bad decisions unless a group of them got together and said it was okay.
Just as a group of 25 of them had gotten together to issue the king their ultimatum.
Did the barons think they had just made life a little more just for the farmer laboring
in his field?
Not a bit of it.
They probably avoided thinking about farmers and other common folk as much as possible
except for when it came time to claim rents and payments for protection.
By contrast, clause 40, when read all on its own, seems a defiant articulation of the rights
of all people, quote, to no one will we sell, to no one deny or delay right or justice,
end quote.
At last, a statement of human rights and dignity and freedom and justice except for the fact
that these three clauses are buried deep in the middle of the document.
Also, they come after clauses about their needing to be standards of weights and measures
when it came to wine, ale, and corn.
It also comes after clause 31, which states, quote, neither we nor any royal official will
take wood for our castle or for any other purpose without the consent of the owner,
end quote.
It's also preceded by this curious clause, number 33, quote, all fishwears shall be removed
from the Thames, the Medway, and throughout the whole of England except on the sea coast,
end quote.
Yes, that's right.
First we've got to deal with firewood theft, fish traps that are cluttering up the Thames
and damaging the boats of wealthy merchants who want to do business and making sure that
a pint of ale is the same size from one end of England to the other.
Then, and only then, can we focus on matters of justice and human rights.
What deludes the power of these clauses still further is that they are not even at the end
of the document.
They are not even the dramatic climax.
After the bit about never denying or delaying justice, the Magna Carta moves its focus to
merchants moving in and out of the country, discussion of who has the right to do what
in the forest, not allowing women to bring criminal charges against anyone, how and if
the crusading movement should continue, what to do about those pesky Welsh causing trouble
in the west and the Scots in the north, and removing from office anyone related to or
a friend of some guy named Gerard de Vaffet, who apparently was not very popular.
There are also several mentions of Jews, an indicator of the rise of the persecuting society
that we start to see more and more of starting in the 12th century, and which we'll discuss
at much greater length in a later lecture.
John also had to agree to give back lands and titles that he had taken from various nobles
and to accept that from here on out, he was beholden to a council of his barons who would
have the right to censure his behavior and make him quit whatever it was that he was
doing that was upsetting them.
In other words, for the first time a king was agreeing to have his power limited by
his vassals, and in this act, many historians have seen the beginnings of the English Parliament,
that body so important to shaping English policy at home and abroad from the medieval
period to the present day as anyone who watches the Prime Minister's questions on C-SPAN
or the BBC can tell you.
Then and now, the Magna Carta was and is a fascinating document, a window on the concerns
of those in the upper echelons of society.
It is compelling also for the sheer variation in the matters with which it was concerned
and how it describes them.
In some instances, the document is incredibly vague.
Clause 13, for example, states that, quote, the city of London shall enjoy all its ancient
liberties and free customs both by land and by water.
We also will and grant that all other cities, boroughs, towns and ports shall enjoy all
their liberties and free customs.
Nowhere does it specify what these so-called ancient customs and liberties might be, or
who gets to determine what they are, or arranges to make sure they are enforced, or what the
penalty will be for disregarding this clause, or even how that disregard is to be measured.
But when it comes to matters of inheritance, well, we can see how important that matter
was because of its position in the document.
It's clause number two, and it's also very specific.
Clause two states that when a nobleman of the rank of Earl dies, his heirs shall pay
100 pounds for the right to succeed to their inheritance.
In the case of the heirs of a knight, the inheritance tax is to be 100 shillings.
Really, you can't get much clearer or more specific than that.
At this point, you are surely asking, if the inheritance issue is number two, then what
is number one?
What was the first thing, the most important thing, in the minds of the barons?
For those of us living in the modern world, the answer might surprise you, but for the
medieval world, it may complete sense.
The topic of clause one is the church.
More specifically, the fact that, quote, the English church shall be free and shall have
its rights undiminished and its liberties unimpaired.
Be granted and confirmed by charter the freedom of the church's elections, end quote.
As you'll remember from earlier in this lecture, I described how John was not the most popular
guy in the eyes of the Pope, who had gone so far as to place England under interdict,
essentially causing John subjects to pay for their king's bad behavior.
This conflict had come about because John, like his father Henry II before him, had thought
it would be a good idea if the crown handpicked the men in the positions of greatest religious
authority in the land.
The idea being that the king would then have control over the secular and religious realms.
And really, what else was there?
You might remember this didn't end so well for Henry.
Four of his knights chased down and executed the Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Becket,
in the cathedral itself, claiming they thought that that is what Henry wanted them to do.
For his part, Henry denied giving any such order, but he still had to do public penance
for the act.
It's another mark of John's ineptitude as king that he hadn't learned any of the lessons
of the past.
When the position of Archbishop came empty, John named his own candidate.
The papal court said, no, and they named their own, Bishop Langton.
He was blessed in Rome, sailed for England, and discovered he was not to be permitted
into the country.
John mounted what was essentially a religious blockade, and Langton spent several years cooling
his heels on the continent.
This is what had made the Pope so mad and caused him to lay the order of interdict on
England.
Again, John didn't think things through.
Cash poor and desperate for revenue, he thought this would be a great excuse for taking back
the church's lands for the crown.
Now as you'll remember from our lecture on William the Conqueror, after his victory,
he bequeathed what amounted to a quarter of all the land in England to the church, which
quickly became the greatest and arguably most powerful landholder on the island.
John had his eyes on those riches and claimed them for himself, which in turn made the Pope
excommunicate him.
This really didn't seem to bother John much either.
What did get his attention was the fact that King Philip II of France saw England's weakness
as marking a potential turning point for him.
If he could get a significant proportion of John's nobles to renounce their own king
and throw their lot in with him, he could unite England and France as one nation, ruled
from the Île de France and not London or Winchester.
In 1213, John finally made a smart move.
He ceded his lands to the papacy, then received them back for an annual fee.
What this meant was that the Pope was now both the spiritual and the secular feudal
overlord of England.
What it also meant was that Philip II of France was suddenly not very interested in launching
an invasion into what were now, at least officially, papal lands.
The threat of French conquest dissipated, Archbishop Langton got to come home and declared John
was no longer excommunicated, but the memory of this episode smarted, and it almost made
of the Magna Carta a nothing.
Because when John agreed to accept the articles in 1215, he certainly did not do so willingly,
and immediately upon giving his formal agreement, appealed to the Pope to declare the document
null and void, unenforceable and without significance.
Now with an even stronger vested interest in England and not wanting to dilute any of
his newly won authority, Pope Innocent III was happy to issue a papal bowl declaring
that the Magna Carta was, quote, as unlawful and unjust as it is base and shameful, whereby
the apostolic sea is brought into contempt, the royal prerogative diminished, the English
outraged, and the whole enterprise of the crusade gravely imperiled, end quote.
This decree came down from the Pope in August of 1215, meaning that Magna Carta had lasted
less than three months.
Then things got even worse.
John got in another fight with Langton, had to put down additional rebellions throughout
England, managed to lose most of what was left in the royal treasury due to a poor decision
about where to cross a particular river, and then died of dysentery in October of 1216,
giving his nine-year-old son, Henry III, to succeed him.
In the 20th century, some scholars have attempted to rehabilitate John and make excuses or offer
explanations for his behavior as king, arguing that he really wasn't all that bad.
Yes, he was.
Bad.
No way to put it nicely.
He was a dismal failure as a king.
In fact, things were so bad that it seemed in the early days Henry III might not last
long as king, and might be removed in favor of someone who was more mature, skilled in
warfare and diplomacy, and who had close ties to the throne and the royal family.
Such a person did emerge, but in what is the real turning point in the story of the Magna
Carta, he did not try to take the throne for himself.
Rather, he sought to save the throne for young Henry by reaffirming the articles of the Great
Charter.
This man was William the Marshal.
He first came to the attention of the world during the Civil War between Stephen and Matilda.
William's father, John, had decided to back Matilda, and Stephen threatened to hang young
William, whom he was keeping as a hostage.
In what has got to be the most extreme example of calling someone's bluff, John reportedly
shouted to Stephen to go ahead because he had, quote, the hammer and anvil with which
to forge still more and better sons, end quote.
In the end, Stephen could not bring himself to execute the boy, and William survived,
grew up, and rose to become the most universally admired knight in the land, serving as right-hand
man to four kings with absolute loyalty.
He served Henry II, Richard the Lionheart, John, and then John's son, Henry III.
And it was William's loyalty and recognition that something drastic had to happen in order
to keep Henry III on the throne that gave the Magna Carta new life.
In 1216, William made a point of reissuing the Charter in the name of Henry, and while
he kept the bulk of the document intact, he carefully and cleverly amended certain clauses
in order to appeal to the greatest population of nobles he could.
He needed to keep those loyal to the crown happy, and he needed to persuade those who
were disgruntled to come back into the English fold.
This was a brilliant move, but again, we need to be clear.
The peasants, the traitors, the craftsmen, they only figured insofar as they had anything
to do with the concerns of the nobles.
Later on, Henry would reissue the Charter under his own authority, and later kings would
follow suit.
Over time, it was customary for the full text of the Magna Carta to be reissued every year,
and eventually it was a law that the document be read in its entirety in public at least
twice a year.
In a world with a literacy rate hovering somewhere between 10 and 20%, this oral reading was
hugely important.
Without this, there would be no way for the average person to even know what the document
contained.
And as has become obvious, over time it was the so-called average person who would come
to be most deeply invested in the Magna Carta.
This oral reading is reminiscent of another similar performance that happened annually
far to the north in Iceland.
In what, in a perfect scenario, would and should be a turning point of the medieval
world, but really wasn't, the Scandinavian settlers in Iceland formed what really was
the first parliament of Western Europe, and they did it way before Magna Carta, a few
centuries earlier, in fact.
In the year 930, the inhabitants of Iceland began the custom of an annual meeting, the
Alting, which occurred in the warmer months on the plain called Thingvetler.
At this meeting, the leaders of various communities, the godi, would gather to make laws, pass
judgment for crimes committed, exact fines, arrange marriages, drown witches, and more.
This may not sound terribly egalitarian, but the important point here is that all free
men were allowed to attend, and even more significantly, the laws were recited aloud,
so that all could know what they were.
The man who spoke them held the position of Lögsugurmother, or law speaker, and he pronounced
these laws while standing atop the Lögvurg, or laurach.
Iceland's parliament is still called the Alting, and it is the oldest parliament that is still
extant in the world today.
What happened in Iceland in 930 is in many ways a revolutionary moment, a true turning
point, but alas, it was such for Iceland and pretty much nobody else.
One might like to imagine that this democratic spirit somehow worked its way south, but in
this case, this is a turning point that was significant for Iceland, and really only for
Iceland.
But to get back to England and the Magna Carta, neither John nor his barons, nor William
Marshall nor Henry III for that matter, could have imagined what the events of a June day
at Runnymede would eventually produce, nor from their own perspective could they see
how the moment when a king agreed against his will to a contract he never intended to
keep would ultimately transform not only England, but Europe and eventually the entire world.
In the 17th century, lawyers in England, plenty of whom were not nobles, began to assert that
the Magna Carta stated basic principles of law, arguing even more vociferously than John's
barons had, that there needed to be limits on the powers of the king, and that this document
had been affirming this fact for centuries.
Because the document had been issued, reissued, read aloud, and confirmed by rulers for so
long, it had ultimately taken on an iconic, mythologized status.
It did not matter that clauses 38, 39, and 40 were buried in the middle of the document.
They were important affirmations of human rights and dignity because they were in the
document in the first place.
The power of the document continued to grow over time.
It was cited by the founding fathers of the United States, and by those who fought in
the French Revolution.
And every time someone pointed to the values described in the Magna Carta as an inspiration,
the significance of the moment of the initial agreement was enlarged and enhanced, until
eventually the barons at Runnymede had become mythologized as freedom fighters yearning
to break free from the yoke of the crown.
But in fact, they really wanted no such thing.
They wanted their king to rule properly, to stop taxing them excessively, and to be sure
that a pint of ale in London measured the same as a pint in Winchester, as in Norwich,
as in York.
Striking a blow for human rights was not on their minds.
Some of them, certainly, as men who believed in the class hierarchy of the age in which
they lived, would have been horrified at the idea that anything in the document suggested
that an earl might have something in common with a blacksmith, or a knight with a farmer.
But still, King John's acceptance of the Magna Carta does stand as a turning point, because
without his agreement to its articles, reluctant and disingenuous as he was in giving it,
the English system of law and justice might not have developed along the lines that it
eventually did.
And if that hadn't happened, one could go so far as to suggest that the United States,
the modern nation of France, and the international body of the United Nations would not exist
in the forms that they do today.
So although no one really appreciated it at the time, the creation of the Magna Carta
in 1215 was a true turning point in not only the medieval, but also especially the early
modern world.
Other things were happening in 1215, things that, unlike Magna Carta, were actually recognized
for their grave importance at the time that they occurred.
At the same time, however, Magna Carta provides us a fascinating window on certain attitudes
that were becoming more prevalent in medieval society, particularly when it comes to relationships
between Christians and Jews, which we'll discuss at greater length in Lecture 17.
Clauses 10 and 11 of the Magna Carta specifically address what happens in cases when Christians
who owe money to Jews die before the debt is repaid.
It is a concern that we'd be addressed by several of the cannons of that other big event
in 1215, the Fourth Ladering Council.
Although few people today could tell you what was important about the Fourth Ladering Council,
in the medieval world, everyone was impacted by the decisions that were made there and
the cannons that resulted from this meeting.
As we'll see next time, this other turning point in 1215 dramatically impacted the Church
at all levels, from the highest ranking bishop down to the lowliest parishioner, and its
influence would be felt across cultures, space, and time, with repercussions well into the
modern era.
