Welcome back. In our last lecture, we saw a turning point that today is hailed as one
of the most significant developments ever in the area of human rights, law and justice.
This was the drafting of the Magna Carta by 25 English barons and King John's acceptance
of it in the year 1215. The problem is, when it occurred, this event was important precisely
to the 26 people immediately involved and no one else. Ten weeks after its instantiation,
the document was declared null and void by the Pope and it seemed likely that this would
become just a footnote to history. A series of events over the next centuries and some
creative interpretation and revision by jurists would ultimately make people look back to
this event as the moment when the idea of equality among all people was born in the
western European world. But if you were to ask the average person anywhere in Europe
and say, the year 1240, what the most important event of the last few years was, pretty much
everyone from Rome to London to Paris, from the Pope to a farmer to a knight to a parish
priest to a blacksmith, would say, the Fourth Lateran Council.
Like the Magna Carta, it too occurred in 1215. But unlike the Magna Carta, it was a turning
point that was recognized for how dramatic it was at the moment it occurred. Today, when
given a choice about which was the more significant event, Magna Carta or the Fourth Lateran Council,
most people would say Magna Carta and probably only because most people today might vaguely
recognize those words as ones they've heard before. Unless one is a church scholar or
historian, Fourth Lateran Council might not ring any bells at all. But in a weird way,
the Fourth Lateran Council goes unrecognized today for its significance precisely because
the canons it passed, so utterly transformed western Christianity. So pervasive were the
changes that today it is difficult to imagine a Catholic Church before 1215. As we'll see
in this lecture, this is precisely why it's important for us to understand it. As the name
of this meeting, Fourth Lateran Council, indicates, this was certainly not the first time that
officials in the upper echelons of the church hierarchy had met to issue pronouncements
on matters of doctrine, theology and practice. But this meeting was important because it
had such a far-ranging impact on all people in the medieval world, even and especially those
who were not Christian. And thus, it marked a dramatic shift in the way things happened in
the religious realm from the Pope on down to the lowliest parish priest and his flock. In some
cases, the Fourth Lateran Council was simply restating or reaffirming edicts issued by earlier
church councils. So in a few instances, it wasn't necessarily declaring anything new, but rather
reasserting these earlier points with greater force, as we will see. What we see here is a
continuation of the efforts the church was making in the 11th century to both shore up and increase
its power while reining in some of the more unique expressions of the Christian faith. Of particular
concern was the matter of heresy or expressions of belief held not to be in keeping with Orthodox
teaching. This is something that church had repeatedly come up against from almost the moment
of its inception. Very often, church officials defined the Western church's belief systems by
identifying a movement or certain practices as not Christian. So this was a reactive rather
than proactive formulation of policy. What we need to remember then is that certain Christian
offshoots were considered perfectly legitimate and orthodox by those who followed their teaching
and tell the moment when the official hierarchy of the church declared them heresy. One of these
beliefs was Arianism, a heresy that had been popularized in the late third and early fourth
centuries by the Egyptian religious figure Arius, and which held that Jesus was not co-eternal with
God the Father, but rather that Jesus had been produced from God the Father, and thus, while
certainly divine, he was subordinate to God the Father in the Trinity. The Council of Nicea in
321 had denounced this thinking as heresy, clarifying as orthodoxy the idea of the triune God.
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost were co-eternal and equal, three in one. Then there was Pelagianism,
popular through the sixth century, especially in Britain. And this was the belief that humans were
not all necessarily tainted by original sin, and also that it might be possible for one to get to
heaven by performing good works, a belief that seemed to negate the necessity of the grace of God.
Although this heresy was officially condemned as such by the Council of Carthage in 418,
Pelagianism and Semipelagianism continued to pop up at various times and places throughout the
Middle Ages. We could do an entire lecture simply on Christian heresies, but these two examples
served to illustrate how Christianity, especially in its earliest days, was not the Christianity we
know today. So what we have to always keep in mind is that Christianity in the medieval world
was an ever-evolving entity, and many of the traditions and customs we associate with
Catholicism and its offshoots today evolved, in some cases rather organically, and then either
received official sanction or got condemnation, hence the need for periodic gatherings like the
4th Ladering Council. In 1215 the Council officially recondemned any previously identified heresies,
and it also sought to curb, what had become, relatively speaking, an explosion of the founding
of new monastic orders. Benedictine monasticism had, since the early centuries of the Church,
been the dominant form of monastic living, but over time some members of the order came to regard
Benedictine monasticism as a little too cushy, a little too worldly, and so reform orders came
into being. The Cistercians in 1098, the Franciscans in 1209, the Dominicans at almost the same moment
as the 4th Ladering Council itself. The concern was that soon there would be as many orders as
there were religiously minded people with their own particular vision of what a monk should be
and do, and the Council sought to establish rules for the formation of these orders and
curb the explosion of unlicensed religious figures. The figure of the partner in Geoffrey Chaucer's
Canterbury Tales dramatically demonstrates the dangers for the general population if religious
orders and religious followers were not strictly regulated. Chaucer's partner is a scoundrel who
travels the world with fake religious relics, charging the gullible for the opportunity to
touch them and thus supposedly receive absolution from sin, a pardon, hence his name. He is without
a doubt the most negatively written of any of Chaucer's 29 pilgrims, and is most certainly
the kind of figure that the 4th Ladering Council feared might harm the reputation of the Church
and lead otherwise innocent people into wrong belief and sin.
As you may remember from one of our previous lectures, the great schism between the Western
Latin and Eastern Orthodox Churches in 1054 at first seemed to be a non-event in that it did
not at all affect the everyday lives of most Christians in either the East or the West.
But by 1215 it was clear that this split had happened and that the formerly unified branches
of Christianity were drifting further and further away from one another. The 4th Ladering Council
simultaneously tried to heal this breach while still affirming the primacy of the papacy in Rome.
In Canon 4, the Council states, quote, although we should like to cherish and honor the Greeks,
who in our time are returning to the obedience of the Apostolic See, we neither want to nor
should defer to them in things which breed danger to souls and detract from the decorum of the Church,
end quote. With that statement, one hand of the Latin Church gives the Eastern Orthodox Church
an encouraging pat on the head while the other hand wraps it soundly across the knuckles.
This approach to healing the breach between the two continues in Canon 5, quote,
we decree that after the Roman Church, which by the divine plan has as mother and ruler of
Christians the primacy of ordinary power over all other churches, the churches of Constantinople
shall have the first place, that of Alexandria II, that of Antioch III, that of Jerusalem IV,
end quote. Once again, the Council seems to offer a concession to the Byzantine Church.
They are first, but only after the Church in Rome, which is always the primary religious
authority on earth. It seems a deliberate move to try and appease the East while asserting the
power of the West. Otherwise, the phrasing might have ranked the Church in Rome as one and Constantinople
too. So if we take a step back, we see some of the impact of the turning point of the great
schism being felt a century and a half later in a very tangible way, but these concerns were still
mostly in the upper ranks of the Church hierarchy. What about for the average person in the medieval
world? Did the Fourth Lateran Council have any impact on him or her? The answer is a resounding
yes. As we'll see in a moment, the majority of the population of the medieval world was directly
impacted by the new rules, but perhaps no one was affected as much as the parish priest.
Your typical parish priest, unlike higher-ranking Church officials, was much more connected with
his immediate community. Not only did he perform mass several times a week, but he also administered
the sacraments of baptism, confession, communion, last rites, burial. He gave comfort to the sick,
blessed marriages, and did much, much more. One way the Council supported and enhanced the
parish priest's position was by making it clear that attending mass on a regular basis
was an absolute must. While most people in the medieval world were at least nominally Christians,
there were plenty of people in very rural areas who were mostly concerned with day-to-day
survival, and who probably also engaged in rituals that were pagan in origin, but had been absorbed
and transformed a bit by the Church, especially around planting and harvest time. At these times,
the Church made what were originally fertility rituals into moments in which the parish priest
might come out and bless the fields, putting a Christian sheen on an event that dated, perhaps,
from before the arrival of Christianity. Obviously, parish priests had long been
engaging directly with their flocks in ways intended to bring them more firmly within the
embrace of the Church. Requiring people to attend mass was another way to more completely imbue
the social order with Christianity, as was the new requirement issued by the 4th Ladering Council
that people needed to take communion and make confession at least once a year.
Before this, while the sacraments of communion and confession were important, there was no hard
and fast rule about how often this needed to happen. Many people probably went years between
confessions or taking of a sacrament, and that had been, by and large, not ideal but not a huge
problem. Now, there was no room for excuses. These rules actually created the need for a bit more
planning on the part of the parish priest. When it came to communion, this was a matter of economics
and logistics. How to anticipate who was going to take communion when? What if there was not enough
bread and wine? What if there was too much, and that which was not consumed would go to waste?
As concerns planning, most parishes opted to declare that Easter would be the time when all
churchgoers would be offered communion, and they also indicated that the time of Lent and Easter
would be an appropriate time to make confession. By planning this way, they avoided the problem of
not enough or too much wine and bread, which was a grave concern because of another point
clarified by the Fourth Laddering Council. This was the doctrine of transubstantiation.
According to this doctrine, at the moment that the priest consecrates the bread and wine, they do
not only represent the body and blood of Jesus Christ, they actually are transformed into his
actual body and blood. Although the bread might still look like bread and the wine look like wine,
they were in fact the flesh and blood of the Savior.
Now the Fourth Laddering Council was not the first time that this idea had been put forward.
Many church scholars and other officials had long believed that this miracle occurred every
time the priest consecrated the bread and wine, but it was not uniformly accepted and
many theologians had debated this point of doctrine for some time. Indeed, Thomas Beckett,
whom we discussed a little bit in our lecture on Eleanor of Aquitaine, had reportedly expressed
discomfort with the portion of the mass when he was required to bless the bread and wine
and supposedly convert it into Christ's body and blood, and Beckett had tended to hurry through
this section of the mass. It was an awesome responsibility, and as you can imagine, it led
to some thorny issues. What happened if a crumb of bread was dropped and a mouse ate it? Had the
mouse just eaten the flesh of the Savior? Was this okay? If not as many people as anticipated
took communion, what to do with what was left? The priest and his acolyte should consume it, yes,
so that none of it would go to waste? While the doctrine of transubstantiation still made many
people uncomfortable, the Fourth Ladering Council was absolutely clear on this issue. If you were
a Christian, this is what you believed. If you openly stated opposition or disbelief of the doctrine
of transubstantiation, you risked being branded a heretic, the punishment for which could be severe
and could include execution. This sanctioning of transubstantiation as doctrine, like the other
canons, similarly strengthened and emphasized the importance of the position of the priest.
He was the only means by which the common person could have communion with God, for only he could
transform the bread and wine. But the issue would remain the thorny one and would be revisited on
several occasions by later councils. The Fourth Ladering Council was important also,
because it added a sacrament to those already on the books. Marriage. It usually surprises people
to learn that before the year 1215, marriage was not a Christian sacrament. It was, more than anything
else, an economic arrangement between families. At the higher levels of society, especially among
the nobility, it was almost always a political arrangement. This son married to this daughter
would unite these lands and make one nation more powerful and another less so. We saw this demonstrated
in dramatic fashion in our lecture on Eleanor of Aquitaine when she married the king of France,
bringing with her the massive duchy of Aquitaine. France suddenly became a power it had not been
before. When Eleanor divorced the French king and married the future Henry II of England,
she affected a dramatic power shift in Western Europe. Even at the lowest levels of society,
marriage was usually much more than a love match, although it is at the lowest levels
that we see unions that arise out of mutual affection. Among peasants, there were still
economic concerns, fields that would belong to one family and not another, animals and property
that would accompany a marriage, a dowry of cash or goods. All of these were important concerns
that would be negotiated by the families of the couple who intended to marry.
The marriage ceremony itself was nothing like the elaborate weddings we see so frequently today.
Very often, one person would bring his or her belongings to another person's home,
and that was it. There might be a small celebration in the community, and if the couple were feeling
particularly religious, they might, after pledging fidelity to one another, walk to the door of their
parish church where they could receive a blessing. While the Fourth Laddering Council did affirm
that all that was necessary to contract a valid marriage was the stated consent of both parties,
it also decreed that any disputes involving a marriage were to be the business of the church.
Parish priests were supposed to be apprised of a couple's intent to wed and then attempt to ensure
that there were no impediments to the marriage. In some cases, this would mean trying to ascertain
if either party had been married before, perhaps in another town. This also meant dealing with
consanguinity. As we discussed in our lecture on Eleanor of Aquitaine, consanguinity is the idea that
two people who are related to one another within a certain degree, say, sharing the same great,
great, great grandfather, could not be married. Before the Fourth Laddering Council, the more
or less official rule was that a couple could not be related to one another within seven degrees.
Given the size of the medieval population and the fact that most people were born,
lived, and died in the same community, adhering to this rule would have been pretty much impossible.
Most people had long ignored it, invoking it only when they wished to be granted an annulment,
as Eleanor had done with the King of France. The Fourth Laddering Council, recognizing how
impossible it would be to enforce this rule, changed it so that a couple could not be within
three degrees of consanguinity. In other words, if they shared a common great-grandparent,
the marriage was forbidden. The council made additional decrees concerning marriage.
Even while acknowledging that a marriage was valid if the two people involved agreed to it,
no need officially for a priest or other witnesses, the council also sought to discourage
so-called secret marriages and specifically declared the offspring of such unions to be illegitimate
and excluded from any inheritance. A secret marriage meant that two people had pledged to be
husband and wife to one another, but had not told anyone else. From our modern viewpoint,
the distinction between a secret marriage and what we might call living and sin seems awfully fine,
indeed razor thin. But it was a very important distinction in the medieval world,
as a marriage contracted in secret legally could be an impediment to a later marriage.
We see King Henry VIII of England making use of this argument when he wanted to get out of
his marriage to his fifth wife, Catherine Howard. He put forth the argument that she had essentially
engaged in a secret marriage or been contracted to a man named Thomas Culpeper, which made her
later marriage to Henry VIII invalid and ultimately resulted in poor Catherine's execution for treason.
Although the abstract, it was the law that the offspring of such unions were illegitimate,
in reality, plenty of people with children born out of wedlock or who were otherwise ruled officially
illegitimate managed to leave those children wealth and lands through all sorts of means,
including simply naming the person in question in a will. While these rules certainly affected a huge
portion of the population, once again it was the parish priest who was called upon to be the
authority and to police such matters. But when it came to marriage, the priest himself was
implicated in a far more serious fashion. He himself was forbidden from marrying. It may come
as a shock to discover that the fourth latter in council would feel the need to reaffirm priestly
celibacy. Isn't that the way it always had been, you might ask? The answer is no. While it had
always been the case that celibacy was greatly admired, it was never so emphatically articulated
as a condition of entering the priesthood until 1215, when the injunctions against priestly
marriage articulated almost a century earlier at the second latter in council in 1139 were firmly
enshrined as canon law. In many cases prior to this, it seems that celibacy was regarded as a
state of living to be admired and aspired to, but not expected of most people. Monks certainly,
but your run-of-the-mill priest overseeing life in a small community? Not really. As I noted a
moment ago, the parish priest was perhaps the single most important member of a village community.
He was deeply engaged with the births, sins, loves, losses, and deaths of all his parishioners,
and very often he was married to one of them. The widespread nature of clerical non-celibacy
is attested over a century and a half later in Geoffrey Chaucer's Canterbury Tales, a fact that
suggests that this was both a real problem and that it had not been effectively resolved by the
fourth latter in council. At the opening of the Reeves Tale, Chaucer sets the scene, telling us
of the miller in the tale that, quote, a weaf he had a, a coming of noble keen, the person of the
tune her father was, end quote, or in modern English, the miller had a wife who was nobly born.
She was the daughter of the town parson. This would have gotten a knowing snicker from Chaucer's
audience. The following lines would have gotten a solemn shake of the head, quote, this person of
the tune, for she was fair, in purpose was to mock and hear his heir, both of his cattle and his
misage, and strange hemadit of her mariage. His purpose was for to bestow her hyah into some worthy
blood of unsatraya, end quote. Or in other words, the miller and his wife had a daughter
and the parson intended for this grandchild of his to be his heir. He planned to leave her all his
goods and the house he lived in. Because she was going to be an heiress with significant possessions,
the family hoped to advance themselves by arranging a marriage with someone a little higher up the
social order than they were. If you think about it a minute, the problem is clear. Church officials,
by definition, could not own property. Any place they lived, any goods or possessions they made
use of during their lifetimes, all of this was supposed to revert to the church upon the priest
or the parson or the monk's death. Clerical marriage was thus not only a theological problem,
but an economic one. If priests were regularly allowed to marry and have children, they would
naturally want to provide for those offspring. And if they did that, then the church would lose
revenue and holdings, and its power and influence would be diminished. So celibacy was important
here not only as a spiritual ideal, but as a way of protecting the church's interests from the
understandable desire of a man to provide an inheritance for his heirs. If he's truly celibate,
then he has no heirs, and there is no problem. The ideals of poverty and celibacy were affirmed
again and again in the canons of the 4th Lateran Council. Several of the clauses specifically
forbade the passing on of wealth from a religious person to any family members, such as siblings
or nieces or nephews, and likewise forbade anyone in an official religious position from practicing
a secular trade by which they could make additional income. By the same token, however,
several of the canons attempted to provide an education and living for those too poor to afford
it in what is an admirable desire to provide a quality when it came to education.
Canon 11 states that every cathedral church should specifically provide for a master whose duty it
should be to quote, instruct for nothing the clerks of that church and other poor scholars,
thus opening up the path of knowledge to those who are learning." Although a similar idea had
been stated in the 3rd Lateran Council, it was, again, emphatically reaffirmed in the 4th. Another
example of the church flexing its muscles and attempting to remind the medieval world of its
position of supreme importance in all matters, large and small. The emphasis on access to learning
and knowledge for poor religious clerks suggests that the 4th Lateran Council is a much more
important step toward human rights than the Magna Carta was when it was first drafted,
as it seems, at least theoretically, that this canon makes it possible for anyone to become
a member of the clergy. At the upper levels of ecclesiastical society, you would typically find
the younger sons and daughters of noble houses. The lower ranks had a more egalitarian feel,
but even then, it usually cost a significant amount of money to finance the education necessary
to move into religious life. With its emphasis on the ideal of poverty and desire to spread
knowledge, the 4th Lateran Council theoretically made it possible for even the lowliest peasant
to become a scholar, a teacher, and a man of God, serving him as monk or priest.
Although this had earlier been an ideal, the canons issued in 1215 clearly wanted to establish
this more firmly. Without a doubt, the meeting of the 4th Lateran Council is the single most
important event to have occurred in the 13th century, or before or after that for that matter.
This meeting codified doctrinal issues, most significantly, transubstantiation. It addressed
concerns at the upper levels of ecclesiastical society, while it also dictated the behaviors
of those on the lowest rung of the social ladder. It dealt with grand issues like the great schism,
the founding of monastic orders, and local matters of inheritance and the like. In short,
it mattered to everyone in the medieval world. And when I say everyone, I mean everyone.
For while the audience of this document is Christendom, east, west, noble, common, rich,
and poor, the canons also demonstrate a striking concern with those peoples living outside the
Christian community. Many of its decrees deal with attitudes and actions toward Jews, Muslims,
and others outside the Church, and thus everyone in medieval Europe is potentially affected by
the statements issuing out of the Lateran Palace in 1215. Particularly chilling is Canon 68,
which expresses concern over the inability to distinguish Jews, Muslims, and Christians from
one another. Quote, we decree, the official document reads, that such people of either sex
in every Christian province and at all times shall be distinguished from other people by the
character of their dress in public, end quote. Here we arguably have the medieval forerunner
of the armbands and badges Jews were required to wear in Nazi Germany. In addition to addressing
corruption among Church officials and codifying matters of theology and doctrine, the Fourth
Laddering Council was also deeply involved with what has been called the rise of a persecuting
society. In our next lecture, we'll explore what caused a dramatic increase in a persecuting
mentality from about the 10th century on and examine some of its more stunning results.
