Welcome back. In our last couple of lectures, we've explored turning points that can be
nailed down to a very specific moment in time, and coincidentally, both those moments occurred
in the year 1215. In the case of the Fourth Lateran Council, the cannons legislated by
that body affected everyone in medieval society, from peasants to popes, from almost the moment
the council convened. In the case of the Magna Carta, almost no one in the medieval world
was immediately impacted by the clauses of that document. But months, years, and centuries
later, the drafting of that agreement would have a profound effect on the entire world.
But in both cases, we can trace the originary turning point to a specific moment, even a
particular day and time. With the next few lectures, the opposite will be the case. These
lectures focus on turning points that were rather stretched in their enactment. This is
exactly where the vantage point of our modern society comes in handy, because looking back,
we can see how certain key events over a long period of time really did mark a change in
what the medieval world looked like, and also paved the way for the development of early
modern society. Specifically, over the next three lectures, we'll be looking at the persecution
of the Jews in medieval society, a change in climate known as the little optimum, or medieval
warm period, and advances in agricultural technology. In each of these cases, the changes
happened over the course of a couple of centuries, so for those living in the moment, the change
wouldn't have been all that obvious. But the world looked dramatically different on one
side of that span of years than it did on the other, and today we're going to try to
understand why. In this lecture, we'll begin by trying to understand why between the 11th
and 13th centuries, we see in medieval Europe what scholars have called the rise of a persecuting
society. Historian R.I. Moore first coined this phrase, and the point he makes is persuasive.
It can't be an accident, he states, that we suddenly see a series of violent outbursts
towards certain marginalized social groups starting around the 11th century. Leppers,
heretics, homosexuals, and Jews, among others, get singled out for condemnation and are routinely
and emphatically ostracized from mainstream society. Moore's argument is compelling.
These groups really have nothing in common with one another, but their sudden and contemporaneous
persecution is far from coincidental. This is not about the behavior of these various
groups, but rather it's about a shift in larger social thinking that identifies, defines,
and then persecutes them. We could talk about all of these groups at great length, but today
we're going to focus on the Jews, as they are the group who most compellingly demonstrate
how this persecution came into being and what its long-term effects would be. Like the fall
of Rome, the persecution of the Jews in medieval Europe was a turning point that took about
two centuries to occur and was a transitional period marked by singular and stunning moments.
As we begin this lecture, it's helpful to keep in mind two vastly different images from
the history of England, which, as you can probably tell by now, is my particular area
of expertise. Shortly after taking the throne in the second half of the 12th century, King
Henry II of England, who never did anything halfway, ousted all of his Christian banking
and finance officials and replaced them with Jewish officials. A little over a century
later, in the year 1290, Henry II's descendant Edward I would declare all the Jews expelled
from England, and that they were in sometimes horrible fashion. One account tells of a mercenary
ship captain who offered passage to the continent to a community of English Jews, for a fee,
of course. After these Jews had booked passage, paid their fare, and bent on their way east
for a brief while, the captain anchored on a tidal sandbar and ordered them all off the
ship.
What shall we do when the tide comes in? They demanded. Not my problem was the answer.
And the ship captain left them to their fate.
As dramatic examples, these two moments stand in stark contrast to one another and help
us see just how much the world had changed in so brief a time. As we discussed briefly
in our lectures on the fall of Rome and the Muslim conquest of Spain, Jewish communities
had long been an important part of the fabric of the medieval world. They were tolerated
when the Roman Empire became Christianized. They were recognized as good public servants
and remarkable scholars, and they were not inclined toward proselytizing.
There was an understanding that their religious traditions sprang from the same root as Christianity.
Likewise, as we saw in Lecture 3, when the Islamic world moved into Spain, the Jewish
communities there were tolerated and in some cases embraced, because they, like Muslims
and Christians, were quote-unquote people of the book.
For centuries, Jews were more or less accepted within the mainstream medieval Christian society
based on the thinking of St. Augustine, who had argued essentially that while they were
not presently in the community of the saved, the possibility remained that someday they
could be. He went on to say that their primary sin, their main error, lay in reading too
literally. They did not recognize the allegorical prefiguration of the Old Testament in terms
of the coming of Christ. But, Augustine reasoned, perhaps they could be taught how to interpret
correctly.
In the thinking of Augustine and other church fathers, the Jews also served an important
function concerning the end of days. They were prophesied to accept conversion when
the Messiah would come again. In other words, Christians needed Jews to keep being Jews
up until the last second, so their presence in medieval society was generally just fine.
During the early Middle Ages, so before the year 1000, Jews worked in a variety of different
occupations, from farmer to scholar to blacksmith to miller. Their households were scattered
throughout the communities in which they resided, and they were generally accorded the right
to practice their religion and to participate in civic life. In part, this was due to protections
that had been specifically extended to them by the emperor Charlemagne as he established
his great carolingian empire. From about 800 to 1000, Jewish culture was flourishing in
much of the medieval west. But by the 13th century, in both secular and religious law
codes throughout Europe, the professions available to Jews were limited almost exclusively to
those involving money lending or rent collecting. Their homes were all located in a designated
part of the city, often surrounded by a wall or otherwise cut off from the rest of the
community, and they were forbidden from participating in the political life of their societies.
They had been ghettoized. How and why did this happen?
We get some clue from the eyewitness accounts of events in the Rhineland in 1096. We saw
earlier that shortly after Pope Urban II called the first crusade in 1095, people from all
walks of life took the cross and set off to recapture the holy land from the Muslim world.
Some set off by sea, but some traveled overland, heading through the Rhineland on their way
to Byzantium and then onward to Jerusalem. It seems that some groups of crusaders thought,
why go all the way to the Levant to kill infidels when there are some other non-believers right
in their own backyards? The result was a series of massacres of Jewish communities committed
by groups of crusading forces. In mites, spear, cologne, treer, metz, Bamberg, Regensburg,
Prague and other cities, military forces stopped their trips eastward and engaged in
acts of atrocity against local Jews, threatening to kill them if they did not convert to Christianity.
Many accounts tell us how the Jews were offered refuge and protection by their neighbors,
and in some cases, the leading burgers of the town and even the Christian bishop of
the community sought to protect them from the depredations of the crusading forces,
but not always successfully. According to an account written by Solomon
Barr Simpson, some years after the fact, when the Jews gathered in the courtyard of the
bishop of mites realized that their defenders would not be able to protect them from the
crusading forces gathered outside the gates, they took matters into their own hands. Quote,
the women then geared their loins with strength and slew their sons and their daughters and
then themselves. Many men too plucked up courage and killed their wives, their sons, their
infants, the tender and delicate mother slaughtered the babes she had played with. All of them,
men and women, arose and slaughtered one another. End quote.
It is a horrifying account to read, and it is made all the worse by the fact that what
happened in mites was far from an isolated incident. In the wake of the calling of the
first crusade, a persecutorial zeal seemed to possess many segments of the medieval Christian
population and huge losses were suffered by Jewish communities in the Rhineland and elsewhere.
How did we get from a place where Jews were contributing and valued members of society
to this? First off, medieval society in the 11th and 12th centuries was changing in some
fundamental ways. There was population growth, in part attributable to the subject of our next
lecture, the medieval war period or little optimum. And with that growth came basic social
changes. More land came under the plow and that land was quickly claimed and organized
in terms of the menorial system of land holding. In this system, a person was usually located
somewhere in a hierarchy in which they owed services or payment to the Lord or landholder
above him and received some sort of payment and services from serfs below. Positions in
these hierarchies became solidified not just in terms of status, but in terms of number.
With the growing population, there were no free spaces in the social structure and people
sought to crowd their way into a secure position wherever it was on the social ladder, by any
means possible, even if that meant crowding someone else out. In this land crisis, any
time it was possible to take land away from someone, usually after the death of a landholder,
and then fold that land back into the manor estate rather than re-granting it to the leaseholder
or his heirs, that's what tended to happen. We have plenty of records of Jewish farmers
who held lands of a Lord and worked them, but on the death of the head of the household,
the Lord of the Manor took the lands back rather than granting them to the heirs. This
pushed more and more Jews away from the countryside and into urban centers, which were experiencing
significant growth during this period. In these urban centers, the Jews tended to become
merchants, traders and bankers. Over the course of the 12th and 13th centuries, their options
for employment would become even more limited by law, and soon banking, money lending or
rent collection would be the only careers legally available to them. While there were
always pockets of medieval society where Jewish communities managed to flourish, this
persecutorial mentality was more or less the norm throughout most of the medieval world.
And because this is exactly the time that we start to see the widespread appearance of
leprosy, probably due to increased travel for trade as well as the growth of urban centers,
including their close quarters and generally poor hygiene, well, you have a sort of perfect
storm of factors coming together to produce a persecuting mentality. Lepers were forbidden
from inheriting or passing on land and wealth, and they were also because of fear of contagion
ostracized from mainstream society and were required to live in leper communities. In
many cases, it was just a small step to exclude other groups that made the mainstream of medieval
society similarly uncomfortable. Another broad social shift that we have emerging at this
time is the rise of the university system, which we discussed a bit in our lecture on
Peter Abelard. Many scholars of Abelard's ilk took a great interest in the history
of the church and its relationship to Jewish tradition, and they liked also to debate
with the leading Jewish scholars of the day. But these debates over the course of the 12th
century became more and more theologically critical until several scholars concluded
that for all intents and purposes, the Jews living in medieval society were not practicing
traditional Judaism in the way that St. Augustine had understood it. Part of this came from
the arguments concerning the Talmud and Jewish philosophical movements, like the work of
the 12th century Antelousian philosopher Maimonides. By the 13th century, bishops and
popes claimed these works were later additions to real Judaism and should be burned, which
they were on several occasions. The argument beginning to hold sway in medieval Christian
thinking was that medieval European Jews had strayed from the core beliefs of the Torah.
They were practicing what has come to be known as rabbinic Judaism, the traditions and ethical
positions we see described in the Talmud and other post-Torah works, and therefore the
argument went they were not the Jews that Augustine had said would be necessary for
the events surrounding the end of days. And in this case, the argument continued, why
should we bother accommodating them at all? Add to this a rise in deep religious fervor
as we saw with the calling of the first crusade, the land crunch, a growing population, and
you have a recipe for disaster. A further element that ironically contributed to the
Jews' outsider status was the fact that they seemed to have been remarkably efficient,
reliable, and good at whatever craft or trade they took up. In the case of banking, this
would ultimately produce greater negative feeling toward them. For example, as I've
already noted, in 1164 Henry II of England transferred all of his economic and banking
matters to Jews at his court. In 1182 Philip Augustus of France ousted all the Jews from
his domain but let them back in on the condition that they work exclusively for him managing
the royal finances. Such a move created resentment and served to enforce long-standing and often
negative stereotypes of Jews as being greedy for money and wealth. But their position in
the world of money ultimately arose because of a Christian injunction against usury.
Today, the word usury is used to indicate the charging of excessive interest on a loan,
but in the Middle Ages it meant the charging of any interest at all. The church had long
held usury to be a sin, building on the ideas of many early philosophers that it was simply
against the order of things, unnatural, for someone to be able to receive a return when
no goods were actually being exchanged. As you might imagine, without the prospect of
earning interest there was little motivation for anyone in the Middle Ages to make a loan
ever. But medieval people still needed loans, especially in the 12th and 13th centuries
when urban centers were growing and trade was increasing. The de facto solution the medieval
world came up with was to allow Christians to obtain loans from Jews. For you see, while
the church frowned upon making money through interest-bearing loans, it didn't seem too
concerned about paying that interest to another party within reason.
And since Jews were already in the state of sin, what was one more? This was a clever
way to serve both religious ideals and economic needs, but it also began to direct more and
more Jews toward a profession with which many people had formed unpleasant associations.
Once the mentality of persecution had achieved some measure of traction, it began to feed
upon itself to pick up steam in what became a sort of feedback loop of marginalization
and violence toward Jews throughout medieval Europe. There was negative feeling toward
Jews, so Jews were channeled toward social positions with negative associations. Because
Jews were becoming more associated with negative positions like money lending and rent collecting,
more negative feelings toward Jews proliferated. You can see where this is going.
As the 12th century progressed, negative attitudes toward Jews increased. As with the persecution
of Jews in the Rhineland by the Crusaders, violence would occasionally burst out in startling
moments of horrifying brutality, and then they would recede.
One such moment occurred in the town of York, England in 1190. The lead up to this moment
had involved several events which, in retrospect, inevitably moved the Jews toward a violent
confrontation with their Christian neighbors.
In the late 12th century, Yorkshire was moving away from a simple agrarian rural economy and
more and more toward mercantilism and trade. Therefore, plenty of merchants and nobles
in York needed access to cash, to loans. In the 1170s, the leaders of the community actually
advocated for Jews, specifically money lenders, to be moved in to help fuel the fires of the
economic engine.
Now, as we've already seen, Henry II had long been a protector of the Jews in England,
and when he turned all his financial matters over to them near the end of his reign, it
caused some resentment on the part of those who were ousted. One can only imagine that
this resentment had festered, and when a delegation of Jews showed up to do homage at the coronation
of Henry's son, Richard the Lionheart, in 1189, their presence in a group was mistaken,
deliberately or not, as a threatening gesture. It seems that some harsh words and taunting
between the Jewish delegation and the guards outside the coronation was wildly misinterpreted.
Again, it's not clear if this misunderstanding was deliberate or not, and pretty soon a full
scale riot erupted. In the aftermath, several Jews and Christians were killed. Furious, Richard
ordered three of the Christian participants to be hanged as punishment, but this was not
enough to stem the rising tide of animosity.
Almost as soon as Richard headed for the Holy Land on Crusade, violence erupted again,
this time in York, where that community of Jews had been moved in. While those who participated
were explicit in stating that they were acting from religious conviction to wipe out infidels,
it seems pretty clear that what they really wanted was to wipe out evidence of their
debt to the Jewish moneylenders that had arrived in the 1170s.
Once the persecuting mentality had hold of the population, it did not let go, and in
1190, some 150 Jews living in York retreated to the stronghold of Clifford's Tower, where
they hoped to wade out the bloodlust of a recently assembled mob. There they held on
for several days, but when the citizens brought in siege towers and it became clear the stronghold
would be taken, the Jews of York followed the example of the Jewish communities in the
Rhineland and opted to die at their own hands rather than be forcibly converted. They set
fire to the tower. Those that did survive were brutally slaughtered by the mob waiting
below. That this was about money rather than belief is evidenced by the fact that the mob
leaders immediately after the massacre went to the cathedral where records of debts were
kept demanded the accounts of debts owed to Jews and then burned them.
After the massacre at York, things seemingly quieted down again until the fourth ladder
in council, which we discussed at length in our previous lecture. As I noted then, much
of what the council legislated in its canons had to do with money, Jews, and the duties
of Christians in terms of these financial obligations. It also demonstrated the newly
minted persecutorial zeal that kept rearing its head in the medieval world with the injunction
that Jews needed to wear clothing or armbands that would identify them as such.
You may also remember from our previous lecture that one thing the fourth ladder in council
tried to curb was the formation of new monastic orders. It wanted to keep a tight reign on
the members of its flock. Almost immediately after this meeting, however, an exception
to this rule was granted to a new monastic group, the Franciscans.
The Franciscans were part of a new world order of monks, the so-called mendicant or wandering
monks. The ideal here was extreme poverty, and St. Francis and his followers, and to
a lesser degree the Dominicans already established, felt that in large measure the establishment
of monastic houses was not the purest way to interpret the vow of poverty. For really,
how poor could you be if you had a roof over your head, plenty to eat, and a bed to sleep
in every night? The Franciscans sought to embrace true poverty and throw themselves on the mercy
of the world, traveling through the countryside and, most importantly, preaching as they went.
The idea here is that they would help those wavering in their faith become stronger. But
also, what this meant in a practical sense is that they were now the eyes and ears of
the church. They could go places that ordinary monks did not go, and thus they were charged,
or else they took it upon themselves, to identify and root out heresy and anti-Christian sentiment.
Scholar Jeremy Cohen has argued persuasively that it is no accident that the rise of the
orders of the friars, like the Franciscans, seems to coincide with a time of particularly
emphatic persecution toward Jews. Although we can't say one is the source of the other,
they both seem to feed on and reinforce one another, and the idea of Christian zeal and
hatred toward anyone or a group out of the mainstream increased.
As we move further into the 13th century, hostile treatment of Jews throughout the medieval
world increased. In many communities, they were now forbidden to own land and ordered
to reside in a designated region of the community. In some places, these Jewish quarters were
actually sealed at night so that the Jews were effectively imprisoned in their homes
each evening. It's no coincidence, I think, that this is also the time of other great
persecuting movements. A heretical sect known as the Cathars, who lived predominantly in
southern France in the Languedoc, were brutally murdered and their lands confiscated in what
we've come to call the Abagincian Crusade, which lasted for most of the first half of
the 13th century. This time is also when the great Lepper hospitals were established,
and the church attempted to define and quash what it deemed as deviant sexual behavior.
Suddenly, there were threats to the social and moral fabric everywhere it seemed, and
they needed to be legislated against and punished. It is also in the 13th century that we start
to see the proliferation of blood libel accusations toward the Jews. These were claims that Jews
engaged in mysterious rituals that required the blood of a Christian child to complete,
the idea being that they would ingest the blood or flesh of a sacrificial Christian
child in a mockery of the Christian Eucharist. We can't really pinpoint the origins of blood
libel, but it had had a significant presence as a rumor at least since the early 11th century.
In 1255, the nasty rumors took a violent turn after the death of a little boy, Hugh of Lincoln.
A local Jew was accused of the ritual murder, and under torture, he eventually confessed.
Even though this was obviously a false confession, it fueled anti-Semitic feeling, and once
again, economics played a role in what happened. A few months before this occurrence, King
Henry III of England had sold his rights to tax the Jews in England to his brother,
Richard of Cornwall. Just prior to little Hugh's death, these taxation plans against
Jews had sprung up all over Europe, and what they meant essentially was that the government
had the right to levy attacks on Jewish communities whenever they felt the need. In a difficult
position to start with, the Jews had no real recourse. Whenever a tax was levied, they had
to pay it. And Henry III decided that he regretted giving his brother the right to tax the Jews,
so when he saw the chance to make a little additional money, he grabbed it and proclaimed
that if a Jew was found guilty of a crime, all of that person's possessions reverted
to the crown. Hugh's death was deemed a Jewish conspiracy and resulted in the arrest of some
ninety Jews, eighteen of whom were ultimately executed because they refused to throw themselves
on the mercy of the jury. All their property was also confiscated. This was the first time
that a civil governing body, not a religious one, had handed down a conviction for ritual
murder, but it certainly would be the last. The story of little Hugh of Lincoln became
popular in England and beyond, with many visitors to his grave reporting miracles. This
only fueled the growing anti-Semitism in medieval society, and around a century after
his death, the story of Hugh of Lincoln and the Jews was retold in Geoffrey Chaucer's
Prioress' Tale, one of the most famous of the Canterbury Tales.
One might think that this would add still more fuel to the fire, but by the middle of
the 14th century in Chaucer's native England, there was actually no fire to be fueled. There
were no more Jews. That's right. For all intents and purposes, not a single Jew remained
in England after the year 1290, when King Edward I ordered them all to be expelled. Those
who did not leave had the choice to convert to Christianity or face death.
While England was the first to officially expel Jews from its borders, several other
countries followed suit. In 1306, Philip the Fair of France, in desperate need of cash,
exiled the Jews of France and claimed all their property for the crown. In 1492, in
what would be the first indicator of the coming Spanish Inquisition, the Jews were expelled
from Spain.
All throughout the medieval world, from the 11th century on, Jewish communities were
forced to obey stricter and stricter laws concerning where they lived, what they could
do for a living, and how they could practice their religion. The years from about 1100
to 1300 marked the clearest turning point for the fate of the Jews in the medieval world.
Before this, they were relatively well-integrated members of society. After this, they were
not. We can see the repercussions of this turning point well into the modern period,
with the rise of Nazism and the Holocaust being the most obvious, but by no means only,
example.
In our next lecture, we are going to discuss a turning point that overlaps with that of
the persecution of the Jews. While in the case of the Jews, their turning point was
a result of the actions of humans, our next event was the result of dramatic changes in
the natural world. But as we'll see, these changes in the so-called medieval war period
would have profound effects on human society.
