Welcome back. In our last lecture, we explored the rise of the university system in the medieval
world, focusing particularly on the influx of medical knowledge from the Greek and
Arab worlds via Italy, especially when it came to the medical community at Salerno.
As other major cities developed universities, a need for more and more copies of key texts
arose and many scribes and producers of vellum or parchment, animal hides suitable for writing,
found their services in high demand. The production and copying of texts was a long and laborious
process, and if the world was going to continue its move forward, there needed to be another
innovation. And in the middle of the 15th century, there was. How important was this turning point,
you might ask? Well, to get a handle on that question, let's jump ahead a bit to the year
1517. In that year, a German by the name of Martin Luther wrote a document that has come to be
called the 95 Theses. In this document, he identified elements of Christian practice with
which he found problems, instances of bad behavior, for example, the selling of indulgences. And these
were pardons from sin that could be had for a price. Luther found this practice hypocritical
and antithetical to Christian theology and ideology in his purest form. He famously nailed
a copy of his 95 Theses to the church door in Wittenberg and sent also a copy of his argument
to the Archbishop of Meitz. Luther was expressing a dissatisfaction with the Latin church that had
been growing for some centuries. His protest, like those of the groups that had come before,
the Lawlards in England, Jan Hus and his followers in Bohemia and others, certainly would have had
an interested but rather limited audience, simply by virtue of the difficulty of disseminating ideas
like these. But there was something new on the scene. That something was the printing press. And
a few months after Luther nailed those Theses to the church door, they were translated out of Latin
into German, hundreds of printed copies were made, and they began to circulate throughout
Europe. The Protestant Reformation had begun. Now, while this event most likely would have
happened no matter what, I think it is significant that one of the defining elements of the early
modern period, the Protestant Reformation, can trace much of its impact back to a medieval
innovation. The exponential increase in literary production during the early modern period was
made possible by the development of movable type and the printing press, in combination with the
more widespread use of paper, a much easier writing surface to produce than the parchment or vellum
which had been made from animal hide. Although he was probably not the inventor of movable type,
Johannes Gutenberg was responsible for its initial and eventual mainstream use in the medieval
world. Originally trained as a goldsmith, the family occupation, Gutenberg set up his printing
press in Mainz, Germany, by 1450. He is perhaps best known today for the 42-line Bible he produced,
which has come to be known generally as the Gutenberg Bible. As far as we know, his press
turned out 180 copies of this Bible, some printed on paper and some on animal hide,
almost 50 copies survive. Now there had been experiments with printing prior to Gutenberg's
foray into the business, but in these earlier experiments, pages were usually printed using
the woodblock method, in which the words of a single page would be carved in mirror image
into a block of wood, which could then be inked and pressed onto a surface. This was fairly
labor intensive, but it was still quicker than copying out text by hand if one wanted to produce
several copies of a particular text. The problem was that over time, the wood on the block would
start to wear down, so the impressions it could make once it was inked would become blurrier and
blurrier. This would necessitate re-carving or refreshing the woodblock from time to time,
another lengthy process. Faster still was printing using movable type, which is what Gutenberg did.
The phrase movable type refers to the fact that individual metal letters could be moved or assembled
into whatever order someone wished, and thus could be used over and over for a variety of
different texts. An obvious advantage over entire pages carved into a block of wood,
if you think about it for just a moment. Because the letters were made using metal,
they were also fairly durable. Now at first it seems that Gutenberg commissioned several of his
metal workers to carve the individual letters by hand, but then he discovered that pouring
metal into molds was an easier method, especially because he would need multiples of certain letters,
like the letter E. The way the system worked was this. First, a handwritten copy of whatever it
was that was going to be printed would be set before the printer, who would then have to load
the individual letters of type into a series of grids held in a frame called a form, and he would
have to do this in mirror image. He would recreate the page as best he could. Where capital letters
were needed, he would reach into one of the cases on the top of the shelf, hence the phrase
uppercase to refer to capital letters, and for all other letters he would reach into the more
accessible and more frequently used holders lower down on the shelf, hence lowercase. He would have
blanks or spacers to place between words and hold the rest of the letters in alignment. Once he had
filled all the grids in the form, he would lock them into place with metal clamps of some sort,
and then slide this tray into the printing press where it would rest on the bed. The letters
were then inked and a piece of paper or parchment or vellum would be slid into the mechanism. It was
held in place between two frames covered with paper or vellum known as the frisket or tympan. Once
the page was secure, then the printer would use a windlass mechanism to roll the paper under the
platen and then would bring the platen down on the paper using pressure to transfer the ink letters
onto the page. Then the platen would be raised, the form with the paper rolled out, and the printer
could check this first sheet for errors. This test sheet became known as the proof sheet and was
important because this is the stage at which the printer could catch errors that were hard to spot
when setting type and mirror image. After reading over the proof sheet, the printer would make any
corrections necessary and start the process again. Once the proof sheet was clean, then things picked
up considerably. Scholars estimate that it was possible for a printer to turn out at least 300
pages in a single day when in the old process of handwritten manuscripts, completing one page in a
single day, might be considered a solid accomplishment. Adding even more speed to the process was the
fact that sometimes multiple pages could be printed at once. For example, a single sheet might be
divided into quarters and each quarter would have a different page of text on it. Once the ink
dried, the page could be flipped over and four more pages printed on the reverse. After this,
it was a simple matter to cut the pages apart and collate them in order. Voila! Eight pages of a book
printed in the space of a few minutes. In the early days of printing, copy editing was not the
refined process that it is today and some mistakes certainly crept in to printed pages. In some cases,
these mistakes might actually have been deliberate. For example, if a printer was setting four pages
of type and he was coming to the end of the form and he discovered that he needed another letter N,
but that he had used up every piece of N type in the lowercase box, well, what was he to do? He
could perhaps grab an N from the uppercase box. It would look a little out of place, but it would
do the trick and readers could figure out what was going on. Or he could take another letter,
maybe a U, turn it upside down in the form and hope that no one would really notice what he had
done. A situation exactly like this has led to one of the greatest debates in Shakespeare studies
concerning the end of the play, Othello. In act five, scene two, after he has killed his wife,
Desdemona, Othello describes himself at lines 347 and 348 as being, quote,
like the base Indian who threw a pearl away richer than all his tribe, end quote.
The only problem is, in the earliest printed version of Othello, the word Indian is spelled
with an upside down U in the place of the N. The question becomes, was this on purpose or
an accident? In other words, should it be a U here or an N? If it's a U that has accidentally
been put in place upside down, then the word is Udian, I-U-D-I-A-N, which has something to do
with Jews, the holy land, the lost tribes of Israel. It is full of potential meaning and
significance. But this is no less the case if the letter is supposed to be an N and the printer
was out of Ns and chose to substitute an upside down U. Because if it is supposed to be Indian,
I-N-D-I-A-N, then the reference here has something to do with the Americas so recently
discovered in Shakespeare's day, the so-called New World with which early modern Europe and
Shakespeare in particular were so fascinated. Both interpretations are valid and believable,
but no one can really arrive at a definitive conclusion. It is a debate that has helped keep
any number of Shakespeare scholars fed and clothed and in a job for any number of decades.
And we still don't know for sure what it means. Mistakes in the critical cruxes like this which
they provide aside, the introduction of movable type to Europe was one of those turning points
that changed the world in the short, medium and long term. The printing press and various social,
political and religious movements, like the Reformation, would become intricately bound
to one another, each fueling the other in one of those feedback loops we've been discussing
in this lecture series on so many occasions. Part of what helped keep this engine going
was the use of paper, which had first been brought into Europe via, you guessed it, Italy,
in the 12th century. Paper didn't really catch on at first because it was a much
flimsier material than animal hide, and indeed if you have ever handled a medieval manuscript,
you can tell just how durable it is. Even after a thousand years, many manuscripts can be stretched
and scraped and banged around, but they remain largely intact and legible. In fact, if you were
a scribe working on a medieval manuscript and you made a mistake, there was a fairly easy way to
correct it. You simply took some sharp object or other and scraped the mistake right off the page.
That's how thick vellum and parchment were. You could remove a layer of writing and still
have ample surface on which to rewrite it. And since the process of composing a manuscript
could take weeks, months, or even years, you needed a material that would stand up to all
kinds of abuse during the production process. In most instances, paper just wasn't going to cut it.
But, when the printing press arrived on the scene, we have a situation in which a single sheet could
be handled just a few times during the production of a book, and so paper, which could be produced
much more quickly and cheaply than animal hide, came to be the desired medium.
But it is a sign of how the introduction of the printing press was such a clear turning
point in the development of medieval society that we can see, at the moment of its adoption,
a desire to both look toward the past and toward the future. Many printers still used
vellum, as expensive as it was to obtain, a nod to the traditional way of doing things.
At the same time, most printers were also eager to make use of paper, so affordable was it.
Alas, this benefit to society has been, in some respects, a tragedy for scholars of the
end of the medieval period. For over the years, many texts that were printed on paper
have either disintegrated or they were literally read to pieces, so they don't actually survive
for us to study. This is one reason why those texts, known as incunables, are so valuable today.
The word incunable, plural, incunabula, comes from the Latin word signifying swaddling clothes or
cradle. In other words, something in which you would place an infant. By definition, incunables
are those books printed before the year 1501, from the infancy of the age of printing.
They are thus, in some ways, a very modern element found in the medieval period and they
offer us a glimpse of a world in transition, at a moment when writing exists in what we
might call a continuum between script and print. And while we see many entrepreneurs,
eager to learn this new technology and make use of it for both personal profit and the
greater good, we also see many printers who recognize the power of the past and are not
about to give up on the manuscript tradition overnight. This is the case with William Caxton,
the first printer in England, about whom we'll hear more in a minute. When Caxton set up his
printing press, he also continued to maintain a brisk trade in manuscripts, catering simultaneously
to a wealthy, traditionally-minded clientele and a less wealthy and newly literate public
hungry for reading material. With the shift from manuscript to print culture, there was
much that was gained, but a fair amount that was lost as well. Not least of all, the gorgeous,
illuminated pages of luxury manuscripts. In high-quality manuscripts from the medieval
period, there is a riot of color on the page, and a whole world of activity happening in the
margins, things that just simply couldn't be reproduced in a print shop. Something like the
Kai Rowe page from the book of Kells, for example, which we discussed in an earlier lecture,
simply couldn't be produced more than once. It is an absolutely unique expression
of a singular artistic talent and mind. So, too, the marginalia, or the details
along the borders and edges of manuscript pages. Marginalia were often delightfully quirky, and
sometimes what was depicted there had nothing at all to do with the matter that was in the main
text on the page. What is particularly interesting for those of us who work on such matters
is how the individual scribes sometimes leave traces of their unique personalities alongside
the texts that they so laboriously copied. In one manuscript, a scribe notes how difficult the work
is, especially because someone has done a poor job of scraping the hair off the animal hide.
In other texts, we see vulgar jokes written out, pictures of animals jousting on the backs of snails,
nuns breastfeeding monkeys, and curses directed toward anyone who might borrow the book
and not bring it back or who might miscopy the text. In one manuscript of the writings of St.
Augustine, we find in the margin a line that the copyist missed when he was producing the text.
This is a fairly common mistake called an eye skip. He was copying one line, and when he dropped
down to the next one in the source, he simply dropped one too far. The error probably wasn't
discovered until the page was checked over, and it would have taken too much time and effort to
redo the entire page. So the illuminator, and occasionally this person was described,
but sometimes it was a different person. The illuminator decided to have a little fun with
the error, and he drew a picture of St. Augustine himself in the margin, standing on the omitted
line and pointing to where it should go in the text. In manuscripts that were prized personal
texts, we often find notes in the margin made by the owner, a comment on the script that certainly
wouldn't be reproduced in any print copies, and which helps to make that particular text truly unique.
So when you read a text from the Middle Ages in a modern edition, you are getting a clearly
accessible version of that text, but you are having a very different reading experience from
that which a medieval person would have had. Before the innovation of the printing press,
a literate person in the medieval world would come to a text not simply as a reader of the main
matter, but as someone who also experienced what the past readers of that manuscript had thought
and felt about it. So the manuscript was a living artifact, changing and shifting its meaning
from generation to generation, and certain very important texts were so valued that they were
sometimes chained to the lecterns on which they rested, thus they could not be borrowed or stolen.
It was a very great and generous thing for a monastery or a library
to lend out its copy of a key text to another organization or to a person who wished to make
a copy for themselves. We have surviving from the period a letter asking one monastery to lend
another its copy of a particular text. We wouldn't ask, says the letter, but this is a special case.
You see, a bear got into our scriptorium and ate our only copy of this particular text.
This has got to be the first example of the dog ate my homework excuse,
but you have to admit it is awfully persuasive. All of these unique details about medieval text
and the manuscript tradition largely disappeared when print became the norm in the late medieval
and early modern world. Books were now affordable, so they were not as precious and prized as they
had been, and they were less likely to be passed down from generation to generation as had been
the case with manuscripts. Printers such as William Caxton in England exploited the printing press
to great advantage while still participating in the luxury manuscript book trade, a fact that
points to the continuity between the medieval and the early modern. Caxton learned printing on the
continent, probably in Germany, and he first turned his hand to printing in the Belgian town
of Bruges, where he printed the first text in English, the story of the Trojan hero Aeneas.
After returning to his native country, England, Caxton set up that nation's first printing press
in the town of Westminster around 1476. His life and career is a wonderful example
of that continuity between the medieval and early modern of how the one was transforming
into the other rather than there being an abrupt division or separation between the two.
A commoner, Caxton came from the countryside of Kent into London, where he was apprenticed
to a Mercer or someone who dealt in cloth. In this business, he traveled to the continent
where he was first exposed to printing. While there, he advanced to a senior position in the
town of Bruges as part of a group known as the Company of Merchant Adventurers of London.
This was sort of an ex-patriot group of businessmen who had found it more profitable to remain on
the continent to conduct most of their business. He advanced to this position through hard work
and intelligence, and it was this post that brought him into the orbit of the noble house of Burgundy,
whose duchess, Margaret, was sister to the King of England.
Caxton was a shrewd attainer of patronage, able to gain Margaret's good favour and that of other
nobles back in England, especially after he returned. It was always a good idea, if you were
an author, a scribe, or a printer of books, to dedicate them to someone powerful and high-ranking.
Caxton dedicated any number of books to members of royal and noble families,
but he also mentions several well-connected commoners in his prologues and epilogues,
among them several powerful but non-noble London merchants.
Caxton recognized the power that remained with the traditional social elites,
as well as that which was increasing among the bourgeoisie, and the output of his print
shop suggests he was a shrewd businessman who cleverly exploited the potential of both groups
of consumers. Similarly, he recognized and catered to traditional interests when it came to the
output of his print shop. He is perhaps best known for printing the works of Geoffrey Chaucer.
But he also took the initiative when it came to many works, often translating texts out of Latin
or French on his own impulse, and then printing them for an audience that he gauged would be receptive.
In his many prologues, he often cites the Pauline dictum that, quote,
all is written for our doctrine, end quote, or that essentially all knowledge that can be
gleaned through reading can be useful and instructive. He seems a curious mix of devoutly
religious conservative and radically innovative entrepreneur, and he is just one example of how
the turning point of the printing press points us back to the lessons of the past as well as
forward to the possibilities of the future. As I noted earlier, Caxton continued to participate
in the luxury book trade, importing, buying, and selling handwritten manuscripts for wealthy clients.
While the luxuriously illuminated manuscript was still a status symbol in the late 15th century,
the ease and quickness with which printed books could be produced and circulated in combination
with an increasingly literate and educated population helped fuel the explosion of writing
that has come to be associated with the early modern period. While plenty of people still
treasure their manuscripts, the convenience and accessibility of the printed book was too powerful
to maintain the handwritten book trade. In this respect, it is like the moment when Fibonacci
introduced Arabic numerals to the medieval world. Roman numerals didn't stand a chance,
even when those who made a living doing calculations in the old style of math
managed to get legislation passed that forbade the using of this new numeral system.
It would be like having the internet that exists in 2012 common to being fully formed in the early
1990s, but having the union of bike messengers legislate against it so that they could still
have jobs transporting important documents from place to place. Is there a place for bike messengers
in the economy of the 21st century? Absolutely. Has that place been squeezed and limited and
become much more specialized with the advent of faxes, emails, PDFs, Dropbox, and other
similar innovations? Again, absolutely. So the appearance of print culture in the medieval world
affected the very shape of the political, social, and religious spheres. At the same time, in England,
the printing press had a rather unexpected effect, and this was that it began to cement the forms
of the language, especially in terms of spelling and grammar. Rather curiously, it was solidifying
the written form of the language at exactly the same time that a little something called the great
vowel shift was happening. Now, there's no true scholarly consensus on why exactly this happened,
but as writer and humorist Bill Bryson puts it, what happened basically is that people in England
started taking vowel sounds that had what we call continental values or which tended to be formed
relatively low and farther back in the mouth, and they started quote unquote shoving them forward.
So for example, the word time in Middle English had been pronounced team. Space was pronounced
spasa. Many words that have what we think of as silent letters today were not at all silent during
the Middle English period. A mounted man on horseback was a connect, not a knight. Similar
things were happening to a lesser degree in German and Dutch, exactly when both those cultures
were having a printing revolution of their own. Thus, in many ways, the sudden and widespread
use of the printing press is a boon to scholars of the earlier periods and that they now have more
clues when they're trying to reconstruct what earlier forms of the language sounded like.
Printed texts from the 15th and 16th centuries tell us that chains was often pronounced chines,
and that in Shakespeare's day, the words reason and raisin were pronounced the same,
which allowed the Bard of Avon to make a number of clever puns, which his original audience would
have thought funny, but which completely escaped the notice of most modern theater goers.
Any number of Shakespeare directors has had to wrestle with the reason, raisin question.
Do we go with the early modern pronunciation and hope that some of the audience gets the joke,
or do we go with modern pronunciation so that the main meaning of the line is clear?
And finally, what is really special about the turning point here is that the innovation of
the printing press marks a shift that definitely affected a huge portion of the medieval world,
like the Black Death, like the cannons of the Fourth Lateran Council.
But this was a shift with overwhelmingly positive effects for almost everyone.
Knowledge was available, and it was accessible to almost everyone.
Learning was no longer the exclusive domain of a privileged few.
Information could be had and shared by more people and more quickly than ever before.
Ideas spread faster. Responses to those ideas were crafted and circulated and recirculated.
The world was open like never before.
In our next lecture, we're going to discuss how this turning point and the others we've
explored in this series have all been leading us toward what scholars call the early modern period.
But as you certainly all know by now, at least I hope you do, what these points all indicate
is that the Renaissance had been happening all along from the fall of Rome right into the 16th
century. In addition to reviewing the major themes of our course, next time we'll also discuss Stephen
Greenblatt's award-winning book The Swerve, which argues that the rediscovery of a lost classical
text in the 15th century is what caused the medieval world to suddenly swerve in a certain
direction and become modern. Greenblatt is both right and wrong in the argument he makes,
and I hope you'll join us next time to find out why.
