Lecture 24 Toward the Early Modern
Welcome back to the final lecture in this course on turning points in medieval history.
We began our exploration of the moments and people who changed the course of history with
an analysis of the fall of Rome. Fittingly, the events discussed in this first lecture are the
most significant for this course as a whole because it is from the ashes and memory of Rome
that the entire medieval world develops. You could call this the swerve that sets us on course to
the Renaissance or early modern period. In today's lecture, we're going to discuss a swerve of a
different kind. This is the National Book Award Prize winner by Stephen Greenblatt which appeared
in 2011. This text is also called the swerve and has as its subtitle the phrase, quote,
how the world became modern, end quote. In a nutshell, Greenblatt's argument is that a single
event in the 15th century, the discovery of a lost Roman manuscript entitled On the Nature of
Things, caused a dramatic ripple effect through society that made the European world cease to be
what we think of as medieval and instead start to become what we think of as modern. As you might
guess, I think that Greenblatt is wrong about this characterization. And to be fair, he does
acknowledge in several places the debt to the medieval world and the other turning points we've
discussed so far that made the change about which he is writing possible. At the same time, however,
he overstates the significance of the main event under discussion in his book. A single event in
the early 15th century cannot be the sole reason for the rise of what we have come to call the
Renaissance or the early modern. If we've learned anything over the course of the last 23 lectures,
it's that the events of history are interconnected and that one turning point often gives rise or
leads to another. But I think that in some ways, Greenblatt gets the general idea really right
exactly by getting his specific point really wrong. In other words, the event that he describes is
absolutely a turning point that shifts society in a new direction. But it is not a swerve the likes
of which the world had never seen before. The world of medieval Europe came into existence with
the fall of Rome and swerved when the Muslims conquered the Iberian Peninsula. And again,
when Charlemagne founded his palace school, and again, when the 4th Lateran Council issued its
cannons, and yet again when the Black Death raced through the countryside. What Greenblatt has done
is identify just one in a series of turning points that have been leading us inevitably to the rise
of a new kind of social order, one that this lecture series has shown had been germinating
for hundreds of years. But let's go back for a moment to the story Greenblatt tells,
because it is a really great story. And even if Greenblatt hadn't written a book that won such
an important prize and so much acclaim, it still might have been a perfectly fitting story on which
to end this course. First of all, Greenblatt is a great writer and storyteller, and he brings the
events of the year 1417 to life as very few scholars could do. His account is so thorough,
so detailed, you can almost smell the medieval world through which a man named Poggio Bracciolini
traveled as he sought and made his incredible discovery. The account of what happened is also
vastly entertaining and grounded in a really solid understanding of what the European world was like
in the 15th century, and I highly recommend that you check out the swerve if you have the chance.
Here, in much abbreviated form, is the story. In the early 15th century, a skilled scribe named
Poggio Bracciolini, who came from a well established but provincial Italian family,
had the good fortune to serve a series of popes in an official capacity. He transcribed official
documents for the office of the papacy, and when he was at leisure, he indulged in a hobby that was
somewhat unusual but not too terribly uncommon. He tracked down ancient books, and when he made
a particularly interesting find, he either had the book transcribed or contrived to find some way
to persuade the owner of the book, and this was usually a monastery, to part with it.
In this, he was aided by generous patrons who were also interested in learning about the past,
in recovering lost knowledge. Many of them subsidized his hunt for books as surviving
correspondents attests. But Bracciolini was too busy with what we might call his day job to really
pursue this interest as fully as he would like, until the day when his employer and master,
Pope John XXIII, was declared by the Council of Constance to be unfit to serve as pope.
Now, at the time the council convened in 1414, there were in fact three claimants to the position
of pope, as this was the time of the western schism, when rival popes were competing against
one another in Rome, Avignon, and elsewhere. This event itself could be the subject for another
lecture or seven, but what's important for our purposes today is that in the early 15th century,
Bracciolini found himself without a job and without clear future prospects.
His former employer was sitting in a German prison waiting for the powerful Medici family
to ransom him. John XXIII of the 15th century is not considered a pope by the Catholic Church
today and is only referred to in its official histories as an anti-pope, with the Catholic
encyclopedia calling attention to the fact that John, whose real name was Baldessare Cosa,
had been a man much more concerned with secular, worldly matters than religious or spiritual ones.
But that is neither here nor there. The pope was out of a job and the members of his household,
including Bracciolini, were told to fend for themselves.
So many people would have taken this as a serious blow, but Bracciolini saw an opportunity.
Freed from the obligations of his day job, he was now free to go book hunting into the
hard-to-reach areas of the medieval world. Those with interests similar to his had long
been interested in trying to gain access to monasteries high in the mountains or far to
the north of Italy. As it was thought, there might be some ancient books there that had rested
untouched and of little interest to anyone for centuries. Because, as you'll remember from
any number of our earlier lectures, monastic institutions in the medieval world were for
centuries the centers of learning and knowledge. So that is how Bracciolini found his way to
the Abbey of Fulda in southern Germany, which had been in existence since the 8th century.
This would be a logical place for an ancient manuscript to be found, as the 9th century
abbot of this institution, Rabanus Marus, had had a desire to collect and preserve the knowledge
of the ancient world that was on par with Charlemagne's, and he had gathered and transcribed
numerous texts from the pre-meneval Roman world. As Greenblatt tells it, when Bracciolini first
laid hands on the book in the monastery, he might, at first glance, have thought that it was a later
and very well-known Latin work compiled by that same Rabanus Marus who had made Fulda a center
of learning. The works had very similar titles. The poet Lucretius, who had lived in the first
century BC, had called a compendious treatise he had written De Re Rum Natura, while the 9th
century monk Rabanus Marus had named his De Re Rum Naturis. But after a moment of examining the
manuscript, it must have become clear to Bracciolini that he had found something new, a text written
in beautiful, complex Latin lines by a writer and scholar whose name had long been known to
the medieval world, but whose work had been deemed forever lost. Scholars such as Bracciolini
would have certainly known the work of the Roman poet Ovid, who wrote the words,
quote, the verses of sublime Lucretius are destined to perish only when a single day
shall consign the world to destruction, end quote. This line alone would have sent any man
interested in books and knowledge off to see if he could find any traces of this marvelous work
still in existence. No one had, that is, until Bracciolini did. So what was in this book that
was so important and probably made Bracciolini's heart skip a beat or three when he realized
what he had discovered? Well, what we need to remember first is that Lucretius and his De Re
Rum Natura, or On the Nature of Things, was a product of the pre-Christian Roman world,
and thus it would be expected to explore ideas that a late medieval Christian, even a scholar
interested in the past for primarily academic reasons, would find, generally speaking, blasphemous
or dangerous. Of course, since Christ had not yet been born when the Roman poet Lucretius was
composing his opus, there was a little latitude with which to excuse his thinking. But Lucretius'
poem was radical even for its own day, the first century BC. In fact, it is possible that the
celebrated Roman writer Virgil, who composed the epic poem The Aeneid, hailed for centuries
as the best the ancient literary world had to offer, it's possible that Virgil was writing
against many of Lucretius' ideas. In the Aeneid, Virgil gives us a hero who is dutiful and pious
in all things, who respects tradition, the will of the gods, and accepts his fate even when it
compels him to do things he would rather not. In the Aeneid, we get a detailed look at the
afterworld, a reassurance that our souls live on after our bodies, and the petulant grand,
intemperate, interfering, generous, and vengeful gods who meddle in the lives of humans on earth.
What Lucretius says about all this is essentially nonsense. In stunningly beautiful lines of
Latin hexameter verse, this writer puts forth a theory of the universe, matter, life, and everything
else that is both brilliant and radical, beautiful and troubling. He takes as one of his primary
positions that there is no god or gods, and thus no afterlife, no souls. He is in both the contexts
of the ancient world and the medieval one an atheist. In Lucretius' theory of life, the universe
and everything else, all matter, is made up of invisible particles, and this matter is always
in the process of becoming something else. In other words, when a flower dies, it is not gone,
its particles break down, return to the earth, reassemble themselves, and become something
different, perhaps another flower, perhaps dirt, or grass, or worms. Thus, when human beings die,
they die, and because humans possess no souls and there is no afterlife, this doesn't really
matter. Their bodies will break down, they will be mourned and missed by those who love them,
but they won't know because there is no place for them to be, and no knowing or understanding
for them to have. There is no god or gods, Lucretius says, but if it makes you feel better to visit
a temple or shrine, go ahead. This is okay if it gives you pleasure, because really, if there is no
god or afterlife, then what is the point of life, but to do what pleases you most? Go to the shrine
if it makes you happy. Eat a large meal if that's what you prefer to do, or a small one, or none if
that's what you enjoy. Entertain yourself with whatever amusements you prefer. It sounds pretty
close to hedonism, but Lucretius was also clear that what pleasure was one of the goals so was
trying to avoid pain, and one way to do this was for humans to work together, something they obviously
had done over time to evolve to the point where they presently existed. Lucretius went against
much of the thinking of the Roman period by arguing that humans had not once lived in some sort of
golden age when life was easy, and there was no war, and the earth offered up its fruits in abundance
with little or no toil. Rather, he held that human civilization, as he and his fellow Romans had come
to know it, had evolved out of a period of barbarism and brutality. This thinking obviously would have
been troublesome to many people living in the 15th century, as the long-established Judeo-Christian
tradition told of a prelapsarian paradise, the Garden of Eden, where Adam and Eve had lived
until they were expelled by God for sinning and eating from the tree of knowledge, the only tree
forbidden to them. What's more, Lucretius had further argued in his poem, humans were fooling
themselves if they thought that they were the most important creatures in existence. Emphatically,
Lucretius asserted that humans were just one element in a great interlinked chain of existence,
an idea that in later centuries would come to be called the Great Chain of Being.
Humans were different from antelope and bugs and horses and daisies and sea slugs, but they were not
superior. And the idea that Greenblatt has adapted from Lucretius as the title for his book
is that of the swerve, or in Latin, cleanamen. As Greenblatt succinctly sums it up, quote,
if all the individual particles in their infinite numbers fell through the void in straight lines,
pulled down by their own weight like raindrops, nothing would ever exist. But the particles do
not move lockstep in a preordained single direction. Occasionally, they swerve. The swerve is only the
minimal of motions, but it is enough to set off a ceaseless chain of collisions, end quote.
It is these collisions that make history, and it was the swerve of Bracciolini's pulling
De Reirun Natura off the shelf at the library in the monastery of Fulda that created the swerve
that, according to Greenblatt, produced the modern world. Now, I absolutely agree that this moment
constituted a turning point of extreme importance, but I completely disagree with the idea that it is
this moment alone that gave rise to what we might call the modern era. To be fair, I think that if
pressed, Greenblatt would certainly acknowledge that this is true. For example, he goes on to tell
the story of what happened after Bracciolini rediscovered Lucretius' poem, and what happens is
the copy that Bracciolini has made gets recopied and circulated throughout Europe in manuscript form,
but what really increases the text's visibility is the fact that the printing press has come into use,
so thousands of copies of De Reirun Natura can be printed in the blink of an eye.
This fact becomes even more compelling when we learn that it took Bracciolini
more than a decade to get the copy of the text he wanted back from the scribe he had hired.
Compelled one thinks by the need to try and make a living more than anything else,
Bracciolini had to leave the manuscript behind at Fulda,
but he had engaged a scribe to make a complete copy of the text and then send it on to him in
Florence. This arrived after some months and was apparently a very rough, hastily executed copy.
Bracciolini then turned this over to Niccolò Niccolì, the most renowned scribe of his day,
to make a more elegant version of the text. For years, Bracciolini tried to get the finished
product returned to him, and letters to Niccolì from Bracciolini show increasing
exasperation and anger. Still, it does not usually take a practice scribe 12 years to copy a text,
so part of what was going on here may have been Niccolì's interest in the subject matter,
and a desire to hang on to this poem for a bit longer.
But this moment in the history of De Rerum Natura does point up the relative merits of print over
handwriting when it came to Johannes Gutenberg's innovation, which we just discussed at some length
in the lecture right before this one. What happened next is that Lucretius' text then
spread throughout the medieval and early modern worlds. It ended up in the hands of Machiavelli,
who wrote the prints and gave posterity the adjective Machiavellian, a word with negative
connotations that is shorthand for, quote-unquote, the ends justify the means. Thomas More,
author of Utopia, also seems to have been influenced by some of the ideas in Lucretius' text,
as do any number of other early modern thinkers and writers. Although many of the ideas in
On the Nature of Things might seem to run contrary to other ideas found in early modern humanism,
the humanism part, for example, they were still deeply influential and able to be co-opted by
those thinkers and intellectuals in the Renaissance who wanted the achievements of individual men
to be valued and sought to reconcile religious faith with education and scientific learning,
even though Lucretius himself might have felt strongly opposed to such ideas.
And as the literati of the early modern period sought to look to the ancient past for guidance,
particularly to the Greek and Roman worlds, they also very often tended to imagine,
or want to imagine, that humanity had once lived in a time and a place that was very pastoral.
In this view, in the past humans had lived a life of ease and wild away their days in an
eternal warm spring, tending flocks of sheep, composing poetry while resting under a tree,
and playing tunes on simple reed pipes. Again, not something Lucretius would have countenanced.
But for all the ways that the claim about De Redum Natura and the modern world
overstates the text's impact or simplifies the idea of a shift from the medieval to early modern
period, it also totally gets it right when we think about all the themes we've explored in
this course so far, and it serves, as I've said before, as a fitting subject for our final lecture.
First of all, and very obviously, the power of the past, our first theme, is everywhere apparent
in the story of how this text was discovered and how it came to be more widely disseminated.
Bracciolini and plenty of others like him were obsessed with the idea of discovering lost texts
from the ancient past. They wanted to know what the great thinkers who had come before them had
thought. They were hungry for knowledge that had been mentioned in numerous medieval documents,
but which, as a whole, had long been lost. Without the power of the past, this turning point,
this swerve, never would have happened. Thus, Bracciolini's story has clear affinities with the
story of Charlemagne, with the story of Abelard, the rise of the university system, and the development
of ideas about science and medicine. We can invoke here to King Arthur, Alfred the Great's
transformation of the Kingdom of Wessex into the Kingdom of the Anglo-Saxons, the claims to precedents
that ignited the controversy of the Great Schism, and more. As we saw in Lecture 1 and in every
lecture since then, the past always has had the power to shape the future. The theme of crisis
or necessity also comes into play with this turning point. As with the imprisonment of the
Antipope John XXIII and the dissolution of his household, Bracciolini suddenly found himself
without a lord or master, an unenviable position in the medieval world, as we've seen from any
number of lectures so far. In some sense, Bracciolini was in a crisis not so much unlike that in which
the monks of Lindisfarne found themselves when the Vikings came ashore, or in which the English found
themselves when William the Conqueror crossed the Channel and defeated the forces of Harold
Godwinson in 1066. Life before the event in question had been one way, and afterward it was very
different. Bracciolini had had to adapt to a dramatically changed situation and quickly,
and it is in that adaptation that we see another clear example of one of the major themes of our
course, the power of the individual personality. Even for the time and place, Bracciolini had
to have been quite a character, someone who had risen from rather humble beginnings to a position
of some importance by his own skill and intelligence, someone with an intellectually curious mind who
was able to perform bureaucratic duties by day while indulging in an obsession that in some respects
was esoteric and arcane in his free time, someone who reacted to the end of his professional life
as he knew it, not by running for home, but by seizing the opportunity for adventure. He had
to have been someone who could charm suspicious monastic librarians into letting him examine
their most ancient and precious treasures, someone who could convince wealthy patrons back in Italy
to lend him their financial support so he could pursue his quest.
But of course, his singular personality has only become clearly evident to us down through the
long marches of time because of larger social changes that were happening and in which he found
himself caught up. He was, in some respects, just a piece of flotsam floating in the current of the
western schism, that event that fragmented the position of the papacy and which was as much a
result of nationalist, political, and economic interests as it was religious or spiritual ones.
In this respect, he was rather like Tarik ibn Zayed, who found himself conquering Spain for
Islam in spite of himself, or Petrarch, whose larger-than-life intellect and burgeoning humanistic
impulse was offered a rare outlet due to a confluence of events in the early 14th century.
These events themselves arguably came into being with the changes wrought by the little
optimum, or medieval warm period, and advances in agriculture. So many of these changes, of course,
took another swerve with the appearance of the Black Death and its profound impact
in every stratum of society and just about every place in the medieval world.
After the first wave of the Great Pestilence subsided in 1350, the world looked considerably
different than it had in 1348, and also considerably brighter for those who had managed to survive.
And of course, we cannot escape in this story the appearance of serendipity, of the great good
fortune accorded to history when a monk at Fulda perhaps said, oh wait, there's this other old
book over here you might want to see. Or perhaps Bracciolini had the idea to stand on his tiptoes
and look up to a shelf that might have contained something not visible from his normal standing
position. Or maybe he glanced at the title side and thought, oh, here is that boring
dereru naturis again, I've seen this before. But then he decided to read a little further anyway,
and suddenly realized that this was not the text he had initially assumed it was,
but something altogether more exciting. We can't know exactly how these events played out,
but no matter the particular sequence, it is obvious that luck, that serendipity, played some part here.
And if we pause for a moment to consider the different kinds of turning point we've been
talking about throughout this lecture series, we see here too how Bracciolini's rediscovery
of the dereru natura provides a fitting conclusion to our discussion. It was a turning point that
we can trace to a specific moment in time, the moment when Bracciolini lifted the book down off
the shelf. And in this regard, it is like the Norman conquest or the Magna Carta, or the day
when Abelard was held down and forcibly castrated, or the moment when Pope Urban II called on Christians
to take up arms and march east. It was, at the same time, a turning point that was rather stretched
over time, like the development of a persecuting society, or shifts in agricultural technology,
or the effects of the little optimum, or the fall of the Roman Empire itself. There was a
considerable lapse of years between the moment when Bracciolini knew what he had, to when it was
finally copied and started to circulate, to when it was printed and became more widely disseminated,
to when its full significance was realized and seized upon by larger portions of society.
And indeed, in some ways, Bracciolini's discovery is rather like the turning points of the Great
Schism, or the Magna Carta, or the victory of King Arthur at Mount Badden. Much more discussed today,
centuries later, and much more influential as an idea now than it was at the time it happened,
our third category of turning point. It is only in hindsight that Magna Carta has achieved its
near mythic status, that the legend of King Arthur is so pervasive in the cultural consciousness,
that the rift between the Latin and Eastern Orthodox churches seems so lamentable and insurmountable,
that Stephen Greenblatt writes a book about an event that almost no one outside of academia
had even heard of before the year 2011, and he wins a prize for it. But let me be clear,
I think that the swerve is a laudable achievement on all sorts of fronts,
and Greenblatt is one of those rare, brilliant academic writers who is able to speak to a more
general public without it all seeming to talk down to that public. He respects his audience,
is excited about the story he wants to tell, and assumes correctly that many other people
are going to be excited to hear that story as well. Along the way, he imparts fascinating
information about medieval religion, social structures, literary traditions, and more.
The book is as commendable for its ability to paint a vivid picture of a bygone age,
as it is for tracing in such detail how De Re Rum Natura was rediscovered.
But if this event fits neatly, like the turning point to the fall of Rome,
into our three main categories, it also fits into our fourth category, in that in some respects,
it is not a turning point at all. One could argue that nothing much changed because of
Bracciolini's discovery. The medieval world was already on its way to being modern. It had
swear so many times before this, when Rome fell, when Charlemagne set up his palace school at Aachen,
when Otto's forces rode over the Majars at Lechfeld, when Eleanor of Aquitaine divorced the king of
France, when Fibonacci introduced Arabic numerals to Europe, when Salerno formed the first university,
and when Gutenberg set up his printing press. All of these earlier course corrections meant that
society was already thinking in such a way that De Re Rum Natura had an audience willing to hear
the voice of a poet dead almost 1500 years. In a way, this story helps me make the point
I've been emphasizing all along much better than I could myself. From the moment Rome fell,
the medieval world was heading toward the early modern, toward Shakespeare, and the discovery
of the Americas, and the Protestant Reformation, and the brilliance of Leonardo da Vinci,
and so much more. Every turning point in the medieval world that we've discussed in the last
24 lectures shifted the flow of the river of history, bringing us ever closer to the modern world,
to today, and to the end of this course. Thank you for joining me on this journey.
We hope you have enjoyed these lectures from The Great Courses.
Our courses are now available to order online. Visit our website at thegreatcourses.com,
or call our customer care representatives at 1-800-832-2412. That's 1-800-832-2412. Thank you very much.
