More Advance Praise for The Master Algorithm
“This is an incredibly important and useful book. Machine learning is already critical to your life and work, and will only become more so. Finally, Pedro Domingos has written about it in a clear and understandable fashion.”
—THOMAS H. DAVENPORT, distinguished professor, Babson College, and author of Competing on Analyticsand Big Data at Work
“Machine learning, known in commercial use as predictive analytics, is changing the world. This riveting, far-reaching, and inspiring book introduces the deep scientific concepts to even non-technical readers, and yet also satisfies experts with a fresh, profound perspective that reveals the most promising research directions. It’s a rare gem indeed.”
—ERIC SIEGEL, founder, Predictive Analytics World, and author of Predictive Analytics
“Machine learning is a fascinating world never before glimpsed by outsiders. Pedro Domingos initiates you to the mysterious languages spoken by its five tribes, and invites you to join in his plan to unite them, creating the most powerful technology our civilization has ever seen.”
—SEBASTIAN SEUNG, professor, Princeton, and author of Connectome
“[An] enthusiastic but not dumbed-down introduction to machine learning . . . lucid and consistently informative. . . . With wit, vision, and scholarship, Domingos describes how these scientists are creating programs that allow a computer to teach itself. Readers . . . will discover fascinating insights.”
—Kirkus ReviewsCopyright © 2015 by Pedro Domingos
Published by Basic Books,
A Member of the Perseus Books Group
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of this book may be reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. For information, address Basic Books, 250 West 57thStreet, New York, NY 10107.

Books published by Basic Books are available at special discounts for bulk purchases in the United States by corporations, institutions, and other organizations. For more information, please contact the Special Markets Department at the Perseus Books Group, 2300 Chestnut Street, Suite 200, Philadelphia, PA 19103, or call (800) 810-4145, ext. 5000, or e-mail special.markets@perseusbooks.com
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Domingos, Pedro.

The master algorithm: how the quest for the ultimate learning machine will remake our world / Pedro Domingos.

pages cm
Includes index.

ISBN 978-0-465-06192-1 (ebook) 1. Knowledge representation (Information theory) 2. Artificial intelligence—Social aspects. 3. Artificial intelligence—Philosophy. 4. Cognitive science—Mathematics. 5. Algorithms. I. Title.

Q387.D66 2015
003′54—dc23
2015007615
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1TO THE MEMORY OF MY SISTER RITA, WHO LOST HER BATTLE WITH CANCER WHILE I WAS WRITING THIS BOOK The grand aim of science is to cover the greatest number of experimental facts by logical deduction from the smallest number of hypotheses or axioms.

—Albert Einstein
Civilization advances by extending the number of important operations we can perform without thinking about them.

—Alfred North Whitehead

Contents
Prologue
Chapter 1The Machine-Learning Revolution
Chapter 2The Master Algorithm
Chapter 3Hume’s Problem of Induction
Chapter 4How Does Your Brain Learn?
Chapter 5Evolution: Nature’s Learning Algorithm
Chapter 6In the Church of the Reverend Bayes
Chapter 7You Are What You Resemble
Chapter 8Learning Without a Teacher
