An early list of examples of machine learning’s impact on daily life can be found in “Behind-the-scenes data mining,” by George John (SIGKDD Explorations, 1999), which was also the inspiration for the “day-in-the-life” paragraphs of the prologue. Eric Siegel’s book Predictive Analytics(Wiley, 2013) surveys a large number of machine-learning applications. The term big datawas popularized by the McKinsey Global Institute’s 2011 report Big Data: The Next Frontier for Innovation, Competition, and Productivity. Many of the issues raised by big data are discussed in Big Data: A Revolution That Will Change How We Live, Work, and Think, by Viktor Mayer-Schönberger and Kenneth Cukier (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2013). The textbook I learned AI from is Artificial Intelligence,* by Elaine Rich (McGraw-Hill, 1983). A current one is Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, by Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig (3rd ed., Prentice Hall, 2010). Nils Nilsson’s The Quest for Artificial Intelligence(Cambridge University Press, 2010) tells the story of AI from its earliest days.

Chapter One
Nine Algorithms That Changed the Future, by John MacCormick (Princeton University Press, 2012), describes some of the most important algorithms in computer science, with a chapter on machine learning. Algorithms,* by Sanjoy Dasgupta, Christos Papadimitriou, and Umesh Vazirani (McGraw-Hill, 2008), is a concise introductory textbook on the subject. The Pattern on the Stone, by Danny Hillis (Basic Books, 1998), explains how computers work. Walter Isaacson recounts the lively history of computer science in The Innovators(Simon & Schuster, 2014).

“Spreadsheet data manipulation using examples,”* by Sumit Gulwani, William Harris, and Rishabh Singh (Communications of the ACM, 2012), is an example of how computers can program themselves by observing users. Competing on Analytics, by Tom Davenport and Jeanne Harris (HBS Press, 2007), is an introduction to the use of predictive analytics in business. In the Plex, by Steven Levy (Simon & Schuster, 2011), describes at a high level how Google’s technology works. Carl Shapiro and Hal Varian explain the network effect in Information Rules(HBS Press, 1999). Chris Anderson does the same for the long-tail phenomenon in The Long Tail(Hyperion, 2006).

The transformation of science by data-intensive computing is surveyed in The Fourth Paradigm, edited by Tony Hey, Stewart Tansley, and Kristin Tolle (Microsoft Research, 2009). “Machine science,” by James Evans and Andrey Rzhetsky (Science, 2010), discusses some of the different ways computers can make scientific discoveries. Scientific Discovery: Computational Explorations of the Creative Processes,* by Pat Langley et al. (MIT Press, 1987), describes a series of approaches to automating the discovery of scientific laws. The SKICAT project is described in “From digitized images to online catalogs,” by Usama Fayyad, George Djorgovski, and Nicholas Weir (AI Magazine, 1996). “Machine learning in drug discovery and development,”* by Niki Wale (Drug Development Research, 2001), gives an overview of just that. Adam, the robot scientist, is described in “The automation of science,” by Ross King et al. (Science, 2009).

Sasha Issenberg’s The Victory Lab(Broadway Books, 2012) dissects the use of data analysis in politics. “How President Obama’s campaign used big data to rally individual votes,” by the same author (MIT Technology Review, 2013), tells the story of its greatest success to date. Nate Silver’s The Signal and the Noise(Penguin Press, 2012) has a chapter on his poll aggregation method.

Robot warfare is the theme of P. W. Singer’s Wired for War(Penguin, 2009). Cyber War, by Richard Clarke and Robert Knake (Ecco, 2012), sounds the alarm on cyberwar. My work on combining machine learning with game theory to defeat adversaries, which started as a class project, is described in “Adversarial classification,”* by Nilesh Dalvi et al. (Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2004). Predictive Policing, by Walter Perry et al. (Rand, 2013), is a guide to the use of analytics in police work.

Chapter Two
The ferret brain rewiring experiments are described in “Visual behaviour mediated by retinal projections directed to the auditory pathway,” by Laurie von Melchner, Sarah Pallas, and Mriganka Sur (Nature, 2000). Ben Underwood’s story is told in “Seeing with sound,” by Joanna Moorhead (Guardian, 2007), and at www.benunderwood.com. Otto Creutzfeldt makes the case that the cortex is one algorithm in “Generality of the functional structure of the neocortex” (Naturwissenschaften, 1977), as does Vernon Mountcastle in “An organizing principle for cerebral function: The unit model and the distributed system,” in The Mindful Brain, edited by Gerald Edelman and Vernon Mountcastle (MIT Press, 1978). Gary Marcus, Adam Marblestone, and Tom Dean make the case against in “The atoms of neural computation” (Science, 2014).

“The unreasonable effectiveness of data,” by Alon Halevy, Peter Norvig, and Fernando Pereira (IEEE Intelligent Systems, 2009), argues for machine learning as the new discovery paradigm. Benoît Mandelbrot explores the fractal geometry of nature in the eponymous book* (Freeman, 1982). James Gleick’s Chaos(Viking, 1987) discusses and depicts the Mandelbrot set. The Langlands program, a research effort that seeks to unify different subfields of mathematics, is described in Love and Math, by Edward Frenkel (Basic Books, 2014). The Golden Ticket, by Lance Fortnow (Princeton University Press, 2013), is an introduction to NP-completeness and the P = NP problem. The Annotated Turing,* by Charles Petzold (Wiley, 2008), explains Turing machines by revisiting Turing’s original paper on them.

The Cyc project is described in “Cyc: Toward programs with common sense,”* by Douglas Lenat et al. (Communications of the ACM, 1990). Peter Norvig discusses Noam Chomsky’s criticisms of statistical learning in “On Chomsky and the two cultures of statistical learning” (http://norvig.com/chomsky.html). Jerry Fodor’s The Modularity of Mind(MIT Press, 1983) summarizes his views on how the mind works. “What big data will never explain,” by Leon Wieseltier (New Republic, 2013), and “Pundits, stop sounding ignorant about data,” by Andrew McAfee (Harvard Business Review, 2013), give a flavor of the controversy surrounding what big data can and can’t do. Daniel Kahneman explains why algorithms often beat intuitions in Chapter 21 of Thinking, Fast and Slow(Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2011). David Patterson makes the case for the role of computing and data in the fight against cancer in “Computer scientists may have what it takes to help cure cancer” (New York Times, 2011).

More on the various tribes’ paths to the Master Algorithm in the corresponding sections below.

Chapter Three
Hume’s classic formulation of the problem of induction appears in Volume I of A Treatise of Human Nature(1739). David Wolpert derives his “no free lunch” theorem for induction in “The lack of a priori distinctions between learning algorithms”* (Neural Computation, 1996). I discuss the importance of prior knowledge in machine learning in “Toward knowledge-rich data mining”* (Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 2007) and misinterpretations of Occam’s razor in “The role of Occam’s razor in knowledge discovery”* (Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 1999). Overfitting is one of the main themes of The Signal and the Noise, by Nate Silver (Penguin Press, 2012), who calls it “the most important scientific problem you’ve never heard of.” “Why most published research findings are false,”* by John Ioannidis (PLoS Medicine, 2005), discusses the problem of mistaking chance findings for true ones in science. Yoav Benjamini and Yosef Hochberg propose a way to combat it in “Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and powerful approach to multiple testing”* (Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 1995). The bias-variance decomposition is presented in “Neural networks and the bias/variance dilemma,” by Stuart Geman, Elie Bienenstock, and René Doursat (Neural Computation, 1992). “Machine learning as an experimental science,” by Pat Langley (Machine Learning, 1988), discusses the role of experimentation in machine learning.

William Stanley Jevons first proposed viewing induction as the inverse of deduction in The Principles of Science(1874). The paper “Machine learning of first-order predicates by inverting resolution,”* by Steve Muggleton and Wray Buntine (Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Machine Learning, 1988), initiated the use of inverse deduction in machine learning. The book Relational Data Mining,* edited by Sašo Džeroski and Nada Lavrač (Springer, 2001), is an introduction to the field of inductive logic programming, where inverse deduction is studied. “The CN2 Induction Algorithm,”* by Peter Clark and Tim Niblett (Machine Learning, 1989), summarizes some of the main Michalski-style rule induction algorithms. The rule-mining approach used by retailers is described in “Fast algorithms for mining association rules,”* by Rakesh Agrawal and Ramakrishnan Srikant (Proceedings of the Twentieth International Conference on Very Large Databases, 1994). An example of rule induction for cancer prediction is described in “Carcinogenesis predictions using inductive logic programming,” by Ashwin Srinivasan, Ross King, Stephen Muggleton, and Michael Sternberg (Intelligent Data Analysis in Medicine and Pharmacology, 1997).

The two leading decision tree learners are presented in C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning,* by J. Ross Quinlan (Morgan Kaufmann, 1992), and Classification and Regression Trees,* by Leo Breiman, Jerome Friedman, Richard Olshen, and Charles Stone (Chapman and Hall, 1984). “Real-time human pose recognition in parts from single depth images,”* by Jamie Shotton et al. (Communications of the ACM, 2013), explains how Microsoft’s Kinect uses decision trees to track gamers’ motions. “Competing approaches to predicting Supreme Court decision making,” by Andrew Martin et al. (Perspectives on Politics, 2004), describes how decision trees beat legal experts at predicting Supreme Court votes and shows the decision tree for Justice Sandra Day O’Connor.

Allen Newell and Herbert Simon formulated the hypothesis that all intelligence is symbol manipulation in “Computer science as empirical enquiry: Symbols and search” (Communications of the ACM, 1976). David Marr proposed his three levels of information processing in Vision* (Freeman, 1982). Machine Learning: An Artificial Intelligence Approach,* edited by Ryszard Michalski, Jaime Carbonell, and Tom Mitchell (Tioga, 1983), gives a snapshot of the early days of symbolist research in machine learning. “Connectionist AI, symbolic AI, and the brain,”* by Paul Smolensky (Artificial Intelligence Review, 1987), gives a connectionist view of symbolist models.

Chapter Four
Sebastian Seung’s Connectome(Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2012) is an accessible introduction to neuroscience, connectomics, and the daunting challenge of reverse engineering the brain. Parallel Distributed Processing,* edited by David Rumelhart, James McClelland, and the PDP research group (MIT Press, 1986), is the bible of connectionism in its 1980s heyday. Neurocomputing,* edited by James Anderson and Edward Rosenfeld (MIT Press, 1988), collates many of the classic connectionist papers, including: McCulloch and Pitts on the first models of neurons; Hebb on Hebb’s rule; Rosenblatt on perceptrons; Hopfield on Hopfield networks; Ackley, Hinton, and Sejnowski on Boltzmann machines; Sejnowski and Rosenberg on NETtalk; and Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams on backpropagation. “Efficient backprop,”* by Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Genevieve Orr, and Klaus-Robert Müller, in Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade, edited by Genevieve Orr and Klaus-Robert Müller (Springer, 1998), explains some of the main tricks needed to make backprop work.

Neural Networks in Finance and Investing,* edited by Robert Trippi and Efraim Turban (McGraw-Hill, 1992), is a collection of articles on financial applications of neural networks. “Life in the fast lane: The evolution of an adaptive vehicle control system,” by Todd Jochem and Dean Pomerleau (AI Magazine, 1996), describes the ALVINN self-driving car project. Paul Werbos’s PhD thesis is Beyond Regression: New Tools for Prediction and Analysis in the Behavioral Sciences*(Harvard University, 1974). Arthur Bryson and Yu-Chi Ho describe their early version of backprop in Applied Optimal Control* (Blaisdell, 1969).

Learning Deep Architectures for AI,* by Yoshua Bengio (Now, 2009), is a brief introduction to deep learning. The problem of error signal diffusion in backprop is described in “Learning long-term dependencies with gradient descent is difficult,”* by Yoshua Bengio, Patrice Simard, and Paolo Frasconi (IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 1994). “How many computers to identify a cat? 16,000,” by John Markoff (New York Times, 2012), reports on the Google Brain project and its results. Convolutional neural networks, the current deep learning champion, are described in “Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition,”* by Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner (Proceedings of the IEEE, 1998). “The $1.3B quest to build a supercomputer replica of a human brain,” by Jonathon Keats (Wired, 2013), describes the European Union’s brain modeling project. “The NIH BRAIN Initiative,” by Thomas Insel, Story Landis, and Francis Collins (Science, 2013), describes the BRAIN initiative.

Steven Pinker summarizes the symbolists’ criticisms of connectionist models in Chapter 2 of How the Mind Works(Norton, 1997). Seymour Papert gives his take on the debate in “One AI or Many?” (Daedalus, 1988). The Birth of the Mind, by Gary Marcus (Basic Books, 2004), explains how evolution could give rise to the human brain’s complex abilities.

Chapter Five
“Evolutionary robotics,” by Josh Bongard (Communications of the ACM, 2013), surveys the work of Hod Lipson and others on evolving robots. Artificial Life, by Steven Levy (Vintage, 1993), gives a tour of the digital zoo, from computer-created animals in virtual worlds to genetic algorithms. Chapter 5 of Complexity, by Mitch Waldrop (Touchstone, 1992), tells the story of John Holland and the first few decades of research on genetic algorithms. Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine Learning,* by David Goldberg (Addison-Wesley, 1989), is the standard introduction to genetic algorithms.

Niles Eldredge and Stephen Jay Gould propose their theory of punctuated equilibria in “Punctuated equilibria: An alternative to phyletic gradualism,” in Models in Paleobiology, edited by T. J. M. Schopf (Freeman, 1972). Richard Dawkins critiques it in Chapter 9 of The Blind Watchmaker(Norton, 1986). The exploration-exploitation dilemma is discussed in Chapter 2 of Reinforcement Learning,* by Richard Sutton and Andrew Barto (MIT Press, 1998). John Holland proposes his solution, and much else, in Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems* (University of Michigan Press, 1975).
