This video was sponsored by CuriosityStream,
home to over 2500 documentaries and nonfiction titles for curious minds.
Here we have the graph of sine of sine x plus cosine y equals cosine of sine x y plus cosine x.
And although it looks crazy, it actually has some interesting applications.
No, I'm just kidding. Or maybe I'm not. But as far as I know, I'm just kidding.
Now, the reason I'm showing this is really because it's funny.
And the only reason I was able to find this curve was because it was in a book called Curse
for the Mathematically Curious, which is a more technical book, but for the math enthusiasts,
you may enjoy it. Anyways, several curves and mathematics do have applications.
I'll get to more advanced ones later, but we learned several of these in high school, right?
Like parabolas or sineusoids or logarithms and more like that.
But often just any randomly picked curve doesn't really have applications or at least
not obvious ones. It just looks pretty or cool or really weird or it has some unique property.
For example, take the wirestross function. I hope I'm pronouncing that correctly.
This is a curve that's continuous everywhere, but differentiable nowhere.
If you've taken calculus, you know a curve like this with a sharp corner or one with a cusp
is continuous, but not differentiable at that sharp point.
Well, this function is continuous. There are no holes or brakes anywhere, but again,
differentiable nowhere. So you can kind of say it's infinitely jagged.
And if you zoom in, you see it behaves like a fractal.
This isn't super applicable, but it was the first function discovered to have this
continuous everywhere differentiable nowhere property.
Even less useful though is the Einstein curve. It's a very simple set of parametric equations.
I'm sure everyone can understand this. And what you get when you plot it is Einstein.
I just found this on Wolfram Alpha, but the fact that even a computer could determine this is
quite impressive. And they have more like the Santa curve or the warrior pose yoga curve and so on.
So not very applicable, but definitely artistic. However, there is a kind of curve that has
applications when it comes to art like Photoshop and video editing software and more like that.
And those would be Bezier curves. Now this is an entire family of curves that's found based on
a certain number of control points. For example, with two control points, we can construct a
linear Bezier curve, which isn't too exciting. But with three control points, we can make a
quadratic Bezier as follows. First imagine two extra points moving from one to two and then two
to three respectively in the same amount of time. Those spinning numbers are basically percentages
of the completed path and they always match. Now I'm going to do the same thing again,
but add in a third dot that moves along that purple connecting line from one end to the other,
also in the same amount of time. The path that dot traces out is a quadratic Bezier curve.
Then for a cubic Bezier, you need four control points with
a bunch of other connecting points slash lines that follow. This then continues to higher order
curves, which I won't show. And it does just take watching these a few times to see how they work.
Credit to Jason Davies for coding this by the way, very useful.
One thing to notice is that the location of the control points determines what the curves will
look like entirely. And also in most cases, the curves in red don't touch every single one of
those control points, like this one for that quadratic Bezier. Now, if we have these four
points, the associated cubic Bezier curve would be this here. It might not touch points two and
three. However, if we draw tangent lines just at the ends here, then those will always intersect
some other points. And this makes it a little easier to predict the look of these curves,
because if I move one point around, then we still get that same behavior.
Taking this to computer graphics in Premiere Pro, when I use the pen tool and just click
two points, then I get a linear Bezier curve. But instead, if I click once and then click and drag
a second time, I get a quadratic Bezier, which is defined by these three points. No, that fourth
one doesn't do anything yet. And then I can adjust the shape however I want. But that fourth point
does come in when I click and hold again, because now we get a cubic Bezier curve defined by these
four points. So what we have here is a quadratic attached to a completely separate cubic Bezier
curve, kind of like a piecewise function. These two points are this for two totally different
curves. But by forcing them to both be on this tangent line and move together, then we don't
have to worry about a corner here. It'll always be smooth. And believe it or not,
cubics and quadratics are the main curves you'll see in computer graphics. Connecting them together
over and over allows for much more complex shapes. And since a Bezier curve is defined
by the location of those control points, placing them strategically allows us to create basically
whatever we want. And yes, this is used to create fonts, computer graphics and more.
That might have been a new type of curve for some of you, but this next one will probably be more
familiar. And that's the Lemnis gate. Although you've probably never seen it like this.
The Lemnis gate is basically a figure eight. But here we have a specific kind called the
Lemnis gate of Bernoulli. It has two focus points. And mathematically, this is defined as all the
points where if you take the distance from each focus and multiply those values together,
you get some constant, regardless of where you are on the curve. But you can also make the shape
like this. First, we attach a rod from the left focus to zero comma one, then from there to zero
comma negative one, and from there to the other focus to get this linkage here. Now imagine the
focus points are pinned, they cannot move, but the other joints can. Since the rods are rigid,
then this one can only move along this circle that goes off screen. And this other one can only move
along this circle. Now if you put a dot in the center of that yellow rod and allow everything
to rotate, that dot will sweep out the Lemnis gate of Bernoulli.
This is common in robotics, for example, to look at all the connections and see what path is swept
out by some point. And one famous example of this is Watts linkage. Here's the animation you'd find
on Wikipedia. The configuration consists of three rods, and with this setup, the center point can
only move in a nearly straight line up and down. This was actually used in Watts pattern for the
steam engine in the late 1700s. And still this day, the linkage applies to suspensions for different
types of vehicles to ensure there's no horizontal motion. Now another curve you can create with
something physical is the cycloid, as this is the path that one point on a wheel traces out.
I'm sure many of you know where this is going, but this relates to the Brachistochrone curve.
This curve answers the question of, given two points at different heights, what shape slide
with no friction minimizes the time it takes for an object to slide from point A to point B?
Naturally, many people say the shortest path or a straight line, but that's not the answer here.
Even putting a straight drop in the beginning, which does increase length, actually reduces time.
But the absolute minimum time comes when you take a piece of that cycloid, flip it upside down,
and make it bigger here, and use that as the slide. That shape will win every single time.
Now this is derived through something called the calculus of variations.
In calculus one, you learn how to find points that have maximum or minimum y values, where
if you just move a bit in any direction from that spot, the y value in this case decreases.
Well, calculus of variations is used when you need to find entire curves that have an optimal
something. That something could be distance, where this straight line is a minimum,
or it could also be time, where the Brachistochrone curve is a minimum.
And if you wiggle that curve in any way, the associated time would guaranteed go up,
meaning the original curve is in fact the minimum.
But it's not just time and distance you can optimize. For example, take the catenary curve.
I've talked about this before, but still real quick. If you asked a typical high school student
what shape this makes when you have a cable hung from two fixed points, I think most of
them would say a parabola. And that's very close. But this actually is a catenary curve whose equation
is this here. Now how this is derived is through the calculus of variations. And that's because
this minimizes something, and that something is potential energy. I forgot to explicitly state
this, but since potential energy is a function of height, then minimizing this essentially means
a cable wants to quote hang the lowest. Okay, now back in. So if you took these two fixed points
and drew every single curve of this length, the length of the cable, or at least the part between
these two points, and drew every curve with that length going from here to here, and added up all
their potential energies at every little point, they would all have some value. But this, this
catenary curve is the one that has the minimum value. And that is the shape that the cable takes.
Besides just hanging cables, the catenary curve is seen in architecture, for example,
because of the structural properties that it offers. Now where regular parabola does show up
is when you throw an object through the air, at least near the surface of the earth. But what's
cool is even this minimizes something that can be found with a calculus of variations.
It's not obvious at all. But it turns out if you find the kinetic energy or one half mv squared
at some point, and the potential energy mgh, then subtract them, and do that for every point
along the curve, and add or really integrate the results, that value will be a minimum for this
parabolic curve. You could do the same thing for every curve that could possibly exist between
points a and b. And assuming the total time is the same for all of them, if you added up all the
kinetic minus potential energies at every point, the minimum sum would be for the parabola, which
is the path the object takes. It's you a totally different way to think about motion rather than
f equals ma. Now the shortest distance between two points on some surface has a more specific name
actually. And that's a geodesic, which isn't usually very simple to find. If I asked you to
find the shortest path from point a to point b, that's not too exciting because it's obviously a
straight line. But that simplicity goes away when you have curve surfaces. So now I can't really
curve this that well, but here curve surface. If you want to find the shortest path or the geodesic
from point a to point b, requiring that you have to move along the paper, how would we find that?
Well, that isn't super easy to do. However, in this case it is, because that geodesic path is
going to be the exact same thing. And the reason for that is geodesics are preserved under certain
smooth transformations. So because I knew this was the shortest path straight line, of course,
then I know, no matter how I deformed this, this is still going to be the shortest path
from point a to point b. And I also discussed in a previous video with my candy oatmeal,
that you can wrap a piece of paper around a cylinder without having any distortion or crumbling
or anything like that. So if I wanted to find, hey, what's the shortest path from point a to
point b moving along the cylinder, it's going to be the spiral that moves along the side here.
And that's because again, I knew this was the shortest path. This is a smooth transformation
which preserves the geodesic. Therefore, this is still the shortest path. And again,
it's not easy to find these in general. But this was a big part of Einstein's general theory of
relativity, because photons, for example, travel along geodesic curves in space time.
Now on top of what we've seen so far, there are several other famous curves out there,
some applied and some just interesting, but might have to save those for another time.
For those who want to continue learning about how math applies to the real world though,
I recommend checking out CuriosityStream, the sponsor of today's video. One documentary they
have that extends beyond what we saw here is the Secret Life of Chaos, which explores the
mathematics of, of course, chaos theory. This goes into detail about some of the patterns that appear
in nature as well as mathematics itself. And you'd be surprised at so many applications there are
to chaos theory. CuriosityStream hosts thousands of other documentaries and nonfiction titles as
well. So whether you want to learn about black holes in astrophysics or future methods of
transportation, all the way to ancient history and more, this platform will have exactly what
you're looking for. It's also available on a variety of platforms worldwide, including Roku,
Android, Xbox One, Amazon Fire, Apple TV, and more. And it only comes out to $2.99 per month.
Plus, if you go to curiositystream.com slash Zach Star or click the link below and use the promo
code Zach Star, you'll get your first month's membership completely free. So no risk in just
giving it a shot. And this gives you unlimited access to top documentaries and nonfiction titles
that I know many of you will find very interesting. So again, links are below. And with that, I'm going
to end that video there. Thanks as always to my supporters on Patreon, social media links to
follow me are down below, and I'll see you guys in the next video.
