Thanks very much.
Archeology is not just about unearthing artifacts, it's sometimes about unearthing new information,
new photographs, new images in the archives, and these are just sort of a fun series of
photographs that I recently came across in the archives in the Bannoncroft Library at
University of California Berkeley, including my favorite Moevious on his first camel.
I don't know if you can work out the caption there in the lower side.
Some nice work that he was doing as a graduate student in the early 1930s at a site in Israel
called Mugaret S. School.
So as you've heard tonight is the annual Halamel Moevious Junior Lecturer.
Professor Moevious was a distinguished scholar, a curator and archaeologist here at Harvard
University.
He was really internationally recognized as a paleolithic archaeologist, but he did
a wide range of things.
This is really important.
His work ranged from the Irish Mesolithic to the sort of East Asian Lower Paleolithic
and probably most famously upper paleolithic sites such as Avery Patot in southwestern
France.
Importantly, with his appointment here in 1939 as curator in the Peabody and then later
in appointment as a lecturer in the Department of Anthropology in 1948, he was the first
paleolithic archaeologist working at Harvard.
So there's a tie-in here in that the point of me being up here is to introduce tonight's
speaker Dr. Stanley Ambrose, which I'm very happy to do.
The tie-in is twofold.
One, as I just learned, Stan is actually from the same hometown as Professor Moevious, Newton,
right here, attended UMass Boston as an undergraduate, but he was also received as PhD in 1984 at
the University of California, Berkeley, under Dr. Glenn Isaac, who then came here in 1983
as the second paleolithic archaeologist after Dr. Moevious's retirement.
So there's a nice tie-in there.
The other tie-in is that I think like Dr. Moevious and like the sort of mission of the
Harvard Museum of Science and Culture, Dr. Ambrose's research and his research interest
really cut across a wide range of different time periods.
It involves work from a wide diversity of different geographic locations, and it really
embraces a sort of natural science approach to figuring out the past, not just archaeology,
but really embracing a wide variety of different ways of thinking about reconstructing the human
past and the environment in which early humans lived.
So tonight, one part of this, as you'll hear, Professor Ambrose will be discussing the archeological
evidence for the impact of enormous volcanic eruption at Mount Toba about 74,000 years
ago and how this might have impacted human populations.
But what I want you to get a sense of is this is just one small part of what he does.
Really Dr. Ambrose's research interest range from everything from African archaeology from
the Iron Age to quite recent periods to the sort of deepest early Stone Age.
He's done work on Miocene apes, interests in the study of modern human origins more
broadly, paleoecology, human diet, using isotopes in particular, looking at sites from China,
Kenya, stone tool analysis, language, the evolution of cooperation.
The list really does go on for quite some time.
Looking at these topics, answering these questions have taken him to field sites in
Kenya, Ethiopia, India, and Australia, and I'm sure other places as we might learn.
His work has been published widely in things such as the Journal of Archaeological Science
or Nature.
He's published a number of co-authored books as well.
And perhaps not surprisingly, his research has been well funded by the National Science
Foundation in particular, recognizing his repeated innovative research projects.
So the list of accomplishments could go on for quite some time.
But I'd like to notice sort of a personal note that I've known Stan for about 15 years
now.
And during that time, I've often drawn on his sort of encyclopedic knowledge and I think
a particularly good skill of knowing a good idea from a bad idea.
And he's helped me sort of pursue the good ideas and not the bad ones quite often in
the past.
For that, I thank him.
So with that, please join me in welcoming Dr. Stanley Ambrose.
Well, thank you, Christian, for that generous introduction.
I don't know if I deserve all of it.
I hope my voice carries.
I've got a bit of a rough throat.
I should open up this water bottle.
Thank you all for coming and especially Professor Moevious's children here.
I never got to meet Professor Moevious, but I feel like I should know him.
I mention him in almost every class I teach.
And he's on my exams.
And well, there'll be no exam after tonight's talk, but I'm going to move widely.
I was looking at something that he wrote in 1948 and he actually mentions the volcanic
ash from the eruption that I'll be talking about tonight.
So this is something that was well known.
Can everybody hear me all right?
Okay, good.
Let's see where we're going.
Well, first of all, Kano in winter in erupting, this is up in the Kamchatka Peninsula.
And I'm going to talk about a much larger eruption than this and how it affected population
history and I'll try to explain to you how we go about identifying population history
from the genes and how the consequences of this eruption may have changed the environment
in ways that favored a new pathway, a new direction in human evolution.
And I like to call this new direction the troop to tribe transition.
I'd like to just define troops and tribes for you in the way that fits my real interests.
A lot of people around the world are very interested in the evolution of cooperation.
There are people on Harvard University campus writing books about how evolution favors cooperation.
I would disagree that it always favors cooperation.
We know about competition, there's a lot of writing about competition.
If we think about most of our primate relatives, they live in what we call troops that live
in closed territories.
They may have tightly knit cooperative, sometimes not so cooperative relationships within their
troop and on a regular basis they go to the boundaries of their territories and they make
noises and in the case of chimpanzees, they may actually look for lone troop members from
the adjacent troop and try to kill them.
Richard Rangham has written extensively about this, Professor Rangham here in the Anthropology
Department.
So the question is, to what extent did we have in our past a troop-like kind of organization
and when did we really break out of it?
We may not have broken out of it entirely.
So small, closed, defended territories is what I think of as troops.
Human tribes have regional networks of communities that people visit, they have relationships
between them, they can go out and visit and they can come home again.
Most primates are on a one-way trip and I'll talk about one exception later.
We have positive relationships.
We have names for people in other groups, sometimes they're fictional names.
We can talk about brothers in arms and these are important human innovation to be able
to make a symbolic name for something and then behave as if they are your brother or
your sister or your uncle, so forth.
Now modern hunter-gatherers in arid and risky environments tend to have the greatest extent
of their social networks.
This could contrast with some agricultural communities, many of them who live in very
stable environments, do you think of the Yanamamo in South American forests or Papua New Guinea?
To call them tribes is being contested by John Yellen and Henry Harpending who are also
of Harvard University here and they wrote about this in World Archaeology.
They didn't use the troop to try distinction, it's very hard to actually find mention of
this in the literature, but when we teach our anthropology courses and evolution courses
we always talk about primate troops and then we talk about two and a half million year
old stone tool using meat-eating groups.
To what extent did they have an intergroup favorable reciprocal relationships?
This question came to me in the middle of a lecture and then I realized that maybe it
wasn't as far back in time as we would necessarily assume.
So let's talk about volcanoes and a little bit of art.
This is Turner, I haven't seen the movie yet, I don't think it got any Oscars.
But in 1815, Tambora erupted in between Java and Sumatra, I think it was, and the skies
turned gloomy for several years, 1816 was a year without a summer.
These amazing sunsets and the atmospherics were incredible, it looks like Beijing where
I was about two months ago in the bottom one, pretty thick air.
A lot of things happened in that summer and Lord Byron with his guests at his summer home
on the shores of Lake Geneva wrote, this is just a little excerpt from his poem, the bright
sun was extinguished and the stars did wander, darkling in the eternal space, I won't read
the whole thing, it goes quite a long time and it gets more dismal and there's death
in it.
And one of his house guests was Mary Shelley and Mary Shelley created this story then.
I won't attribute it entirely to the volcano.
This is what happens to the atmosphere when a large low latitude, high explosive eruption
occurs that has a lot of sulfur gases in the mix.
This was Pinatubo and you can see the distribution of the sulfur gas as it went around the world
over 12 weeks.
It was the largest sulfur exhalation and it went up about 20 miles into the stratosphere
and spread around the world for a couple of years at least, there was a one degree temperature
drop, Tambora was quite a bit more severe with a larger eruption.
Now I got involved with this when I saw this paper that was published in Nature in 1992
by Michael Rampino and Steven Self and they proposed that the eruption of Toba in Sumatra,
73, 74,000 years ago, it's the largest crater lake in the world right now, produced enough
sulfuric acid that was in the stratosphere to reflect sunlight for five to six years
and cause a volcanic winter just like the nuclear winter scenarios that were popular
in the 80s and they're still being modeled and considered.
Billions of tons of sulfur were ejected into the stratosphere according to them and it
may have initiated the last glacial era at 70,000 years ago.
The climate records were not very detailed then but that was the idea.
They become much more detailed and we'll look at some of them and the volcanic ash was found,
here's Toba down here, volcanic ash was found halfway across the Indian Ocean.
One of my mentors at Berkeley in grad school was Desmond Clark.
He went to India in 1980 and 81, 82 with a little team when they couldn't go to Ethiopia
to find early hominids and early archaeological sites and Martin Williams, who I've worked
with in India and in Kenya and in Australia now, found a volcanic ash layer halfway across
India and it turned out to correlate and it looks like India was covered with at least
10 centimeters of volcanic ash.
We'll talk a little bit more about that later.
How big was the eruption?
The eruption happened new date 73,880 years ago.
That's a nice date.
When I saw the talk that this table came from, I was about to fall asleep and then I saw
that Toba produced 800 cubic kilometers.
The estimate was in 1990, 1992, 800 cubic kilometers of rock blasted into the atmosphere
and the total eruptive volume has been estimated to be 2,700 cubic kilometers.
That's a lot.
So that was in 1992 and by the year 2002, the ash had been found, I think, out into
the Arabian Sea.
So it was getting bigger as more research was being done.
There's Yellowstone at about the same scale for comparison.
The eruptions, the super eruptions from Yellowstone.
Now by 2008, they started thinking it was even bigger and you can see Pinatubo's ash
fall area and Tambora the year without a summer.
That looks pretty big.
In 2012, ash was discovered and chemically fingerprinted fairly precisely.
In two cores drilled into the muds in the bottom of Lake Malawi.
That gets us to about 21 million kilometers square and probably closer to 2,000 cubic
kilometers of a dense rock equivalent.
Even out here in the Indian Ocean, about the same distance as across the United States,
it was up to 34 centimeters thick.
That's a little bit more than a foot thick, 14 inches.
That's amazing.
The Yellowstone ash has never been found east of the Mississippi despite the prevailing
winds.
It's getting bigger.
In April last year, it was reported all the way down there in the south coast of South
Africa.
Near the bottom of a sand layer that occurs for maybe 100 miles along the coast.
This wind-blown sand layer seems to represent an interesting climatic event.
I'll come back to the cultural changes that seem to be marked by this sand layer.
The search is now really on for finding this ash just about everywhere.
It's hard to find it because it's little individual cryptic shards of glass.
But there's no volcanoes in South Africa.
They can be chemically fingerprinted with microscopic techniques.
Here's the, this is called the two-mile time machine.
Every core that's drilled into the ice in the Arctic can go down about two miles before
the ice gets very deformed and you lose a detailed climate record.
But you can get annual layering.
This is the second mile down.
The first mile covers 10,000 years of a Greenland ice core.
Second mile covers 110,000, 120,000 years.
When the curve goes down, we're looking at low oxygen isotope ratios.
That's cold.
When it goes up, we're looking at warm.
The last 10,000 years, 12,000 years is just at the top of the graph and it stays that
way to the present.
A warm wet period where ice is accumulated rapidly.
What's interesting is that Toba produced enough sulfuric acid to leave a very large
patch of a very acidic ice, sulfuric acid, haze that finally precipitated out.
And it was already in an ice age.
So we can get a simple answer to Rampino and Self's question, did it cause the last
ice age?
The last ice age was pretty much all the way there.
However, it went a little further.
So these ups and downs, pairs of them are called Greenland events and there, the S stands
for stadial.
There's a little I there that stands for interstadial.
The I's are warm, the S's are cold.
So that's the interstadial, stadial.
And that was stadial 20.
Now it definitely did not cause the last ice age because after 1800 years of the coldest,
temperatures recorded in 123,000 years worth of ice, it got abruptly warm, 16 degrees Celsius,
that's about 27 degrees Fahrenheit, increase in warmth.
So again, this eruption may have done something to exacerbate the cold here, make it the coldest
of one of these instant ice ages, and that's what I call them, lasted 1800 years, but didn't
cause the last ice age.
Last ice age then came, and it's from about 70,000 to 60,000 years ago.
That's a long time for almost unrelenting cold, a few little blips of warm, and that's
the last glacial maximum as it's commonly known when the mammoth hunters were killing
off the last of the woolly mammoths.
It was colder, it was a tough time, and the people weren't as technologically sophisticated
or so we may think back then.
So I call that marine isotope, I don't call that, it's been called marine isotope stage 4.
This is marine isotope stage 5, a predominantly warm and wet period.
But this is the flickering switch of last glacial climate.
This is a stage of predominantly cold, stage 3 is predominantly warm, stage 2 sort of dips
down into what we call the last glacial maximum, and then the last 10,000 years is warm.
So Toba erupted after the onset of one of these instant ice ages, and you could argue
that it made it the coldest and stayed cold.
So if we look in detail at it, we can see the sulfur in centimeter by centimeter of
the ice at a depth of about 2,591.05 meters, that's about two miles down.
And that's the most sulfur in the core, so whoops, going backwards.
I thought this was an arrow pointing to where the sulfur spike was, but it's actually the
height of the sulfur spike, and it's six years wide.
And there's more later.
Dust increases dramatically as well during this 1,800 year period, and then dust drops
away when that warm period comes, interstitial 19, and then we go for 10,000 years of that
very cold period with lots more dust, very little vegetation to hold the soil down, very
cold at that time.
This is just a bit of a detail on it.
So this is just to emphasize that the eruption didn't cause a cold period, but I think it
may have exacerbated it.
Now I've done some research in India, as I mentioned.
This is the Saan River, Narmada, and that's near Rajasthan, volcanic ash has been found
in many, many more places than this, but these are places that I've done work on the volcanic
ash.
This is where Toba is, and I'll just show you a few of these places.
This is the type site where Martin Williams, with his grad student, Royce, they came upon
that pale layer there, and Martin said to Royce, if this was Ethiopia, that would be
a volcanic ash.
I'd better take a double sample, and he did.
Then we came back when I developed my specialty of analyzing soils, and we cleared off a nice
section and sampled.
That's Parth Chauhan, and part of our team there, and I'm working with him elsewhere.
He's at about the top of the volcanic ash.
It's a little bit brown here, a little bit upriver.
The ash actually is pretty pure down to the bottom, gets reworked, and the soil is ashy
all the way up to there.
That's my behind.
Sampling the soils for analysis.
There's a close up of the ash.
It's bright white, 10 centimeters across India, and probably elsewhere.
You know what happens when bright white stuff falls on the ground around here?
This doesn't melt.
It reflects sunlight.
That's called albedo.
It's reflectance.
Ice and snow have high reflectance.
This bright white ash could have helped the cooling.
The aerosol, parasol gas, so to speak, the fine mist that was ejected, the sulfuric
acid is white, makes a white haze that is an effective reflector of sunlight.
That's why big volcanic eruptions cause global cooling.
They have to be low latitudes because that's where most of the sunlight falls to really
have an impact.
October was low latitude.
Chemical fingerprint was distinctive and identified all over the place.
One of the things I do is I analyze the carbon in soils, not the carbon-14, the carbon-13,
which is not radioactive, and it's ratioed to the common carbon, carbon-12.
Here has given us a nice natural label, like a tracer that, in biomedicine, they'd give
you a radioactive tracer.
There's a natural tracer.
These are low 13C content plants.
They include trees and shrubs and rice and wheat and potatoes and non-tropical grasses.
These are called C4 plants, and they have much higher carbon-13 content, and there's
nothing in between, and they are mainly tropical grasses.
If we have a warm forest in the tropics and it's wet, we get 13C values of the soil that
look like this.
If it's a dry open grassland, we get 13C values that look like this in the organic carbon.
Calcium carbonate, the same stuff that chalk and limestone is made out of, forms in the
soil, and it also acquires the carbon isotope ratios of the plants.
That is offset by 14, so we can move the numbers here to be 14 for 100% woody plants, herbs,
trees, forest, and somewhere around zero to a little bit more for grasses.
I've done some analyses at three sites, and these are three separate sites in their graphs.
I've shown you these two, and that's 500 centimeters above the base of the ash, and then it goes
down to about 200 centimeters below the ash.
Each of these graphs goes from trees to grass.
Let's see if I've got that labeled here.
There we are.
These are all of the sites where we excavated and sampled soils.
The carbon isotope ratio of the soils underneath the ash showed forest.
One exception, that one bit.
Inside the ash and near the top of the ash, whoops, going the wrong way.
This helps.
13C values shifted up with more grass.
This really long section stayed with lots of grass for a considerable time, maybe 2,000
years.
We don't know exactly.
Soils above the ash supported C4, grassy woodland to grassland.
Put simply, the eruption fell on a very forested landscape, over 400 kilometers that we sampled,
and after the eruption, there was grassland.
Central India was deforested by the Toba eruption.
Now, what are some of the broader impacts?
We can go to the fossil record closer to Toba, Southeast Asia, and Lois has identified about
11 or 12 large mammal extinctions, either total extinctions or regional extinctions.
What really is interesting to me is that orangutans used to live on mainland Southeast Asia.
Their last appearance date is somewhere around the time of Toba.
Orangutans really don't do well on the ground.
They have four arms, they don't really have legs, and that's just one of the species.
He says it's not significant.
That's 12 more extinctions than I've ever said happened.
Now, let's switch from the paleontology and talk about genetics.
As long ago as 1972, the geneticists studying the patterns of genetic diversity observed
that there wasn't enough genetic diversity in humans alive today to account for the amount
of time we've had a fossil record of humanity.
And John Hay and John Maynard Smith proposed that about five times the age of the origins
of agriculture, which gets us to about 60,000 to 70,000 years old, there was a long period
of very low population size where much of the genetic diversity was lost.
And there have been a small number of mutations accumulating since that period that differentiate
people.
But most of the mutations that we should see, the genetic diversity we should see, is missing.
So that was a mystery.
It goes all the way back to 1972.
So this just happens to be a period from when Toba, all the way up through marine isotope
stage four, that early glacial maximum, they didn't know anything about this.
Now, this is how geneticists just pretend I'm a tree, okay?
I had to give a talk once where I had no graphics and I just, you know, nothing to show on.
And I said, well, just pretend, imagine I'm a tree.
This is a tree that's growing.
It's not lost any branches.
And the lineages, so to speak, each branch has survived for a very long time.
So to get back to the common ancestor of this tips of the branches and those tips of the
branches, you have to go way down to the trunk.
It's down in the lower garden there.
It's in Kenya, but it's a tree from India.
It makes a lovely shade.
This is a jacaranda that was trimmed and it's got three main trunks.
It once had long branches, but now with the decimation, new sprouts have come up all at
about the same time.
Now, we can imagine if a human population or any animal species or even plant species
population is reduced to a small number, then they become the progenitors of everybody afterwards.
And if you measure the length of these, you can say from this branch tip to that branch
tip divided by two, knowing the growth rate gets us back to about the time of the chopping.
And then to get to another main trunk, you have to go much further.
This is the picture of Africa, actually.
There's a lot of different main branches and subdivisions that all coalesce to large trunks
and then the large branches coalesce to a main trunk.
On one of these side branches here, two of these wisps account for everybody outside
of Africa.
I'll show you that.
But let's do a little simulation here.
I'm going to teach you how we can turn a theoretical family tree, one ancestor, two ancestors,
and then these four sisters, if we can say these are females, give rise all at about
the same time, maybe when the climate got good, to a bunch of people, lineages that
have survived to the present.
Each of these little X's would be a mutation along a lineage that differentiates them.
And you could cut up the number of mutational units that separate this person from the other
49 and do these pairwise comparisons and then calculate some statistics and get a frequency
distribution of the number of pairwise differences.
If there was a population explosion at seven mutational units of time in the past, then
you get this kind of a hump, wave-like distribution.
So population expansions make waves that look like this.
Let's look at some humans and apes.
So if the expansion was recent, there might only be instead of seven site differences,
there might be two or three.
And we could call this a rake-like expansion of rake-like family tree, but with short times
means a recent expansion.
Only a few mutations have accumulated in all the lineages from the ancestral lineage.
If it was further back in time, we would get longer tines on the rake, and there would
be little sub-tines poking out.
Okay.
So here we have three branches within the western chimpanzees that have exploded at about the
same time.
So we could call these clades or branches.
So we have three nested clades within the western chimpanzees.
They coalesce back to Nigerians.
Eastern chimpanzees have one big expansion.
Central chimpanzees don't look like they expanded.
There have been stable populations that have had lineages that have survived for a long
time.
This is 811 humans from around the world.
Not much genetic diversity at all, less than the eastern chimpanzees.
And here's where Neanderthals fit in.
Okay.
So eastern chimpanzees, which live in the most ecologically sensitive areas, most likely
to get their forests dried up during ice ages, have the smallest genetic diversity among
the chimps, almost like humans.
And here's what it looks like when we turn it into that wave-like distribution, the frequency
distribution.
Modern humans almost know genetic diversity.
Eastern chimpanzees, an interesting little bump here, won't have time to talk about that.
Central, Nigerian, western chimpanzees, gorillas.
So we look like we're missing most of our genetic diversity around the world.
If we compare different human populations, take the nested clade approach, we can see
that the people in Africa that belong to a maternal group that's been called L has the
greatest number of genetic differences among people.
If we compare people from southern, eastern Asia, Australasia, including Australians and
Melanesians and so forth, they have slightly more genetic diversity than northern Eurasians.
And we can put a time of the beginning of the expansion, this peak here, in terms of
number of mutational units and how much time it took those mutations to accumulate.
This is about 70, 60, and 50,000 years ago.
So that's an interesting thing.
Populations expanding sometime about after Toba erupts, and then these populations are
expanding out of Africa at the end of that very cold marine isotope stage four that was
very cold from 70 to 60.
So the reconstruction that's been made of this is that people out of this subgroup of
the L lineage went across the south end of the Red Sea, the Babel Mandeb Straits called
the Gates of Tears, and another subpopulation of this L3 went out across the Sinai.
And the ones that went out across the Sinai we call N subgroup, and the ones that went
out across the south end of the Red Sea are in the M subgroup of the L3 of East Africa.
Now they originated in East Africa.
The most diverse branches of these M's and N's are in Kenya, Tanzania, and Ethiopia.
So everybody outside of Africa is not just an African.
They're an East African.
Very different from the West African L0s, 1s, and 2s.
So this is the whole family tree on the maternal DNA.
Goes back to 200,000 years.
Here's our L3 and a little bit of L4.
And these two little subbranches of L3 are the non-Africans.
There's more genetic difference between individuals in a single African village than there is
between people from Asia, Japan, all the way to Iceland, from Australia to Iceland.
Okay.
Oh, yeah, one more thing about this.
Lots of lineages, these are major lineages, were founded in this period around 80,000
to 70,000, 60,000 years ago.
The genetic dating is not very tight.
It's got big error margins.
So other populations, other species that have gone through population expansions from small
sizes include chimpanzees, the Eastern chimpanzees, lowland gorillas.
Nuclear DNA was shared between West Africa and East Africa.
Eastern and Western lowland gorillas are presently separated by thousands of miles.
They were exchanging genes 77,000 years ago.
Big surprise.
Gorillas have a bottleneck around 70,000 or expansion.
Macaque monkeys in central India, about 55,000 years.
All tigers on earth have one lucky mother, 73,000 years ago, according to the geneticists
Luo.
And ancient DNA tells us about cave bears in their population history and Neanderthals.
That was a big surprise.
Let's look at Neanderthals.
First we'll just look at orangutans.
So there's fossil orangutans that gone.
Let's compare Borneo to Sumatra and orangutan genetics.
There, that's a garden rate that looks like it's been worn down to a stub.
Hardly any distance between all of the individuals, genetic distance.
So the length of these teeth is practically zero.
And it turns into this pair-wise frequency of just a few differences.
The Sumatran ones, it's a funny way of drawing it, but to go from this patch of orangutan
DNA sequences to that one, you have to go all the way back to there.
And they're the ones that are scattered out here with many genetic differences between
pairs of individuals.
So let's look at Neanderthals.
This paper was published in Science, well this is just the cover story.
Neanderthal bones and their DNA has been giving up their DNA for a couple of decades now.
And some of them now go off this map.
And this covers Western Europe.
These are all Neanderthals that died, radiocarbon dated somewhere around 40, 45,000 years ago.
East Toba eruption.
The ones that have yielded their DNA, these are all very closely related.
And you can see Africans here for comparison.
Very deep branches in the African DNA, there's our L3.
And you can see that the M and N are just subsets of the whole L3, non-Africans.
So we are all East Africans unless we're from West Africa or South Africa.
So this paper was published in 2012 with more DNA sequences.
And you can see this short-time garden rake kind of distribution.
They're dead by about 40,000.
Their common maternal ancestor for all of them in Western Europe lived 60,000 years ago.
Coincidentally, the end of that very cold period.
Marine isotope stage four.
So this population expanded.
There are the dates, it's maybe hard to see.
And they lived for 20,000 years.
It was about 43,000 years ago when people from Africa made it that far into Western Europe.
So Western Europe was depopulated according to the geneticists.
Sometime in the early last Ice Age and repopulated 60,000 years ago.
I kind of like this.
What were Neanderthals like?
How well did they behave?
Everything you thought about them was true.
And that includes me.
I found out when I graduated high school that I was Neanderthal man, Newton high.
Okay, the fossil record of them, the archaeological record of them is not pretty.
There's lots of interpersonal violence and trauma.
This is a painting from reconstruction of what was going on at Krapina in Croatia.
Where they had 49 individuals, most of whom were butchered.
He's cradling somebody's head in his lap.
This one's breaking open the femur.
This guy's chewing on another long bone of one of his neighbors.
We're very nice to each other.
Most archaeological sites have little scraps of Neanderthal bone that have traces of burning cut marks and hammer marks on them.
You don't hear about most of these.
You hear about the full skeletons that are severely arthritic, traumatized, healed bones, broken bones, re-healed, lots of nasty stuff.
Cannibalism.
They used stone tools that you would imagine you could find, not just imagine, you can find the geological sources.
Within the home range of a hunter-gatherer in a relatively rich territory.
They don't look like they were planning their predation very well.
The arguments about how much they scavenged versus hunted.
They had small home ranges by the stone tool site to source distances.
They engaged in strenuous activities for most of the day.
Giving them all this arthritis.
They had short lifespans.
It's been argued that they didn't live long enough to be grandparents.
And that's important for social learning, I think, and for survival.
They carried around stone tools that archaeologists loved to classify.
And I'm a primary practitioner of Professor Movious's craft and skill.
So I know just how disappointing some of these tool kits can be, the early ones,
because it's easier to say what they did to a rock than what you call it.
Later in time, you can look at artifacts and say, ah, that's a type 22, no doubt about it.
They seem to have been strongly territorial.
Were they like chimpanzee troops?
That's the question.
Now, let's look at some of the archaeology I've done just very briefly.
I've been working in Kenya for a long time, about 40 years.
These two areas are lots of fun.
This is one of the sites in the southern area along the Intuka River.
And down here at the bottom, there's a volcanic ash you can't really see.
It's not the Tobash.
It's about 52,000 years down there.
We get some of these large, generalized, all-purpose tools,
like this large spearhead-sized, big knife thing, and little small blade segments.
Very sharp obsidian volcanic glass comes from about 70, 80 kilometers away.
These are all-purpose tools.
These are highly specialized, displacable, replaceable, disposable things.
The big ones are a jack-of-all-trades kind of tool.
And we can see the rise after a quarter million years ago to about 105,000 years ago.
Suddenly, in the last Ice Age, we start to see lots of this obsidian,
which is coming from quite a distance, 60 to 100 kilometers from the archaeological sites,
shooting up to as much as 65% of the artifacts in the bottom of that section I just showed you.
That means a lot of interaction over long distances.
In South Africa, in that site where the volcanic ash was found at Pinnacle Point,
directly above the sand layer, we find the same kinds of blade segments,
the disposable, sharp, easily replaceable, thin, fragile tools.
They're replacing these thick, robust tools that you could use for all kinds of circumstances.
I've made the argument that these are very effective because they're very sharp.
They're easy to replace.
You can make specialized toolkits, and you can bring along the right replacement parts
if you've planned out your day, your activities.
Neanderthals, Stephen Kuhn at the University of Arizona said,
their toolkits look like they were planning for the unanticipated,
planning for the unplanned, big tools that they could modify as needed when they encountered something.
So that's quite different.
Well, that's enough archaeology for now.
How do we survive?
Why did Neanderthals die out?
That's the real important question here.
I'm sorry.
I can't think of Neanderthals after looking at the totality of the evidence
that they were much different than Mad Max beyond Thunderdown.
Tina Turner, Mel Gibson, well, I won't say anything about Mel,
but he's got that kind of reactionary us against them kind of mentality.
So Neanderthals faced off to modern humans.
What was the advantage?
They're obviously a lot stronger than us.
I think that humans before Tova didn't have this long-distance transport
of the archaeological materials that show that they got outside of their home ranges
and came home again very often.
There's small amounts, but not a lot.
And I would say they were more cooperative afterwards.
Neanderthals never were.
Last archaeological sites made by Neanderthals look like the one the quarter million years ago.
The archaeologists who work on these throw up their hands and say,
well, they just didn't change.
It didn't matter what the climate was.
And it must have been just the right thing, you know, like bacteria.
They've really worked it out.
They've got the all-purpose toolkit.
Now, I think that one of the most important things about modern people is
that they have these social relationships.
And they cement these ties with gifts and symbolic things.
I'm wearing some beads now that were a gift.
This woman is wearing her social capital, 25 Bushman exchange partners
that she's had for most of her life.
And this just is a marker that she has friends she's trusting.
She cooperates, she reciprocates, she gives as much as she receives.
These are the kinds of people you want in a tough environment
where you're all in the lifeboat.
This is really important.
We see she's wearing a lot of ostrich egg shell beads.
They go back 50,000 years.
I've dug up these.
They're older than 40,000 years old in the Kenya Rift Valley.
And these simple little things, they're really tiny.
That's a one-inch pin down there for scale.
May have been the first formal tokens.
I called them small things remembered.
Let's just move this over here.
And these people have these chains of relationships.
The attitude that lots of archaeologists have when they look
at the archaeological record is that it's always us versus them,
a zero-sum game.
But there's a new math.
If I give to you, it's not my loss.
I'm multiplying.
If two people cooperate, one person
may just be able to feed themself and their family maybe.
Two people, three people cooperating.
They can feed the whole camp.
So 1 plus 1 may equal 3, 4, or 5.
There's no negative in reciprocity.
But if you cheat, you may get shunned.
So rather than your gain is my loss,
we might want to think about Yates.
And I think this is a way they thought about the world, and they do.
They go out of their way to try to make new relationships with people.
Here, take this.
It's a gift.
I want you to have it.
This was told to me by Ed Wilmson, who worked among the Bushmen.
It's yours.
I want you to have it.
Don't you forget it.
So that's where we are.
I would argue that during the really tough times brought on
by this Toba eruption, especially the first 1,800 years,
people in Africa worked out systems of reciprocity, trust,
and cooperation that Neanderthals never did.
And with the cooperation sharing and exchange of information,
they could make those toolkits that look like the right tools for the job.
Neanderthals don't look like they had an information sharing-based use
of the landscape.
I call this a culturally constructed landscape.
They know where to go and what to do on the landscape because they've
got information that they've gotten shared through cultural mechanisms,
language, through friendships, their networks.
Neanderthals don't look like they had these networks.
They probably spoke in the imperative.
They didn't have these extended social landscapes.
If they left home, they were dinner.
So it looks like they developed the original social security system
as the best way I can describe it with reciprocal gift exchange.
So I'm pinning, based upon the archaeology,
where we see the hard evidence for extended social landscapes
in stone tools that have traveled further than the distance of the diameter
of 100 gatherers territory, even in the driest environments.
That's where I pin this troop to tribe transition.
So this also helps facilitate the exploitation of very risky habitats.
You can go out somewhere knowing you have a safety net to come back to.
If resources fail, you can move in with your friends.
A lot of this networking is about reciprocal rights of access
to each other's territories without getting shot.
So this would also allow expansions out of Africa.
So the timing out of Africa, 60 to 50,000 years ago, fits with this.
They worked out the system.
They did all the R&D in Africa.
And what we think of is it was upper paleolithic mammoth hunters
and painters making beautiful blades and art, fancy tools.
Those things go back 30,000 years earlier in Africa.
So cooperative tribes could outcompete Neanderthal troops.
Now, I'm not sure if I have more time.
Christian, I could cut it off here.
And because what I'm going to do now would take you
in a completely different direction.
Is it all right?
All right, here we go.
The biology of cooperation.
I was stunned with the epiphany when I read a paper in Scientific American
in July 2008 about oxytocin, the love hormone, the trust hormone.
And that there are genes that underlie the susceptibility to the influence
of these pro and antisocial hormones.
And they vary among individuals.
And they're widespread throughout the animal kingdom, vertebrate animals.
And even invertebrates.
They are things like oxytocin.
Some variants of serotonin and vasopressin are more pro-social.
Testosterone is an antisocial one.
Fill her up with testosterone.
We know about that.
Each hormone system does have actually pro and antisocial variants.
Some people are totally resistant to the effects of oxytocin.
Others, I think that the used car salesmen might be spraying it around their offices.
Some people are suckers.
And you can, in the laboratory, make them more generous, more accepting of less
generous offers, more tolerant, and more likely to give.
Some don't do it at all.
Did Neanderthals have mainly antisocial variants of these hormones?
Were they more predominant prior to TOBA?
We'll see if we can figure this out.
Did frequencies of pro-social genes increase in Africans during the bottleneck?
The time when you need the most trust and cooperation?
If you were living in a very, very small population, I didn't tell you that
geneticists say that the genetic diversity of today could be accounted for by 5,000
breeding-aged females 70,000 years ago.
You could multiply that by six for parents, non-reproductive males and females, 60,000
people.
It is enough to account for the genetic diversity of the whole planet, a little bit higher now
because they keep measuring more genetic diversity in Africa.
Do hormones fossilize?
Well, I don't think so.
You never know.
Biochemistry is getting great.
I was hoping to get this by answer out of the genes in the fossil bones themselves, but
most fossil bones don't have genes, genetics preserved, genes preserved, but testosterone
seems to have some interesting skeletal effects and some of the other hormones do too.
We know this clinically that it will increase the jaw length and facial height of young
boys if you give them extra testosterone during puberty, if they're having delayed puberty.
Orthodontists need to know this.
Jessamy Doman and Andrew Hill and colleagues at Yale presented this paper two years ago
at the Paleoanthropology Society, a new osteological approach to inferring social behavior, hominin
social behavior, facial indicators of testosterone level.
Indeed, there's a fossil trace of testosterone and they concluded that early Homo sapiens
and Homo neanderthalensis, so that's Homo sapiens earlier than 80,000, had elevated
levels of testosterone and maybe more male-male competition.
We know a lot about that.
High salivary testosterone is linked to masculine male facial appearance.
This is an Australian aborigine.
That's one of the most complete skeletons that was known in the early 1900s.
Marcel Boule put this together.
After learning about this face-shaped stuff, I started looking at these skulls in a very
different way as maybe the product of sexual selection.
Neanderthals have these big jutting faces.
This is a pre-Neanderthal.
Look at the third molar here, how far it's angled out.
It's as if they were trying to get that jaw out as far as they could.
It's amazing.
There's a big gap there.
We can't stick our finger behind our third molar.
The jaw ascending ramus is in the way.
They could stick a big, sharpie marker pen back there.
That's a big gap.
Why were those teeth getting pulled out?
Why was the jaw pulling out like that?
They had huge noses too, big nasal passages.
Well, how about voices?
This is a different way of looking at things.
The larynx can grow completely out of proportion to other body parts under the influence of
testosterone at puberty in human males.
Hypertrophied larynx of human males and their disproportionately low-pitched voices are
an adaptation to exaggerating body size, just like beards.
We use voices to assess physical strength and fighting ability, don't we?
I brought a heuristic device here.
With my grandchildren, I can give them a little scare if I go, I can give them shock and fright
if I go, so you musicians know, tenor sax, alto, you name it, the bigger, the vocal tract,
the super pharyngeal vocal tract, the deeper your voice.
So there's a modern human and luscious pell again.
If we keep the hyoid in the same position, that's what holds your voice box, then the
distance to wherever the lips might be out here would be quite large.
Now, we know this, that people with big lower faces have deep voices, Barry White.
And Ron Perlman, his first big role was the Neanderthal Inquest for Fire.
He has a really deep voice.
I was in, let's see, where was this?
This is Beijing.
I think, yes, that was in the Beijing Museum, across from Tiananmen Square in, just Christmas,
actually, and I just, just struck by the, the fighter, it's a full-size ceramic tricolor
statue, three-glazed statue of a fighter, and I thought, well, yeah, he looks like a
fighter.
Look at that jaw.
And if you go into all the Buddhist shrines and temples, you will see that the Buddha
is surrounded by guys with these huge lower faces and big brow ridges, even though he
has a real baby face.
They're protecting him.
Now, the last part of hormones, testosterone responses are related to facial masculinity
for competition, testosterone administration decreases generosity, okay, but oxytocin
increases trust.
Now, Professor Rangham, I think he had to leave here, he's part of this research group
and Peter Ellison as well, and most of the people on this list are just upstairs here.
Among chimpanzees, testosterone levels increase markedly during adolescence.
This is a common chimpanzee.
The bonobo, which is the, I suppose you could call them the free love hippie chimpanzees,
do not change.
Now, let's just do a little comparison here.
Bonobos, I'm calling them tribes because of the last point on this list.
Females are dominant, they have low sexual dimorphism, there's not a lot of difference
between males and females.
Females are very rare, intergroup counters are amazing, they're peaceful, they party.
The males get kind of like, but then they say, I give up, and they come together peacefully
and then they go on their separate ways, feeling good.
Sea troops, Professor Rangham here is well documented, lots of aspects of their male
aggression, he's written a whole book about it.
They have high sexual dimorphism, big canines compared to the females.
They are highly aggressive and they have these intergroup encounters that are violent and
often deadly.
A group of males will go off and patrol, they'll sit and listen, see if they can find a lone
male and then they'll kill him.
The last piece of the puzzle was published last summer, 2014.
This is supposed to be an anatomically modern human, sometimes I wasn't sure if they were
Neanderthals.
Very rugged, they're older than 80,000, at places like Shkuhul and Kafsa Cave in Israel.
Here's a post 80,000 year old skeleton.
Most of the, all the humans younger than 80,000 are much less robust.
Something happened around that time of Toba.
The hypothesis I proposed in 2010 that Toba was a strong selective force for killing off
anti-social people among the Africans in those harsh environments is quite consistent with
this.
So that's my hypothesis.
So here we are.
It's not just charisma, image and sarcasm, against more basic instincts.
I think Neanderthals spoke in the imperative.
Okay, you can fill in the caption here.
Maybe you remember this episode of Star Trek.
Kirk and his crew are captives in the Klingon ship.
And Kirk looks at him and he says, what do you think he's saying to the Klingon commander
that's going to get them out of there?
He says something to the effect.
And he turns around and he snarls at his command, his second in command.
And they start fighting amongst themselves like a big bar fight.
And these guys just steal away and go, beam me up, Scotty.
Short tempered.
Now, catastrophic theories usually put you on the fringe.
I don't have a Nobel Prize to promote something that is now widely accepted but has taken
40 years and there's still holdouts that the asteroid that hit the Yucatan Peninsula
65,000 years ago wasn't responsible for big change.
So if that asteroid didn't happen, where would we be now?
We'd be scurrying around in the underbrush and up in the tips of trees, watching out
for those snapping jaws.
So we could make the same question about what happened 73,880 years ago.
Would we still be more like primate troops than human tribes?
That's a hard question to answer because we have lots of evidence of some artistic creativity
before 80,000 years ago.
But creativity and art and pro-sociality, that's not a perfect one-to-one correlation,
so to speak.
Anyways, that's my story and I'm sticking with it.
