Lecture 3 – The Social Context That Shapes Our Talk
And welcome to Lecture 3.
In the previous lecture, we talked about shared meanings and we talked about context.
Where, when and with whom that surrounds each moment of talk and shapes the meanings of
our words and gestures.
Today we are going to discuss the biggest context of all, the context of all other contexts,
our society's culture.
It's the storehouse for all those shared meanings we need to learn so we can understand
words and gestures.
It also permeates every pore of our minds and bodies, shapes every action we take and
sound that we make.
In the process of revealing the power of culture, we will also answer two key questions.
What's wrong with those people?
And why do American tourists always whisper in cathedrals of Europe?
In our everyday talk, our cultural learning automatically provides us two things – a
perspective on life.
So we can see things as normal, typical, expected, right, wrong.
And the storehouse of knowledge about the physical and social worlds we inhabit.
In this lecture, we'll be focusing on the knowledge available to us for explaining words
and non-verbal actions.
Culture is the way of life of one generation, which is taught to the next generation so
they can see the world the right way and behave as normal members of the group.
We call this form of teaching socialization.
Culture as a perspective on life or a way of seeing – well, let's think of it as
a series of – a set of contact lenses through which we can see the world and live in the
world that we see.
When our contact lenses fit well, we don't even notice we have them on.
In fact, we take our cultural lenses, our worldview, so much for granted.
We have to travel to another part of the world that's very different from our own to find
out what we actually can't see.
And our reaction is often, well, what's wrong with those people?
Instead of, how does their culture work?
Interestingly, we almost always start with a value judgment.
A way of seeing is driven by our values.
Our lenses are built out of the ideals and actions of our society.
Actions that it considers to be right, true, and proper.
Cultural learning is never neutral.
So we can be repelled by human behavior in other societies.
Our society does this.
It communicates standards of achievement and appropriate behavior for social life in general
and for particular situations.
For life in general, the prescriptions are called values – the right, true, and proper
things for everyone.
For situation, they're called norms or rules of behavior.
They represent the general values.
And they're often attached to socially recognized positions like being a proper parent.
Or they describe action patterns that happen anywhere in the society.
Normal conversation.
The general norms for normal conversation involve appropriate quantity.
When someone speaks to you in short sentences, you're supposed to reply in about the same
length of sentences.
If they say, how are you, and you reply like it's a book, it's not appropriate.
Same thing with relevance.
What you say back to them is supposed to follow from what they say to you.
If you say something else, that's considered to be odd, not normal.
And you're supposed to respond to people in the same manner in which they're speaking.
So if they're making a joke or being light, you're supposed to take on the same mood.
Otherwise, it's considered odd or unusual.
Culture is also a store of practical knowledge, as children are socialized into understanding
how the world and people work.
The physical world, why and how the sun rises and falls every day, and the social world,
the forces visible and invisible that tie us together as a group, and why and how some
groups of people are better than others.
What language is?
Starting with the names that we give to ourselves and to other people and to our behaviors.
Our culture teaches us all this.
It teaches us how language actually works, how to string words together, how to deliver
them in ways that people will understand, how to perform effective talk.
Every society teaches it, but more importantly, every society performs it every day for children.
Because it turns out children learn language more by observation and imitation than by
exhortation.
To know how our culture works, we compare it to others.
Interestingly, at the societal level, one of the ways we have come to understand our
key values and our ways of talking has been to compare our societies to other societies.
Geert Hofstede's original study of the communication styles and habits of the employees in a very
large 100,000 plus person international firm are still quoted widely today, and they became
the basis for much of the subsequent research on intercultural communication.
He developed six dimensions along which cultures can be compared, and we're going to discuss
two of these today.
The first dimension has to do with what to talk about, values.
Individualist versus collectivist cultures.
We are an individualist culture, like Britain and many European countries.
When we need to explain how things happen, we begin with how events affect individuals,
or with how individual actions change other individuals.
There's a much greater emphasis in our culture on personal accomplishments.
Success is measured in our culture by surpassing other members of our group, standing out from
the crowd.
In collectivist cultures, many Asian societies, talk focuses more on family and community
and individual responsibility to those groups.
People want to know who your family is because that places you in the society, and then larger
issues can be discussed in terms of that place.
Success is measured by your contribution to the achievements of the group as a whole.
You stand in with your group.
You take pride in your similarity to other members of your group.
The second dimension I want to talk from Hofstein's study has to do with the norms
of appropriate manner of speech.
The dimension he used was called high expressive versus low expressive cultures.
Current psychologists call it immediacy.
The degree of perceived physical or psychological closeness that is required between people
to be effective as communicators is really what he was measuring.
In expressive cultures, talkers immediately communicate warmth, closeness, and availability.
Physical contact, touch.
In low expressive cultures, talk first, and then maybe at the end, we'll shake a hand.
Not much going on here in terms of immediate contact.
High contact cultures tend to be from warmer climates in the world, South America, for
instance, Southern Europe.
Low contact cultures seem to be found mostly in cool climates, North America, Northern
Europe.
My experience, of course, is directly related to bringing both of these parts of the world
together.
As I mentioned in a previous lecture, my wife is an Italian-Canadian, and one of the first
things I had to get used to when I joined the family was the fact that high expressiveness
and immediacy is a required way of meeting people.
What that involves, of course, is kissing everybody.
I mean everybody on both cheeks.
No more shaking of the hands and hanging back, saying, how are you, touching on the form.
No, no, no.
When you walk in, men and women alike, except the few that actually say, I don't do that,
expect that you reach forward, kiss right, kiss left, and they do the same thing.
It's amazing.
I actually at first was quite freaked out by it, but now I've really grown to like it.
Couldn't do without it.
Now we may be seen as an individualistic and low expressive culture in general, but there
are always two levels of cultural sharedness in every large society.
Our general character of the society doesn't necessarily show up at the local level.
Why?
Because everyone learns the society's values and knowledge in a general way, but they're
transmitted at the local level, the level of family and local community.
So it turns out that socialization into the culture isn't a cookie cutter.
There are sub-cultural variations within a particular community, or even a neighborhood
sometimes.
We get variations of socialization into the culture based on differences in the past
experiences of the group, differences in social and economic standing, religion, historical
and national origins of the group.
We may attribute things to individual personalities of the people who belong to that group that
are really far more about their cultural past than about their group's origins.
So to sum up this part of the lecture, our culture is a storehouse of meanings that gives
us enough stuff to create commonality, common meanings at some level with everyone we talk
to who's been brought up in the same culture, and enough stuff to adjust when others perform
differently than we do.
Stuff of talk, learning to converse, essential categories of shared meaning, words and
non-verbals, this is what our socialization provides us.
Let's talk about words first.
Now our common sense model of talk is based on words, but they're quite slippery tools.
They're essential, but they don't stand still.
The meaning our culture attaches to each sound or group of sounds is entirely arbitrary.
Words simply refer to or stand for something else.
So as a culture we have to agree on the basics and we memorize them and we make the new generation
memorize them.
So we do have a list of verbal symbols and their meanings.
In the whole culture, it's called a dictionary or from the anthropological side it's called
a cultural lexicon, it is the verbal information base of the society.
But we don't learn all the meanings of each word and each word may have a dozen or a hundred.
Discover that for yourself.
I invite you to go to any dictionary, any online dictionary, make it easy.
Look up a simple word, three letter word like run.
Now how many meanings do you think might be listed in a dictionary for a word like that?
Well if you go to dictionary.com it lists 179.
Now that should actually be kind of a problem if you think about our previous lectures on
the fact that we depend on words to deliver the meaning that we actually think is the
meaning for other people to hear.
Turns out there's lots of meanings of a formal type.
But there's also a second level of meaning we haven't thought about and that is something
we call connotation.
So the dictionary meanings are denotation, connotation represents the fact that words
may carry personal meanings for you or someone else.
Even for the members of your group but nobody else's group.
Because in fact you have a history of using them in that particular sort of way.
It means something to you and to your friends, may not mean anything to anyone else.
The multiplicity of denotative meanings plus the possibility of uniqueness of connotative
meanings are reasons for a good deal of the uncertainty in our face-to-face talk.
We simply don't pick the right meanings or when we send our messages they're interpreting
them in a different way than we would ever choose in our own minds.
Now I hope this properly complicates our simplistic, I said what I meant and I said it clearly
approach to explaining communication failures.
I hope it also reminds you of the statement from lecture two that meanings are actually
in people not in words.
Of course this is true for two reasons.
First people can choose other meanings than the ones in your head when they're listening
and two in any particular conversation in a particular context there's a lot more being
communicated than just words.
So let's talk about more than words, learning the meanings of face and body gestures.
If I asked you what had more impact on you when you were making small talk with someone
would you say it's the words they spoke, the way they sounded when they spoke those words
or the look on their face when they were speaking?
Well if you weren't clear about what their words meant you would lean heavily on how
they looked and sounded to figure out what they actually were talking about.
Albert Morabian had a truth, he had research that produced the kind of truth for applied
communications.
The impact of a message on the receiver, its perceived meaning, is based not on what
was said but on how it was said.
In situations where we're not sure what people are saying, we don't quite get the words,
we lean heavily on how they look and sound while they're saying it.
In his study about 55% of the meaning or the impact of the person came from the look on
their face and about 38% came from the tone of their voice.
Now that doesn't leave much room for the words, about 7%.
And we've been using this kind of information for many years and trying to understand how
it is that people understand and do not understand messages that are communicated to them in
face-to-face conversations.
A non-verbal seemed to operate in three ways in our face-to-face communication.
One they can affect the actual meanings being conveyed verbally, I think we communicated
that previously when we talked about Albert Moravian's work, but two, they can also shape
the type of relationship that we're creating with another person, and that came out of
our previous lecture on the model of interpersonal communication, and three, they can directly
communicate our emotions before and during talk.
So let's just talk about each of these in turns.
Nonverbals can affect words in a number of ways.
I'll mention three, but I'm sure you've noticed these before.
First of all, they can be substitutes for a verbal message.
You can come home from work after a bad day with a defeated look, a slumping posture,
drooping shoulders, and no one has to ask you how your day went.
You've already told them.
They can accent a message.
Here the nonverbal reinforces the verbal message, pounding the table to show how angry you are
while you're actually speaking in anger.
They say it twice.
Contradiction, my favorite.
A person who's about to give a speech and says they're not nervous while sweating and
pacing, or someone who shouts, I'm not angry, very contradictory.
Secondly, nonverbals shape the type of relationship you're creating with another.
How we actually look at people makes a great deal of difference about how they feel about
the connection between us.
So how long we look while we talk, eye gaze studies, the distance between us, how these
and nonverbals are called proxemics, the distance, whether or not we touch them, where
and how our voice rises and falls as we talk to them.
All of this is representative of relationship communication through nonverbals.
And it's the focus of axiom, too.
Interpersonal communication always has content and relationship dimensions.
The third aspect, of course, we need to talk about is that nonverbals simultaneously communicate
our feelings without words.
There are lists of nonverbals for all the sensory systems we talked about in lecture
two.
But for understanding talk, we're simply going to emphasize two of those.
Look on our faces and the sound of our voice.
The face is the primary site for the communication of emotional states.
And it's the primary signal system for communicating emotions.
Professor Paul Ekman has demonstrated that there are six universal basic emotions that
people everywhere in the world can recognize.
Now I'm sure you can name each of these.
Happiness, sadness, fear, anger, surprise, and disgust.
He conducted studies in different societies and pictures of faces were shown with each
of the expressed emotions, and the majority of participants in his studies, no matter
where they were in the world, named the emotions in the same way.
Now scholars at the time didn't believe this.
In fact, anthropologists argued for an entirely different view of the situation.
Not a universal sort of species-based recognition, because Ekman got his original ideas from Darwin,
but in fact for cultural relativism, where it says that every behavior is shaped by the
local culture, including the expressions of emotions.
Now to deal with this, Ekman had to have one of his own critics redo his research in another
culture and come up with an alternative explanation to assuage the cultural relatives models.
And he reconciled his findings with cultural relativism findings by talking about expression,
display rules.
The emotions are universally expressed, but people have different ways they can actually
show them.
They don't have to show them the same way at all times and all places, because display
rules for emotions are socially learned, often culturally different, and the rules about
the management of expression about who can show which emotion to whom, and when they
can do so is shaped by the cultural background of the people who are expressing them.
He actually demonstrated this in a series of interesting studies that showed when alone,
by themselves in a dark room, Japanese and American students displayed the same facial
expressions of horror and disgust in response to seeing films of, there were gories, films
of surgery and accidents, but when a scientist sat with them while they watched the films,
the Japanese students masked their negative expressions, much more so than the Americans
who just let it all hang out, no matter who was in the room.
Emotions may be universal, at least at the basic level, but their expression depends
upon where you were brought up.
Let's talk about the voice.
The voice is second only to the face and its power to instantly communicate emotional
meaning through changing sound, hesitations, shakiness, uncertainty, fear, sadness is
expressed by downward inflections, low pitch, slow speaking rate, anger on the other hand
is expressed by a wide variation in pitch, upward inflections, fast speaking rate.
I promise we'll be giving you more information on the nonverbals of the voice and the face
in future lectures, but doesn't all this sound much more complicated at this point?
I mean how do we learn all these words and nonverbals with all these multiple meanings?
It has to do with the way we learn anything while we're growing up, although it may appear
to parents that children sort of learn one thing at a time because they're told to, children
don't learn one thing at a time, they're constantly observing, internally rehearsing
words and nonverbals in bundles, in collections, in packages, for different situations.
Schemas are combinations of observed words, vocal tones, looks that are queued up by changes
in the situation, changes in the context.
Schemas are culturally provided, pre-organized sets of expectations about people and situations
that allow us to make sense of what's going on.
We don't learn things one at a time, that would be far too slow and difficult.
Think of schemas as like kind of line drawings in a child's coloring book.
They permit us to make instantaneous choices about what to put inside or outside the lines
of our understanding of reality, and over time we fill in the details of each schema
with our own experience, our own unique emotional coloring.
Since we learn them early, they kind of operate outside of our immediate awareness, but each
situation can queue up deeply learned patterns of words and actions, how to start a conversation,
how to behave, what to expect, and we can respond instantly.
So now that you know about schemas, we also now know the answer to one of the key questions
we asked early on in the lecture.
Those tourists, why do American tourists all whisper when they enter cathedrals?
Seen it happen dozens of times, 50 foot space, outside, sunny, bright, everybody's talking
on a blue streak, 50 feet later they step into the dark, cool surroundings of a cathedral,
everybody starts to whisper.
Why?
Because it's the schema for that particular context.
You shift context as you step from outside to inside, inside is considered holy space,
quiet is the way you show reverence.
How do we know how to do this?
We just learned it as part of a package of behaviors that go with this situation a very
long time ago.
How deep does this kind of schematic learning go in us?
I think the best way to answer that question and to make it, I hope, as obvious as possible
that this is the way we learn most of the important reactions we have to situations is to tell
you a research story, a research story which is a study on how to handle a personal insult.
In 1996, two researchers at the University of Michigan, Cohen and Nisbet, did a rather
simple experiment to make a complex point about the depth and lasting qualities of cultural
learning.
They found a classroom at the end of a long, narrow hallway lined with file cabinets in
the basement of the social sciences building.
They filled a room at one end of this hallway with about 80 college men, 18 to 20 years
of age, had them fill out a detailed questionnaire as well as give us a live sample.
And one by one, they were let out into the hall to carry the questionnaire they filled
out to an office at the other end of it and then hand it to a staff member who would tell
them what to do in the second part of the experiment.
Now, it turns out the experiment really happened when they walked down the hall.
A man appearing to be a researcher, really just a grad student of one of the profs, brushes
by them, walks quickly ahead, stops further down and opens a file drawer.
Now, as soon as he does this, it makes the hallway too small for the student simply to
pass by easily, so when they approach them, following orders to go to the other end, they
try to squeeze by.
And as they did, the confederate appears angered by this intrusion, slams the file door closed,
turns away, jostles the student's shoulder, and under his breath, he insults him with
a rude name.
Now, all this is designed to anger the students, and it did.
As the students approached the room at the end of the hall, their faces were observed
and secretly rated for expressed anger by observers who didn't know anything else about
them, just what they saw on the face.
When they entered the room, their hands were shaken to see if their grip was any firmer
than usual, as in other means of testing their unconscious expression of anger.
They were asked for a second saliva sample, as part of the general experiment.
Saliva samples were tested for cortisol and testosterone hormones that drive arousal and
aggression.
When they were asked to complete a story where a young man called Steve is at a party and
finds his girlfriend upset because his friend Larry made a pass at her.
Shortly after that, Steve sees Larry trying to kiss her.
Question ends, if you were Steve, how would you deal with Larry?
Well, they all got angry in this experiment, and they showed it.
But about half of them got significantly more angry than the rest.
They had angrier looks, they had more intense handshakes, more violent thoughts expressed
towards Larry in the writing, and they had much higher levels of stress and aggression
hormones in their bloodstreams.
And when leaving the experiment, they had to walk down the hall again, except this time
they were suddenly faced by a very tall, large, intense guy walking very aggressively toward
them down the hall.
Everyone in the experiment stepped aside.
The average step-aside distance was about five feet.
Larry wants to get in the way of this guy.
But the really angry men didn't step back until about two feet.
So who were these guys?
Well, it turns out that's not the right question.
It didn't matter whether they were jocks or intellectuals, physically imposing or not,
whether they had one type of personal style or another.
What mattered was where they were from, not who they were as individuals.
That turned out to be the right question.
Where are these people from?
Turns out that students from the southern states were significantly more enraged by
the incident than students from the northern states.
It wasn't personal.
It was cultural.
In fact, the culture of a particular region of the U.S.
Sociologists investigating crime statistics in various regions of the U.S. have noted
that there's always been a distinctive pattern of crime in the southern states.
Murder rates are higher there than in the rest of the country, while property and stranger
crimes like muggings are far lower.
Homicides in which the South seems to specialize turn out to be those in which the victim and
the killer know each other, and they know the reasons for the crime.
Turns out that repaying an insult is the best part of it, because, of course, in the South
murder is personal.
Historians assembling the immigration and settlement data from the 1700s onward, and
anthropologists having done the fieldwork and analysis of more recent community records,
have argued that the South has a culture of honor imported to the U.S. from the highlands
of Scotland.
The Scotch-Irish, who settled in the hilly country ranging from the southern edges of
Pennsylvania to the northern edges of Georgia and Alabama, were the fourth and last great
wave of early and localtic immigration.
They liked the land they were settling in because it looked like the land they had left,
and they brought with them a culture of violent retribution for insults that led to 200 years
of family feuds and murder to sustain family reputation, many of which, by the way, went
unpunished, or were only lightly punished because of the value of manly honor that was attached
to them.
The Scotch-Irish represented the herding cultures of the contested, lawless lands at the border
of Scotland and England.
These lands were harsh, rocky country, fought over by landlords and kings for generations.
Moreover, they were herdsmen.
Land was too poor to farm, forming tight, clannish family bonds, loyalty to family, over anything
else, and violently defending their own and their clan's honor at the drop of an insult.
Now, this actually makes sense because unlike other types of agriculture where sharing of
land and water is involved, and where creating more stable and cooperative communities is
necessary, herding is a mobile.
Solitary and rather fluid form of occupation.
Your assets can easily be captured and driven off by somebody else, so herders are only
protected by their reputation for fighting.
Anyone who challenges them, their assets are their family.
A man's reputation is the core of his success in this kind of situation and his self-worth,
and his willingness to defend himself with violence is the key to getting other people
to believe.
Now, in their own monograph called Culture of Honor, Cohen and Hesbitt said they needed
measures of behavior before they could take seriously any anthropological or sociological
hypotheses about cultural differences.
They said, we examined the sequence of reactions following an insult in an effort to determine
whether Southerners become more upset by affronts and are more likely to take aggressive action.
They were.
Their looks, handshakes, willingness to face down a potential adversary as they walked
up the hall a second time, their hormones, thoughts, and words all showed it.
Now, these were not the children of herders.
These are students from upper middle class households of Atlanta, the suburbs of Atlanta,
families making over $100,000 a year who just happened to be brought up in the South and
were going to a university in the North.
From my point of view, this is a detailed demonstration of how a deeply learned cultural
scheme actually lasts and works.
With the right situational cues, a bump, and a verbal insult, our bodies know automatically
how to react, and we almost instantly know how to feel, look, think, and speak.
Just as we do for all kinds of other schemes we learned when we were young, the fact that
it seems to be shared by a large group of people can only be explained by cultural transmission.
That's socialization of many generations that goes back more than 400 years.
In summarizing his review of this research, Gladwell says, cultural legacies persist generation
after generation even though the conditions that have spawned them have long since then
disappeared.
Again, let me bring you back to the cultural complexity underlining our simple views of
communication.
In lecture one, our everyday view of communication makes a series of assumptions about talk that
we don't even notice, including our assumptions that the words we speak have one or only a
few obvious meanings as we speak them, when in fact the cultural lexicon indicates they
have multiple denotative meanings, and these in turn can be altered by our personal experiences
with them in terms of their connotations.
Or over our nonverbal behavior can alter those meanings even as they're being spoken,
as well as communicate feelings that we may not be conscious of at the time, and despite
our comfort with our conscious abilities to communicate, it turns out our perceived success
in talking with others is generally structured by deeply learned patterns, schemas that are
triggered by situational cues, including other people's responses to our words and our gestures.
These patterns have little to do with our conscious thought because they're buried deeply in what
is called the cognitive unconscious part of our mind, and it can't be accessed with words.
So how that part of the mind works and how it supports or undermines our day-to-day talk
and our relationships will become the focus of our next lecture.
And before the next lecture, there's something I'd like you to think about.
Do you have some patterned responses to the world, values, beliefs, superstitions, habitual
reactions that are distinctively connected to your cultural heritage, passed on to you
by the generations that came before, or that are part of you because you share them with
others from the same region, community, neighborhood?
Think about it.
We're all individuals, but it takes a subculture to raise a child.
