Lecture 4 – The Operations of the Cognitive Unconscious
Hi and welcome to lecture 4.
In lectures 1 and 2, we made the case that humans are born to talk.
We need to communicate with those around us to fulfill our fundamental needs.
In lecture 3, we discussed the essential sharedness at the heart of talk, common perspectives,
ways of seeing, regarding what's real, what's good, what's bad, shared repertoires of
meanings for words and gestures, shared schema, outlines of attributes for people and situations
and what they mean.
I ended lecture 3 with an example of how deep and long-lasting cultural learning is, how
deeply ingrained early social schema are.
In this case, the automatic reactions of participants in an experiment to personal insults that
were driven not by who they were as individuals, but where they were from in the United States.
And where do these deep early learned reactions come from?
They're stored in a part of the mind we call the Cognitive Unconscious, a part to which
our conscious mind has no direct access because its memories are not constructed of words
and pictures, but of biochemical patterns.
However, these patterns give shape to every word we say.
So that's what I want to talk about in this lecture, the Cognitive Unconscious.
I want to make you aware of three things.
The operations of the Cognitive Unconscious is the part of the mind that does most of
the work getting us through our day.
Secondly, the three areas of decision making by the Cognitive Unconscious that permit us
to act and speak normally.
And third, the effects, both positive and negative, of these unconscious decisions on
our communication relationships.
Let's go back to the beginning, the development and the operations of the Cognitive Unconscious.
We always need to know what was going on.
We always need to know what was going to happen next.
And the womb, our body, mind silently answered these questions as we grew.
It knew what was going on and what was going to happen next because the information was
built into the biochemical exchanges that went on in the blood flow between our mother's
body and our own.
So life was good, then we got born.
The cord was cut, we were on our own with a collection of face, body, vocal gestures
that didn't seem like much on the surface.
But beneath all those cries and all that body movement, the body, mind, the Cognitive
Unconscious was continuing to answer the key questions of life for us.
It was paying attention to incoming stimuli and how they affected our body and developing
a set of connections between our external efforts to thrive and survive and our internal
states so we could grow.
You don't just consciously recognize this, that's all.
He's mentioned in lecture two, once we acquire language we think conscious thought does everything,
but it doesn't.
The mind and the other 10 plus million bits of information.
What does that mean?
We used to think that thinking made us human.
No words, no mental processing, wrong.
We now know the mind processes 11 million bits of information per second.
The conscious mind, however, processes only about 40 bits per second.
And in his book, Strangers to Ourselves, Tim Wilson asks the obvious question.
So where did the other 10,999,960 bits go?
All that information enters the mind below the level of consciousness into a place without
words.
It turns out we have two minds, a conscious and a cognitive unconscious.
To use an iceberg as a visual metaphor, cognitive neuroscientists and social psychologists think
of the cognitive unconscious as the huge submerged part of the iceberg, and that the conscious
brain is that bit of snow and ice that still shows above the water.
So let me introduce you to our two minds in a general sort of way.
First the conscious mind.
It works best when there's enough time, when there's not too much data, and when the decision
actually matters to us, because we have to be motivated to do the work of rational thought,
because rational thought is work.
It's effortful, slow, controllable, and flexible.
Neuroscientists say it's seeded in the frontal lobes of the cerebral cortex, the last part
of the brain to develop, right behind the forehead.
That's the location of the brain's speech, reflective thought, and executive functions.
It works in the there and then mode, or the what if mode.
Now I know this, of course, personally, we all do, but certainly I can tell you my story.
I can be sitting there sort of drifting off on the TV or reading the newspaper, and my
wife will suddenly turn to me and say, honey, where are you?
And inevitably I'm some other place.
It's probably a kind of disease that comes with being a professor, but I'm always working
on some other problem in my head.
That's the way the conscious mind actually operates.
Now to make time for all this problem solving, or for daydreaming, I do that too.
In the repetitious low demand situations of daily life, the conscious mind shifts a good
deal of the here and now stuff, the here and now thinking, to some pretty high level and
sophisticated approaches too, to the other mind, to the cognitive unconscious.
Now of course, the conscious mind can work in the here and now if we choose to focus
it.
Now we'll keep returning to this as we speak about the challenges we face in becoming more
effective communicators.
The conscious mind can also work in the here and now if it's focused by a dramatic turn
of events, an emergency.
But it only works well in this kind of situation when it's repeatedly trained with routines
and protocols for handling emergencies before they actually happen.
Other situations, changing by the second, are not optimal for the conscious decision-making
process.
Too much data, too much going on, not enough time to make effective decisions.
Trained professionals use their sense of the situation or their gut reactions to speed
up the decision-making process when they're under pressure.
What they're doing is they're calling up the other mind, the cognitive unconscious,
to help them save the day.
When we come up, the conscious mind is most effective when there's time, when the data
is relatively simple, and when there's a clear, attainable, and valuable goal in mind.
Say planning your day, I'm going to pick up dry cleaning on the way home this afternoon
and I can stop at the grocery store if necessary.
By the way, do we need any milk?
Conscious mind and full bloom here.
But it's not particularly effective in emergencies or in situations that feel threatening.
For example, when we're having a fight with a friend or our beloved.
In those cases, the emotional level runs high, talk comes fast and furiously, and there's
really not much time to think rationally.
So we respond from the other aspect of our mind, the cognitive unconscious.
The cognitive unconscious works in a completely different way than the conscious mind.
It's automatic, fast, effortless, and it's rigid.
It just sees and acts.
No creative reflection here, just pattern detection.
It works in the here and now, and unlike your conscious brain, it's always paying attention.
It's always on.
The core of it is in the midbrain, a series of organs called the limbic system of the
brain.
It's important to note that this part of the brain, evolutionarily speaking, developed
far earlier than the cerebral cortex and the frontal cortex where the seat of the conscious
mind is.
It's a much older part of the brain.
It was actually the part of the brain that allowed us as developing creatures to get
our first memories.
They were emotional memories.
So we could remember, unlike other creatures who live in a kind of constant now, what
actually was for eating and what was going to eat us long after the event occurred.
It all began, of course, in the midbrain.
Every waking second as we grow, the cognitive unconscious is processing incoming data, looking
for patterns in the information flows from the rest of our body or from the environment
around us and remembering them.
Now, how does it remember?
It adds emotional markers to them.
They're called somatic markers, changes in the body caused by little nano surges of positive
or negative energy.
It's creating what are called non-conscious preferences.
It uses these to talk to the conscious mind through the body.
All this work is done by the amygdala, the heart of the limbic system, which is the heart
of the cognitive unconscious.
It stores deep emotional memories and it's the always-on, sampling and matching part
of the cognitive unconscious, constantly dipping into the stream of incoming information and
comparing little bits, thin slices of these huge inputs to our established non-conscious
preferences, either positive or negative.
Now, we discovered non-conscious preferences in the lab in the 1980s.
We first learned about them and how easily they could be developed in the research of
Robert Zion.
He had people watch a list of items, go buy on a small screen.
Items that had no meaning for them whatsoever, nonsense syllables or elements of the Chinese
alphabet, a list of 30 of them.
He didn't tell the participants that each of them was actually paired with a happy or
sad face that flashed at the same time, but did it so quickly that the conscious mind
couldn't register it.
At the end, he simply asked people what syllables or ideograms they preferred and they were
easily able to do this.
They just simply listed the ones with the happy faces.
Now, what we've done here is created instantaneous non-conscious preferences.
Now, this experiment has been done many times and with brain scanning today, we can actually
see the visual system light up and look at the subliminal flashes that the conscious mind
can't see.
The cognitive unconscious organizes and stores our deeply learned patterns of perception
and preference for people and actions.
These are patterns of visual and oral cues that trigger predictions for future action.
And we call these patterns schema for what's going to happen next.
It permits us to enact a necessary human attribute, a theory of mind.
We all are into and need to be doing a certain amount of automatic mind reading, a certain
amount of anticipation of what another is going through or is intending to do in the
next moment.
Again, each pattern comes with preferential surges of positive or negative emotional energy
attached to it.
These act as kind of nonverbal messages, somatic signs to our conscious mind to take action
when it's needed.
And as we'll see, these operations can protect us in emergency situations.
So let's talk about the three key functions that the cognitive unconscious carries out
on behalf of and sometimes instead of the conscious mind.
Three functions of the cognitive unconscious.
It supports rational decision making.
See, it doesn't all happen in the conscious mind.
It constantly evaluates the world around us.
It lets us know what's going on.
And from time to time, it initiates action in a very sophisticated and efficient manner
because it knows what's going to happen next.
Let's talk about function one.
The cognitive unconscious helps your conscious mind think and problem solve efficiently.
Anthony Domassio wrote a breakthrough book called Dick Hart's Error, Emotion, Reason
and the Human Brain in 1994, in which he is elegantly assembles historical and contemporary
case studies and research on folks whose neocortex frontal lobes had been disconnected from the
midbrain by accident or surgical error.
Even though they could speak extremely well and their analytical thought was fully functional,
their lives fell apart because they couldn't make the simplest decisions.
Domassio's breakthrough insight was that the cognitive unconscious uses its emotional
preference patterns to nudge the conscious mind through the data that flows in every
second and through the many small choices that it must make to come to a fully conscious
decision.
Now the cognitive unconscious has no words.
It has to communicate through the body itself to get the conscious mind's attention.
So it produces gut feelings, knowings, headaches, sweaty palms, changes of mood at every choice
point.
These somatic markers, we referred to them earlier, appear in the body and give the conscious
mind a sense of which way it should go.
Since the time of Aristotle, we've believed that the conscious mind did all the work of
deciding.
And now we know that without the support of the cognitive unconscious, we simply couldn't
make decisions at all.
Function two of the cognitive unconscious, it's always on.
Assessing people and situations to let us know what's going on now.
The cognitive unconscious instantly evaluates the world around us.
Our amygdala is constantly processing those thin slices of incoming data, comparing it
to what we already know and assessing it in terms of good, bad, reward, threat dimensions.
Generating those gut feelings somatic markers that Damascio talked about.
And how does all this happen in face-to-face talk?
Well now we know.
We didn't know before.
In 2008, Alex Pentland and his colleagues at MIT published an overview of their research
that showed us how the cognitive unconscious works in face-to-face talk.
By using a very small device about the size of a credit card that's worn like an ID badge,
he called it a sociometer, to continuously measure various non-verbal aspects of people's
interactions.
The same info that's actually being processed by our senses and through the limbic system
of the brain and our friend, the amygdala.
He calls them honest signals.
They happen quickly in milliseconds.
Hard to fake, and they tell the mind something important about whether an emerging relationship
will end momentarily or continue.
Consciously perceiving the subtle variations in behavior that mark immediate states of
interest in a relationship would be a difficult task at best as a distant observer.
But it's impossible to do while you are actually participating in the conversation yourself.
That's okay.
The non-conscious mind does it for you.
Pentland's sociometer data shows us what it notices in the person that you're talking
with.
It notices their activity levels, small movements in the body, changes in posture, leaning towards
or away, changes in the tone of voice, not words.
When talking starts, when it stops, mimicry, when people's movements and speech patterns
automatically begin to imitate in others the beginnings of empathy and trust in a relationship.
Now there's been a lot of research in the past decade about the internal processes that
must be going on in the brain behind mimicry on the pathways called mirror neurons.
They're distributed throughout the brain and they trigger off micro-imitations of another's
behavior in our bodies at the muscular level.
We don't know any of this stuff's going on here.
It's so micro and nano-sized.
It's how we learn to feel, how others feel, how we get empathy.
Our bodies actually imitate what they're showing us.
Now this is clearly the mechanism for non-conscious rehearsals that children go through in their
learning as they grow up.
Also, the cognitive unconscious mind is noticing interest and attention movement.
If two people are talking together and each one is anticipating when the other will pause
and then jumping in exactly at that point and leaving no gaps, they're paying a great
deal of attention to each other.
Finally, of course, the issues of influence are shown by the extent to which one person
causes another to match their speech patterns.
You may have noticed this in yourself if you've ever spoken to someone with a regional accent
different than yours.
You may find yourself inclined to imitate the sound of their voices as you talk.
It's the cognitive unconscious way of naturally getting us to fit in to belong for a moment.
Now, of course, it got this information in many situations, but the most interesting
one is at a speed dating event, sociometers and speed dating.
It's the wave of the future.
Each man and woman spent five minutes chatting with ten members of the opposite sex.
At the end of every encounter, each of them secretly wrote down whether or not they wanted
to exchange numbers and handed it in a form to the organizer.
If they both said yes, the organizers passed on the numbers at the end of the night to
each of them.
Now, the common assumption in this situation is that men will say yes to almost anyone,
whereas women are far more selective in who they're going to give their numbers to.
The answer is that's wrong.
Sociometer data patterns predicted 71% of the mutual exchanges far better than the 20%
that would be achieved by simply guessing.
And it turns out men only said yes to women that they somehow knew were also going to
say yes.
Now, since the women's responses were a secret until the end of the night, how could the men
know after only five minutes?
Well, the men picked up on what Pentland calls women's exploring displays at the non-conscious
level.
When the women had high activity levels, interest and excitement, and openness to influence
shown by a strong variation in vocal emphasis and rhythm as they unconsciously began to
match their speech flow to the man's speech flow, this pattern predicted the women's
decision about whether or not to trade phone numbers.
Their conscious decisions may have been kept secret until the end of the evening, but the
women's unconscious signaling had already delivered their decisions loud and clear.
The unconscious unconscious senses what's going on before our conscious mind does.
His first impressions can be extremely accurate most of the time, although not always, because
sometimes it can be wrong because the earliest reactions in our lives may have established
schema connections that don't serve us well in present situations.
And we'll talk more about this momentarily.
But first of all, let's finish up with function three of the cognitive unconscious initiating
action in a sophisticated and efficient manner.
Why?
Because it knows what's going to happen next way before your conscious mind does.
It works far faster than the conscious mind in terms of making decisions.
How do we know this?
In the early 1980s, neuroscientist Benjamin Libet did a series of studies on an increase
in brain activity that precedes bodily action called the readiness potential.
Simple experiment.
They always are.
They're really good ones.
Fired up volunteers with scalp and wrist electrodes asked them to perform a very simple task, stare
at a large clock, flick their wrists whenever they felt like it, and report exactly the
time when they were first aware of their intention internally to make the movement.
They just had to call it a time when they thought they were going to move next.
Now, their announced intentions always came before the action.
But the brain's readiness potential preceded the conscious intention by a lot.
In brain time, this is amazing.
Up to half a second before the subject was even aware he was going to move, it was already
preparing to move the wrist before they had the conscious thought to do it.
Cognitive unconscious can move the body without talk.
But if necessary, can find indirect ways of communicating with the conscious mind to get
us through three kinds of situations in life.
No threat situations.
Situations with some threat in them that we can manage, and very high threat situations.
Let me give you a quick example of each of these.
No threat situations.
When we see someone gesturing intensely with both hands while talking on a phone and not
touching the steering wheel, we need to ask the question, we do ask the question, who's
driving the car?
And of course, the cognitive unconscious is driving the car.
This is such a well-learned habit, that is, all the actions around driving the car, that
the cognitive unconscious simply switches to the knees and it does the steering while
you're gesturing with both hands and talking through a headset.
I'm not making this up.
I actually saw this in my own neighborhood not long ago.
It was just amazing to watch.
And the woman who was doing it was actually making a turn, even scarier.
But of course, it was a low threat situation because there wasn't much traffic around.
You could do this.
Cognitive unconscious just simply does the work and you don't have to think about it.
A high threat situation.
Same idea, oncoming car, except now you're standing on the sidewalk.
And without paying attention, you step off into the street.
However, your peripheral vision on your left picks up a kind of blur of information.
And without telling you, it simply tightens up all your muscles, pushes an enormous amount
of adrenaline in your system, and forces you to quickly step back onto the sidewalk and
the car just misses you, doesn't hit you.
Didn't bother to say, I'm going to do this.
Your conscious mind wasn't even involved because of course, if your conscious mind said,
I think that blurs an oncoming car.
By the time you got to the end of that particular little statement, you'd already be dead.
No, no, it just takes care of it for you.
Thanks very much.
Just get back on the sidewalk.
Most of life, of course, doesn't have these kind of extreme situations.
But there are lots of situations that contain sort of minor threats that have to be dealt
with here.
And the cognitive unconscious helps you manage those too.
And what it does is it lets you know what's going on indirectly.
This is based on a now famous experiment called the Iowa Gambling Game Story, where two decks
of cards, red and blue, participants turned over cards to get payoffs and make money.
The red decks, however, were dangerous.
They made big payoffs at first, but then began to produce big losses.
The blue decks turned out to be safer, steady, smaller payoffs, but few smaller losses.
It seemed to be the way to go.
After about 50 card turnovers, people in the experiment begin to get a hunch about the
red deck problem when the experimenter asks them.
But they can't quite explain it.
At 80 cards, they can explain it when they're asked again.
And they've really reached the state of explicit or conscious learning.
They've figured it out.
However, the experimenters were also measuring the sweat on the back of their hands, one
of those somatic markers of stress.
The body, it turns out, following the line of data from the sweat measures on the back
of the hand, body knew by the 10th card about the red deck.
And without telling the conscious mind, began to change the behavior of choice around which
deck to choose.
And although they didn't notice it, it turns out the participant's work began to choose
after the 10th card, began to choose fewer red cards, although they continued to choose
some and they made big losses.
The body knew well before the conscious mind knew what actually was going on here.
Now, all of this power, let's look at the positive and negative impacts that these types
of decisions made by your unconscious mind have in our communication relationships.
The positive effects of the cognitive unconscious on our talk, well, we simply couldn't talk
effectively without its speed and its automaticity, its automatic nature.
The deep cultural learning of the language of conversational schemas, what to do first,
what to do next, allows us to talk fluently, automatically.
We call up the normal conversational schema that we talked about in lecture three and
we just talk.
And without the instantly invoked patterns of people and talk, we couldn't actually get
through the situation.
We need to have instant access to the stereotypical schema of people's performances, including
their nonverbal displays of the situations so we know what actions are going to happen,
where, and when while we're talking.
We actually couldn't display a kind of theory of mind that we mentioned about earlier.
We couldn't anticipate what was going to happen next without the cognitive unconscious.
We couldn't uncover word meanings instantaneously with little hesitation.
We couldn't read the meaning of the other's nonverbal displays as the words are being spoken.
Our cognitive unconscious helps us do this very quickly and with great certainty.
Without it, we'd sound like tourists struggling to order dinner in someone else's language,
stumbling over ourselves and everybody else in the conversation, trying to make sense
of the situation.
Now, all this sounds terrific.
And generally it is.
The cognitive unconscious works well because life is generally well structured.
We detailed the structure, the deep structure in lecture three.
But the big point here is that the cognitive unconscious isn't perfect.
And when it goes wrong, it can go very wrong.
The negative effects of the cognitive unconscious on our talk, hmm, a part of the mind that
presents ideas so smoothly read situations so we can speak with confidence can suddenly
turn against us if the situation changes rapidly from positive to negative.
Like first responders, professionals who are trained, we're not deeply trained to handle
difficult situations before they happen.
This is, in fact, the entire reason for this course to become like sort of first responder
professionals in our little communication emergencies.
By the time you finish this course, I hope you'll have the tools to do this.
I believe you will.
We put our words and ourselves out there as part of normal conversation.
If someone actively disagrees with us and it comes as a surprise or it's done in a way
that seems to diminish our sense of self, the cognitive unconscious reads this as a
threat.
We said it was rigid.
It can't tell the difference between a psychological threat to your self-esteem and a physical
threat to your body.
And it's fast.
It's already on before your conscious mind actually knows it.
Cognitive unconscious is paying attention to the changing feelings displayed in the face
of our critic before the words even appear.
Remember our dating situation.
It's already running a compare and contrast analysis of the emotional expressions of the
other to anticipate what's going to happen next.
And before our conscious mind can react, it's running its body-centered threat response
schema.
It's speeding up your heart, increasing the sweat on your palms, raising the hairs on
your forearm, tightening your neck and throat muscles, forcing the blood out of your gut
to your limbs, and doing anything it can to let you know it's coming.
Get ready to fight or flee.
Daniel Goldman in his work on emotional intelligence called it an amygdala hijack.
It's a sudden reaction driven by strong emotion leading to very inappropriate actions or talk.
And before the other's criticism hits us, we're ready to defend ourselves.
We're about to speak from deeply learned views about people and situations in a semi-automatic
way, not from this moment, but from back there when we learned it all, when we learned all
these judgments, the kind of jerk idiot generalities that easily come to mind from
the cognitive unconscious.
In its effort to warn us and prepare us for attack, our friend the cognitive unconscious
has automatically set us up to create more problems because the other's unconscious mind
is already reading us, anticipating our reaction.
A downward spiral of automatic responses begins.
So before we say the first worst thing that can come out of our mouths, we need to stop
and call up the slower, effortful, controllable approach of the conscious mind to analyze
what's going on here and now.
We need to become conscious of what's happening in our bodies and use the power of our conscious
mind to delay or deflect the process.
That's the first step in becoming a professional first responder in communication breakdown
situations.
Just stop and give your conscious mind a chance to catch up with the situation.
Now this is such an important moment that I'll use one lecture to review how to manage
our reactions to these challenges, how to call our conscious mind back into the present,
to the here and now, that it usually resists working in.
So where are we going with all this?
Before we get to the point of calling our conscious mind into the present, in order to
manage our unconscious reactions in difficult situations, we need to know more about how
the conscious mind operates.
So in the next three lectures, we're going to describe its basic processes of perception,
cognition, and feeling to show how they work at the conscious level and also show how much
they depend on the cognitive unconscious.
More importantly for each process, we'll analyze, we'll provide clear practical advice about
effectively communicating how we see, think, and feel about ourselves and those around
us while managing our non-conscious reactions and not letting it take over before we conclude
two things to think about.
Remember a time when someone made a first impression on you, a great one.
You really liked them the moment you met them.
You both talked easily to each other like you've known each other for years.
Try to reconstruct what it was that attracted you to them.
Did you feel in sync with them?
Do the honest signals described early in the lecture help you clarify what happened?
Also I want you to think about the last time you had an amygdala hijack, really lost your
temper, or you witnessed this in someone else.
Did you or they demonstrate the key elements of this overwhelming moment we described?
And if it was you who lost it, how did the event leave you feeling when it was over?
Now next, we're going to take a closer look at perception function of our conscious mind
and we'll see you then.
Thank you.
