Lecture 5 – The Conscious Mind in Perception
Hi and welcome to lecture 5.
To understand why we talk the way we do, and in order to talk more effectively, we need
to analyze three interrelated processes at work in the conscious mind.
How we see things, how we think about things, and how we feel about things.
These will be the subjects of the next three lectures.
The first of these, how we see things, is the reality management process of perception.
Selecting, organizing, and interpreting incoming data.
In this lecture, I'm going to outline how these processes work to organize our images
of the world around us, of ourselves, and our behavior, and of other people, and how
they behave.
So, let's talk about the perception process in general terms.
Seeing the world around us.
When something does get our conscious attention, the conscious mind uses a three-step process
to take it in.
It selects, first of all, what we're going to see.
It organizes that data into patterns, and then interprets those patterns to give a meaning
by a quick compare and contrast method, with the patterns we've already learned.
In general, when we have to pay attention to too many things coming at us, we tend to
look at those that we can relate to our previous experience.
It has to have some meaning for us already, and if we can't quickly relate it to something
we already know is confusing for us, we tend to ignore it.
We organize incoming data into patterns using two general ways of rank-ordering messages.
We use intensity.
We notice the most intense messages first, the loudest, the biggest, the most colorful.
We also use novelty.
Our mind pays attention to new versions of old stuff, food, clothing, fashion, whatever.
For example, if it's too new and it's strange, we tend to shut it off.
We ignore it.
Once messages are in order, our minds create patterns, and we use dimensions like resemblance,
things that look like each other, that sort of go together, or we use proximity, things
that are close in space and time, and we put those together.
Then our minds interpret the patterns.
Think about what it means by comparing to established patterns through schema.
We talked about schema.
Many of them are deep in our non-conscious mind, and keep us functioning normally, but
many are also stored in our long-term memories, and we use those for conscious comparison.
In most of the moments in our daily lives, we tend to be low-effort decision-makers.
Quicker is better.
Sort of like requires far less work than really thinking about something, and we seek and
want and need efficiency and speed.
Because life is well-structured, using schemas for perceptual processing works well.
They reduce the amount of information we have to process.
They allow us to relate new experiences to our past, to create a feeling of continuity
and stability over time.
And they provide us shortcuts to reduce ambiguity and uncertainty, and I've told you before
how much we really hate uncertainty.
But they also cause us to ignore or distort incoming data, or things that are inconsistent
with our worldview.
This way, they help us feel right about ourselves.
In summary, the most important forces behind all of these general processes of selecting,
organizing, and interpreting patterns of data are low effort and consistency.
When we are perceiving the world around us, consistency is really the key.
To feel good, right, calm, the elements of our perceptual schema must be consistent with
each other.
They must hang together, not just at one moment, but also over time.
We consciously work to achieve consistency between our perceptions of our self, our
own behavior, and the feedback that the world gives us about that.
The perception process, seeing ourselves in the context of the world around us.
Now remember that the selective attention process chooses what to look at based on intensity
and novelty, and then organizes what it has selected into patterns.
And I said that if we see something that's too new, too novel, we tend to ignore it.
That's what we do.
The world doesn't respond to us and our behavior in ways that we find consistent with our perceptions
of our self, and we can't change the incoming data.
Ignoring or distorting it is an automatic response.
Let's review both of these processes.
Ignoring reality to be consistent.
Now a quick example.
Simmons and Levin ran a simple experiment at Cornell University.
They made a short movie that started with a long shot of an actor walking through an
empty classroom.
He stops and begins to sit.
As he does, there's an edit and a close-up appears of a different actor completing the
action of sitting.
When it was showed to 40 people, only 12 of them noticed the change on the actor.
Now mistakes like this in quotation marks happen all the time in movies.
They're called continuity errors.
We watch this for them during the making of the movie, but it's like trying to edit your
own writing.
Your mind simply constructs each scene the way you expect it to flow, and the error, a
door opening the wrong way, or a sudden change of makeup on one actor's face between two
shots is often missed.
You can also see why eyewitness testimony to a frightening event is the least reliable
form of evidence.
Viewers have to ask many people recalling their views to get a complete story of what
actually happened because we miss stuff all the time.
The other factor, of course, is distorting reality so we can be consistent and pain-free.
Everybody wants to be right, certain and calm, because they want to avoid the psychic pain
of what Leon Festinger identified as a process called cognitive dissonance over 50 years
ago.
It's a state of tension and discomfort that occurs whenever a person holds two cognitions,
perceptions of self and behavior that are psychologically inconsistent.
People strive to make sense out of contradictory ideas and lead lives that at least in their
own minds are consistent and meaningful, such as smoking is a dumb thing to do because
it could kill me compared with my other cognition of myself, my other perception of what I'm
doing.
I smoke two packs a day.
Now the dissonance between these two perceptions produces mental discomfort, to say the least,
ranging from minor pangs of guilt, sometimes to deep anguish, and people don't rest easy
until they find a way to reduce it.
Now, in this example, the most direct way for a smoker to reduce dissonance is by quitting.
But if she's tried to quit and fail, now she must reduce her dissonance by convincing herself,
by changing the way she sees smoking.
So she says to herself, smoking isn't really so harmful.
Why?
I had an aunt who smoked until she died at 92.
Or smoking is worth the risk because it helps me relax or prevents me from gaining weight.
And after all, that's a health risk too, and so on.
In fact, the drive for consistency, also called the drive for consonance, between our perceptions
of ourselves and our behavior is so important that we'll go out of our way to claim supportive
evidence as well researched and arguments in favor of our ideas as well taken and important
while dismissing as contradictory arguments, as stupid, poorly researched, and based on
rare occurrences.
You can see this being played out in the media on major issues all the time by people who've
taken different views of the world.
This effect is so pervasive that social psychologists call it the confirmation bias.
We see what we need to see to be internally consistent.
For example, if you believe you are a capable, kindly, and attentive spouse, and your mate
criticizes you for being incompetent, cruel, and dismissive, you might ignore or distort
the message one way or another.
What do you think?
Either you attribute the message to the fact that your mate might be just having a bad
day, or you might decide that they're playing some kind of odd joke on you.
The idea is to maintain your consistent views of yourself and your behavior.
This process is also supported by the unconscious operations of the mind as well.
A group of people were having their brains scanned using magnetic resonance imaging while
receiving critical information about their favorite presidential candidates.
The scans indicated that the reasoning areas of the brain, frontal lobes, virtually shut
down when this dissonant information was being delivered.
But when consciousness was restored, when they got information that fit their perceptions,
by telling them, of course, that the first information was actually a lie, it was fabricated,
the emotion circuits of the brain lit up happily, I guess it's hard to change your mind.
And it is.
Unless you can get someone to do something they wouldn't ordinarily do, then a change
can happen.
If someone wouldn't ordinarily harm another and they do, their perception of the other
becomes much more negative.
They must have deserved it.
It's called blaming the victim.
On the other hand, if someone does a favor for another that they wouldn't ordinarily
do, then their perception of the other also changes positively.
They must have deserved it because they're such a good person.
Think of these arguments as the kind of, I'm not the kind of person who would do that without
a good reason, kinds of arguments.
I find that good reason, of course, by changing my perception of the action or the target
of the action.
More distortion to be consistent and pain free.
Go back and do a little review here of a classic field study that got all this started.
I'm doing it because it's intrinsically interesting, I hope, for you, but also because it really
sets up hundreds and hundreds of experiments that follow from the year it was done.
It's a field study in 1955 where Festinger infiltrates as a graduate student a small religious
cult whose charismatic leader had predicted the imminent end of the world and the arrival
of a spaceship that would take the faithful to a new planet.
He successfully predicts that the most committed members of the cult, those who had already
given away their worldly goods, would become more committed rather than less committed
to their beliefs and their leader when the world didn't actually end.
The people in the room awaiting the arrival began to worry when the ship didn't show
up at the appointed hour, but were transformed into believers when four hours later their
leader, a Mrs. Keech, suddenly had a vision and announced that their faith had actually
saved a doomed planet and prevented the landing.
Within minutes they were calling local radio stations and newspapers to report the good
news and within hours they were on the streets, buttonholing people to join the group.
But they're doing in their minds as saying, we're not the kind of people who give away
all of our worldly goods, so I must have had a good reason to do that.
I saved the world.
Interestingly, people who stayed in their own homes, as members of the cult, to wait
out the eventuality, began to lose faith in their leader when it didn't happen to them.
And her husband, a non-believer, had actually gone to bed at his regular hour and had a
sound sleep that night.
Now, this field study led to lab experiments that go on for years, first of basically thousands
of experiments doing the same kind of thing, coming up with reasons to get people to say,
I'm not the kind of person who can then make a change.
Festinger had subjects come in to do a really boring task for an hour in the lab.
At the end, he had them read how interesting the work was.
Across the board people thought it was awful.
As part of the debrief, he told each subject that half the folks in the experiment were
being told that this was really an exciting task and that this was really an experiment
about their expectations, their positive expectations on task performance.
He then feigns embarrassment.
I have a conflicting appointment.
My colleague hasn't shown up, and I can't talk to the next subject.
So as they come in, would you please tell them the experiment is really interesting?
In other words, would you lie for me?
He gave half the subjects a dollar to do this and the other half $20.
And a week later, when he questioned them, the $20 liars hadn't changed their perception
of the experiment because they were given enough cash to justify, in their minds, doing
what the professor asked them to do.
The experiment was still boring.
The $1 liars, however, when asked to rate the experimental work, had unknowingly changed
their impressions of the task.
Turns out, they thought it was fun after all.
And they did this in order to resolve the dissonance of the, I'm not the kind of person
who would tell a lie for a measly dollar.
So I didn't.
They changed their view of the experiment.
They convinced themselves that boring work was actually exciting in order to justify
lying for only a dollar.
And by the way, we are so sure we need to be right that not only do we reconstruct our
memories of what's recently happened, but of course of our lives as a whole, we need
a coherent narrative that supports our current sense of self.
As Daniel Gilbert said in his book Stumbling on Happiness, Bogey was wrong in Casablanca
when he told Ingrid Bergman she would regret maybe not today, maybe not tomorrow, but soon
and for the rest of her life if she stayed with him in Morocco instead of leaving with
her Nazi fighting husband.
Quite the contrary, she would have found reasons to justify making that choice and not the
other and lived happily ever after.
Now there's another way to change your perceptions of yourself and your behavior.
We can change our perceptions if we consciously choose to be involved in learning.
We have to be willing to go outside our comfort zone and do the hard, often painful conscious
work of making the changes.
It takes a long time, lots of courage, and people actually stop before things get too
tough, but we can do it.
Now we've been dealing with perceptions of one's self and behavior.
What about how we see other people?
Seeing the people around us.
Now, people are complex.
Seeing them should be more complex than seeing things.
Most of the things that we talked about in the beginning of the lecture, seeing the
world, come out of experimental data on observing things.
So people should be more complicated than that, shouldn't they?
Well, it turns out they're not, not in our perceptions.
Our perceptions of people are also, like things, simple, internally and externally consistent,
stable across time, just like the way we see ourselves, our behavior, and the world around
us.
Unless the situation compels us to do otherwise, we work quickly.
We work off of first impressions.
We see people as coherent, unified whole using only a very few clues.
We organize our perceptions around these key dimensions, and we'll discuss two important
ones.
The first one is whether we think of them as kind of warm, engaging folks or kind of
cold, standoffish people.
This was based on Kelly's original experiment, which everybody has built on since then.
She has a speaker come into a classroom of students that were handed a short bio of the
speaker.
For half of them, it included the adjectives, very warm, intelligent, skillful, industrious,
determined, and practical.
The other half had the words rather cold instead of very warm.
The person did a 20 minute talk, after which she was rated by the students.
He received significantly more positive ratings from the people who got the very warm bio.
Those same students were also more likely to ask questions and engage them in discussion.
The other experiment I want to point out to you is a more recent experiment done by Nalini
Ambadi around the dimension of dominance and supportiveness.
So we did warm, cold, now we're going to dominate supportiveness.
Here she actually lets people hear two second clips of the sound of doctors' voices talking
with patients.
Now the words are filtered out, but the tone, pitch, and rhythm were clear.
Half the doctors, unknown to the people who were actually making the ratings, half the
doctors in this sample had been sued, and the other half hadn't.
The raiders didn't know this, and when they were asked to evaluate the sounds of conversations,
dimensions of using warmth, dominance, hostility, anxiousness, they were able to accurately pick
out the sued doctors.
They consistently rated them as dominant and hostile.
The culture provides schematic, prepackaged realities for interpreting people and their
actions.
So we take all of our perceptions and put them together in coherent holds.
When we see people, we kind of use an automatic, implicit personality theory, a kind of triangle
of traits.
Now if I asked you to think of the word that naturally fits at the end of this phrase,
you're tall, handsome, and in your mind you have a choice between strong or flabby, which
word actually fits.
Flabby doesn't fit, does it?
Tall, handsome, and flabby doesn't make any sense at all.
Tall, handsome, and strong makes lots of sense.
We have little combinations of these kind of schematic labels that we apply all the time
to people.
Role names and expectations also guide our perceptions about people, and we can make
quick decisions about them.
As we said in lecture three, when we observe the norms of social behavior in action as
children, they tend to be attached to recognized social positions, parent, teacher.
That sort of thing.
It's a package, a schema.
So when we hear such names or give them to people, we immediately assume that the traits
and behaviors we've associated with the role name are actually present in the person directly
in front of us.
And finally, one of the last great simplicities we use to assemble our impressions, a coherent
impression of somebody else, is of course stereotypes.
These are generalizations about individuals based on their membership in a group, proximity
and resemblance roles we actually talked about earlier.
Stereotypes are a shortcut to communication, but really not to understanding.
An interesting quick example about this, I call this the door story, Professor Simmons
and Levins from Cornell U had strangers, actually they're confederates, on campus stop
and ask pedestrians for directions.
As the two people talk, they are suddenly rudely interrupted by two men who pass between
them carrying a door.
The interruption lasts exactly one second, but one of the men carrying the door trades
places with the stranger who was asking for directions.
When the door is gone, the pedestrian is confronted with a different person who continues the
conversation as if nothing had happened.
Did the innocent pedestrian notice this?
The answer is less than half of them did.
About 47% reported noticing the change.
Those who noticed, who got it, had something in common with the stranger they happened
to meet.
They were dressed about the same, they were about the same age, and we actually have
lots of data showing that when we meet people of our own social world, we momentarily pay
more attention to them than when we meet people who are different from us.
Now would this shift of attention extend to whether or not we actually see others who
are not like us?
They ran the experiment again.
Except this time, the stranger was dressed as a construction worker, hard hat boots,
and only approached people of his own age so we could control for that variable.
He encountered 12 people, the door passed between them and the switch was made again,
but this time fewer people, only 33% actually noticed.
The higher mis-rate was based on the fact that the students didn't really see the person.
They said so.
They said they only saw a construction worker.
No details like face and eyes, just boots, hard hat, the outfit.
So stereotypes are tied to roll names.
They're also tied to differences in skin color, perceived differences in national background,
dress, many other noticeable differences that we use every day.
We use them to manage all the incoming information by taking little thin slices of it so we can
make our perceptual decisions with speed and certainty.
By the way, when the two professors explained the door experiment to a class of 50 students
and asked them how many thought they would actually catch the trick, all 50 said they
would get it.
Because after all, they are going to be in the position of we're not the kind of people
who can be tricked, right?
So now we have a picture of someone else in our heads.
How do we keep it consistent and stable over time?
And in moment to moment interaction even.
This is something of course that we want to do, but remember our motivation is to go
for easy quick information processing, even for interactions with those upon whom our
happiness depends, friends, mates, colleagues at work.
One of the devices we use is the attribution process.
We try to read their minds to maintain a consistent perception of them.
That allows us to think we can predict their behavior, to move instantly from what's going
on and say to ourself, this is what's going to happen next.
Because it comes from inside of them, we think it comes from their personality, which we
think we know.
The problem with this is most of our behaviors affected by the situations we're in, the context.
Yet when we attribute motives to those in front of us, thinking about the situation
is not our automatic choice.
Thinking that we know who they really are is.
We can do the harder work of analyzing the situation to explain their actions, but it
would take more time and effort and would only happen after we've already made the automatic
biasing choice of, that's the way they are anyway.
So a common occurrence in a conversation would be this, what do you mean I didn't tell you
I wanted this?
Why would I tell you?
You just have said no, we can't afford it, just like you always do.
This kind of persistence of a consistent view of people is what we actually need to have.
Now there is one small exception to this, it's called the self-serving bias.
If things turn out well in a particular moment, we give ourselves the credit, we're so good.
But if things don't go well, we just blame the other.
Suddenly, you know, it's not our fault, it actually happens in them.
Or we blame the situation if they're not around, because it wasn't our fault, the traffic
was bad, it was raining.
Now the other big process we use is self-fulfilling prophecy.
We predict how others will behave because we think we know them, and so we act towards
them as if our beliefs were really true.
Now of course they respond to our actions appropriately, and effectively our prediction
becomes true.
Many of you will know that if you anticipate bad behavior from a child, chances are very
good that that's what you'll get.
Essentially what we're doing is observing the effects of our own behavior on the other
person.
But instead of thinking about what we did and how we might have altered the situation,
we don't see it that way at all.
Remember we're looking outward through our eyes at them.
We don't see ourselves as contributors to their behavior, we're watching them as responders.
And our automatic belief is that motivations for their behavior come from inside of them,
because that's how they are, you get the idea.
So here we are, in seeing the world and other people, we tend to use simple generalities
to construct incoming reality, information, into patterns, using resemblance and proximity
between things and people, and we tend to automatically, unthinkingly distort reality
when it serves our sense of self.
And instead of thoughtfully, effortfully, effortfully perceiving other people, seeing
how they are behaving as individuals, no, we just construct something based on our first
simple impressions.
Our first reactions tend to be low effort categorizations based on key traits, followed
up with pattern making processes provided by the culture, role names, stereotypes, or
learned in our previous experiences with them, attributions of motives, self-fulfilling prophecies,
all this is pretty much semi-automatic at least.
Where is the conscious mind in all this processing, all this automatic stuff?
Well, it hasn't left you.
In fact, I'm going to ask you again to slow down your perceptual processes by using your
conscious mind.
But this, of course, requires a choice on your part to consciously focus for a moment
on who's in front of you, because if you don't focus, your conscious mind will be actually
thinking about something else, or thinking about the here and now as if it wasn't in
the here and now, why, well, I'll tell you in the next lecture when we review how our
mind actually thinks.
So before we conclude, let me leave you with some practical tips about managing your perceptual
biases for more effective communication.
First of all, accept that you and everyone else has these biases, particularly when the
world doesn't respond to you the way you want it to.
If your self-image won't permit you to go that far, at least take some time to ask yourself
if you may have them.
Sometimes it helps to talk about this with a family member who may have also internalized
some of the same schema or stereotypes that you have.
Sometimes it helps to ask a friend if he or she has noticed you reacting to what you think
is going on rather than what is actually going on.
Note, have this conversation when you're feeling particularly calm and open to listening without
defense.
Ask a kind friend, someone who will be honest but gentle with you.
Secondly, in some situations choose to override your unconscious mind's quick automatic response
to organizing everything.
Slow down deliberately, challenge yourself to see differently.
Remember, it's giving you back your schema, not the reality that's actually in front of
you.
So inside your head, get conscious, slow down.
If things happen that you don't like in a situation, don't jump to conclusions about
your innocence.
You're both involved in this somehow.
Remember, interpersonal communication is a system of two-way transactions in cells and
no matter how your conscious mind punctuates the talk and justifies what you just did or
said, you're both involved.
Don't jump to conclusions about people.
It's only your schema about them, not their reality that you're reacting to.
If you suddenly notice a change, focus on describing their behavior to yourself before
you react.
I just saw her do this and instead of an instant evaluation or judgment, respond to them with
a kind of hypothesis instead.
Maybe she is before you talk.
For example, try thinking about that aggressive driver as someone who just learned that her
child is seriously ill and is trying to rush home as quickly as she can.
Perhaps the person who pushes in front of you of the grocery store line just received
a negative job review and feels angry and hurt and is simply behaving badly because
that's the only way she knows how to get it out.
Then talk with the person.
Describe your perceptions and ask for confirmation.
Ask about their motives and then listen to the answers.
Don't tell them what they think or feel.
It isn't about you and your feelings.
Just put that part on hold.
Avoid mind reading.
I know we do it all the time, but in this case, you simply don't know what the other
person is thinking.
Accept that and ask a good question.
Acknowledge your limitations.
Be a little bit humble about this whole process.
We have a pretty good idea now of how our conscious mind perceives things, selects, organizes,
and interprets things.
In the next lecture, we'll take a look at how our conscious mind thinks about things.
We touched on it a bit here when we discussed interpretation, but in the next lecture, we'll
go a lot further.
Thanks.
