Lecture 6 – The Conscious Mind in Using Language
Hi, and welcome to Lecture 6.
As we mentioned in the previous lecture, the next step is, in perception, is something
we call interpretation.
It's conscious thought.
It's cognition.
The cognition process involves how we name and think about the patterns we create in
our perception process and how we deal with the differences between our expectations and
reality in day-to-day life.
Now, let's take a minute to review some important points we made in the last two lectures.
As we mentioned in Lecture 4, our conscious mind can and does work its way through the
process of rational problem solving and decision making.
When it's a relatively slow energy demanding process, think of preparing a presentation
for work or doing your taxes each year.
Every day talk, however, demands a quicker form of cognition, of thinking.
We size up a new situation very quickly, figure out who is there and what's going on, and
perhaps most importantly, try to guess what's going to happen next, using the schema from
our early learning and life experience.
If we didn't, our mind would slow down to the point that we would seem to be lost in
thought every time we tried to speak.
As we said in Lecture 5, we effortlessly create first impressions of people and things in
our environment.
Then we interact using low effort, automatic forms of thought.
We work out of our long-term memory right at the surface of our non-conscious mind where
we call words and thoughts into our conscious mind quickly, but the words we choose internally
end up shaping two important things, how we think about something consciously and what
we actually say to others about it.
However, the more automatic and low effort our thinking process is, the more vulnerable
we are to making the following kinds of mistakes that can interfere with good communication.
First of these is called context framing cues.
When the context, the situation we're in triggers our thoughts and plays a bigger role in our
decision-making than we may want it to.
The next is our inability to fully communicate our thoughts, followed by our unthinking use
of abstract judgment words that can shift a conversation from information-based to emotion-driven
in a blink of an eye, finally our use of automatic shortcuts in reaching decisions.
Let's talk about the contextual cues that trigger non-conscious framing.
You take your beloved to a movie whose plot turns on marital infidelity, and on the way
home you have a substantial fight about something minor and unrelated to the movie because your
fears about infidelity have been triggered by what you saw there.
You recall a moment from an earlier in the day when you spoke in a kinder way to a stranger
on the street than you ordinarily would have, because their accent reminded you of where
you were born.
All of these are cues in the context that trigger our thoughts.
Now, our limiting our ability to communicate is because of our low effort thought.
The question is, when we think about something, are we calling up many words to name it and
to describe our perceptions in concrete detail, while making an effort to consciously analyze
a situation and decide something about it, or are we using a few abstract labels and
automatic processing to reach a decision?
A few are the number of words, the more general and imprecise they tend to be.
In lecture three, we've already said that words have multiple meanings and people pick
their own, so if we only think in a few simple terms, others may not share our meanings for
those few words.
Also remember from lecture three, words are only symbols that represent things they refer
to.
They are not the thing itself.
And also, we said meaning is in people, not in the words.
And like the six people in every conversation, we have four sources of interpretation or
cognition involved anytime two people are talking.
We've got both of those people's conscious and their cognitive unconscious minds working,
both their slow, effortful processing of the conscious mind and their quick, efficient
and unconscious minds interacting while they're talking.
For instance, when asked about our colleague George, we could say at the specific descriptive
level, George is about five foot nine, 160 pounds, he's a grad student from another country
working here as an intern.
This is all simple, verifiable, descriptive fact, and it's unlikely to trigger anything
in either of our unconsciousness if we're talking to somebody about George.
Or we could move to a high level of abstraction for something more powerful and positive.
George is a really great guy, less verifiable, it's a value judgment, and more likely to
tap into some other experiences or maybe one's own feelings about what makes a really great
guy and what doesn't.
More abstract we get in our talk, the more information we have to leave out.
And the more we depend on other people's schematic reactions, beliefs about how the
world should be, to feel in our meaning when we talk.
Now it is possible that someone else could think we were being sarcastic when we called
George a really great guy because they think that George is just the opposite of that.
And of course they're filling in our words with their meanings.
Now this means we should be more careful in our use of words, but we aren't because we
speak quickly and because we assume we all mean the same thing by the words we use.
Now when we use abstract judgment words as part of our thinking processes they also become
part of our talk.
In everyday speech we treat highly abstract labels as if they were the same level of description
we were using when we were actually describing the features or characteristics of things
or people.
But worse we often treat them as if they are the thing or person we're describing.
We don't even notice it and we do it all the time.
So as we move from describing George in detail to exclaiming George as a great guy we go
from words that are concretely descriptive of his characteristics, things that other
people could observe and agree on or could find out about if they chose to, to words
that are abstract and evaluative and contain very little information about George.
Now such words are not very good for creating shared meanings about him because they're
actually about us.
They are our feelings, our judgments about George and what's missing is what other people
really need to know which is why we feel that way.
It would be the same thing if we called George a jerk.
We've already pointed out that at this high level of generality other people will put
their own meanings into our statements about George and that can lead to confusion and
to them questioning our description of reality.
And when that happens what do we do?
Well we've already told you that.
We just fall back on our what's wrong with them solution or you know everything should
be obvious what's wrong with you you don't understand me approach to how we deal with
disagreements.
Turns out when we talk in high abstractions everything isn't obvious and to make things
clear for others we need to make our thinking clearer to ourselves.
We need to move back down to a level of language where people can actually hear and at least
acknowledge the situation or the problem we're describing.
And also we need to include in our thinking something about the why we made the judgment
we actually did.
When we ask ourselves why we said something judgmental we're doing the work of trying
to untangle the automatic emotional reactions of the cognitive unconscious from the thinking
that's going on in our conscious mind.
And when we ask another person why did you say that we're encouraging them to do the
same kind of work.
In fact we can say that effective communication begins with asking why.
If saying how we got to thinking that George is a great guy is valuable for people to know
and if they're really going to understand us better why don't we just do it.
The answer is it's hard to work.
It forces us to think about our thinking and you may remember we said earlier that we prefer
low effort approaches to thought in most of our daily talk.
Moreover judgemental abstractions imply a great deal so we don't have to do all the work of
saying it.
Second we really like using abstract and judgemental language.
It rewards our self sense of self as competent.
We sound clear we sound definite sure of ourselves and when we talk like this then we get other
people's attention and we of course love ourselves for this.
We get them involved engaged very quickly.
We get their emotions working at several levels positive or negative hope or hate and again
we do this without providing much in the way of information.
It all works it's all good well not quite.
When we talk like this things can go wrong very very quickly.
Poor word choices spoken in inappropriate context can get us into some serious trouble
because we can't know for sure until the other person tells us how others will get our judgments.
Turns out that sticks stones and words can hurt.
People respond to the emotional energy attached to their meanings for our words.
Words can have attached to them those same somatic markers of positive or negative energy
stored in our unconscious mind as we said in lecture four.
These are deeply learned because words often mark in conscious memory situations or people
whose actions were either threat or joy inducing to us as we grew up.
And when something didn't happen to us directly that's okay we can be told about it often
enough and with enough negative emotion by someone we care about that we will react to
the word and what it represents as if it were real even though we never directly experienced it.
The last we want to talk about is our simple judgment tools the heuristics that we use
to make decisions about what's going on and what's going to happen next in everyday talk
and there are four of them.
The first judgment tool thinking tool we tend to use is that we take things at face value
we just accept things words and numbers the anchor our next thought.
What we hear first can act as a starting point for our subsequent decision making.
Now the rule here is just be careful what you say first to another.
The second judgment tool we use is called ease of availability.
We base our judgments on the ease with which we can bring something to mind something that's
familiar.
When logic seems to be the easier it is to recall the truer it must be.
It's a wonderful experiment where the experimenter asked participants to recall and write down
the times they were assertive so the first part of it they're asked recall six times
you were assertive write them down.
Turns out that's pretty easy for a human memory and at the end of the exercise people
then rated themselves in terms of whether or not they were assertive and they rated
themselves as assertive.
Next part of the experiment participants are asked to recall 12 times they were assertive.
Now that turns out to be much harder to do for the human memory and at the end of the
experiment after struggling to come up with the last six people rated themselves as far
less assertive.
Again the logic is I must not be so assertive because this was really hard to remember.
They don't judge the task they judge themselves.
Another judgment tool we use to evaluate situations is the representativeness approach.
How similar is it to be as we look at them as we perceive them and how they fit into
our schema.
Classifying something a person or a situation and comparing it to a typical case in our
past is what we do.
We compare and contrast where speed matters in the flow of the action around us we pay
attention to certain elements things we already know about remember lecture five which become
the focus of our thoughts as we make a quick match with the past and if it's kind of like
now that's good enough we've decided we can talk now we can move on and we do this without
looking directly at what's really happening in front of us in effect our sense making
is based on plausibility well he looks like one of those kind of people he could be a
threat to me I remember my childhood those kind of guys actually were bullies for me
in school.
We look at positive possibility rather than accuracy to make that final decision.
And the fourth and final approach the quick device we use in our thinking is we treat
assumptions as facts.
We have a hard time distinguishing between the kinds of information we actually know
what we call here inferences and observable facts the difficulty with the English language
is that unlike other languages the words I know refer to several levels of data at the
same time.
The words I know reflect report data what we call descriptive data statements that can
be verified or disproved back the rule of thumb for report information or data is the
following I know it because I saw or I heard it and if someone else were there they would
have seen or heard the same thing so we need to keep going back to that if we're actually
presenting information as factual.
The next level up however we call inferences or assumptions these are statements made about
something that we don't know on the basis of something we do know.
We add information automatically and turns out this is what we mean by the words I know
most of the time a good deal of the information we exchange as factual knowledge is actually
the assumption of knowledge and finally the third level what we call judgments we add
an expression of approval or disapproval to an assumption we made whether or not that
assumption is based on something we've actually seen or heard and this level of I know can
be the most oppressive form of language needless to say perhaps but as we go up each step our
language becomes more compact and more abstract.
Let's just reflect for a moment on the nature of description or judgment by doing a short
exercise what I'm going to do here is I'm going to have a statement I'm going to make
a statement and that I want you to decide whether it's a description of a behavior or
a person or it's a judgment about a behavior or a person if you keep your answer in mind
for a moment then we'll discuss each statement after it appears okay how about John was mad
at me yesterday for no reason judgment or description well the no reason makes it a
judgment you're trying to read John's mind you can't observe his metal processes directly
you can't know them directly and following our rule of thumb for knowing factual data
this is not factual data it's a judgment how about this one yesterday night George cleaned
up the basement what do you think it's a description right you or anyone else could
have seen him enact these behaviors so they're factual how about Henry is aggressive well
pretty straightforward that's a judgment this is your opinion there's no supporting description
of behavior here or the situation heck maybe others think he's just assertive and finally
this one my father complains when I talk with him judgment description well if you're not
sure turns out when I ask these questions to lots of other people they're not sure either
turns out the word complains is a tough one we often use it as a descriptor when in fact
like other words of its kind they're just simply labels for whole chunks of behavior
and carry lots of emotional weight with them moreover we don't exactly say what it means
to us when we use it it's a shorthand for any combination of what we think of as irritating
behaviors irritating repetition of statements they say it over and over again the sound
of their voices complain fuller whiny the focus of their talk is repetitious it's really
a judgment hidden under a label you want to communicate what your father does describe
his actual actions and words the last time you talked to him and then describe your feelings
about him much more effective at the descriptive level than simply using the word complains
speaking at the judgment level of I know can be the most oppressive form of language we've
already said this for instance when we share gossip or rumors about other people we often
do this without thinking about it very much in fact automatic assumptions and judgments
are a mostly unnoticed part of our everyday small talk unnoticed that is until we're
challenged by someone and we find ourselves in one of those 3d moments we've talked about
which involve unexpected differences and disagreements that can take us by surprise and make us
feel pretty ineffective as speakers just want to give people the facts think about this it's
accident time on the interstate after the injured are taken care of the policeman involved
in the scene start talking to anyone who can talk and ask them the same dumb question what's
happened here some people look at the cops as if they're not so they see all the carnage
around and say why would you be asking such an obvious question they need to ask and get
as much descriptive information as possible and also ask as many different people as possible
as they because they know at some point in the future in a courtroom perhaps people will
make conflicting judgments about what might have happened here and the police have to
be ready with as much detailed description of the events as possible we just don't take
this kind of care in everyday talk particularly when we're in disagreement about something
for us it's a matter of just simply winning the contest we rushed to judgment now this
rushed to judgment has a model behind it that we call the inference ladder and although
other versions of this model of thinking have been extant in the field of communication
for many years this particular version of the ladder metaphor explaining how the mind moves
upward from many facts to a very few judgments from description to abstraction was published by
an organizational change practitioner called Peter Senge and his colleagues in 1994 it has
been widely used ever since as a teaching tool it works because it combines into one easily
remembered image all of the processes of the mind we are reviewing in this part of the course
it combines non-conscious and conscious thinking and is a very useful way of thinking about the
minds on the fly decision-making processes when particularly in situations of disagreement with
somebody like many other useful models including our interpersonal communication model it comes
with some basic assumptions or truths attached to it and here they are when confronted by someone
else we believe that one our beliefs are the truth and two this truth is obvious or it should
be to anyone listening and we know that it should be obvious because our beliefs are based on real
data and what is that real data the data we select now we start at the wider bottom rung of the
ladder and the observable data we are immersed in a sea of that millions of bits of information
per second our non-conscious mind manages all this through the perception processes we discussed last
lecture so at the next rung of the ladder we select data we add meanings to it based on our
cultural background based on our personal experience and we produce lasting patterns lasting
memorable patterns we tap into these patterns to deal with reality as best we can but reality is
a flow it's full of constant variation and our mind leaves out lots of new bits because they
don't fit with the old bits we also discussed this in our perception lecture so when we call upon it
to fit one or more of these patterns into current reality our mind simply makes stuff up
again we just go for plausibility thus the next rung up the ladder says our mind makes
inferences or assumptions about what the current moment is like based on what we know from the
past and we go for just close enough and what isn't there we just add we do this in a very rapid
automatic fashion but remember we're creating something that isn't real that actually isn't there
in most conversations these first rungs are handled automatically by the cognitive unconscious
part of the mind at the next rung of the ladder we now consciously draw conclusions about the
external situation on the basis of our invented internal reality not only to do what we need to do
to make up our conscious minds but also to respond to the surges of emotional energy delivered by
our cognitive unconscious as we reach a decision remember that we use our emotions to work our
way through decisions and we we finish we draw a conclusion essentially make a judgment about
what's actually happening now because we are conscious of our beliefs and about how things
should be or ought to happen at the next rung of the ladder we have to kind of massage our
conclusion about this particular moment to fit our beliefs and then finally at the highest rung
we talk now we think we're acting in the moment i mean we think we're responding to an event or
another person in the here and now except of course that we are no longer in the right now
the right now the reality is at the bottom of the ladder this particular moment is what started
the process but obviously is not what ends it what you act and think on is a much higher level of
emotionally energized abstraction in fact you're five steps above the reality of the now
and one more thing just so we'll realize how disconnected we can be from real reality
sanghi puts in a feedback loop on the ladder pointing downwards to show us that our beliefs
pre-construct the data that comes through our mental door in the first place he reminds us that
we say when i see it then i'll believe it when in fact the mind operates in the reverse
we have to believe it first then we can see it now these processes are at work anytime we
talk with another person they're simply more obvious when we're in disagreement with them
now i have a number of exercises i do in my workshops to demonstrate our mental processes
at each rung of the ladder of inference and for today for today we're just going to do the first
step we'll work at the second rung the selection and perception processes of the mind
i'm going to repeat a single sentence give you about 10 seconds to process it
all i want you to do is discover how many times the letter f occurs in the sense
finished files are a result of many years of scientific study combined with the experience
of many years now how many f's do you think were in that sense
well people get different answers and let me tell you how that works when i do this
in other situations with a group of people in the room i start out by saying how many people got
sixes i get a few hands fives i get a few more hands threes a little few sheepish hands even
twos one or two people it's always the same no one ever because begins with a consensus
on how many f's are actually in the sentence would you like to know how many f's are in the
sentence to know which answer you actually got and where it stands in the variety of answers
that i always get it turns out there are six i want you to remember how the non-conscious mind
works in this situation the last time we we showed the non-conscious mind is a metaphor we use that
iceberg with the conscious mind is the bit of snow and ice that's on the top and the non-conscious
mind is the enormous part below the water now i asked you to look for f's in the sentence that's
a conscious mind rule but the non-conscious mind has an additional rule that is leave out the f's
that sound like these and it turns out o f the word of is pronounced like a v so that's what
your mind was doing and why it didn't automatically generate the number six for most people to do
this right away so what's the lesson of the iceberg and the f's people have different
selection rules based on their inheritance and early experience as speakers we can't know that
we can't know how the other mind the other's mind actually selects data that comes through its front
door because you know what they don't know it either these are non-conscious rules that were
constructed before the age of five some people can see all six s right away others don't takes a
long time to actually point them out when we make the assumption that everyone sees things the same
way we do we end up wrong most of the time that's a judgment by the way from my experience
and if we don't get conscious about our thinking processes we often think and speak in error
particularly in difficult situations we do some of the following things first of all we take the
uncalculated risk that is we fail to recognize where we are on the inference ladder before we speak
we use indiscriminate basically stereotypical thinking and say that to people and we assume
that all people are in a category and have identical characteristics and of course we view people
and things in terms of the labels that we give them the next thing that we often do in this
particular situation is we use static evaluation that is once we label somebody we don't change
our perception of them even when they change most commonly we tend to think in polarization
terms when you think abstractly and quickly we tend to think in black and white opposites all
or nothing it's hard to think of middle ground terms only problem with that is that's where most
of the reality is we tend to speak out of these particular processes in what we call allness
senses speaking as if our statement is the only thing there is to say about something we use the
words always they always do this never you never do this the reality we refer to as constantly
changing but by using all words always and never we act like nothing changes our words don't change
now how can we consciously talk ourselves down the inference ladder
well what we do in the first four steps of the ladder is done by the cognitive unconscious in
most conversations evoking a schema providing information but we can learn to go back down
the ladder consciously we can reconstruct our reality by asking questions of ourselves and of
others and when we do this we resolve many conversational gridlocks most often we discover
we're not talking about the same thing more specifically there are specific things you can
do right away to avoid the destructive power of judgmental words and automatic thinking
in everyday talk when you're facing disagreements look for meanings in people not in words look
behind the denotative meanings of the words being used and remember the perception process
you only have a schema to work with here not reality so be aware of the quality of your
information as you speak try to distinguish between facts and assumptions inferences
and when facing disagreement differences and disorder get down the inference ladder as we
said earlier make your thinking processes and there's a part of the information being exchanged
put your thoughts on the table say things like I assume that shows you how you the assumptions
you made I came to this conclusion because shows you how you got to the end of the process
and get them to do the same get them to ask question what leads you to that conclusion
or can you help me understand your thinking here all of this will help you and the others
stay more focused on the realities being described and less on the feelings hidden
underneath our labels and abstract judgments whether we like it or not whether we think of
ourselves as objective and cool or not our feelings are always with us they are the uncons they are
the conscious level of the unconscious energy stored in the cognitive unconscious part of the
mind in the next lecture we're going to complete our look at how the conscious mind functions
by focusing on how we can become aware of this process and express our feelings thanks
