Lecture 7 – The Conscious Mind and Emotion
Welcome to Lecture 7.
As information flows through our perception and cognition processes, we notice something,
bodily changes.
For instance, as we move from uncertainty to certainty, things happen, e.g. fidgeting
body movements, tension in the shoulders and neck, change to a moment of stillness in the
body, dropping of the shoulders, unclenching of the fingers, relaxing of the stomach muscles.
These muscles are responding automatically to biochemical changes deeper in the mind
body.
Remember Lecture 4?
We call them somatic markers.
Once we become aware of these physical reactions, we name them and call them our feelings.
As a society, we talk about our feelings constantly.
Isn't it the first question a reporter asks of someone who's just achieved or avoided
something dramatic?
But at the individual level, our awareness of and ability to talk about feelings vary
significantly.
Moreover, few people are actually conscious of the interaction between our feelings and
thinking processes and their effect on the way we communicate with each other.
In this lecture, I'll describe how developing an awareness of our feelings, naming them,
and describing them accurately to ourselves and to others, is central to our becoming
more effective communicators.
First, some history.
In our studies of human thought and talk, emotions and cognition have been separated
from millennia.
Feelings are dangerous is the main theme that goes through most of these millennia.
A quote from Publius Cyrus, first century BC philosopher, rule your feelings lest your
feelings rule you.
Or in the 1600s, after writing dramatic treatise on the nature of rational thought, Descartes
makes the point that feelings are less useful than thought by saying, I think, therefore
I am.
And down is one of the great bumper stickers of philosophy of all time.
Now, things change by the 1960s.
Here's a quote from another textbook writer, Maurer, who says, the emotions are of quite
extraordinary importance in the total economy of living organisms and do not deserve being
put into opposition with intelligence.
The emotions are, it seems, themselves a high order of intelligence.
By the 1980s, emotions are seen as an essential evolutionary adaptation for the mind.
And the key functions include preparing us to take adaptive action, coordinating experience,
providing direction, providing a sense of wholeness, becoming aware of our feelings and
how we notice and name deeper responses.
Our culture as always provides us a common sense model of feeling awareness.
Something happens outside of us, we experience it, and then we respond physiologically with
an emotion.
Now, this common sense model was turned around by psychologist Stanley Schachter in 1960
with his groundbreaking research.
His hypothesis is something actually happens outside of us and our bodies react first.
And only then does our conscious mind match our internal emotion to the situation by calling
up and naming a feeling, then we have the feeling.
Now, he argued that for anyone to notice a feeling, they had to be in a general state
of physical arousal, what is called diffuse physiological arousal or DPA.
And that different feelings arise out of the same general state of bodily excitement.
Now, this was a considerable point of contention at the time among psychologists.
They also argued that the way individuals describe their feelings would depend on how
they interpreted what was going on around them in the situation.
The context of their reactions makes the difference.
He had students do an experiment in pairs.
One was the naive subject who received a small amount of synthetic adrenaline in a glass
of water.
Can you imagine?
We could actually give students drugs back then.
Never done today.
The other was the experimenter's helper who drank only water.
As the symptoms of arousal, speeded up heartbeat, some sweating, faster breathing, began to
appear in the naive subject, the experimental helpers were told to pretend they shared the
same symptoms and to act in one of two ways.
As if this were an enjoyable, exciting experience or as if it was uncomfortable and frightening.
Students of the subjects responded to what was happening internally by listening to how
the helper was defining the situation externally and imitating how the helper was behaving.
So it turns out that changes in the helper's behavior shifted the context and the meaning
of the student's internal reactions to themselves.
Now, why was this happening?
Well, in the brains of the students who had drunk the synthetic adrenaline, the amygdala
was sending quick evaluations of the chemical stimuli to the body and the frontal lobe of
the brain was watching all of this and as frontal lobes always do, they waited for more
information to understand the context.
This was an ambiguous situation.
There was no imminent danger in the situation.
There was no amygdala takeover or hijack going on here, but the body was aroused.
So the amygdala is actually saying somehow through the body to the frontal lobes, do
something and depending on the scenario, the frontal lobe was responding with, we are
doing something.
We're laughing and having fun or we are doing something.
We're actually scared.
Now this is exactly the opposite of the common sense model of emotional reaction.
Something happens outside of us.
We experience it as a feeling and then our bodies react physiologically with an emotion.
This effect has been demonstrated in many following experiments.
He set this out, everybody changed the way they looked at doing experiments on emotion.
Mostly in the lab, however, there are very few real life moments, but there was one and
I think it's worthwhile telling you about.
Usually in the lab, the experimenter is putting a naive subject to the test.
In this case, the naive subjects actually chose the test themselves.
Remember, your brain is always trying to figure out what's going on, matching your internal
state to something that it notices in the situation.
The researcher's hypothesis in this case, strong emotions are relabeled as sexual attraction
whenever an acceptable object of that attraction is present and the emotion producing circumstances
do not require the full attention of the individual.
When you're aroused and you don't feel like you're in danger, your arousal in fact can
be turned into sexual attraction if there happens to be a good looking young woman coming
your way.
Of course, it turns out there is.
We call this study misattributed lust on a swinging bridge.
In it, 85 males between 18 and 35 were interviewed after they'd just come to the edge of one
of the two bridges over the Capilano River in north Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
The research is called the Capilano Suspension Bridge, the experimental bridge.
Until there, it's a great tourist attraction, five foot wide, 450 feet long, constructed
of wooden boards attached to wire cables that run from one side to the other of the Capilano
Canyon.
It has the tendency to tilt, sway, and wobble as you walk across it, has very low hand rails
made of wire cable, and it creates the impression that one is about to fall over the side at
any moment.
It's a very long drop to the ground below.
The control bridge on the other hand was a solid wood structure further upriver.
This bridge was wider, firmer, made of heavy cedar, only 10 feet above a small shallow
rivulet, high hand rails didn't tilt or sway.
Like all good researchers, they tested the fear-inducing qualities of each bridge and
everybody interviewed rated the Capilano Suspension Bridge as very scary.
Those on the control bridge didn't feel any fear at all.
Also needless to say, everyone interviewed coming off the swinging bridge was in some
state of DPA, diffuse physiological arousal, when the experiment occurred.
Now, what was this experiment?
The person was simply being stopped and interviewed by an attractive young woman at the edge of
the bridge.
The interviewer explained that she was doing a project for her psychology class on the
effects of exposure to scenic attractions on creative expression.
She then hands them a two-page questionnaire.
The first page contains six items, age, education, prior visits to the bridge, all that sort
of thing.
The second page was the creative part.
Subjects were instructed to write a brief dramatic story based upon a picture of a young
woman covering her face with one hand and reaching out with the other.
Just an idea to stimulate thoughts in the brain.
Any story with a mention of sexual intercourse and sexual content of any kind receives scores
on a scale, with intercourse being mentioned receiving five points and at the most, girlfriend
is being mentioned receives a score of two.
People just simply, the men had to react to this woman in the picture and just make something
up.
On the completion of the questionnaire, the interviewer thanked the subject and offered
to explain the experiment in more detail when she had more time.
She tore the corner off a sheet of paper, wrote down her name and phone number and invited
each subject to call if they wanted to talk further.
The experimental subjects were told that the interviewer's name was Gloria and the control
subjects were told her name was Donna so that they could easily be classified when they
called.
On the assumption that curiosity about the experiment should be equal between control
and experimental groups, it was felt that the differential calling rates might reflect
differential attraction to the interviewer.
I think by now you've probably guessed the outcome.
Subjects on the swinging bridge expressed significantly more sexual content in their
projected made up story about the woman with the hand in front of her face and then the
people did on the solid bridge, in fact double the amount.
More of them took the experimenter's phone number, 50% actually tried to call her whereas
only 12% of the control subjects from the other bridge called.
The subjects were in the midst of a full body reaction on the Capilana swinging bridge
and their conscious brain found a logical answer to it.
It must be sexual attraction to the experimenter, not fear.
It showed up in their non-conscious use of sexual imagery as they're writing about a
neutral picture and their continuing interest in the young woman.
Her brain needs to match your arousal to a feeling thought quickly and it's not that
careful about how it does it.
It just simply matches up the biochemistry to a stimuli that kind of looks about right
and you consciously attribute your arousal to the wrong thing.
What this might mean for effective communication?
Well, one possibility is that it might be best for us to consider the circumstances under
which we are having a conversation.
If one or both the people are trying to talk to one another in the midst of a tense or
frightening situation, they might attach some surprising emotions to the outcomes of that
conversation.
Keep this in mind the next time you're having, you're telling somebody something personal
and for something else difficult going on in their lives or in the moment.
In summary, there are always three levels of reaction to a changing situation.
Emotions, the biochemical responses to the changes, they're instantaneously positive
or negative in your body.
Rapid bodily reactions and response to those chemical shifts.
Your cognitive brain, the left frontal lobe, is basically got the job of matching up your
internal state with the external and interpreting these reactions.
Even though, of course, they may have little or nothing to do with one another.
And then, of course, its job is to name them as feelings so you're consciously, you will
consciously recognize them.
So what about feelings and mood?
Well, feelings are a way of noticing emotions that require attention and interrupt cognitive
processes and behaviors.
But after the immediate feeling has subsided, it usually lingers on in the form of a mood.
Do moods matter?
Well, you may have moved on to feeling something else in your day to day life, but the biochemistry
from the first reaction isn't quite done with your body yet.
One of my faves, simple, uncomplicated, people are called on a sunny day.
They're more positive about their current state of happiness in life in general than
people who are contacted on a rainy day.
In another study, when people are given a small, almost worthless gift, they seem to
feel better and were in a much better mood when they gave ratings to their household appliances
when interviewed 50 feet further away in the mall than other people who were walking nearby
them and were stopped, asked the same things, but who had received nothing beforehand.
Bad moods do just the opposite, make life and other people look more dangerous to us.
So it seems like our brain has the same problem with misattributing arousal.
If we haven't figured out why we're in a particular mood, we sometimes allow that feeling to inform
our opinion of things in general.
But moods and feelings matter most when we're not paying attention.
When we do notice our situation, they don't affect our opinions or our thoughts at all.
We can separate them out quite easily.
So we don't have to be under the automatic control of our moods, we just need to awake
into the fact that we're having one and come up with a reason why, then it no longer shapes
other unrelated thoughts.
How about feelings, mood, and problem solving?
When do we let our feelings do the thinking for us?
I should call this the fifth heuristic.
We talked about four of them in our previous lecture.
This comes out of work by Anthony Forgus, who actually does the effective infusion model
analysis of emotions and thought processes around decision making.
He argues that emotions shape our decision making under two extreme circumstances.
One, too much information, too little time, and the decision matters very much so you
have to go with your gut.
Remember Damasio's research in our previous lecture on those who couldn't decide anything?
Remember first responders quickly changing, dealing with quickly changing situations?
Number two, circumstance when we kind of go with our feelings is when we have too little
information, lots of time, and the decision just doesn't matter very much.
People ask themselves, how do I feel about this?
And they go with that.
In other words, we automatically let our current feeling state shape our decision making even
when it doesn't matter to the outcome of our decision.
So immediate feelings are kind of like moods.
They can unconsciously influence the judgments we make.
Now volunteers for an experiment at a particular university enter the lab one after another,
and one of them is actually an actor, a confederate of the experimenter, and is paid to appear
to be just another volunteer.
In the first scenario of this experiment, the actor comes in late wearing a t-shirt
from the university, apologizes nicely for her lightness, puts away her headphones, opens
a bag of cookies, and shares with the group.
In the second scenario, the actor shows up late wearing the rival university sweater,
acts with hostility towards the experimenter, and when she comments on her lightness, you
know she just ignores her.
She proceeds then to eat her cookies by herself, puts on her earphones, and blasts her music
loud enough for everybody to hear.
Volunteers in both groups were told they were to be either a player or an observer in a
simple game of computerized tennis.
The actor was purposely selected as a player in both scenarios.
The point of the experiment was that all other real volunteers were the observers.
The volunteers were to watch the tennis game within an individual cubicle and act as lines
men.
They were told that while they actually had no control on the judging or calling the game,
they were still to make calls according to what they saw because they were providing
the experimenter with excellent data on the clarity of the game.
So the volunteers knew they had no influence on the game.
There was no purpose to be served by false reporting about the balls falling inside
or outside the boundary lines, and still their feelings biased their reports.
When the ball fell just inside the line, the people who had been treated uncivially
by our experimenters, Confederate, called it out.
When the actor's computerized opponent hit a ball that was just out, they called it in.
People who felt warmly towards the actor did just the opposite.
They made calls to enhance their game.
This was all done without their realizing it.
They thought they called them just like they saw them.
Subjects had no personal agendas here.
They didn't know anybody in the experiment before they showed up, and even though they
knew they had no control over the game, their feelings toward the actor powerfully influenced
what they saw.
Now my TV watching sort of guilty pleasures are two reality shows.
They're competitions about things I like and know something about.
One is for singing and the other is for ballroom dance.
And I have found that in the early rounds of these shows, no matter how talented individuals
are, I know that they won't move ahead in the show and in the competition and have a
chance to win if they are also not pleasant, personable, or if they're not a bit humble
in the face of critique from the judges.
After all, the audience votes.
And at least on these shows, warm feelings in the viewers can take a competitor a very
long way towards winning.
Feelings influence how persuasive we can be.
An experimenter induces either a positive or negative mood in subjects by asking them
to think about something that had made them sad or happy and then ask them to write an
argument for a change that had recently been announced on campus.
Turns out the sad people produced higher quality and more persuasive arguments than did the
happy persuaders.
Feelings also influence our casual attribution of others' behaviors.
As we said in a previous lecture, when individuals try to explain others' behaviors, they make
what psychologists call the fundamental attribution error.
That is, they believe that people act as they do because of the type of people they are internally
and not because they're reacting to the situation they happen to be in.
I want you to note, however, that in happy relationships, this is not so much of a problem.
Why not?
John Gottman, whose relationship research we will explore in later lectures, found out
that in long-term relationships, if one person does something negative, the other tends to
evaluate the negativity as fleeting and situational, thanks that the individual is just in a bad
mood or having a stressful day.
In unhappy relationships, the same behavior is interpreted as stable and internal to the
person.
The attribution error is back.
Now, we've been consistently discussing face-to-face talk in personal relationships.
There's also lots of good data on the effects of feelings on productivity, leaders' feelings
and co-workers' feelings in the workplace.
Feelings and mood turned out to be contagious.
In 70 work teams across diverse industries, members who sat in meetings together ended
up sharing moods, good or bad, within two hours.
Leaders' positive mood was significantly and positively related to group work experience,
work performance, performance of pro-social behavior, helping each other out, and negatively
related to the group's voluntary turnover rate.
People stayed.
Feeling good makes people more mentally efficient, better at understanding information.
You others as and events in more positive light feel more optimistic about their abilities,
makes them more creative and predisposed to be helpful to other people.
Almost all the processes we've discussed are automatic, low-effort ways of noticing and
naming our feelings, and as I hope you can see, the outcomes of these processes can affect
our emotional connection to others and our communication with them in important ways.
We need to become more conscious of our feelings and more aware of when they appear in our
minds and how we name them.
To be more effective communicators, we need to become more emotionally intelligent.
This concept was introduced to the public in 1995 by Daniel Goldman in his book called
Emotional Intelligence.
In it, he reviews the implications of this concept based on a number of pieces of research,
a number of scientists including Reuven Baron, who invented the widely used shorthand designator
EQ for emotional intelligence, as opposed to IQ for cognitive intelligence.
And he defined emotional intelligence as, quote, our ability to recognize, understand,
and use emotions to cope with ourselves, others, and the environment, close quote.
To me, recognize, understand, and use means knowing, naming your feelings, and coping
means being able to regulate your feelings and effectively communicate them.
Now there are several important recurrent findings in this research into emotional intelligence.
Among others, people who can read their own emotions and recognize their impact are likely
to be good at reading other people's emotional states.
They also seem to be more aware of their overall strengths and limits, and this awareness contributes
to a sound sense of their self-worth and their capabilities.
People who can manage their feeling reactions, who can keep their disruptive emotions and
impulses under control, particularly in difficult situations, are seen as more trustworthy, honest,
and of high integrity.
People who can be more emotionally flexible in adapting to new situations, including seeing
the upside in events, are seen as more effective managers.
Knowing and naming our feelings, here's some research on what emotions there are.
Plucic's emotional circumplex really speaks to what philosophers and psychologists have
proposed over the years as being the basic emotions.
All the lists include fear, anger, and sadness.
Most include joy, love, and surprise.
We have only a few hundred emotion words, and they tend to fall into families based on similarity.
Many types of studies have indicated this, including studies using factor analysis and
similarity scaling.
Plucic lists eight primary emotions in his research.
He basically adds two to Ekman's original list that we covered in lecture three.
Most surprisingly, they can be organized like a color wheel to demonstrate their similarity
and their combinations to produce new emotions.
He puts similar emotions close together, and the opposite's 180 degrees apart, like
complementary colors.
Other emotions are mixtures of the primary emotions, just as some colors are primary
and others are made by mixing the primary colors together.
He did research on whether people got the combinations.
The emotions that result when two or more fundamental emotions are combined.
And they did.
The four key emotions and their opposites are joy, sadness, fear, anger.
We've already seen all those.
But he adds two more opposites to Ekman's last two, disgust and surprise.
It turns out acceptance is his opposite of disgust.
Anticipation is a feeling of calm and openness.
Anticipation is his opposite of surprise.
Anticipation is a feeling of awaiting a reward.
Same feeling that we get every time we thumb through our phone mail looking for a new message
or a new addition to our social networking page.
It's a kind of addictive feeling.
He provided simple, clear names for feelings that people can actually describe.
But he assembled them into a circular model, the circumplex, and the emergence of secondary
emotions based on combining and joining primary emotions becomes really obvious when you see
it.
Pluchik's research demonstrated that people have a high level of agreement on these combinations.
They seem to represent something real to us.
He gives us direct and a pretty simple way of noticing and naming our feelings.
And this can lead us to emotionally competent talk.
When we finally notice our physiological responses to a situation, blushing, sweating,
and tightened gut, our emotions come.
We need to name them as feelings.
As emotional intelligence researchers shown, knowing and naming what arouses us is a strength.
It contributes to our sense of self-control.
When we are oblivious to our own feelings, we'll also be tuned out to how others feel.
So most often, if we notice our emotions, we can manage them.
This is one of the key functions of the conscious mind.
And it's so important that we'll give over a lecture to this process in the near future.
Recognizing and communicating your feelings more exactly and at the appropriate time is
worth it.
It sustains relationships.
Gottman's research on relationships will come through with this in more detail in a
future lecture as well.
It really makes a difference.
And the important thing, of course, is how you actually communicate your feelings.
So here are some guidelines about how to be effective when discussing your feelings with
someone else.
First of all, try to describe your feelings accurately to yourself.
And think before you speak.
Before launching into a tirade about how you feel without really thinking about it using
only vague labels like mad or great.
Try to describe how your body feels, such as, I'm shaking like a leaf.
Or I feel all tied up in knots.
These statements are more accurate and don't leave the other wondering what's really going
on.
They also avoid blame.
I'm doing the feeling here.
Not you make me feel something.
You can be feeling several emotions at once.
You may not be mad at your partner.
You may also be disappointed or embarrassed.
Remember our lust on the bridge example.
There may be other emotions regarding other difficult or frightening situations at play
besides the emotion you happen to be feeling regarding your partner.
Identify reasons for your feelings.
Me and the other need to know what triggered your me in this situation.
Anchor in the present.
Saying what happened just now is vital to get their information.
Don't open the guinea sack of past hurts and alleged crimes and throw them out of the
table.
Own your feelings directly.
Say, I am sad.
I am angry.
I am excited.
I'm happy.
And always say I am feeling instead of you make me feel.
You make me as disowning and disempowering.
If you say I am feeling, don't follow it with a that.
That's just an indirect way of stating an opinion or belief.
Not a feeling statement.
I feel that you don't listen to me as an opinion.
I feel that I'm never going to learn this as a judgment.
You've got to get these that's out of there and just say I feel upset.
I feel unheard.
I feel badly.
Avoid all the statements.
I'm always, you never.
This is hard to do when you're driven by intense feelings, particularly anger, frustration
and sadness.
I'm going to ask you to do it several more times.
Say what you want the listener to actually do.
Don't just blow off steam or collapse into tears.
Hold it together long enough to let the other know how to avoid this situation the next
time.
In the last three lectures, we've taken a look at how people perceive the world, how
they think about it, and how they perceive and feel in this process.
We don't see, think and feel separately, actually.
As we consciously process the information flowing through our minds, these things all
come together.
They happen simultaneously, and the way they are woven together is never neutral.
The mind creates our reality from a particular point of view, a perspective, and that is
the perspective of the self.
In the next three lectures, we will look at how we develop our sense of self and how vital
it is in shaping our sense of and responses to the world around us.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
