Lecture 9 Self, Attachment, and Self-Esteem
Welcome to lecture 9.
In our previous lecture, we reviewed the several levels of self that develop as we grow.
From the foundational layers of personality that shape how we process information from
the world around us, to the rise of the self-concept, a sense of distinctive existence that we can
observe in our own minds, and that develops out of our interaction with parents, siblings,
and peers.
Ourself is the narrative we invent to make sense of how we see, think, and feel about
the people around us.
But while we can think about ourself from a distance, we can't distance ourselves from
the emotions that the self embodies.
We don't just perceive ourself concept and think about it, we feel it.
And not just any feelings, but immediate and powerful feelings.
And if you're not sure about this, just think of your reaction to the last time a waiter
treated you with condescension when you simply inquired after a long delayed first course.
No waiting on those feelings, they just showed up promptly.
And they're intense.
Feeling our sense of adequacy or worthiness.
When our sense of self-worth is threatened, intense anger or deep sadness can be triggered.
Moreover, these feelings are directly wired into our body's biochemical responses to
incoming messages and can automatically drive our responses to others.
Who does that waiter think he is anyway?
In this lecture, we're going to consider how self-esteem develops.
And what emotions are involved in the process?
The euphoria we feel when it's supported and the anger and sadness we feel when it's compromised.
We're also going to consider how we manage our self-perceptions and our self-presentation
to preserve our self-esteem in our daily interactions with others.
To do this, we're going to organize our story around a simple model of self-awareness called
the Johari window.
The simple table built around two dimensions, what we do or don't consciously know about
ourselves, and what others do or don't know about us.
As these dimensions intersect, it also makes the point that we simply don't always know
what we don't know about ourselves.
Now the Johari window is divided like a window into four panes.
The upper left pane is box number one.
This is the open self, where all the information, behavior, attitudes, feelings, desires that
you and others know about you or that you would tell them exist.
This is the area where we construct and preserve a coherent narrative of ourselves and a stable
sense of self-esteem.
It's built out of our memories of who we think we are, in terms of who we think we were and
how we behaved in memorable situations, and how we remember being treated by significant
others.
The upper right pane is box number two.
This is the blind self, which includes all the things that you don't see or know about
yourself, but that others recognize, from minor irritating unconscious habits to substantial
automatic defense mechanisms or approaches to conflict.
As you become aware of these things through self-observation or through very carefully
structured talk with someone you trust, your communication improves.
We'll talk about this in the next lecture, when we talk about the defense mechanisms
that we use while we're talking, to maintain our sense of self and self-esteem.
For now, let's go to the lower left pane of the johari window.
Box number three, the hidden self.
These are all the things you know, but keep secret about yourself.
Others don't know these things about us.
When and how we disclose these things to others, and how much we tell shapes the way we see
others, and they see us.
These include all the I, me conversations we've discussed up to this point.
The socially unacceptable impulses, thoughts, and fantasies that we entertain, but we never
enact, because our social self intervenes, and we manage our external behavior accordingly.
Having people uncover these might undermine our ideal sense of self, and damage our sense
of self-worth.
Now, the lower right pane is box number four.
It's the unknown self.
This box represents non-conscious truths about ourselves, things that neither we nor anyone
else actually knows.
Contents of this area of the self are inferred by things that appear in the consciousness,
and blind-sighted reactions that take us by surprise, which are triggered by situational
cues that we haven't noticed before.
This is the home of all that early call and response learning that shaped our basic temperament
inheritance.
All the input before we were five, that established our personality and became the foundation
for a distinct sense of self, and self-worth.
And because our course focuses on effective communication for better relationships in
all parts of our lives, we're going to discuss our earliest learning in terms of attachment
theory as part of this unknown area of the self.
How we develop our fundamental ways of relating to others out of our earliest communication
relationships with our caregivers.
So let's look again at box one, the things that are known to us and others.
Where does our knowable and tellable self-concept and self-judgment information come from?
From several sources.
From the family, the first and most important influence on the development of our self-concept.
This box includes our responses to parental instruction and our imitation of their behavior.
It houses our deep memories to their responses to our temperament differences and also to
their direct definition of our self.
Our parents tell us who we are by labeling our behaviors early on and providing characters
for us to perform.
My big boy, my sweet girl.
And their gender labeling and other manifestations of difference.
These are followed up with direct instruction on role performance.
Parents and soon teachers try to fill us with the words and the rules or norms for behavior
in terms of what's right and proper.
These are provided as role names and as role performances to be observed and imitated.
Many researchers argue that these ideals don't come in bits and pieces.
They're often delivered in the form of identity scripts.
How to be somebody who belongs to this family.
The scripts lay out the roles and show us how to play them and they form the basic elements
of our future life story.
Here are some examples of family ideals.
This is what a member of our family does.
Work hard, save money or look out for yourself because no one else will or help others.
It's the right thing to do.
And our competence and value as a person is based on our parent's judgments of our
performances against these scripted ideals.
We discover a definition of our self and our feelings about our self in their eyes.
This is reflected appraisal.
The self-fulfilling prophecy contributes to our sense of self-worth as well.
We act in ways that fulfill our own and others' expectations of ourselves.
Children and everyone else must import others' perspectives into their mind.
We can't manage our own behavior as described in the game stage if we can't see ourselves
the way other people see us.
But as we take their perspective, particularly if they are emotionally important to us, we
may label ourselves as they do and then fulfill those labels, live up to or down to the way
others in our lives define us.
Let's see what research tells us about self-fulfilling prophecy and teachers.
In 1968, Robert Rosenthal and Lenore Jacobson conducted an experiment to see if teachers'
expectations for students had any effect on the students' performance.
They administered an IQ test to all students in an elementary school and told the teachers
that some of the students had scored so well that they were sure to bloom academically
in the upcoming year.
Now, in fact, this was not exactly true.
The students identified as bloomers were actually chosen randomly by the experimenters, meaning
that, on average, the students designated as bloomers were no smarter or more likely
to bloom than any other kids.
The only way in which these students differed from their peers was in the minds of their
teachers.
Rosenthal and Jacobson observed the classroom dynamics periodically over the school year
and at the end of the year, they tested all of the children again with another IQ test.
Had the teachers' expectations become reality, indeed they had.
The students labeled as bloomers showed significantly higher gains in their IQ scores than did the
other students.
Rosenthal and Jacobson's findings have since been replicated in a number of other studies.
Now, did the teachers and Rosenthal and Jacobson's study callously decide to give more attention
and more encouragement to the bloomers?
Definitely not.
Most teachers were quite dedicated to giving equal attention to all and said they tried
not to treat some students better than others.
Ever from being a conscious deliberate act, a self-fulfilling prophecy, is a good example
of automatic thinking.
After a careful review of the data, it turns out the teachers approached the bloomers a
little more warmly.
The child responded positively, so they gave them a little more material and a little more
difficult material to learn and more and better feedback on their work.
And finally, they tended to answer their questions more often in class and gave them a little
bit longer to respond.
Our self-judgment information also comes from seeing others through the eyes of other people,
seeing ourselves through the eyes of other people, either present or imagined, and incorporating
their views into our self-concept, who we call this the looking-glass self.
Besides our family, we look at ourselves through the eyes of other people present in our lives,
our childhood and adult peers.
Your peer evaluation works the same way as parental evaluation.
Like our parents, they reflect ourselves back to us, from the schoolyard to the workplace,
to lifelong relationships.
We absorb information in the form of reflected appraisals of us.
We see ourselves in the mirror of their responses.
If they think well of us, we flourish.
If they don't, our self-esteem wilts.
Perhaps the most important element in this open area of self is the story we have to
tell about ourselves, our narrative.
Over the years, this sense of self-worth is constructed and then stabilized by the manipulation
of our memories of us by us.
In their book, Mistakes Were Made, But Not By Me, Tavris and Aronson review many studies
of the effects of cognitive dissonance on people's memories.
When we unthinkingly make our personal narrative coherent over time, we also automatically self-justify.
We mentioned earlier that building a coherent narrative of self is one of the most important
tasks of the conscious mind.
So we're building a conscious schema here, leaving out the parts that don't fit from
the past and including those elements of life that justify our present.
Mostly we don't tell the whole truth, nor do we intentionally lie.
We just simply move parts around, fit them together, make them work to support our present
view of our self.
We leave out the dissonant parts, the, I'm not the kind of person who parts, and as
Tavris says, memory smooths out the wrinkles of dissonance by letting the confirmation
bias, we discussed this in lecture five, letting the confirmation bias hum along, selectively
causing us to forget discrepant, disconfirming information.
This works to support feelings of either positive or negative self-esteem.
To illustrate this process, they review an experiment on teenagers' memories of their
quarrels they had with their parents.
Teens came into the lab with their parents and filled out questionnaires listening, listening
typical topics of disagreement, personal appearance, fighting with siblings, all the usual stuff.
They then had a 10-minute discussion with their parents to try and resolve their biggest
disagreement.
After that, the teens filled out another questionnaire in which they described how they felt about
the conflict, about their parents, and how emotionally intense they were at the moment.
Six weeks later, they were asked to recall the conflict and read it on the same dimensions.
Now, the teens who felt close to their parents rated the conflict as less intense and themselves
as less conflicted than they actually had reported at the time.
On the other hand, the teens who felt ambivalent and remote from their parents remembered themselves
as having been angrier and more bitter than they actually reported at the time.
Their memories of the relationship were retrofitted to serve their current sense of self.
The issues here are the same ones we faced in our discussion of perception of others
and the world around us, the issues of consistency and coherence.
Have attention, helpful forgetting, and building new patterns of closure are the answers to
building a coherent story.
We also tell our stories from our eyes out.
We say, my father did this or did that.
We never say, and I also did something that triggered his behavior.
We tend to tell our stories with the kind of conviction that listeners don't question.
And if they do show that our memory is simply wrong or non-existent, they're usually shocked.
Now let's turn to box three, the hidden self.
Besides the eye-wee discussions we'd rather not have anyone know about, we also help or
hinder our self-esteem by seeing ourselves through the eyes of people we imagine.
It's called the social comparison process.
The concept was developed by Leon Festinger.
A psychologist who also developed the concept of cognitive dissonance.
We learn about our own abilities and attitudes by comparing ourselves with other people.
In our minds, we socially compare ourselves when there is no objective standard for us
to measure ourselves against and when we experience some uncertainty about ourselves in a particular
area of life.
We are most likely to spontaneously engage in downward social comparisons, that is, with
people who are not as good as we are on some dimension of behavior.
We do this when we want to feel better about ourselves.
Or we compare ourselves with our past.
Well, I'm way better now than I was then.
When reminded of a negative past self, we can then restore our present self image by focusing
on how much better we are, how much better our current self is in the moment.
Now what about upward social comparison?
Comparing ourselves with someone who has excelled generally makes us feel bad, unless, of course,
we feel that we can attain what the other has or is at the moment.
Then we're motivated positively.
Now we come to box number four, the unknown area of the self.
We get to the root of self-esteem here.
My favorite model of self-esteem is that of Stephen Glenn, a clinical psychologist who
focused his career on the positive development of young people.
He argued that self-esteem is based on how we hold three vital beliefs.
My life is significant.
There are places outside myself I am a value.
I am a capable person who can learn and do things when I need to.
And although I can't always control what happens to me, I can always determine how I let that
affect me.
And there is much I can do to shape my life.
Our positive or negative perceptions of these three beliefs determine whether or not we
see ourselves as significant, capable, and influential in our lives.
As Glenn said, that's not how we're born.
We're born powerless, with no sense of who we are, and totally at the mercy of others
in our world who take care of us.
And the sooner we emerge out of that, the more of our potential we can realize.
We are not only born powerless, but also essentially selfless.
Our parents teach us about ourselves and the world around us by the way they treat us while
they're teaching us.
And their way of relating to us in our earliest years turns out to be far more central to
our underlying feelings and beliefs about ourselves than the ideals they preach and will
eventually judge us against.
It's a kind of double-edged sword.
They're setting us up for success or failure in their game, not only by creating the game,
but by enhancing or weakening our ability to play it by the way they treat us while they
teach us.
What we're talking about here is our parents' attachment styles.
These are the patterns of communication that teach us not only about the kind of people
we are, but also about the kind of people they are.
And since they are our first relationship, how we will deal with relationships in the
future.
Now, attachment theory draws on the groundbreaking work of psychiatrist and child psychologist
John Bowlby and developmental psychologist Mary Ainsworth.
It states that the kinds of bonds we form as infants with our caregivers influence the
kinds of relationships we form as adults.
Out of their research, they develop three types of attachment styles.
Infants with a secure attachment style have caregivers who are responsive to their needs
and who show positive emotions when interacting with them.
They trust their caregivers, are not worried about being abandoned, and come to view themselves
as worthy and loved.
Infants with an avoidant attachment style typically have caregivers who are aloof and
consistent, rebuffing the infant's attempts to establish intimacy.
These infants desire to be close to their caregiver, but learn to suppress this need
as if they know that attempts to connect will be rejected.
People with this style find it difficult to become close to other people.
And infants with an anxious ambivalent attachment style have caregivers who are inconsistent
and overbearing in their affection.
These infants are usually anxious because they can never predict when and how their
caregivers will respond to their needs.
People with this style desperately seek closeness to others, but experience mixed conflicted
feelings even when they're in a loving relationship.
In adult life, people with an anxious resistant attachment style are often inconsistent in
how they deal with others.
Now later research divides the anxious ambivalent style into two types, fearful avoidant and
dismissive avoidant.
People with a fearful avoidant attachment style consciously desire intimate relationships,
but avoid them because they're afraid to trust others and worry that they will be hurt if
they allow themselves to become too close to another person.
They have a negative view of themselves and other people.
People with a dismissive avoidant attachment style claim that they do not need close relationships
but rather prefer to be independent and self-sufficient.
They have a positive view of themselves, but a negative view of others.
In 1987, a study of the first three styles, Hazen and Shaver asked adults to choose one
of three descriptions designed to capture the three kinds of attachment styles described
before, according to how they typically felt in romantic relationships.
Others then asked people questions about their current and past relationships.
The results of this study were consistent with an attachment theory perspective.
Securely attached adults reported that they easily became close to other people, readily
trusted others and had satisfying romantic relationships.
People with a fearful avoidant style reported that they were uncomfortable becoming close
to others, found it hard to trust them and had less satisfying romantic relationships.
And people with an anxious ambivalent style also tended to have less satisfying relationships
but of a different type.
They were likely to be obsessed and preoccupied with their relationships, fearing that their
partners did not want to be as intimate or as close as they desired.
These findings have been replicated in many other studies.
The basic idea of attachment theory is that the nature of our relationship to our primary
caregiver shapes our sense of self-esteem and in turn our adult expectations about relationships.
Now current research and thinking is that with conscious effort we can modify our learned
attachment styles as we mature by challenging the negative view of our self that it entails
and by building relationships that foster secure connections in the present.
This helps us rebuild our self-esteem but it also requires lots of patient work.
Let's connect attachment style directly to our definition of self-esteem.
The secure attachment style clearly fosters a child's self-esteem.
Parents in the other three styles, however, are treating their children as unlovable.
That means they're not significant.
They don't matter.
When whatever the child does, its behavior is criticized or ignored.
It comes to see itself as incompetent and certainly in the avoidant style, children
also come to see that they have no influence over their lives.
This damages their sense of self-worth and sets them up for future difficulty in dealing
with other relationships.
In the worst case, it sets them up as possible tyrants in the case of the dismissives or
as victims in the case of the fearfuls who defend themselves against taking any risks
making any choice by saying, I don't matter, I can't, and whatever will be, will be.
How do we manage our conversations to protect the self-esteem that we have?
Well, perhaps needless to say at this point in the course, our sense of self-worth is
an emotionally sensitive issue for us.
We soon come to realize that it can be supported or challenged every moment when we're with
other people simply by the way they talk to us.
Turns out that every conversation is about relationship and content.
Remember the six people in every conversation we talked about earlier?
And the questions which underlie life question three, how am I being treated here, are really
the self-esteem questions.
Do I matter?
Am I worthy of your time and attention?
Am I competent in your eyes?
And can I influence the situation?
We know these are vital questions because too often we've been treated like we don't
matter, others simply ignore us or our words.
We're incompetent, others are condescending or worse contemptuous of us or our thoughts.
And we have no say, it's their way or the highway.
This is what drives us to protect ourselves in the traffic of everyday talk by presenting
and protecting our conversational face as we talk with others.
Our face is the emotionally loaded bit of ourselves we transmit as we talk about something
else.
We talk about it as an avatar representing aspects of our deeper self, our personality
and self-concept and our view of relationships.
And we put out a version of this every time we take part in a communicational transaction.
As we start to talk, we take some sort of line or position in the exchange.
We engage emotionally.
We invest our words with enough energy to strike a balance between our sense of independence
and our connection to others.
And we constantly adjust our investment to keep this balance.
We unconsciously act in ways that are really small public performances.
We create conversational identities that reflect how we want others to see us.
It's called face work and it means managing our reactions to others reactions in the moment.
Everyone contributes to each other's face in a conversation.
It's about politeness.
We need to get our face supported and when that happens, we feel positively.
Our self-esteem is enhanced.
When it doesn't, we feel badly.
If we are treated as if our comments don't matter or are stupid or simply not listened
to, it's their way or nothing.
Then we come away feeling diminished and angry or sad.
We hate this pain.
We hate it so much that I've created a seventh axiom of interpersonal communication to cover
our persistent need to protect our conversational face.
It says, in moments of communication uncertainty, individuals need to be or feel right.
Before we conclude this lecture, I'd like to give you another thought experiment or
two and ask several questions for you to consider.
We said earlier that face-to-face talk is like a dance, a subtle flow of nonverbal and
verbal cues to which all parties commit without much conscious thought.
And it's intended to share information about a topic and protect the participant's sense
of self in the process.
Despite everybody's best efforts, however, we're sometimes awakened by an awkward communicational
moment where, by accident, we undermine who we think we are in a conversation, that is
competent and involved, or someone else intentionally does that for us.
Now, can you recall this kind of moment?
A moment when, for instance, you were caught not paying attention in a conversation or
saying something inappropriate or not speaking at all when other people expected you to?
Did you notice your gaffe or did someone else point it out to you?
So what did that moment feel like?
Did those feelings reflect one or more of the three questions that describe the nature
of self-esteem, particularly, I'm not competent, maybe I'm not valuable?
I seem to have no control over myself in this situation.
Any of those feelings?
If you recalled such a moment, what did you do to cover yourself?
Notice the implication of exposure here.
Did you pretend it didn't happen and carry on?
Did you apologize?
Or did you bluster and put someone else on the spot for your embarrassment?
Now, why would doing any of these things matter enough to do them?
You have to protect yourself.
You have to protect your self-esteem.
Many times we allow conversational errors in others just to go by without comment at
all in order to preserve their face.
Why would we do that?
Again, we need to remember that effective communication is a joint activity.
Everybody has to play the game.
Everybody has to be involved.
And finally, I'd like you to reflect back on how you felt your parents treated you when
you were a child.
Do you think the way you were raised, that is your parents' attachment style, shows
up in the way you relate to people in your present life?
Do you think you were raised with a secure attachment style or one of the other styles?
Now, we adjust our talk to make sure that our rightness stays intact and our face isn't
undermined.
And one of the ways we do that while talking is to use a repertoire of responses to momentary
psychological threats called the defenses.
In fact, we use them so often to repulse any threat to our self-esteem that we're going
to review them in more detail in the following lecture.
Thanks very much.
