Lecture 10 – Protecting the Self in Face-to-Face Talk
Hi and welcome to lecture 10.
The potential to undermine our self and our self-worth exists side by side with others'
positive acceptance of us in every moment we talk.
In fact, people have not given each other what they want, the acceptance of each other's
thoughts and acceptance as individuals, so many times over the millennia of human existence
that as a part of the cultural learning of every child there is passed on by observation
and imitation, a series of conscious defenses that they can use to protect their self-esteem
when reality stings.
So in this lecture we will review the common types of defenses and how we use them to
respond to a reality that may threaten our sense of self.
We are also going to review the clever ways we speak emotionally to get what we need indirectly
while trying to avoid putting our self-esteem at risk.
Basically, we are going to talk about how we converse about everyday topics while avoiding
situations where our conversational face is not supported.
Our self-esteem is diminished, and we risk feeling the psychic pains of embarrassment,
shame, or guilt.
Now to do that we have to take a little step back at the turn of the century again.
You remember while Meade was inventing his cognitive model of the conscious self, the
I and the Me at the turn of the century, it turns out Freud had already invented a tripartite
model of the personality.
He called its constituent elements the id, ego, and superego.
In his model the self is powered by the id's unconscious impulses and emotions.
The drive for immediate satisfaction and gratification, gotta get it done now, babies actually can't
help themselves.
And society's efforts to suppress these impulses as the child is socialized, the superego.
In the process of being socialized, society's values are internalized by the child, a conscience
and an ego ideal develop out of parental instruction, as well as a sense of the guilt and shame when
parents punish behavior that doesn't live up to the values they are trying to instill.
This ideal self and the superego represents the larger social order inside the child's
mind, as well as the proper behavior required by society to limit the impulses of the id.
How do these pressures get managed?
Through the ego, which operates on the reality principle.
The child thinks, listen, I really want what I want right now, but I found in the past
that when I demanded it, I got smacked, so I'm going to be real here.
I'm not going to ask, or I'll find a different way to ask, and the social order of course
is reinforced.
Now, this sounds like Meade's notion of role-taking and self-management, and it is.
Remember his model also focused on the conscious part of the self.
However, unlike Meade's kind of debating society approach between the I and the me, Freud's
self is portrayed as a kind of emotional pressure cooker with lots of psychic energy at play
in the struggle between the id and the superego.
Now we do get by in the world without always doing things the way the world wants us to.
We make unthinking decisions that get us what we want right away, and sometimes we get caught.
When I was finishing up my doctorate, you were late into the hours all the time, and
I was working late in my office at York University.
At that point, York University was still surrounded by open fields and lots of rural roads, and
I wanted to get home quickly.
It was four o'clock in the morning, it couldn't be a problem.
I come to a four-way stop of nowhere in the middle of the night, and nobody's around.
So what do I do here?
Do I just stop and do the formal, you know, pause and then go ahead?
Nah, I'll just roll right through it, and all of a sudden the whole world lights up.
There's a cop sitting there in the dark, I don't know, doing his paperwork, something
like that, and he suddenly becomes the superego of the society, catching me up when in fact
I thought I was getting away with something, like the little kid that I am.
It happens all the time, but this is a more obvious and dramatic example of what happens
in smaller ways in conversation.
We do what we do, we ignore or distort input, and go with the flow as long as we don't get
caught.
We always don't get put on the spot by somebody else, we think we're just fine.
In fact, many philosophers analyzing the human condition argue that our ego can't actually
handle too much reality.
We have to somehow defend ourselves against it, defend ourselves against being overwhelmed
by it actually.
Now, I think this idea is captured in a very famous exchange at the dramatic high point
of a courtroom drama called A Few Good Men.
When a young altruistic defense attorney challenges a tough aging Marine commander, alleged to
have given an order that led to one of his men's death.
Like our ideal self, he shouts, I want the truth.
And like our ego defense system, the older man shouts back, you can't handle the truth.
But often we can't, not if it's going to evoke feelings of guilt or shame.
The emotional process is involved in protecting our ego will parallel our discussion of the
inference ladder model of reality.
We reviewed in lecture six.
Remember, it clarified how our thinking processes work when we're confronted.
When we talk back to our confronter, we think we're responding from the here and now.
And actually our thinking is separated from the here and now by at least four steps of
automatic cognitive processing.
So we manage to get through many situations without being here and real, even though we're
telling ourselves we are here and we are being real.
Now, to pull off this self deception, we need to employ communication and thought patterns
that protect our mind, self, ego from psychic pain.
These are the ego defenses.
Now what's interesting is that although Freud's version of the unconscious and its
pressures on the ego is really not very widely accepted today, his concept of ego defenses
and his list of defensive patterns are still used by many therapists and researchers.
When we are in trouble with reality, reality always wins.
So we have to defend ourselves using one or more of these techniques on our everyday conversations.
In our everyday lives.
Let's start with denial.
We simply refuse to admit that a threat is relevant to us or assume somehow that it can
be postponed.
How about avoidance?
Here we refuse to face a threat.
We simply step out of the way of any situation that might force us to look at it and force
us to face weakness in ourselves.
We avoid anything that might cause us dis-ease.
In talk, we avoid certain topics or we talk around them using indirection or euphemism.
How about rationalization, one of the most common defense mechanisms?
Making excuses, explaining away threats to our sense of self.
We didn't live up to it.
It wasn't me, it was them who made me do this.
When a manager is confronted by a colleague about hitting the wall outside her boss's
office in anger, another defense will talk about momentarily.
She turns and says, if you look at this part of the wall, it has lots of marks in front
of it, from bad conversations with that idiot.
Very clever rationalization.
The wall has got the problems and the boss has got the problems.
The next common form of defense is intellectualization.
This is rationalization for the better educated.
More education provides us the opportunity of creating more complex explanations of our
reality that will distance us from our own bad behavior.
So we say, it's the nature of the world, of today's kids, or it's the nature of men,
or of women, or the economy.
Anything to cover up our inability to simply ask for or get what we want.
The better your education, the more power to reason away the world's responses to you.
This reminds me of Woody Allen's ego defense in the movie Annie Hall when he says, the
other important joke for me is one that usually is attributed to Groucho Marx, but I think
appears only in Freud's wit and its relation to the unconscious, and it goes like this.
I would never want to belong to any club that would have someone like me for a member, and
you know that's the key joke of my adult life in terms of my relationships with women.
Now there is intellectualization in full flight.
Notice how elegantly he doesn't say he's a loser when it comes to the opposite sex.
Another very common ego defense is displacement.
When reactions are redirected from a more threatening activity to a less threatening
person or object, you're really angry.
You can't do anything to the person or the situation that made you angry, so you displace
the anger into some other object or situation.
You drive too fast, you whack your kid, seems to help us release all of that tension, at
least we think it does.
How about projection?
Rather than accept negative emotions in ourselves, we attribute our anger and threatened feelings
to other people.
Or commonly we simply blame others for our problems.
We may not be aware of using this defense, others will be for sure.
In its worst form, we make other people into threatening enemies.
This is the basis for genocides throughout the world.
Some tyrant deals with the negativity and unhappiness in the society caused by his policies,
then blames a subgroup in the society and as everybody else go after them, it recurs
again and again in human history.
Now here's one that also recurs in our lives, regression.
With this defense, we actually revert to an earlier, more childlike state.
When we say, let's party, in reaction to a stressful or unhappy situation, we're simply
finding a way of not dealing with the reality we're in by symbolically going back to a happier
time, enacting playful, childlike behavior, and in many cases that involves using mood
enhancers to cut off our senses from the current reality.
Using our defenses to temporarily reduce anxiety by distorting perceptions of reality or distancing
ourselves from it can provide us time to overcome sudden life crises.
For instance, denial works for people who are not doctors when they have heart attacks.
In most cases, people deny having one at all and we certainly don't think they're serious.
On the other hand, when doctors have a heart attack, they have a harder time going into
denial about the event because they know how bad it can be.
And as a result, they are more likely to die from one than the average naive citizen who's
in denial.
In the short run, our defenses can help us with unresolvable conflicts, too, by avoiding
or denying them at least until we're strong enough to handle them.
However, overuse of ego defenses in our lives can mean real disconnection from reality and
from our relationships.
Now we're going to examine how we sound when we're being defensive, and as always, it's
not just what we say, of course, but how we say it.
Both Freud and Meade argue that the ego is a reality manager.
In his model of ego functioning and communication called transactional analysis, Eric Byrne
describes how we look and sound when our ego is managing reality so we don't have to deal
with it directly.
We need to get our reward from others without putting ourselves on the line too much.
As a model of the mind, TA is an easy way to understand the connection between what
goes on inside of our bodies emotionally and how that automatically emerges in the sounds
of our voices, our word choices, and how we act towards other people.
It connects our internal emotions to our patterns of external behavior.
You'll remember that we said the voice was the second most powerful transmitter of emotions,
and when you're engaged in talk, you can hear the sound of your voice, but you can't
see the look on your face.
Only the person you're speaking to can see that, and later, when the sound of your talk
is pointed out to you, you can recall it, and you can learn from that memory and perhaps
change.
Internal ego states produce external behavior to evoke appropriate responses from other
people.
They're always trying to get from others what we need.
Bern gives three names to these internal ego states, parent, adult, and child.
Sounds like Freud's three-part model, but remember, he is only working on the one element
of Freud's model, the ego, the so-called reality manager.
These names represent the general emotional states the ego can be in as it deals with
the world.
By using words like parent and child, he intends to make it easy for people to remember, because
he wants everyone to be able to analyze their own behaviors, change them to become more
authentic when they speak, and deal with reality more directly, and still get what they need.
The ego can operate from three emotional positions, the parent, the child, and the adult.
In each of these ego states, we find several different levels, representing a kind of tone
of voice, I describe it as, actually the emotion behind the voice and the style of
communicating at each level.
We recognize and respond to the different tonalities automatically in conversation.
So first, let's talk about the parent ego state and its first level, the controlling
parent.
It tells you what to do.
Out of that part of the parent ego state comes all the judgments, criticism, demands, and
threats of parenting.
When I run this model in smaller workshops, I get people in groups to play out these roles.
I assign them one of the roles, and I get them to brainstorm what they sound like, what
they look like, and what words would be spoken in each.
In fact, let me ask you my workshop question.
If I ask you to think of the word parent and what parents say, what is the first word that
pops into your mind that parents say to children?
Was it no, or something like the word stop that?
I've asked this question hundreds of times, and all the commands, demands, and threats
spill out under the table.
The controlling parent takes over.
It's top of mind.
And finally, I have to go over to the parent table and say, so, didn't your mother ever
say she loved you?
These are the words and sounds of the nurturant level of the parent ego state.
And there's usually some embarrassed laughter at the table, and they start furiously writing
down all the lovely stuff, but sometimes you have to remind them.
Now I tell them not to be embarrassed.
I remind them of the plasticity of the child's mind between zero and five, and that most easily
recalled memories are those that are attached to negative, fearful emotions, not necessarily
the cuddly, loving ones.
The high impact, why did you do that, emotions, I remembered first.
Not that you don't remember the others, just that these ones come out first.
The standards, any aspect of the parent, words and nonverbal gestures around giving guidance
and instruction has a voice that's firmer than the nurturant parent, but has some of
its warmth, but uses an instructive tone rather than a commanding tone, the voice of the controlling
parent.
It has a voice that says, try it again.
You can do better.
Do it this way.
Now here's how it works.
It's going to be okay.
You can do this.
Then of course there's the nurturant parent voice, the, I love you, you're a great kid,
you're the best thing in my life kind of voice.
Let me remind you that we use these voices all the time.
I'm not describing the social role of parenting here.
I'm describing the sound of the various aspects of the emotions that lie behind that
role.
Even if we're not parents now, we all had parents, because of course, this comes out
of the parenting place in our psyche.
We incorporated their voices and words into ourselves during the play and role taking
stages of our development.
Now let's turn to the child ego state.
We all have these emotions and words because we were all children.
It too has three voices, the natural child.
This is the fun voice, smiling, laughing at jokes, lots of enthusiasm comes from here.
It's a joyful voice.
Also, it can turn negative.
This is where our anger, rage, and aggression also start.
A little workshop story about this as well.
Creativity comes out here in this voice and when I do creative thinking workshops for
corporate clients, I used to make them play games and have fun.
This concerns senior managers at first.
My response was, well, if you want me to get them and you, into creative problem solving
mode, they need to be using both left and right sides of the brain, left and right hemispheres
of the brain.
That's what laughter does.
It connects them momentarily.
If you can't laugh, then you can't step out of the little box in the left frontal lobe
of your brain that keeps you rational and stuck in your older habits.
Let's move to the next aspect of the child, the little professor.
Now, it has my title in it for a really good reason.
This is the part of you that tells other people everything you know about something, whether
they want to hear it or not.
I'm getting your attention because I'm really smart.
I'm three years old and I've almost nailed the language and I'm going to tell you all
about how the world works.
Three years of age, 33 years of age, 63 years of age.
It doesn't matter.
It's always the same.
These are the kinds of folks who, if you ask them for the time of day, they'll give you
Stephen Hawking's history of time.
Think about any boring professional you know who simply talks in paragraphs, sometimes
in whole pages, they're impressing you and they're getting your attention.
Finally, let's talk about the adapted child voice of the child ego state.
This is the voice without which the social order couldn't function.
This is the voice that obeys and parents or other authority figures say, do it.
The adapted child in us says yes.
It can be a pleasant voice or a stoically cool voice, but it agrees.
This voice, however, is also how you show the other side of your anger, the constrained
side of passive aggression.
This is the place where your whiny voice comes from.
Now, there is finally in the middle of the model, the middle ego state called the adult
voice.
It's focused on getting information and problem solving.
Where the natural child might say, what's up?
The adult says, can you tell me what's going on?
Where the angry parent might say, you little idiot, I told you never to do that.
The adult would say, I don't understand what happened here.
I thought we had an agreement.
Can you tell me how it happened?
The adult voice uses a well modulated tone to ask questions.
Take information, discuss problems without going into the other voices and emotions of
the critical parent or the angry child.
When we're confronted with problems, it's our best voice.
The only problem is we often can't find it when we need it.
Because if we're in the mid stuff and trying to control an amygdala hijack, access to the
left frontal lobe of our brain and our conscious thinking is cut off temporarily.
No adult voice.
We stay in the extreme voice and make our problems worse.
Bern talks about a defensive communication, about how to, the style of talking past our
defenses and other people's defenses.
His model has a very important process assumption hidden behind it.
That is when we speak in one of those extreme voices, parent or child, we automatically
evoke the opposite ego state in the other, at the psychological level, at the non-conscious
level.
In difficult situations, this is likely to deepen a problem rather than diminish it.
So when I tell you stop that controlling parent, for that moment I want the response
of a compliant, adapted child, not the response of a thoughtful problem-solving adult.
We may be talking to a friend and we say, stop that.
What the hell is wrong with you?
If they do, we win.
If they do it automatically and without complaint, they win too because it fits their emotional
need to be in a one-down ego state, the adapted child.
Remember that Bern's concepts are intentionally built out of everyday talk because he wants
everyone to self-analyze.
He argued that over time we unthinkingly adopt a communication style that's built around
whether or not we feel positive about ourselves or whether or not we feel positive about
other people.
This is a kind of moment-to-moment version of attachment theory in self-esteem.
His argument is that if we feel positively about ourselves and about the other person,
we're likely to be more real and authentic in our speech.
That is, we'll be consciously aware of our ego states and use our adult ego state and
voice for solving problems.
However, if we have low self-esteem or, on the other hand, if we think we're somehow
better than everyone else, we're more likely to be using one of the more extreme parent
and child voices to get through our day-to-day relationship talk.
This allows us to get the rewards we couldn't get by being an adult.
Now, we have to think about choosing our adult voice to deal with a confrontation.
Let's say you're a manager of a department.
You walk by one of your employees' desk and make a simple adult-level request for information.
Say, will that report be done by Friday?
Not a demand, just a passing request.
Now, your employee could respond in their adult and say, sure, Friday.
Or they could suddenly throw a tantrum.
Friday?
Friday?
You've got to be kidding.
First of all, you've already given me six other things to do.
And Sheila, who could be helping me, is off sick this week.
And this frigging computer is running like it's in molasses, and I've called IT twice,
and nobody showed up to help me.
Friday?
Now, when they're done giving you their angry child, you have to make a conscious choice
here.
I mean, their angry child has already prompted your controlling parent to symbolically smack
their hands and angrily order them to just get it done.
I have to have it by Friday and stride away like you've actually accomplished something.
Or you can calm yourself and ask yourself a question from your adult.
What's going on here?
And then ask them a question.
What can I do to help you with this?
I really need the report by Friday.
You can look into the face of their blameful frustration and encourage them to discuss
their issues as concerns rather than as statements of rage.
Then you can do what all good managers do.
You can help.
Look, this report is now your top priority.
I can get you some temp help with the other stuff, and I'll light a fire under IT and
get them started to help you on your computer.
Can you get it done then?
Now, if you take the automatic route and just command them to do it, after all, they evoke
the controlling parent in you while their child is tantrum.
They will get it done.
After all, you are the boss.
But you'll get it done on Friday, not when you wanted it and could read it, but exactly
at the end of business, just when you have to get it to the courier for the last pickup.
For delivery on Monday, first thing, to head office.
You won't get to review it until you get home over the weekend, and then as you skim
through it, you're going to find out that some of those tables that are really important
are wrong, and they're obvious typos, and your boss is going to see this on Monday morning.
You can always command people like their children, and they will comply, and they will always
find a way to get you back when you do it.
Now, I promise you, choosing your adult voice may be harder work and take a little longer
than you want, but it's the better choice because the final outcome will likely be closer
to what you wanted, maybe exactly what you wanted.
You'll get it on Friday, on time, at a high level of quality.
To deal with difficult talk, we need to wake up and find our adult voice, the only ego
state that focuses on information and problem solving, and that calls out the same state
in the other, rather than the opposite state.
Now, before we conclude here, let me suggest several things for you to do.
Next time you are with several people in conversation, lean back and listen to the voices going by.
People change their emotional positions in a conversation all the time, and it shows
in the way they sound.
Silently identify the voices you hear, and, as you recall, a difficult moment.
Notice the sound of your own voice when another said that you were being defensive, or notice
how others sounded when you thought they were being defensive.
Can you name the voice?
Were you or they actually using one of the defenses we've discussed?
Which one?
I want you to get conscious the next time you're confronted by someone else's criticism
of your behavior, or misattribution of your motives.
Pause before you speak.
Calm yourself and try to respond in your adult voice, describing your behavior or feelings
from your point of view, as if you were actually observing them.
If the other's comments show some insight, calmly acknowledge their truth before you
move on to describe yours.
The things I've asked you to do before the next lecture involve managing yourself, managing
your emotional reactions and difficult situations.
And we are going to review this very important process in the next lecture.
