Lecture 13 – Talking to Connect and Build Relationships
Welcome to lecture 13.
A little more than a dozen years ago, in an effort to share my knowledge of communication
more effectively, I developed a pragmatic model of human communication that describes
three general modes of talk.
Each of these modes appears automatically, or can be chosen in the three of the most
common situations we are likely to face in our daily round of living.
I was inspired to do this by a much earlier book that works at about the same level my
model does, clarifying how people actually speak in different ways in a conversation.
The book was Straight Talk by Miller et al. and was the first I had ever read that gave
the reader specific advice about how to talk in different situations.
For each mode, I describe when it is likely to be used, or may just simply appear, and
what goals or purpose it serves in a conversation.
I then integrate specific tips into the description of each mode so they can be remembered more
easily.
My goal is to get us to notice which mode we are in and whether that style of talk is
appropriate for the context and likely to be effective.
If not, I believe we can learn to consciously choose another more appropriate mode.
My model begins with a fundamental assumption that the first goal of all interpersonal communication,
beginning at birth, is to make connections with others.
We said in lecture one that in overcoming our basic uncertainty about who we are and
how the world works, we need, in fact, we are driven to communicate, to build relationships
with others, and then to influence them to get what we want.
The first two modes in my model of talk, Connect and Control Talk, do just that.
These are our natural responses to two situations.
One, when we speak to show that we feel the same as others in a situation in order to
connect, or two, when we feel disconnected from others by our differences and try to
manage these differences to avoid our own discomfort.
We may or may not reconnect emotionally with others in this type of situation.
The third mode, Dialogue Talk, is specifically for dealing with differences, but the goal
of this mode of talk is to maintain connection even in the face of those differences and
disagreement.
Of course, we haven't had the years of practice with Dialogue that we've had with the two
other modes.
It's essentially an unnatural mode of talk, requiring mindful appreciation to be performed
effectively.
Now, we're going to review the Control and Dialogue modes in our next four lectures,
but today we are going to start with the mode that's at the heart of everything, Connect
Talk.
Talking to Connect and Build Relationships is the basis for everything else we do with
other people.
Let's start with two types of Connect Talk, for building momentary but positive relationships,
Procedural Talk and Ritual Recognition Talk.
Let's review procedural talk.
Now in lecture one, we said that we need to know how to get through simple transactional
situations, exchanging goods and services, having a bite to eat, buying something, just
to be seen as normal in performing our social roles appropriately, and if possible to do
it in a way that creates a positive emotional connection with another, even if only for
a moment.
These are the, hi, can you tell me how much this is?
A dollar ten, thanks conversations we mentioned earlier.
Most of us, most of the time, know the rules for effectively connecting to other people
in this situation, to seek information and get what we want.
We tend to make the request in one of two ways, with a tone of neutral civility or politeness
in our voice, or maybe with a hint of friendly enthusiasm.
It's a schema, a situational script that we learned while we were growing up.
We've also deeply learned that awkward, cool, avoidant, or rude behavior in such situations
not only hinders us in getting what we want, but also triggers off on us, or the other,
a deeper sense of uncertainty about what's going on and what's going to happen next.
We expect others and they expect us to enact the norms of ritual connection in a smooth
and at least civil or polite way, because that's what normal people do.
Now, the second type of connect-top involves ritual recognition or greetings.
This the archetypal version of this is, hi, how are ya, fine, exchange.
We've grown up learning this phrase is a kind of throwaway talk.
We think it doesn't mean anything, but in fact, it is the basic building block for beginning
and sustaining our social connections.
Now, most of the time, there is no real information exchange in this moment.
This reading is really not about how you are, but who you are.
In a simple but important way, it answers the question, how am I being treated here?
When we walk down the hall at work or through the mall saying, hi, hi, how are you?
To people who are passing by, we are saying, you are a person who has the kind of relationship
with me that needs to be recognized when we enter each other's space.
So we do it.
We feel the need to sustain our connection and at least nod our head or murmur a fine,
because at minimum we have a visual acquaintance with the other and are likely to see them
again.
To not complete this ritual act might be interpreted as meaning something negative about the relationship.
Now like many other rituals, the words of greeting don't literally mean what they say.
They have deeper meanings.
So hi, how are you is to be followed by a fine, you, not by anything else.
When we're passing someone in the hall, we don't expect them to respond with a, oh geez,
I'm terrible.
Let me talk to you about my disastrous life.
A ritual exchange isn't supposed to encourage that.
Now that doesn't mean it always happens that way.
In my university, there's a very large building in which many of the academic offices are
located and there's always a gathering at the ground floor elevators between classes.
Everybody waiting to go up and I'm waiting to go up to my office and we wait with a growing
crowd of people as the elevators come down.
But in one particular moment, I get a chance to see and overhear this really interesting
exchange.
A girl is waiting for the elevator and a classmate appears.
The waiting girl says, hi, how are you?
And the new girl says, terrible, let me tell you what happened.
Now it seemed as if this wasn't what she expected.
She looked a bit stunned when the woman said this, a little bit horrified.
The ritual high was suddenly going to get serious.
Even more interesting to see was that as the second woman leaned forward to tell her more
and more bad stuff, the first girl kept gently leaning backwards and backing away.
But most remarkable was what happened next.
A third woman comes up and says, hi, how are you?
To the complainer who automatically turns and responds, fine.
And then without taking a breath went right back to complaining to the unlucky first woman
she met.
Hi, how are you?
Is a deeply learned and always expected ritual.
Now let's talk about a ritual that's closer to your home.
Let me have you think for a moment about what you might say when you come home at night
after a hard day at work, for instance, assuming there's likely to be someone at home when
you arrive.
What do you say?
Hi, I'm home.
Anybody here?
How's your day been?
Maybe what's for dinner?
These are the type of ritual greetings everybody uses when they come home.
Even if you only have a cat or dog to greet you, don't you say something?
Now I want you to think for a moment about what would happen if you walk in the door
and say nothing.
Don't look angry.
Just have a neutral face, but don't say a word.
What do you think would happen?
Isn't it likely that the person calling out, the person you're calling out to would think
something strange is going on, that you're in some kind of mood or something?
You see, rituals aren't throwaways.
They really mean things to people.
The central function of both procedural and recognition connect talk is to ritually demonstrate
our ability to play social roles as a member of our community.
And once we've connected with someone, how do we continue the conversation?
We use connect talk as small talk.
Now despite its demeaning name, small talk, speaking about nothing of importance, serves
two really important social functions, self-disclosure and the structuring of time.
Let's talk about small talk for self-disclosure.
Small talk allows us a safe way to show another, this is how you get to know us better.
As we move from discussing general topics to disclosing more personalized information,
our listeners move from their first impressions of us to something more elastic.
Small talk can act like a kind of relationship audition.
It's a performance where we can show different aspects of our me, our different selves and
see if something seems to connect.
The early stages of small talk tend to focus on sharing demographic or biographical information.
Our name, what we do, where we come from, our marital status, or information that's
queued by the situation.
The weather is always a good place to start a conversation, at least in North America.
We start with name, rank and serial number because they're unarguable, they belong to
us, so they're accepted.
Small talk is not about creating differences, it's about finding similarities as a basis
for connection.
So at first we cover a range of subjects and keep it superficial because it makes it easy
for the other to reciprocate this kind of information at that level and it's easier
for us to discover what works for the other person.
We build up a temporary identity in the discussion of a variety of subjects, restaurants, TV shows,
fashion, personal interests, and when they seem to connect we add a little additional
emotional energy to our conversation.
We put our face on the line in our talk.
People discover how we identify ourselves, then they can decide whether they'd like
to continue their connection to someone who acts and thinks, like us.
And if our early exchanges are reciprocated and we're satisfied that we found subjects
that connect us with the other, our disclosure can deepen.
So for instance, instead of simply telling someone what your job is, you can go on and
tell them how much you hate it and that you're looking for a new one.
This is far more revealing of our internal states and it tends to emotionally deepen
the relationship.
Berger's research indicates how this process works.
He offered 200 suburbanite adults a chance to imagine they were observing a two-hour
conversation between two people meeting for the first time.
They were to place 150 pre-selected statements on a timeline covering two hours and divided
up into 15-minute segments.
They were also asked to leave aside any subjects that would never be raised in such a two-hour
conversation.
As predicted, the first 30 minutes were filled with simple descriptors of the person, where
they were born, the schooling level of their children, etc.
But midway through the process, we find personal value statements about family.
I'm trying to give my children all the things I never had or about the public behavior of
particular categories of people.
By the end of this imagined discussion, people are sharing their feelings about themselves
and their spouses.
What the midway point of this kind of disclosure process, when two people find that their value
statement seemed to connect positively, one of the most common exchanges that can occur
is a form of pastime talk called Ain't It Awful.
Sharing your values by complaining about the behavior of some other group is very connected.
To remind us about our ego states here and the indirect expression of emotion in conversation,
this talk is usually carried out in the whiny child or the critical parent voice.
Ain't It Awful how these kids are today or those idiots in City Hall, we discover a common
interest in blaming somebody for something and we're off.
John Gottman's research on relationships and talk has demonstrated that trashing a third
party during a struggle between a husband and a wife is a terrific way to take a break
from their drama and rebuild connections between them.
By the way, statements that never occur in the first 120 minutes include descriptions
of a person's salary, sexual experience, or fears about a partner's infidelity.
So, how does small talk structure time?
Well, the first stages of sharing small talk referred to before are also used to structure
time in two social situations.
It's called pastime talk.
In the first situation, a situation that requires sharing among people who are strangers, usually
brought together by a common circumstance and who are not likely to meet again unless
they choose to.
We're talking here about cocktail parties, long plane flight flights, or, my favorite,
the distantly connected relatives at the same table in a wedding reception.
Been there, done it, got the whole routine on that one in the last couple of years.
The second situation, of course, is where people meet who know each other and exchange
information to deepen their positive connections already, family and friendship gatherings.
In these situations, small talk seems to be socially required and the process of engaging
in it is just as important as the content exchange.
My Italian family knows how to do this better than any family I've ever seen.
14 people come to dinner and they can go on for hours about talking, not about anything
much more than their personal lives.
Everybody gets engaged.
In fact, they all talk together.
It is the most amazing, connective kind of ritual I've ever seen.
Coming from a Scotch Iris family where hardly anybody talked at meals, this is a complete
change for me and I can see how this really works to hold them all together.
Let's review the fundamental assumptions and performance style of the connect talk conversation.
The essential assumption behind connect talk is that it's about sharing information and
it's not about criticism or competition.
Of course, other people can express different opinions, but there's no challenging in this
particular kind of conversation of opinions that are put on the table.
This is not a debate.
It's small talk.
The goal of connect talk is to build or sustain a positive emotional connection between two
or more people.
Our connect talk to happen, both or all the parties to the conversation need to agree
on this fundamental goal and assumption so the style of talk can actually work.
What is the style of talk?
It's chatty, sociable, casual and as pointed out earlier, it mostly involves routine descriptions
of ourselves, our behavior, preferences and opinions often presented in a playful or humorous
way.
Our voices sound relaxed, even when giving opinions as an indicator that what we say
is not to be taken too seriously.
This is how acquaintances, friends and family talk to pass time and to build and sustain
their positive emotional connections.
Summarize, ritual and small talk are safe ways for us to demonstrate our need for connection
to sustain and strengthen relationships and they're also safe ways to demonstrate our
ability to perform as normal everyday speakers.
Ritual and small talk show our communication competence, show that we know the rules for
these common types of exchanges as well as socialized speakers.
We know when to start, stop, when to continue, what topics to speak to and the appropriate
style in which to speak.
If we can enter and leave these communication moments and sustain others face while we're
doing it, people not only think of us as normal and appropriate but also as likeable
and trustworthy.
When we can't or won't engage in small talk in socially required situations or we can't
adhere to its fundamental rules, we're usually met with some level of sanction, puzzlement,
frustration, rejection, even reprimands and for repeated failures, avoidance.
Now here's an example of the importance of small talk at work.
John Gottman reports in one of his books a group of employees complaining about a socially
inept boss.
Yeah, he's a cold fish.
Yeah, the other day I saw a picture of this little boy on his bulletin board and I said,
cute kids, that's your son?
And he goes, no.
And somebody else says, that was it?
Yeah, so I'm wondering, who is that kid?
Somebody else jumps in.
This guy is just so out of it and to think how pumped up we were that he was coming
to lead this team with his high-powered reputation.
Oh, he's smart all right, but what good does that do us?
We haven't even launched our site yet.
The third part of jumps in and goes, that's because he has zero people skills.
Have you seen the way the other managers avoid him?
And on and on, up their inference ladder, judging his ability to lead, worried about
their team's success, all because, they admit later, they don't actually know much about
him.
And they don't know him because he can't seem to participate in ordinary connect talk.
Finally, the third function of connect talk is to addition for new relationships, find
new connections in the reciprocal disclosure of information about ourselves in increasing
depth over time.
So you can see the functions of small talk aren't small after all.
They help us display our humanity and research indicates that they do so in a way that is
not so obvious on the surface of these ritual exchanges.
It seems that the content of the talk is not as important for building or sustaining connections
as the way we respond to each other's talk in these moments.
John Gottman's research powerfully demonstrates that there's more to connect talk than words.
Psychologist John Gottman has a long history of research into relationship maintenance and
argues persuasively that when we exchange even the most mundane information, there's
an important emotional exchange going on at the same time.
From his research, he has concluded that any effort to talk with somebody is a momentary
bid for emotional connection.
What he and his colleagues found was that patterns of bid and response rather than the
content of the talk were powerfully predictive of relationship endurance.
So two radically different exchanges, when you marry me, yes, and pass me a beer, sure,
no problem, actually contain the same emotional messages, acceptance.
So small talk seemed to be filled with three types of emotional bids, turning toward bids,
turning against bids, and turning away bids.
So what are turning towards bids?
Well, these are positive, connective reactions where the other person responds in kind in
a supportive way to what you just said.
Two guys on a standing on a street corner and a new car goes by, hey, did you see that car?
Yeah, very cool.
One nice return.
Or your daydreaming out loud at work about a trip and one of your coworkers joins in
on the daydream, yeah, wouldn't it be nice to go to, they ask questions, add their experience
to the conversation, turning towards.
And pass me the salt, honey, sure, is a turning towards bid because when it doesn't happen,
we actually notice it emotionally.
All this may appear to be meaningless on the level of topic, but as he says, light the
cells of our bodies or the bricks of a house.
Such exchanges are the primary components of emotional communication.
Each exchange contains emotional information that can weaken or strengthen connections
between people.
So let's talk about turning against bids.
Bids occur when another responds negatively and directly rejects our bid, often using
sarcasm or ridicule.
People who do this as a habit might be considered to be belligerent or argumentative.
Two friends again, wow, I'd like to own that car.
And the other response in your dreams, heavy sarcasm.
Wife says to husband, we should talk about getting one of those new flat screen TVs.
And he replies intensely, what the frig would you know about TVs?
Questioning her knowledge is actually a direct criticism of her competence and self-esteem.
If it happens often enough, it can undermine her certainty that she can carry off any kind
of conversation with her husband without being criticized.
And she begins to avoid them.
So pass me the salt, honey, get it yourself, is a turning against bid.
The third observed pattern was turning away or ignoring bids.
Our two friends again.
One says, hey, did you see that car?
The other says, what time is it?
The response doesn't follow the bid at all.
It breaks the norm of relevancy in normal conversation.
At first it's just irritating.
Our cognitive feeling is they're not paying attention to us, but if it continues, it becomes
quite disconcerting.
Because the ignored one, we begin to think that our bids don't matter.
They don't seem to go anywhere.
For example, a wife apologizes to her husband for a small error.
His response is silence and looking away.
In fact, he's saying, I'm not listening to this.
I don't care what you say.
Very undermining and frustrating.
It's not a direct turning against, but the lack of any response leaves people feeling
very uncertain.
Remember, we really dislike uncertainty.
The overall problem with unrequited bids is that people are not persistent.
Now, if our bid is not required in a momentary relationship, people don't give us what we
need.
We can just walk away.
Our face may be a little dented, but at least we have someone to blame.
The real issue emerges in continuing relationships.
People are not very persistent about continuing to bid positively when another responds regularly
with a turn against or turn away bid.
Even in the smallest kind of talk, we tend to give up fairly easily.
That is, we break the emotional tie.
And once we do this, the relationship is over emotionally.
As an example, Gottman's data on why some marriages fail and others last indicates,
now, I want you to get this.
Husbands headed for divorce disregard their wives' bids 82% of the time.
Happy husbands only do this 19% of the time.
So if a relationship is going to last a long time, we and the other need to work a little
harder at the balance of turning towards bids versus turning away or turning against.
Gottman argues that to survive, the bid ratio needs to be five to one, five positive bid
responses for every negative bid response.
When this pattern is sustained, he argues that we are building credit in each other's
emotional bank accounts.
It's an emotional cushion we can fall back on when things don't go well.
People have emotional memories.
And if their overall feeling is this is a good relationship, they provide room for the
other to fail from time to time, room to forgive.
In long-term formal relationships, the marriage or workplace relationships, Gottman says the
data are clear.
When the ratio of against or ignore bids relative to positive bids slumps to two to one or one
to one, people may be in a relationship formally, but they have little going for them emotionally.
In fact, they're quietly struggling about their connection to each other.
When married couples with these negative patterns face major issues, they don't have much emotional
credit to sustain them through the hard times, and are much more likely to quit the relationship.
When employees face the same patterns of negative responses to their bids, like married couples,
they soon feel misunderstood, disrespected, and they stop trying.
They're more stressed, produced less, and if they can, they quit the job.
The frequency of bidding actually matters.
To maintain a relationship, we have to keep trying to positively respond to the way people
bid for our attention.
It doesn't take very much.
This is very small talk with a very large impact.
If we stop responding, our relationships begin to wither.
Small talk is essential.
Despite the fact that many times we're disgruntled by the need to go through recognition rituals
and small talk, the research data is quite clear.
Engaging in connect talk is essential to the building and maintenance of relationships.
Now, there's something I want you to think about and do before the next lecture.
The most interesting breakthrough in family therapy in recent years is to require a disintegrating
family to eat together at the same table, at the same time, at least twice a week,
without using any of the technology that keeps them disconnected, TV, cell phones, computers,
etc.
They also have to talk to each other, not about anything significant, just small talk.
It turns out that families who do this, as well as occasionally work together to maintain
their living space, reported significant improvements in their lives.
They seem to have reawakened their caring for each other.
For families or pair relationships, the connective dynamics seems to be the same.
At the end of the day, there have to be substantially more positive, moment-to-moment exchanges
between people than negative, if the relationship or the family is going to last.
So, I want you to reflect on your own family or an important relationship in your life.
Does it feel well connected or distanced?
What do you think is the positive to negative connect-talk ratio in your relationship?
Is it as much as five to one?
Can you call up somebody just to say hi or call together your family just to have a meal?
If you haven't done that for a while, consider doing it soon.
Remember, connect-talk is about nothing in particular, but it's also about everything.
In effective connect-talk resulting in unrequited bids, particularly in long-term relationships,
will compel people to avoid bidding again and deny us a positive response or simply attack
us directly for ignoring them or cutting them off.
We'll deal with these kinds of responses in our next lecture on control-talk.
Thanks.
