Lecture 14, Differences, Disagreement, and Control Talk
Welcome to Lecture 14.
I've divided up the second mode of talk for dealing with differences and disagreement into two types, light and heavy control.
Light control talk can often occur in our daily conversation.
It is the talk we use to influence or persuade others to see the world our way.
Heavy control is also a form of persuasion, but driven by intense negative emotions.
We will discuss how it emerges in our talk in the next lecture.
Fortunately, in most people's lives, this type of talk is not a daily occurrence.
So today we'll start with the light control mode of talk.
We'll begin by reviewing the fundamental assumptions that underlie this mode of talk
and think about how they differ from those of connect talk.
And what are these fundamental assumptions behind problems solving with light control?
First, we assume that we need to somehow manage the other or the situation to maintain or regain our face and feel right.
Second, we assume that if we persist in our efforts to persuade them, they will change.
Now this assumption is what drives us to repeat ourselves in this kind of moment.
We don't say things once, we persist in making the same points again and again.
We seem to think that the more we repeat our arguments, the more we will win them by overwhelming them or wearing them down.
The third assumption of the control talk model reminds us of how the mind works.
We assume that the other person's mind works the same way as ours does.
It contains three sub-assumptions that describe our thinking in difficult moments of talk.
When we speak, we assume that our story is obvious to anyone who hears it.
It's the truth, and that truth is based on real data, our data, our personal experience.
And we think we have access to all the data we need to make this argument,
so we're not asking them any questions about their story or their view of the situation.
The fourth assumption in our model of control talk is that the other person's resistance to our point of view is a personal matter.
Like the third assumption, it involves several sub-assumptions.
These sub-assumptions cover the situation when the discussion moves from our version of persuasive light control
to a deeper, more personally critical form of control talk called heavy control.
We begin to feel that it's not just that they're unclear, unenlightened, or dumb,
because they can't grasp our rightness, but that they intend to make us angry or demeanous.
And we know this because we're really starting to feel surges of righteous anger
or righteous indignation in our bodies.
These feelings begin to drive our talk.
So from this moment on, in our heavy control talk, we assume two additional things about the conversation.
One, we already know what they meant to say, so we begin to tell them ever more intensely what they are thinking and feeling.
And what you think, you don't care at all. It's really high intensity mind reading.
And our final fifth assumption is that they are to blame.
This is heavy control talk at its worst.
It's as if we say to ourselves, huh, if they'd only accepted my idea of those pig-headed fools,
oh well, I'm certainly not going to be responsible for this mess.
In heavy control talk, the discussion has gotten way beyond solving a problem.
It is now about making sure that you don't feel responsible and they feel blamed.
This process is so important that we will discuss this personal attacking side of control talk, heavy control,
in more detail in the next lecture.
But back to light control talk now.
Light control is an automatic response to problematic interactions,
situations involving noticeable differences between us and the other,
or real disagreements where differences have hardened into positions on something that's important to both of us,
or situations involving disorderly or unpredictable behavior on their part.
Light control is how we try to solve these problems.
And why do we automatically use light control to persuade others to change?
We are moved by two forces that we reviewed previously.
Early cultural learning. Let's face it.
We learn by observation and imitation as children,
and our parents use this kind of talk on us to varying degrees.
A more contemporary approach as to parenting.
Focus on engaging in age-appropriate problem-solving talk with a child
to encourage the development of self-control.
But even the most encouraging parents have limits to their patients,
and their default position is demand or command, its control talk.
These words come from the critical parent voice, apparently often enough,
that both students in my undergraduate classes and the middle-aged managers in my leadership workshops
begin their analysis of the parent ego state by first remembering commands.
No. Stop that.
And of course there's also a more general cultural schema we internalize as we grow up.
We live in a culture of argument.
We learn to take a competitive approach to finding answers to problems.
If you win, I lose.
We see this as normal, and in a culture like ours,
a tendency to debate and to find a winner pervades every difficult conversation.
Of course our personal experience and this internalized cultural schema
complement our sense of emotional investment in a conversation.
We need to defend our face, our sense of rightness.
Our face is tied to our self-esteem and our need to be seen as competent, valued, and influential.
So we need to protect it and avoid the psychic pain of not being right in the moment.
Light control as a form of problem-solving talk occurs in two situations.
One, where people expect us to use it to persuade, to teach, to manage, to sell.
Two, where it emerges as a natural response to communication problems in the moment.
So let's review both of these.
Light control is a widely recognized form of persuasive talk.
It's expected, and within certain limits of performance,
accepted in key situations that recur in our daily round of life.
These situations have a common theme.
One party to the conversation has more power than the other in that moment,
and the other accepts this difference in order to get what he or she wants,
such as expert medical advice.
The forms of power used are seen as socially acceptable aspects of the role being played in the situation.
These forms of power include expert power.
The speaker knows more than we do, and we want that information, so we let them tell us.
This form of power is often combined with legitimate authority power.
The speaker is enacting a role that is socially recognized as important, like that of a doctor.
Permitting them to exercise a limited form of control over us.
Then there is reward and coercive power.
The power to reward and punish is connected to roles of formal authority, like that of a judge.
But it can also develop in any relationship where one person depends on another
for practical or emotional sustenance.
In summary, light control as persuasion works well for us when the other person has far less power than we do
or recognizes our authority to speak, has less knowledge or insight than we do and needs or wants what we have
and feels they have little to contribute to the situation.
The basic influence tactic in these types of situations is the use of rational persuasion,
use of logical argument and new information to influence the other person,
accompanied of course by appropriate appeals to values and emotions.
It's the basic talk for teachers, coaches, salespeople and managers.
For anyone in a position to know something you don't, that you'd like to know, need to know, and are willing to accept direction on.
Control talk for rational persuasion or teaching begins with a tacit critical judgment of the other person in the situation.
Implied in every teaching situation is a judgment of the other's incompleteness.
Their knowledge or perspectives are somehow incomplete and our teaching will fill this void.
We help them change by giving them more information.
Or in our judgment, their perspectives are incorrect.
They may have lots of information, but their ways of thinking about it simply lead them to wrong answers or reactions.
Usually this situation requires a little more effort on the part of a teacher, coach or manager.
Simply giving them more data is not enough.
We need to help them construct new ways of framing information and essentially change the way they think.
To do this, we need to use more than facts and logic.
We need to appeal to their values and their emotions.
In fact, the more elegantly we can combine rational arguments supported by appropriate data with appeals to others' positive values and feelings about a subject,
the more likely we are to engage them emotionally to change the way they think.
Remember we said earlier, feelings are contagious and those we express as we present our data will be picked up by the other.
In a recent article in University Affairs, I analyzed the relationship between emotions and the facts and logic approach to large lecture delivery.
I argued that in addition to presenting a well-structured talk, lecturers could be far more effective if they found ways to communicate two important things.
Their love for the subject, after all, they have given their adult lives to it.
So they should tell their students how enthusiastic they are about the field and why this particular information they are lecturing on is so important.
And they should show their care for students.
Now in this case, I mean not only by using language levels and metaphors that are more likely to connect with students,
but also by paying attention to the effects of their words on a few students in the first rows of the lecture hall.
So they can repeat a point if they see looks of confusion, for instance.
My research data showed that students notice these efforts and respond positively to them.
Now this also seems to be what happens when many doctors talk one-on-one with their patients.
They can show their care for their patients by simply paying attention a moment longer to what they are trying to tell them at the beginning of the appointment.
However, many doctors don't do this.
Roder and Hall in their book Doctors Talking With Patients, Patients Talking With Doctors,
review what are now widely accepted studies on the first 90 seconds of an appointment.
Right after the doctor asked the question, so what seems to be the problem?
In studies done 15 years apart, the first in 1984, the second in 1999,
around 70% of doctors interrupted the patient's opening statement after only 15 to 20 seconds.
The follow-up on the first problem described.
It was revealed that the issues raised later in the conversation, if that was permitted,
were just as important and sometimes vastly more important than the first thing the patient happened to say.
But in the control talk approach of most doctors, these never come out, or come out only in a haphazard way.
For instance, on the way out of the office, the person may turn in the doorway and nonchalantly say,
so this lump under my arm is going to be okay, right?
It's a matter of controlling the appointment in terms of time for doctors.
They don't want to encourage endless chit-chat, so the researchers looked at the 30% of patients in the study
who were actually allowed to continue their first statement without interruption.
It turned out that their remaining statement took no more than 2.5 minutes.
Keep this in mind when you have your next appointment with your doctor.
In summary, whatever position the speaker happens to be in, the process of persuasive light control is the same.
It begins with some level of judgment about the other,
moves on to providing more or different information than they have now,
and intends to create some sort of change in them.
In the case of academics, know this, it'll be on the exam.
In the case of doctors, you have to follow this regimen exactly.
And in the case of car salesmen, here are the keys to your new car.
Now what about light control for solving communication problems as they emerge?
When connect talk goes awry or when expected persuasive control talks suddenly feels threatening,
people are often taken by surprise and their negative emotions are aroused.
This is an emergent problem situation.
For example, when one person undermines the unspoken agreement about playful sharing of similarities in connect talk
by saying something that is heard as critical, when it was perhaps meant to be humorous,
or expresses an opinion that seems out of place in this type of conversation.
It's the unexpected differences problem.
So say that you're an adult member of a family, you're married with kids, you have a great job,
you feel that esteemed by other family members except one of them
because they remind you at a Thanksgiving dinner of some odd or gross behavior from your childhood.
Everybody laughs and you're embarrassed.
They've revealed something from your hidden self.
Box number three in your four-window model of the self.
You feel your anger rising and they notice and they say, hey, what's wrong with you?
It was funny.
Did you take a joke?
Instantly feel the need to get them to see the light on this one.
And in the process, we tend to display every limitation of the perception of thought processes
discussed earlier because our emotions are engaged and our feelings push us up the inference ladder to judgment.
Their behavior is not just uninformed, it's deeply inappropriate.
Our face is threatened in the situation.
Their words are a kind of criticism of our self.
Our emotional investment in the conversation is threatened.
So to feel better, we need to be right by making them wrong, making their views wrong,
getting them to back off or back down.
Like control is our automatic response.
It's the seventh axiom in action.
In difficult situations, we need to feel right.
So we don't laugh.
Instead, we move into control talk.
Aimed at defending ourselves and explaining away what we did as a child
or undermining the other person's assertion by trivializing it.
Nah, you're full of it.
That's not what happened.
Anyway, how would you know anything about it?
You were two at the time.
Maybe you should have another glass of wine to refresh your memory.
Climate suddenly gets serious as the tacit assumptions of connect talk instantly disappear.
And the other is instantly preparing a comeback.
For now, we are going to stop this flow.
While they're waiting for their comeback, we're going to talk about this in the next lecture.
In this moment of rising negative feelings, a third party could intervene.
So we're going to let an older adult intervene to try to recreate the previous relaxed mood.
And then we'll talk about competitive control next lecture.
And the older adult says, you know, you guys have been at this since you were kids.
Let it go.
It's Thanksgiving.
Your wine sounds like a great idea.
Everybody raise your glass.
I propose a toast.
Whether dealing with unexpected differences or expecting disagreement before we start,
our responses are always the same.
Start with a critical judgment of them.
You're wrong.
Or a complaint about their actions.
I don't like what you said.
And then we launch into giving new information.
That is our view of the situation and the right way to do things.
The other to change their thoughts or actions.
However, unlike the established social situations we discussed earlier,
where the speaker's use of control talk is supported by their position or their expertise,
we only have our assumptions about our rightness to work with.
So what does like control talk look like in action?
Here are the basics.
Start from a critical judgment about them, how they're behavior.
We just said that.
And we usually, it comes down to the three categories.
They're either incomplete or incorrect in their information or inappropriate in their behavior.
You then tell the other your story and their story.
Here's the right answer.
Another perspective, more information.
Or here's what you should have said or done.
You frame your responses with you are or you should messages to tell them how they ought to think, act, and feel.
You're wrong.
You should have said.
You should think or feel or act like this.
That is like me.
And you say it again as many times as necessary, thanks.
If they don't seem to get it the first time or the second time, repeat yourself.
Use the same or different words.
Just persist.
And then you ask questions only to probe for their agreement with you and your story.
And then you listen, but only for leverage to find something you can use in your argument, some weakness in their response that you can exploit to win them over.
What you don't ask about is their story, their side.
In this mode of talk, you really don't care about what they think, but only if they understand and agree with you.
So you ask questions to clarify your argument and get their understanding.
You understand?
You get it?
Am I clear?
Or you ask for their agreement or submission.
Do you agree?
Okay.
Also to make this work, you show little or no acknowledgement or support for their side of the story.
I mean, if you're going to get them to change, you can't be offering acknowledgement of their views or express support for them.
After all, if you begin to legitimize their ideas, it will strengthen them in their stand against you.
And it will be much harder to get them to change and to make you feel better.
And if your version of logic and rationality, facts and arguments, isn't working, then go straight to work on their emotions.
In day-to-day talk, we seem to intuitively understand that the most coherently structured rational arguments are not the only basis for changing a mind.
If there is any resistance on the part of the other, we use emotion-based tactics to get them to change.
And along with competitive light control, we're going to talk about these tactics in detail in our next lecture.
Now let's see how the process of persuasive light control works in the hands of a master.
I want you to picture this workplace exchange.
The situation actually begins the day before when our senior manager, George, asks a staff member, Rob, to meet him in his office the following morning to discuss something important.
When Rob inquires, George says, I want to talk to you about taking over the operations department.
The manager is leaving in just over a week.
Now this offer seems to fluster Rob a bit. He seems a bit odd by the suggestion.
In response, George simply tells him that it's a great opportunity and he can handle it.
Rob agrees, hesitantly, but George says, no problem. For a guy like you, it's going to be okay.
So Rob pulls himself together, promises he'll talk it over with his wife that night, and meet George tomorrow morning.
Next morning, Rob enters George's office and sits down.
But interestingly, George gets up and walks around the desk and sits on its front edge, facing Rob and looking down at him.
He smiles as he begins to describe the job and he ends his outline by summarizing, basically, just keep the work moving and smooth out any kinks.
While he's talking, Rob tries to interject by saying that this sounds really different than what he's doing now, but George just over talks him and says,
yeah, and one of the main responsibilities of the job is the collation of the weekly data into a report that comes directly to me.
He then finishes by telling Rob that it'll be a very good jump in salary for him, plus benefits, with the possibility for more salary increases in the future.
At this point, he picks up a paper copy of the job description and hands it to Rob, who, of course, takes it.
And as if to clinch his argument, George says, so what do you say? Great deal, isn't it?
Throughout this entire sales talk, what George doesn't seem to notice are Rob's nonverbals.
Rob has been sitting with his arms tightly folded across his chest.
He looks down once. He rubs his chin with his hand thoughtfully.
And actually, he doesn't look the least bit happy about all these wonderful possibilities.
And when he takes the job description, he expels a breath and he starts by thanking George for the opportunity.
George smiles and accepts the appreciation.
Rob then says that although the money is a big temptation, he feels he'd be getting in over his head in this situation.
He reveals that he knows his limitations and he's not sure he can handle a managerial position.
George simply says, don't be modest. Of course you can handle it. You're a very smart guy.
And if you start next Monday, you'll have a week to get to know the job with the manager before he leaves. No problem.
Again, Rob expresses his uncertainty by saying, listen, I have enough trouble getting at my own reports, let alone doing one for a whole section.
George is right back in there. We can teach you that stuff.
And I've got great confidence in your abilities given all the work you've done here in the past three years.
Then he sidesteps Rob's resistance and says, so did you ask your wife about it? What did she say?
Now Rob says, she wants me to take it. He's a step up the ladder and we could use the money with our new house and another kid on the way.
George jumps on this and says, there you are. And I mean, nobody has to be told how to spend more money, right?
Rob smiles and nods and George says, good, we're agreed. I'll start making the arrangements this afternoon.
Rob seems momentarily stunned. But when George stands and reaches out to shake his hand, Rob stands as well, shakes it, quietly thanks him and leaves.
And it's done.
So what do you think about what you just heard in this story?
When I run this case in my management workshops, I always get a knowing cynical laugh that starts at the point where George says, good, we're agreed.
Rob has been conned. Well, he's been sold something, that's for sure.
And in George's mind, something good. And with the best of intentions, he wants to give a younger employee a big break.
However, he also needs to solve a problem for himself. The manager who's leaving has decided this rather suddenly and George needs a replacement right now.
And with some clever persuasive control talk, he gets one.
So let's quickly review his talk.
He takes advantage of his role and legitimate authority and positions himself above Rob in the discussion, a psychological advantage.
Once he starts, he keeps talking. He doesn't allow Rob to interrupt him, just over talks him and keeps going.
He shows no acknowledgement of the uncertainty or even anxiety Rob is demonstrating in his obvious nonverbals.
He simply delivers his message, his story, never goes off message to inquire into Rob's apparent discomfort.
As a result, he never asks Rob a single question to get his story.
That would reveal Rob's deeper concerns, which would get the discussion off track.
Rather, as the boss, he tells Rob how Rob will behave, think, and feel in the new job.
Going to be fine. He's right for the job. He can learn it in a week.
These are intended to deflect Rob's negative statements by essentially reflecting Rob's own story back to him, but in a positive way.
He also gets Rob to commit at the non-conscious level by handing him the job description and getting him to take it.
Reciprocation is one of the great influence tactics.
When people offer something positive, we unconsciously feel the need to pay them back in kind.
In this case, I agree.
Now, he also offers Rob several inducements to agree.
He promises Rob a great future, lots of rewards, just say yes.
Promises an easy way to learn the job.
And when all that doesn't seem to work, he uses what he heard when he was listening for leverage the day before.
He suddenly shifts the discussion to Rob's wife.
Finally, George uses his positional power to assert an agreement that actually doesn't exist in the moment.
And Rob simply caves into the pressure.
In conclusion, our natural response to changing others in recognized situations,
where people have differences in power, is the use of rational persuasive light control talk.
However, light control talk is also our default reaction whenever unexpected differences or disagreements appear.
It's an integral part of our social learning, and we use it to instantly respond to challenges.
Meanwhile, before we conclude, there are several things I would like you to observe and do before the next lecture.
I want you to think about a time when this may have happened to you.
Perhaps as a parent when a child disobeyed an order or ignored you.
As a husband or wife when your spouse criticized you for reasons not obvious to you.
Or as an employee when a colleague showed up to meet you, supposedly having the work done with no completed work.
Do you recall repeating yourself to make your point?
Telling them what they should do or ought to have done in this situation.
Perhaps raising your voice as you repeated your critique, directly or indirectly blaming them for your frustration.
By trivializing or ignoring their responses or ignoring them all together as you retold your story.
How did that go for you?
Did you get them to stop or change their behavior to fit your view of the situation?
Or did they actively or passively resist you?
And if you got your way, you got to be or you got to feel right, how did they seem to feel as a result?
Positively motivated to change their way or change their words?
Willing to reconnect with you in the moment and continue the conversation?
Or just simply escape?
How do you feel about winning this time?
Deserving, satisfied, happy with the situation?
If your answers to these questions are not so positive, it could be because when we start using light control on others,
or often then not, they actually use it to resist us.
They pay us back and use their light control to defend themselves.
Now things can get very competitive in these moments.
This can lead to frustration, rising anger, and even the worst kind of exchange.
Heavy control talk.
So competitive and heavy control will be the topic of our next lecture.
Thanks.
