Lecture 15 Commands, Accusations, and Blame
Welcome to lecture 15.
As we indicated in the past lecture, the problem with light control
is that when we use it to make others wrong,
they're likely to use it on us so they can stay right.
This competitive struggle can easily escalate and lead us down the path
to the worst kind of talk, heavy control talk.
The reason we analyze this most problematic form of talk is because
it doesn't happen by accident or only occasionally.
It is one of our built-in natural responses to other people
when they don't give us what we want.
It's just the complicated and threatening end of the continuum of natural responses
we have to the resistance of other people.
A key difference between light and heavy control, however,
is that light control can be started and managed consciously in some situations
when others really need what we have and they see themselves as having less
formal power, less knowledge in the situation than we do,
and they feel they have little to contribute in the situation.
But heavy control is very hard to manage.
It emerges in situations where others resist our efforts to change them.
They refuse to accept our view of the situation.
In fact, they begin to use persuasive light control on us,
as we've mentioned, to defend themselves.
And as they persist in this,
our feelings of frustration and annoyance at their resistance increases
and, eventually, are hijacked by our cognitive unconscious
into deeper feelings of righteous anger or righteous indignation.
We start taking this argument personally,
and we shift our talk to heavy personal attack language.
Now, before we explore heavy control, talk in more detail, though,
let's talk about the most common path to getting there.
Competitive light control.
Now, why do others resist and try to light control us back?
Well, the conditions are essentially the opposite of those where we expect light control to happen.
People don't see themselves as needing what we have.
They have their own ideas.
They don't accept the implicit judgment that somehow they are incomplete
or their thinking is an error.
And they see themselves as our equals.
They think we're imposing our ideas on them,
and as a result, they need to demonstrate their independence.
Moreover, as we persist, our persistence actually increases their resistance,
leading each of us to repeating our arguments and getting louder.
I have a favorite Kathy cartoon that captures this kind of talk.
She and her boyfriend are sitting side by side reading a magazine article
on improving their communication.
Kathy quotes the article,
The secret to a perfect relationship is to tell the other person everything you don't like about them,
thus never allowing resentment to build up.
Her boyfriend jumps in helpfully and says,
In that case, Kathy, I wish you'd change your shirt.
I'm sick of that one.
She throws back, You have a big nose and a fat stomach.
Now he's angry.
Oh yeah, well you have a big mouth.
To which she yells, Ha!
My mouth isn't nearly as big as your stupid ego.
In the last panel, his chair is empty.
And she's looking sad and says,
Every time we read an article on how to communicate better, we quit speaking.
Well, that's the way it is with competitive control.
The most common resolution to this situation is walking out and slamming the door behind us.
Competitive light control is really about personal power.
The real struggle is about who's in charge and who needs to be right.
And with no positional power to protect us,
no legitimate authority with its reward and punishment power,
it comes down to using our personal power and the principle of least interest.
Let me define these two concepts.
Personal power.
This power to persuade is partly based on an individual's personality and early learning.
A person presents an emotionally engaging self.
And it's partly based on a well-honed ability to balance rational and emotional arguments
in order to attract, engage, influence, or inspire others.
This is one form of power that can actually be learned by everyone.
The principle of least interest.
Turns out, whoever is least dependent on this particular relationship
is most likely to exercise their personal power in order to win.
Let's look at some studies of influence tactics used by couples in their relationships.
When couples saw themselves as being equal in the overall relationship,
that is, sharing the formal decisions about money or where to live, for instance,
they tended to choose the rational persuasive approach, facts and argumentation, to light control.
They saw themselves as bargaining and reaching a compromise in difficult situations.
Also, they used rational persuasion when they weren't expecting a lot of resistance from the other,
when both of them were likely to benefit from the change.
When couples describe their relationship as having, as one of having distinct power differences,
where one person made all the main decisions in the family,
when given a list of influence tactics for winning arguments,
the more powerful partner almost always picked hard tactics.
It seems that when a person sees themselves as having formal power in an informal relationship,
they're much more free to put down their foot and demand the other's compliance.
On the other hand, in the same high power, low power relationship,
the less empowered person chose soft emotional tactics to persuade the other to change.
In our example in the last lecture, the boss, George, used several soft tactics to get Rob to accept the job offer
when he saw that his rational persuasion wasn't working out as well as he'd like.
Emotionally evocative tactics can tip an argument towards resolution
when facts and argumentation aren't doing the job.
So let's take a closer look so we can see how often we use these kinds of tactics in our everyday light control comments.
As we've said, there are two kinds, positive or soft tactics, negative or hard tactics.
Let's start with reviewing positive or soft tactics to gain compliance.
Well, first of all, you can promise the other concrete rewards.
If you will just do this, I will give you.
Remember, George promised Rob a better future, more pay, benefits, future raises.
Then we can call on positive self-feelings, telling the other that they will feel better if they comply.
You'll feel better about yourself when you make this choice.
Perhaps you remember that George implied that Rob would feel better about himself making more money in the future.
We can also use positive altercasting.
That is, we can cast the other into a positive role in the future.
We can cast them into the role of a person with positive qualities by arguing that such a person would comply with our request.
George kept telling Rob he could do this, given all of his previous work.
Any intelligent person can do this, and George told Rob, you can handle it because you're a very smart guy.
Now, another tactic is invoking their positive esteem.
That is, other people will think well of you if you do this.
And if you remember, when he had to, George brought up Rob's wife's feelings about the offer.
Now, if these don't work, we can always fall back on moral appeals.
It's just the right thing to do.
Or altruism.
Look, I just really need your help here.
And when positive tactics don't get us what we want, we can always use negative or hard tactics.
We can threaten them.
If you don't comply, I'll reject you.
We can cast them into a negative role, into the role of the villain, because only a person with bad qualities would not comply with our request.
You really are a jerk, because only a real jerk wouldn't give me what I want.
Then we can promise them negative self-feelings.
You'll hate yourself if you don't give me this.
After that, we can just throw in how the family, friends, and neighbors will feel about them by invoking negative esteem.
Everybody we know will also hate you if you don't do this.
And if that doesn't work, we can always call in past favors.
Look at how often I gave you what you wanted in the past.
You owe me this.
Every debate is a form of competitive light control.
When we are in competitive light control mode, we are responding to and enacting the many invisible assumptions our cultural learning has taught us about the combative ways to discover the truth.
These include assuming that there is a right answer.
We have it.
Proving the other wrong, or at least seriously diminishing the strength of their argument with our criticism.
Listening only to find flaws in their thinking and building counterarguments on them.
Listening for leverage.
Defending our assumptions as objective truths, high up on the inference ladder.
And seeking a conclusion that ratifies our position.
These assumptions place a premium on being right, winning, and finding the answer.
When they disagree with us, we can use deflective tactics during the conversation to undermine their efforts and rational persuasion.
We can trivialize their statements by making light of what they are saying, oh, that's silly.
Why would you say that?
By telling them they don't have enough data, or they have bad data, or demanding proof.
And one of my favorites, by ignoring or interrupting them.
Or speaking in a superior way when we talk back to them.
We may also discount what they're saying with words like, you gotta be kidding.
Or neutralize their opinion by saying, so what, everybody knows that.
When two people are competing for control, this kind of sparring can simply go round and round.
It's one of those hamster wheel situations.
Everybody goes round and round until somebody finds a way to silence the other or escape the scene.
Let me give you an example of this kind of competitive light control.
It's a short conversation between a son and his father.
The son comes in looking down and says, jeez, I'm so dumb.
The father says, you are not dumb.
The son says, I am so.
You're not.
My report card says I'm dumb.
Your report card says you need to work harder in a couple of courses.
No, it says I'm dumb.
It does not.
What about my camp counselor last summer?
He said I was dumb.
I talked to him about that.
He was only kidding.
He was not.
I am dumb.
You are not.
You're smart.
No, I'm dumb, but I'm not dumb enough to believe you when you say I'm smart.
The father says, why?
Because you're my dad and you have to say stuff like that.
I'm dumb.
And the father just stands there and stuns silence.
It doesn't matter what age or in this case, it doesn't matter who has the legitimate authority of the parental role.
It comes down to who is more effective in wielding their personal power in the situation.
And it looks like this time the son has outpowered his father.
You'll also notice that the father never asks any questions to discover what's really going on in the mind of his son.
It's simply him offering reassuring but ineffective judgments back to his son's own judgments about himself.
It's an exchange of high inference ladder talk.
No real information here.
Now arguing back in competitive like control leads us down the path to heavy control talk.
That's the real issue here.
Once we've undermined their arguments and their conversational face, we hit back with better arguments.
Remembering that truth is less important than the strength of our assertion,
we make arguments that are driven by plausibility rather than accuracy.
Arguments that sound right.
Remember our basic assumption is that we have all the data we need here.
We have an answer and we're not considering alternatives.
And as they continue to resist and our feelings begin to drive our thoughts,
we use more negative or hard tactics.
We threaten them.
We call them names.
And swear that if they don't give in, no one will ever talk to them again.
So they bristle at this and prepare to respond in kind.
Up to this point it was just an argument about something else.
But now we're beginning to feel that this is about us.
They are resisting us just to make us angry and to hurt us.
At this point the power of dangerous emotion flows through our bodies
in the form of the hormones of aggression, adrenaline and cortisol.
Our cognitive unconscious has seen this coming.
Remember we said it always knows what's going to happen next.
And it's preparing us to get serious about fighting or fleeing.
These fight-flight emotions are translated into feelings of righteous anger or righteous indignation.
We think when we have to deal with this kind of bad intention and behavior on their part,
we deserve to be angry or indignant.
We start taking it all very personally.
Now let's discuss the effect of negative emotions on our talk when we turn to heavy control.
This is what happens when we start taking it personally,
when it's now all about me and my rightness.
So how do we speak in heavy control?
The basic speech forms of heavy control are built on the you message.
This opening phrase structures the assertion that follows it so it will be taken personally.
You messages come in several forms, critical labels, what I call the you are descriptors.
You are messages don't refer to the surface behavior of the person,
but to the person's essence.
Saying you are an idiot to someone is the verbal equivalent of a butterfly collector
taking that long thin needle and sticking it through the butterfly to mount it in a display case.
You are an idiot.
Represent something deep about their DNA.
Remember all those little letters in the DNA?
Well, they're somewhere down in there where they have a W for wrong.
We wonder why people don't listen to us when we're angry and speaking in you messages.
The answer, of course, is that the structure of the sentence forces them to hear it as a personal attack
and at that moment they stop paying attention to us
and they start paying attention to the voice in their head that says,
I am not.
They start to defend themselves.
And when the emotional surge has dissipated and we're feeling a little more calm,
we also wonder why they're not talking to us anymore.
We seem to have a kind of amnesia about all the judgments and commands we just leveled against the other.
Perhaps that's because they come to mind too easily.
They are unthinking and automatic responses to threat.
Now here are the major types of you messages that come out of our mouths so easily
when we're really angry or deeply indignant.
Commands.
Just do it.
Now the U, of course, is implied, but it's there.
Our idea is that the receiver has no choice but to do it.
And when someone says this to us, it's a direct attack on our face and esteem in a conversation.
Someone who commands us is not only saying we have no influence in the moment,
but that we're so unimportant we can be ordered about.
Now, of course, we're lecturing and commanding them in their heads.
They're running there.
What an idiot.
What an idiot.
What an idiot tape.
Over and over again.
It's the mental equivalent of them putting their hands over their ears and shouting,
I can't hear you.
They stop listening to us because they're listening to themselves.
How about accusations?
You don't care.
You don't give a damn.
You don't realize how I feel.
You don't pay attention to me.
These are the mind reading you messages through which we tell the other what they are thinking,
feeling, and believing in this situation.
Really, why do we talk like we know what people are thinking or feeling in any situation?
Even if we happen to be right occasionally, what does that matter if actually telling them their thoughts
and feelings offends them and guarantees they won't listen to us in the future?
No one likes to know it all, particularly one who thinks they know everything bad about us.
And finally, there's always blame, the you made me messages.
When we say this, the first thing the other says in their heads is, I did not.
And if you repeat this type of message enough, people begin to believe you and start taking mental notes
so they can start doing it to you again on purpose sometime in the future.
You made me messages are simply dishonest ways of expressing our feelings.
Now, once we start down the you message path, we leave the other no choice but to react emotionally to our critical judgments,
commands, or direct attacks.
You messages invade the other space and force the other to defend themselves.
Dangerous feelings of righteous anger or righteous indignation suffuse the talk and we begin to escalate in our exchanges.
We go from statements of disagreement and annoyance or frustration to aggression, venting, demanding, threatening, attacking.
We use ridicule and sarcasm or passive aggression, blaming, intense complaining, whining, withholding, denying anything to be emotionally right.
Now, let me give you an example of a couple who, although young, have a very traditional relationship.
He's a dominant, often domineering husband who sees himself as in control of his family.
He and his wife both work to support the household, but he often treats her as no more than a kind of live in made.
What's interesting is that actually doing the housework doesn't seem to bother her as much as the way he treats her.
Constantly tries to tell her what to do, often speaks to her with contempt, particularly when he's angry.
Her response to this repeated effort to use heavy control is to respond in kind.
So they bicker constantly and regularly get into serious fights.
Now, she realizes that this can't go on and she finds a therapist for both of them.
She gets her husband to come to therapy as a way of getting both of them to stop fighting so intensely.
In one of the early therapy sessions, when the husband decides to miss an appointment, the wife and the counselor decide on an intervention.
The therapist agrees to call the husband and offer several free therapy sessions if the husband will just first do something for his wife.
Now, the husband warily agrees to this and that night when he walks through the door, the house is a mess.
His wife asks him to clean up the mess and tells him that this exercise is an effort to help him see the world from her point of view.
He reacts very poorly to this.
He doesn't think it's funny or therapeutic and he certainly isn't going to clean up.
When she implores him to play along, he starts berating her for supporting this stupid idea and as always their fight escalates into a tremendously intense session of mutual recrimination.
And he walks out.
After he calms down a little, he returns to the house and finds her in tears on the living room couch.
After some heavily sarcastic remarks about the general situation, he demands to know what she would do if she came home to a house like this.
She admits she'd be pretty angry.
He simply cuts her off before she can say any more and repeats in an ever louder voice, angry, angry.
You'd be fricking outraged and you'd be throwing stuff around the house to make it worse.
She tries to repeat something the therapist said and he cuts her off again and yells, it doesn't matter.
This is a kids game. He's done.
She tearfully explains that she thought he would have the dignity to walk in, clean up in order to help them save their marriage.
And that she did this to show him what she comes home to every day.
She starts to say, I'm not asking you to and he cuts her off.
Well, hold on. Stop. I let you talk. Actually, he hasn't let her talk.
So let me go and clean everything up, right?
And then we're never going to fight again. Is that right? Lots of heavy sarcasm.
He says, no, no, no. The process isn't going to end today. It's just going to start.
He cuts her off. She persists. And he cuts her off again.
And because she tried to persist, he accuses her of never being able to have an adult conversation without yelling and screaming.
And of course, he's yelling when he says this.
He adds that he's not going to get down on his hands and knees and look like a friggin idiot.
She asks him why he's so worried about looking foolish.
He over talks her and yells, are you kidding me? Are you kidding me?
He says, stop yelling. And then she yells herself, I'm not trying to make you look bad.
He screams, really? And then she can't help herself.
She hurls back to classic parental command, grow up.
And he is silenced, turns and strides out the door, slamming it behind him.
And again, he's left on the couch in tears.
Now, like all heavy control talk conversations, it becomes a very serious struggle over what was said and then what was meant by what was said.
And most importantly, who's to blame?
These three issues always rise up through the smoke of this kind of fiery talk.
What was said?
We drive to find the truth by hurling epithets at each other.
The assumption that cripples our communication in this moment is our belief that there really is a simple truth,
a simple definition of right and wrong in this situation.
And of course, we do this because we need to make them wrong.
And we believe if we persist, they'll admit it.
They'll give in or give up.
So we punctuate the flow of our talk into a cause and effect chain that will serve our need to be right.
What was meant?
The crippling assumption here is we believe we already know what they really meant.
And how do we know?
Because we infer their intentions from our feelings about their behavior.
We're feeling bad, so they must have meant to treat us badly.
And finally, who's to blame?
Well, the answer is simple. It's them.
Somebody has to be made to feel bad about my sadness and my anger here.
And it's going to be you because you're the one I'm talking to.
It can't be me because that would mean I'd have to take responsibility for my behavior and I don't want to do that.
So you made this happen.
Since I didn't get my way here, I'm not going to be responsible for this mess.
Rationally, heavy control makes no sense at all.
The problem that started it doesn't get solved.
And the other person can't be truly made to be wrong.
They can only be silenced.
Emotionally, however, it makes tremendous sense to us.
The upheaval somehow releases us from the responsibility for our own bad behavior.
Now, the worst thing about control in general and heavy control talk in particular
is that no matter how the drama ends, it undermines the integrative, connective basis of the relationship.
We do all of this because we don't have any natural way of talking to each other.
It keeps us connected even as we struggle with differences.
We don't regularly practice the ideals of the emotionally and cognitively self-managed talk that we discussed in Lectures 11 and 12.
And when facing unexpected differences or disagreements, we can't seem to find the right words and behaviors.
Oh, it's time to take action.
Start with managing your emotions and your voice.
In Lecture 9, we covered self-management in general terms.
Now we're just going to be more specific.
As you begin to take a conversation personally, you feel the rise of anger or indignation.
You need to stop the conversation and calm yourself before you say the next worst thing that could come out of your mouth.
Say what you're about to do in your descriptive, non-judgemental adult voice.
Actually, I need to stop for a moment here.
I don't know about you, but I'm getting very upset with all this talk and I need to calm down a bit before we go on.
So I'm going to get a glass of water, go to the bathroom, go back to my office for a moment, whatever.
And then say, I promise this will only take two minutes.
And if you're sitting, stand up.
Show them your intention to stop talking and leave momentarily.
Now before you turn away, say, while I'm gone, I'm going to try to see this disagreement from your point of view so I can get a clearer sense of your issues.
Just a suggestion.
Maybe you could do the same for me.
Anyway, I'll be back in a couple of minutes.
You're probably saying to yourself, no one ever does that.
And my response to this is, right, no one ever does that.
And that's why so many of the really important decisions in our lives go badly.
Think of how managing your emotions and talk would work when the bosses are planning a downsizing at your job.
Or you need to reprimand your 15-year-old in a way that won't make them take off one day and never speak to you again.
Or when you're trying to keep your marriage together.
And once you've broken off this struggle, you've left the room for a moment, calm yourself.
Use deep, centering breaths to reduce the impact of the hormones coursing through your bloodstream in response to your cognitive unconscious mind's reaction to threat.
That's what's preventing you from thinking clearly.
Talk to yourself and your adult voice by asking yourself a question.
I wonder why he or she doesn't want to do it my way.
And force yourself to answer from their point of view.
Tell yourself how your idea might affect them negatively rather than just sticking with your own point of view because they're ungrateful wretches. That's why.
Ask yourself more questions if necessary.
Have a debate with yourself using your adult voice, not your angry parent or whiny child voice.
Keep your promise and come back to the discussion more composed.
And prepare to ask them more questions and make fewer judgments.
Remember, you may or may not get what you want in this situation, but even if you don't, you will have sustained the relationship, kept the lines of communication open between you and the other, and retained the ethical high ground.
All of these are wins that will become valuable assets to be used when this discussion comes around again.
And I promise, if it's that important, it will.
Now, when you try to use these techniques at first, they may feel very awkward and unnatural.
But remember, it was your natural reactions that got you into this situation in the first place.
So when you try these techniques, repeat them.
Over time, you'll find they do work.
It just makes better.
And they'll make a positive difference to your relationship.
Now, in the next three lectures, we're going to examine another way to deal with the all too common situation where our automatic choice of control talk leads us to competitive light control and then into heavy control.
We need another way of talking to deal with our problems and avoid this downward spiral.
So starting with the next lecture, we'll discuss dialogue talk, a mode of talk where you manage yourself and your emotions before you start a discussion.
And where you will frame your speech in ways that will discourage others from using control on you.
And in fact, we'll keep you connected even in disagreement. Thank you.
