Lecture 16 Healing Relationships with Dialogue Talk
Hi, and welcome to lecture 16. Dialogue talk is the one mode of talk that is not automatic.
When facing communication breakdown, dialogue talk requires that we move from reactive rightness
to a conscious choice to be mindful and appreciative in our approaches to conversation.
In making these choices, we are shifting from controlling others to managing ourselves,
temporarily getting ourselves, our face and our views out of the way,
so we can think together with the other as opposed to making up our mind first
and then trying to convince the other of our view through control talk.
Dialogue requires us to suspend our judgments and pay attention to our assumptions.
It also requires particular forms of listening and speaking to avoid the control talk
that undermines meaningful conversations in complex situations.
In dialogue talk, we choose to be mindful, appreciative metacommunicators in difficult situations,
and as a result, the outcomes can be far more positive than those we create
using the approach of win-lose, right-or-wrong control talk.
So to deal with breakdowns, we begin by making a critical choice.
Do we want to be right or do we want to solve the problem?
Now, when I ask this question to people caught in control talk,
they often say, well, isn't that the same thing?
The answer is no.
There are two people involved in this conversation,
and their rightness and yours may have little to do with each other.
Think of how the mind processes data using the model of the inference ladder.
After our minds select data based on what we already know, not on what they know.
Our mind adds meanings to those patterns based on our culture experience,
learning, personal experience.
Not theirs.
Our mind creates our own conclusions, not theirs.
All this while their mind is doing exactly the same thing,
adding their own meanings to their own selected information
and drawing their own conclusions,
I would say the chances are excellent that they think they could be right too,
even though they're not in the same place we are.
This is the key reason why our being right and our solving the problem are rarely connected.
The problem actually lies between us.
It's an amalgam of two unique views, ours and theirs.
This is what needs to be negotiated.
It is interpersonal communication after all.
And for some folks, this argument is not enough.
They say, okay, okay, but what if I'm technically correct?
I'm right.
I have the answer and they don't.
My response is, how does that matter if they don't realize it?
If by the very way you talk to them, they can't hear your right answer
because they're not listening to your words.
They're listening to how you're treating them and to their inner voices of self-defense.
There are times in conversation when we must make the choice to stop
and deal with the problem that's actually, really, right in front of us
rather than overwhelm them with our rightness.
To illustrate this moment, I want you to think of yourself in a car
heading into an intersection to make a left-hand turn.
The way does the oncoming traffic clears the intersection
and you start to complete the turn.
The light is turning red, so you have to clear your lane.
And as you move forward, you are suddenly aware of a car that is running the red light.
Now you have a choice here.
You're in the right if you make the turn, but if you do, you'll be hit.
Now you can make the turn and in the hospital later,
you can always claim that you are in the right.
Or you can solve the problem right here and now, slam on the brakes
and let the other car whizz past you.
Now when this happened to me years ago,
I would rather have had the chance to solve the problem.
I just didn't get the choice.
I was already too far into the turn to avoid the driver that T-boned my car.
The light was already red.
All the oncoming traffic had passed.
I didn't know where this guy came from.
But the last thing I saw before he hit me was his face turned to the right
as he was talking to his passenger.
He didn't even notice the light.
Now if we come into a difficult moment, absolutely certain of our right answer,
we come destined to try and control the other.
If on the other hand we come to the moment to discover the answer that lies between us,
we come to enter into dialogue.
So what is the nature of dialogue talk?
What are its fundamental assumptions?
Notice how these are really the opposite of control talk
and they reflect the axioms of the interpersonal communication model we discussed in lecture 2
and the model of communication ideals we developed in lecture 12.
The first assumption of dialogue talk is,
I'm here to solve the problem, not save my face.
I manage myself, not the other.
The point of dialogue is to solve a problem.
This requires that we focus on managing our reactions to the situation,
not on controlling the other person.
To get into this mode we decide we don't have to worry about face or rightness in this conversation
because we're already okay here.
We're confident, valuable, and we can influence this situation.
We decide all this before we start talking
so that we can begin the conversation by appreciating the other and the situation
rather than trying to change them to protect our rightness and our face.
The next assumption is we both have to change.
Now this assumption recognizes the essential interconnectedness
of face-to-face talk and human relationships.
It also deals with the equality superiority dimension of our ideal model.
In dialogue talk we're equals.
We're both involved at the same level.
Now in dialogue talk I assume that my story is my story
and it's obvious only to me.
Now this assumption helps us get past the natural general assumption
that any reasonable person would automatically understand our point of view.
As a result we must expect the other person to ask questions in order to understand us
and we accept the fact that this process is neither automatic nor easy.
Our complementary assumption to that one is that they have their story
and it's obvious only to them.
Taking this seriously means we can't make any assumptions about how they see the world.
This assumption controls our urge to tell them how they think
or how they ought to think and feel about the situation.
We keep our words inside our space,
never invading their space with mind reading or accusations
or express judgments about them.
We only talk about the things we can see in the moment between us.
So of course we assume next that I will have all the data to solve this problem
only when I listen to their story.
We're also going to have to ask them questions
and listen from their point of view to get this information.
And finally in dialogue talk we always ask the question
how did we contribute to this situation?
When dealing with a problem this final assumption
recognizes the reality of the communication moment
as an intertwined flow of words and gestures at two levels,
topic and relationship.
Not a punctuated chain of events that serves the purpose of protecting
and defending ourself.
Mentally we stop pointing our finger at the other
realizing that blaming them is simply not going to solve the problem.
Now people who resist this last idea often say
yeah but what if it really isn't my fault?
I didn't do anything.
My answer is the same as the one for rightness.
Does your innocence matter if they don't realize it?
Also if we think about it for a moment
we may have gotten into this situation because we didn't do something sooner.
Despite our childlike urge to blame the other
we are bound together in our relationships
and many times we see and hear things
that we simply don't respond to
because it didn't seem polite to say it at the time.
It would have upset them.
We were waiting for another right time to talk.
We didn't think it really mattered.
This kind of avoidance goes on and on until things really get difficult
and then we claim our innocence.
We didn't do anything to deserve this.
As theologian Harvey Cox once said
not to decide is to decide.
I believe that in many instances inaction is just another form of action.
Now using dialogue talk requires two more critical choices before we speak.
One, we have to manage our emotions.
Two, we need to make a conscious choice
to seek understanding of the other person
before making our points in the conversation.
Let's talk about managing our emotions for a moment.
We discussed this in detail in lecture 11
but some reminder includes that we must take a breath,
pause and ask ourselves a question.
I wonder what's actually going on here.
Take another breath, slow our reactions,
diluting the cascade of hormones, rushing through our mind body
and interrupting that oncoming amygdala hijack.
We need to breathe deeply.
We need to rename our feelings,
moving them from hot to cool
and shift from this person must do what I want or else
to I would prefer it if they would.
This will get us into our adult ego state
and prevent the automatic responses
of our critical parent or angry child.
And of course, we need to manage the sound of our voice
when we speak using our adult voice, well modulated,
appropriate to the situation and thoughtful.
Also, we will use descriptive eye messages when we speak
and ask how, what, where and when questions in the process
and we'll talk more about the questioning process later.
In dialogue, we commit to seeking understanding first.
This is a commitment to the first step in appreciation.
It involves suspending our judgments.
When we learn to suspend judgment,
we open the door to seeing the other's point of view.
Now, we don't do away with our own judgments or opinions.
That's not really possible.
But what we do is create a space between our judgment
and our overt reactions that opens a door for listening
and for bringing the conscious mind into the here and now
rather than being mindless.
That is, automatically responding with judgments of the present
based on information we learned in the past.
As we said in lecture 12,
suspending judgment or evaluation
is also a key to building a climate of trust and openness.
As people learn that they won't be judged wrong for their opinions,
they feel freer to express themselves.
People instantly get our judgments.
They just simply stop listening to what we have to say
as soon as we utter them.
And unless we temporarily let go of our judgments,
we can't come down our inference ladder
and ask questions in our adult ego state
to rediscover the data in the situation.
The other's description of what actually just has gone on between us.
I hope this will remind you of the example of the manager
who has to find his adult ego state
when his employee has a tantrum about a report due on Friday.
The manager had to consciously choose not to react
in the critical and demanding parent ego state.
Had the manager lost it
and responded in kind to his angry employee,
it would have made it much harder for him
to get what he really needed in the situation.
A report well done on time on Friday.
In dialogue, we have to speak so people will listen,
using descriptive eye messages.
Descriptive talk means getting judgment out of your words
and giving the other good information in a bad situation.
This means telling the only truth we own
that is saying what we think, see, hear, and are feeling right now.
And if appropriate, how that affects
what we thought was going to happen, our beliefs.
And if spoken in our adult voice and because they tell our truth,
descriptive eye messages can help us speak truth to power,
telling the only truth we own,
what we see, hear, feel, and believe.
Now descriptive eye messages take a little practice
because you messages come to mind so easily in difficult situations.
Eye messages require a little more effort on our part.
So let's do a quick exercise and see how they work for you.
We're going to ask you to change u-message judgments
to i-message descriptors.
The idea is to describe, to add information,
not to irritate or inflame.
So what is the i-message descriptor for the classic u-message?
You're wrong.
Think about it for a moment.
The i-message is, I disagree.
Isn't that what you really wanted to describe?
Your state of disagreement?
In essence, we have no business talking about their interstate of wrongness.
How would we know that anyway?
Let's try, you're confusing me.
Well, how about I am confused?
This is about your interstate of confusion,
not your judgment of their actions or about their possible intentions.
We are only shifting the blame for our feelings onto the other in this way.
It's disingenuous and it's disempowering.
The more we say things like, you're doing this to me or you make me,
the more the others gain insight into how they can control us.
How about this one?
You aren't making any sense.
The i-message for that is, I don't understand.
That's all you can honestly say.
In fact, they may think they're actually making pretty good sense at this point from their perspective.
Now, note that descriptive i-messages stay out of the other psychological space.
The idea is to say what we need to say without invading the other's mind.
And please don't use fake i-messages.
The ones that are you-messages really starting with an I.
Like, I think you are an idiot.
I say this because it's always one of the responses that some bright light in one of my seminars
puts on the table who thinks that if you just start a sentence with an I,
you can get away with any kind of criticism.
In a polite form, of course.
Remember, you are is always a very personalized judgment.
It's control talk, no matter how you start the sentence.
There's a particular use of descriptive i-messages that can really make a difference in difficult situations.
It's the acknowledgement.
i-message acknowledgments help us stay connected with the other, even in disagreement.
i-message acknowledgments are inherently appreciative.
They recognize the other positively, even when the situation isn't working well.
There are often helpful ways to openly acknowledging the other or the situation.
So let's start off with the situational acknowledgement.
My favorite is, this has happened before.
In a work situation, lots of people have this problem earlier in their career.
It's called normalizing.
Everyone feels that they are the first person to ever screw up.
And this drives them to defend themselves and thus not really give you the truth about what's happened.
Remember, we naturally blame situations or others for our behavior when we're in trouble.
Because someone has made an error and we have to deal with it, we need to have them tell us what happened without defending themselves.
To do this, we need to reduce their fear of our critical judgment.
Just long enough to have them give us the information we need to help them help us solve whatever problem has occurred.
And the great thing is that life is pretty repetitious.
And this has happened before to someone you know or have heard of or maybe even to you.
By acknowledging this, you free their conscious mind from the fear of your imminent judgment.
So both of you can talk about the situation differently this time.
How about personal acknowledgments?
Talking about ourselves in terms of how we are.
I am really happy.
Or how they seem.
You seem to be really upset.
Notice the difference between you are and you seem.
You are tells them how to feel.
It's control talk.
It comes across as a truth.
And really it's just a judgment.
On the other hand, you seem simply expresses our perception of their behavior.
Our you seem statements are not truths about reality.
They're only our first estimate in a negotiation of a common reality with the other.
And our estimates are always up for discussion.
By the way, there's one other form of you message that is descriptive rather than judgmental.
I call it the you action statements.
These are descriptive of your perceptions about their behavior.
The usual form is I heard you say or I saw you do.
That means our statements are what they are.
Only ours.
And they aren't put out there for control.
They're put out there for discussion.
Finally, hypothetical acknowledgments are important.
These are usually offered as if I'd been in your situation, I would have to.
This is really a great tool for particular issues in conversations involving disagreement.
When we describe what we saw them do or heard them say,
they might justify their actions with an explanation about a situation or a series of events that cause their behavior.
The behavior that we've called into question.
Rather than attack their statement, we can acknowledge their explanation without agreeing with it.
Our acknowledgment simply says, I'm a human too.
I can see how this might have happened.
This is far better than hitting them with a critical judgment about their behavior and about their explanation.
Acknowledgement helps us keep the discussion going until we get all the information we need to help them help us make a decision
to solve whatever problem has come onto the table.
The hypothetical acknowledgment also solves what I call the Wiley Coyote problem.
Do you remember the Saturday morning cartoon called The Roadrunner?
The Roadrunner is a kind of bird that walks along the edges of roads in the southwest.
When I was driving in the region, I saw them once or twice.
It turns out they're called Chaparral cocks or ground cuckoos.
They are New Mexico state bird and apparently they can run fast when they're threatened.
In the cartoon, the Roadrunner is the prey and the coyote, Wiley Coyote, is always out to catch them and eat them.
It's a classic.
The coyote comes up with every more complex ways of trapping the Roadrunner, blowing it up, running it over,
and the Roadrunner always manages to avoid the trap.
So Wiley has to chase the Roadrunner.
And in the cartoon, it literally runs so fast that the coyote is left in the dust.
The problem is that the Roadrunner can keep up this speed even around those hairpin turns on these cliffside roads in the southwest.
But when Wiley tries to do the same thing, well, I'm sure you know what happens.
Instead of zooming around the curve like his prey, he flies right off the turn and it's what happens next that matters.
He hovers for a moment as if to say, oh, I'm okay.
And then he makes the mistake of looking down.
He turns the camera and goes, uh-oh, and he falls, a long plummet to the desert floor below.
Now, when we're dealing with folks in a difficult situation, the person whose behavior we want to change is always in the place of Wiley Coyote after a bad turn.
They're hovering.
And rather than forcing them to look down, psychologically speaking, by attacking or judging them and have them fall into their fears and defenses,
we need to stay connected with them and keep the discussion open.
The acknowledgement of, I may not agree with your behavior, but I can see how you might have gotten there
builds an invisible bridge between the two of you to keep them looking at you, staying connected,
rather than feeling any more uncomfortable than they already do, and falling into defending themselves.
And in the process, of course, not giving you any good information about the situation.
Eye message acknowledgments are a very powerful form of talk.
Now, descriptive eye messages are also wonderful for providing direct support to another person.
I call this the descriptive eye message complement.
For this complement, we use descriptive eye messages to clarify the reasons we are giving the complement in the first place.
We can then end it with a positive view message.
It's a kind of formula.
Do it in the following order, and it works every time.
When I see you do something, I feel any positive feeling descriptor that comes to your mind.
I think, or I want to tell you, you are some kind of positive descriptor.
In the workplace, let's give an example.
When I saw how you all stayed late on Friday to get this order out to the client, I was very impressed.
You folks are terrific. Thanks a lot.
At home, when I see how hard you work and then you come home with the energy to help the kids in me, I think you're amazing.
I love you.
In the midst of difficult discussions, I know this must be hard for you.
It's certainly hard for me, too.
But when I see you making an effort to work this through, I want you to know how much I appreciate it.
Now, to make support work, use iMessages to describe the behavior for which you're about to give the positive view message at the end.
Without the descriptive support, common phrases like, you're great, or at work, great job, or even love you don't have much impact on people.
In fact, after a while, they become forms of ritual connect talk.
And for all the men in the audience, chocolates and flowers do matter.
So don't forget to give them.
But before you hand them over, say why you're giving them in the first place.
Otherwise, it's just the Valentine's Day ritual.
Expect it, perhaps.
But over time, not deeply meaningful.
Now, before then, there is something I'd like you to think about and do.
Have you ever described your feelings by telling someone else how they made you feel?
You made me so angry.
Doesn't that seem odd?
These are your feelings.
Why are you talking about what you think is in their mind, their intentions?
Remember the defenses, they're about avoiding reality and not taking responsibility for psychic pain.
The theme of automatic blame runs through denial, avoidance, rationalization,
and we use these defenses to blame others for triggering our feelings in us.
It's as if we have no direct ownership of our feelings.
In lecture seven, we outline more effective ways to communicate our feelings
using descriptive eye messages to express and own them.
This means naming them as ours.
I feel.
I am upset, happy, whatever.
And avoiding expressing judgment by describing only what we see and hear and feel.
When I see you do something or hear you say something, I feel.
Why are descriptive eye messages more likely to be effective?
Because they're truthful, they're relevant, and they're clear.
Remember the only truth you truly know in the moment is what you see and hear.
And because your description is only about you, it doesn't diminish the other
or intrude on their psychological space the way a negative judgment does.
The idea here is to communicate in a difficult situation in such a way
that other people will still listen to you and stay connected at some level.
They won't do that if you intrude into their psychological space with your judgment.
Can you think of the last time you openly acknowledged someone else's feelings
or actions in a difficult situation?
This might be hard to do.
After all, in the midst of a struggle, we are usually engaged in criticizing,
not acknowledging the other.
So the next time that unexpected difference, disagreement, or disorder arises
in a conversation, try eye messages of acknowledgement instead of control talk.
Even though I don't agree, I can see how you might, or you really seem upset here.
This is a form of meta-communication that can reduce the intensity of the negative emotions
being communicated and shift the tone of the discussion away from a competition
to be right to one of mutual problem-solving.
The idea behind these forms of talk is to keep the other connected to us
in the midst of a difficult conversation so we can both get to the heart of dialogue talk
that is asking questions and really listening to each other.
And we're going to cover these essential processes in our next lecture.
