Lecture 17, Focus on the Other, The Heart of Dialogue
Welcome to lecture 17.
In control talk, we focus on changing the other by talking, because we assume we are
right, and have all the information we need.
In dialogue, we assume we don't know everything, despite our first reactions of rightness,
because we don't know the other's side.
The focus is on engaging them, not changing them.
Heart of Dialogue is about the other, not us.
It's about them, the person on the other side of the problem we are trying to solve together.
It's about getting them to talk, and it's about listening too, and understanding their
views and feelings of the situation, and the meanings of their words and nonverbals.
In this lecture, we will review two interrelated processes.
First, how to ask the kind of questions that will get them to talk openly, and how to listen
to keep them talking, and show our understanding of what they're trying to communicate.
These two processes are at the heart of dialogue talk, and are really what matter if we want
to be effective in difficult situations.
Remember, we think we already know where we are, we are going to try to find out where
they are.
And many times, particularly in difficult situations, we find out that we end up in
a different place than we started, hopefully a better place.
We're asking questions to get the information flowing.
Remember, we want good information, accurate, truthful, relevant, clear.
In emotionally fraught moments where unexpected differences or position-taking disagreements
have damaged our connection, this is the hardest information to come by.
When people feel defensive, they don't give you the good stuff, unless, of course, we
engage them in a way that reduces their urge to defend themselves.
The best way to do that is to ask appreciative questions, to get them to tell their side
of the story.
The first commitment of appreciation is full understanding.
Therefore, appreciative questions are open-ended questions, seeking descriptive information
from the other, without sounding like we are prejudging the outcome by the way we ask the
question.
We want the other to tell us what's going on now, or what has just happened, without
feeling they will be judged for their answers.
Let's talk about how we form such questions.
Open-ended door-openers, using the 4W2H questions.
The 4W2Hs are who, what, where, when, and how, as well as how much.
In this list of descriptive questions, how much is simply a label for describing any
kind of quantity.
How long, how big, how small, how much time, energy, or money.
This will get people talking.
As they start to tell their side of it, using questions framed in a distinctly appreciative
and solution-focused way, it will help them clarify their own thoughts without putting
them on the defensive.
Instead of why did this happen, try how did this happen?
Instead of why did you do that, try what did you want to achieve here?
Instead of why isn't this working, try what can we do to make this work?
Instead of what's wrong with you, try what can we do to help you succeed the next time?
First of these model questions, how did this happen, what did you want to achieve here,
and what can we do to make this work, offer ways of not asking why, particularly early
on in a difficult discussion?
Notice that the descriptive 4W2Hs don't include why or why not.
What's wrong with the question why?
Well, in difficult situations, it's hard for people to hear why as anything else but
a search for blame, rather than a search for information.
We think about this for a moment, it seems to be a reversal of the question why as being
central to most human endeavors.
After all, it's the most powerful word we have from the point of view of human philosophy.
Why are we here?
Or scientific research in the search for causation, why does this happen under these conditions?
Question why works perfectly well in an atmosphere of scientific research, or philosophical debate,
or in the business world when discussing production processes.
But in face to face heated discussion with someone, the word why is most often heard
as blameful, why did you do this?
It implies the others at fault, and if they hear that, their defenses kick in and the
information they do provide will be skewed to protect their self-esteem.
And how did we learn to think of why as the search for blame?
Well, I believe it happens at the moment when children start to move about the house, crawl
around.
I always picture it as the baby and the mother's feet in the kitchen looking around for some
interesting new information.
With the parent's attention on something else, the child discovers a container on the floor
that has some white stuff in it.
The baby touches it and amazingly it moves.
Now, this is good stuff.
Just then a hand appears and moves the container.
That's the cat's milk bowl and says, honey, don't play with that, it's for the cat.
So our intrepid adventurer seeks other unexplored regions of the kitchen floor to discover,
and the mother turns back to her work.
But there isn't anything nearby as nearly as interesting, so it heads back to the bowl.
As it touches it again, it sees that miraculous movement, cool.
And again, the hand arrives, pushes the bowl a little further away under the kitchen table
and moves the baby to a spot in the corner where the toys are to play with.
The voice says more firmly, I told you not to touch that, it's the cat's milk.
She fiddles with the toys, but can't quite take its focus off that marvelous thing that
it can't have that's now on the floor under the edge of the table.
Suddenly the phone rings.
The mothering one picks it up and again turns away for a moment, and the explorer is off
once again, gets to the bowl just as the cat arrives.
It stops and waits as the baby tries to pick up the bowl, and that good stuff really happens.
I mean, the white stuff moves okay, it actually comes out of the bowl, makes a puddle on
the floor, and the cat starts lapping at the edges of the puddle, you can put your hands
in that stuff, it feels neat, you can bang around with it, it moves faster.
And then the 800 pound gorilla puts down the phone, rushes over, and what does she yell?
Why did you do that?
And instantly the baby starts and learns two vitally important things, one, the negative
emotional power of the word why, and two, avoiding blame by pointing at the cat.
By the way, an angry 800 pound gorilla wields about the same emotional power over an adult
as an adult wields over a toddler.
So we don't ask why questions right away in difficult situations, because there's a good
chance that people will take it personally.
They may not know why, it may have been the best choice they thought they had, it's also
clear that asking how did it happen, and getting people to unwind the processes, steps, or
series of events that led up to the unhappy moment will get you far more information than
a blunt why.
The idea is to get people to explain in some detail what happened without being directly
or indirectly put on the spot for it.
What we need is a lot of good information, not blame and defensiveness.
That's a really important point, and I'm going to say it again.
What we need when we ask appreciative questions is good, honest information, not blame and
defensiveness.
You actually want information to solve the problem and say how did that happen, and stay
with them as they talk.
It's about them and their perspective, not about you, we'll get to you in a moment.
Then ask appropriately closed-ended questions to clarify what they've said or probe for
specific facts and details.
After all, when people start to tell their story, they do it from their point of view,
not yours, and they'll think it's very clear, but they're likely to leave things out because
they assume you already know them, or they just didn't think about them at the time,
or they made assumptions about them but didn't actually see or hear them, so we have to ask
closed-ended yes, no answer kinds of questions to clarify our understanding, like, I'm still
not clear about this.
Why don't you actually talk to your friends about this two days before it happened?
So they knew about it?
Yes?
Okay, so what else happened?
I have a story about this that comes out of one of my workshops.
In the midst of explaining, asking open-ended and closed-ended questions, a workshop participant
suddenly intervenes, who happens to be with the police, he tells me, and says something
that's really interesting.
He started with an assumption.
Did you know that this is a new form of police interrogation?
I said no.
Yep, we're learning to do this instead of the way we used to interrogate, using very closed-ended
questions, detailed and demanding questions.
Who were you with on the night of kind of questions?
Didn't you meet them at this address around 9 p.m.?
Questions like that.
Trouble was that the more we did this, the harder it was for a prosecutor to believe that
the accused was actually telling us their truth instead of simply responding to our
version of reality.
If we say instead, tell me what happened, and the person then rambles on in their own
words, and we record it, and then we ask closed questions to get some of the details straight,
a prosecutor is much more likely to believe it wasn't a forced interrogation, or a hand
confession.
I didn't know about this change in police procedures, but his response also interested
me because I regularly used the metaphor of interrogation as a kind of negative way of
thinking about asking questions.
I mean, after all, the difference between good question asking and interrogation is
as follows.
The interrogator begins with the presumption of guilt, already has the confession in his
back pocket, just want you to sign.
He just needs confirmation of his assumptions and judgments about how you committed the
crime.
Interrogation is a very high powered invasive form of questioning that really demands a confession
as the way to make the interrogation process stop.
Now, for many of us, that may sound like our moms when we were 15 and arriving home hours
late, far later than we promised to be home, and her motives may have been of the highest
order and her questions driven by the fear of the worst, but the process still comes
out the same.
Asking appreciative questions leaves the answers open and up to them.
It lets them tell their story in their way.
Closed questions are for clarification of their story.
One other form of question that helps people get it all out when they're stuck is a creative
door opener.
Is there anything else you can think of?
Else gets people to think out loud, freeze them up to dream for a moment.
If you ask people questions to get them started talking, then it seems that the only polite
thing to do is listen.
But not in our usual semi-automatic way.
We need to listen in a fully conscious, effortful way.
This is a way we're not trained to do in our cultural learning.
In our culture, we focus on the power of talk, not on the power of listening.
In fact, my favorite quote on listening is that, in North America, conversation is a
game where you're the first person to take a breath is considered the listener.
Conversation for us is often simply waiting for our term to speak because we think speech
has the power, when in reality, listening has the power.
How do we listen well?
Listen in a way to make the most of what our partner or friend or colleague is telling
us?
We listen actively.
So let's talk about the work of listening actively.
We're going to discuss and demonstrate an unnatural way of listening for most folks.
That's what listening actively is.
It's the heart of dialogue because this is the one act of communication that engages
all the other ideas of effective talk.
Now, that's not hyperbole.
If you take one thing away from this course, this is the idea I want you to take away.
Why is active listening the one act of communication that engages all of the ideas of effective
talk?
Because it requires mindful attention and appreciative mindset and meta-communication.
It also calls for emotional self-management and a provisional open attitude.
It brings all the ideas together.
It is called active listening because you have to be active internally and externally.
You have to make a conscious effort to do it effectively.
However, the upside of all of this effort involved is that it is the only form of talk
that helps you solve problems and enhance relationships at the same time.
Listening actively creates the conditions for empathy and equality.
So let's talk first about the barriers created by our natural listening habits and what
we can do about them.
Our natural or automatic ways of listening creates several barriers to effective active
listening that we have to consciously overcome.
First one, of course, is our focus on ourselves versus the other.
Our automatic focus is always on ourselves and our own thoughts.
Effective listening puts the other at the center of the conversation.
Being mindful of this self-focus and consciously shifting our attention outward to the other
and what they're saying is what active listening is all about.
How about the differences between our speaking rate and our thought rate?
People speak it around 125-30 words per minute while we automatically listen at 6 or 7 times
that speed.
So we automatically dip in and out of the other's talk just to sort of roughly keep up
and we shift our attention to other things.
But we know that when our conscious mind isn't engaged, the cognitive unconscious will be
and the cognitive unconscious relies upon schema and patterns that are ours and that's
a problem because we don't want to be fitting what our partner is saying to us into our
old patterns.
Remember, it isn't about us, it's about them.
So we need to listen consciously, actively, as if it were brand new, even if we've heard
it before in other arguments.
We need to use the space created by our listening advantage to be summarizing and understanding
what the other has said so far.
Now of course, our lack of emotional self-management can seriously interfere with effective active
listening.
If we hear things that we don't like, our emotional reactions and feelings intrude on our listening.
So we need to use our self-talk to manage this response.
Put it aside and get back to listening to what the other is saying.
Even the speaker can also sabotage the effects of our active listening.
So remember to focus on the message, not the messenger.
We judge the speaker as they talk.
You messages pop into our heads.
We need to turn off our judge-metal self-talk and go deeper than surface appearances by
asking ourselves questions.
What are they really talking about here or what does that mean?
As I pointed out, our listening rate gives us time to do this.
It's a matter of keeping our focus on the content of the talk, not the speaker, and listening
to more than the words.
Now listening actively requires two interconnected processes, undivided attention and understanding
feedback.
Let's talk about giving them our undivided attention, making the choice to actually do
it and then demonstrate it.
Paying attention matters.
Psychology professor has a small seminar.
Graduate students teach us about six students and he teaches them in this case the behaviors
of paying attention and then invites a guest lecturer who opens the class, begins a lecture
and the students behave in typical non-attending ways.
They look down, they check their notes, they look in gesture to each other.
The visiting professor lectures, head down from his notes, monotone voice and pays no
attention to the students.
At a prearranged signal from the experimental psych prof, students start physically paying
attention to the ways in which they're being taught.
Within 30 seconds, the visiting professor makes his first hand gesture.
In another 30 seconds, his speaking rate increases and he becomes more lively and engaging in
his overall presentation.
This continues for several minutes and then at another prearranged signal, the students
stop paying attention and after several awkward attempts on the part of the speaker to reengage
him, he returns to the monotonic lecture he began with.
Their attending made all the difference.
We have to use the body to demonstrate our attention.
We need to lean towards the speaker as they're speaking, even if only slightly.
This communicates involvement compared to leaning back or sprawling.
It shows that we are engaged.
We need to face the other with our body.
Our right shoulder sort of lines up with their left with our eyes at approximately the same
level as theirs.
We need to use an open body position, uncross our arms and, if appropriate, our legs to
indicate readiness to receive the information.
We need to use appropriate body movement.
Active listening is active.
People feel very uncomfortable talking with someone who seems highly controlled, literally
unmoved by their words.
Right movements of the head and hands to indicate encouragement are important, headbops.
Less when they are talking and more when we're providing feedback.
We need to move in rhythm with the speaker.
We also, of course, need to avoid distracting movements, nervously shifting our positions,
drumming fingers on the table or fiddling with our cell phones.
And we need to make positive eye contact.
Start with their eyes, but then move to generally looking at their faces.
No one likes to talk to people whose eyes are darting away from the exchange to other
people or to the rest of the room.
It indicates inattention, even lack of caring.
And of course, we need to encourage them to continue.
We ask them an open-ended question, what's on your mind or what do you want to talk about?
To open the door.
We're physically paying attention, now we have to encourage them to keep talking.
So facial expressions.
A smile to get them started always helps.
Let your face communicate an interstate of what researchers have called relaxed alertness.
Relaxed?
I'm comfortable listening to you and I accept you.
And alert.
I'm intent on the listening process because what you say is important to me.
We also need to use paravirbal and verbal encouragers.
Paravirbels are the hums, ahs and ahs, that must be inserted periodically to show you're
paying attention.
Paravirbal encouragers are short interjections to encourage more talk.
Yeah, tell me more, right, I see.
And then, go on.
You can ask the right question to get them started, fake the right position, even the
right look and still be doing something else in your head while they talk.
But you have to be truly paying attention to put either the right sound or the right
word into the exchange to encourage more talk.
Understanding feedback, the second aspect of active listening.
So we've given there are undivided attention, now we have to give them our understanding
feedback.
This is the most critical aspect of listening actively.
It's the art of periodically reflecting back to the speaker in your own words, the content
and or feeling the speaker has communicated in order to show your acceptance and understanding.
So we have to paraphrase content from time to time.
We state it in our own words, the essence of what we think they have said so far about
the topic.
We need to keep it concise and focus on the essential details of the content of their
message.
Useful phrases include, it sounds to me like you're saying, or what I'm hearing is, is
that right?
Be sure to ask, is that right?
And then listen carefully to the answer.
We also have to reflect their feelings from time to time.
Talk always happens at two levels, and active listening is only effective if it also happens
at two levels.
If the speaker is communicating their feelings openly, then a direct reflection of them will
work just fine.
Listen for the feeling words in their content, excited, happy, rejected, upset, and use those
to guide your reflections.
Now you seem pretty happy about all this.
And however, the speaker is talking about something that you can see evokes feelings
in them.
That is, they're talking about a problem at work or at home, but they're not naming
their feelings directly.
So infer from the content and from their nonverbals what the feeling could be.
Someone complains about their personal life.
You can say, you know, you sound pretty down about this, or that sounds really discouraging.
If you're not sure of what feelings they're expressing, ask yourself a question.
If I were in this situation, what would I be feeling?
This can help you frame the other's nonverbal communications to make your reflections more
accurate.
But if you try and you don't get it exactly right, don't worry.
They'll correct you.
Go ahead, let them.
Dan, this is about getting good information about them, not about you being right in this
particular moment.
Encourage them to clarify.
You seem pretty angry about this.
Is that right?
Well, not so much angry, just really, really frustrated.
Ah-ha.
Reflecting their expressed feelings back to them as we perceive them can be truly connective
in situations where we are separated by differences.
How about active listening at work?
What would this look like?
I'm going to give you an example here.
I want you to think about this scene.
A man called Dave walks over to his buddy's cubicle in his work office.
Dave is looking quite glum, and Joe looks up and says, what's up?
Dave answers that it's not such a great day.
But he stops as soon as he sees Joe's eyes go back to his computer.
Joe apologizes, and Dave excuses himself and walks away.
After all, people really quickly read those nonverbal signs of non-engagement.
But Joe likes Dave.
He's a good guy.
So Joe makes a deliberate decision.
He turns away from his computer, switches off his cell phone, and follows Dave to suggest
they have a quick coffee break.
He learns that Dave is panicked about an assignment that seems to be too difficult.
Dave says he doesn't understand how to do the work.
He says he's afraid he can't get the assignment done.
Now, at this point, Joe could slap him on the back and offer a kind of ritual response,
so relax, man, that'll never happen.
Cheer up.
But he doesn't.
He asks for more details of the assignment, even though he doesn't completely understand
Dave's work.
Now, it doesn't matter that he doesn't completely understand, because it isn't the work that's
the problem.
It's Dave's worry and fear about it that's the problem.
So Joe tries to put himself in Dave's place.
But he doesn't talk to Dave about what he, Joe, would do in this situation.
Instead, he says something like, so you're panicked because you may not have enough time
to learn the new system and get the report done in time.
He lets Dave know that he's listening.
He's keeping Dave at the center of the conversation.
Encouraged by Joe's interest, Dave goes a little further.
He confesses that he's actually afraid he might be fired if he can't produce this report.
Now, again, Joe doesn't just pop in and tell him, hey, relax, don't worry, it's going to
be a problem.
No problem.
But he keeps Dave's concern front and center.
He might say something like, so you're worried about losing your job.
In fact, maybe you're so worried you shouldn't have taken the job in the first place.
Dave says, yes, that's exactly it.
Then he asks, what do you think I should do?
Now, Joe might suggest to Dave that he talk to his boss about the situation, or he may
ask Dave what sort of strategies he's already considered.
There are many ways this conversation could go, but with a little focused, active listening,
Joe gets to the heart of Dave's story.
He reflects his feelings and paraphrases contents several times, and at the end, he will go
on to provide some very useful advice, but only because David has asked him for the advice.
Now this last comment leads us to our last four recommendations about listening actively.
I frame them as the four don'ts of effective listening because we do them without thinking,
and sometimes, gentle warnings get our attention.
What are the four don'ts of effective listening?
Don't give your opinion or advice until they ask.
This is not a platform for you to show off your cleverness or your experience, or over,
the other won't be listening to you until they actually ask for your advice.
Your only talk here should be reflective feedback to show our understanding of their words.
Wait on handing out the advice until you're asked, and accept that you may not be asked
for it.
Giving reassurance or comfort when another is talking to you about something truly sad
also falls into the same category, because our efforts to reassure without being asked
are actually made to make us feel better, not the other.
A quick, it's going to be all right, or you'll get past this, kind of lets us off the hook
and frees us from doing the real work of offering genuine support, attentive and supportive
silence.
Now the remaining three don'ts are warnings against intruding on the listening process.
Don't interrupt to debate them.
This is about them telling their story, not about you being right.
Same thing if they correct your reflections, just let them.
Don't tell them what they should be thinking or feeling in the moment.
Same thing, this is not control talk, don't impose your judgments on them.
Don't use their story as a takeoff for your own story.
Even though you think this may be a way of showing support, it's actually taking over
their airspace.
Now there's something I want you to start doing, listening actively, instead of simply
avoiding ineffective listening.
What we can do to learn to listen effectively, well, the authors of communication texts often
create lists of types of listening, empathic, reflective, critical, objective, active and
so on and so on.
In the end they seem to be variations on the same theme.
True listening engages the listener's mind in paying attention to what the other is saying.
From their point of view, not ours.
We're finding ways to communicate our understanding and acceptance of what has actually been said.
So I want you to practice silently.
I want you to watch two people talk.
You can do this for any conversation but it's much more interesting and complicated communication
moments.
Give them your full attention.
Listen behind their words to see what they're really talking about and don't intervene
and comment.
Just watch to discover whether they seem to be really paying attention and understanding
each other.
Just observe and learn.
Then, of course, I want you to try it, particularly the understanding feedback aspect.
But again, only in situations involving unclear, complicated or difficult conversations.
At first it will seem awkward.
We're talkers, after all, but the more you do it, the more natural it would become.
Not only that, but you'll learn so much more about the people around you and grow closer
to them.
After all, that's the point of effective communication.
Thank you.
