Lecture 20 Communication, Gender, and Culture
Hi, if one of the bases for effective communication is the creation of shared meaning based on
a common language, then why don't people just naturally get along when they speak?
As we've shown in some detail, part of the problem is explained by individual differences
in how the mind processes information.
Everyone has unique developmental history.
We also said, however, that despite its power to create a range of common experiences, cultural
learning is not a cookie cutter.
Crucial social differences create different subcultures or symbolic communities for children
to grow up in.
While learning the same language, children within those communities also learn to share
different ways of seeing the world, compared to children raised in other subcultures.
These ideas lead us to the one social difference that makes a difference across all subcultures,
gender.
How we learn to see those of the opposite gender is embedded in our society's common
language, again with subcultural variations.
And how we learn to see the world through the eyes of our own gender, no matter what
community we grow up in, is a critical part of learning to see ourselves as normal.
In this lecture, we are going to examine the differences in cultural learning that are
created when children are born with different genitalia.
We are taking a subcultural view of the differences between genders and their effect on the quality
of our cross-gender communication.
So how does our cultural learning affect our gender roles, and how do our gender roles
in turn affect the way we speak?
Children always learn more than the language as they grow up.
They learn our way of life, our culture, and the taken for granted views of the world shared
by our group.
Whatever our biological inheritance, gender roles, like all the other roles, are learned.
We learn these cultural constructions in order to enact recognizable gender-related
ways of being and talking.
Through some instruction, but mostly by observation and imitation, gender performance is one aspect
of the taken for granted knowledge we absorb about how things and people work.
The interesting contradiction here is that while we learn to take differences in gender
behavior for granted, we also learn the common sense assumption that if everybody speaks
the same language and speaks it in an accepted style, they must be the same kind of people.
You remember the resemblance heuristic from our perception lecture.
So if we all speak English using whatever accents, phrases, and words that are accepted
in our region, we must be using the words in the same way with the same intentions and
the same meanings.
Now we've said that this common sense assumption of sameness does work well in well-structured
situations because the context surrounding the talk instantly helps us discover the meaning
of the other's words.
But words have a variety of meanings and this shows when we're talking with folks who are
not from the same subcultural background.
It is the basis for considerable frustration when we talk face-to-face.
Sociolinguists make this argument in their research on cross-gender and same-gender face-to-face
talk.
There seem to be stable differences attributed to each gender that are a result of learning
and performing the language in two different subcultural language communities.
They argue that boys and girls grow up in different language communities from six or
seven onward actually and they learn to attach different meanings to the same words, same
messages early on.
Our vocabulary, deeply learned in our first ten years, reflects the cultural values and
is a powerful influence on our perceptions of the world.
The words we utter not only name objects, people, feelings, and experiences, but also
define them as positive or negative.
The process is never neutral.
As we grew, we learned the vocabulary of sexual identity, words that defined and in the process
either diminished or empowered each of the genders.
A good example of the power of definition was our society's continued and automatic
use of what are called male generics until the 1980s to describe active roles in public
life, firemen, policemen, chairmen, assemblymen.
Unless the male involved had a professional job title, surgeon, one could tell immediately
that males were supposed to play these roles.
In the case of those who had professional titles, it was simply assumed that men did
these things.
How the society names things emphasizes particular aspects of reality and neglects others.
By using male generics to define roles, we did exactly this.
The word man was used to mean all people or humanity for centuries.
In fact, until the 1980s, the most powerful scientists, researchers, politicians, business
leaders could use the word man in this way without fear of having to explain themselves.
And in particular, when academics were challenged about the use of the word man, they would
say with some disdain, well, of course, man means humanity, with that contemptuous sound
of like, what did you think I meant?
Despite the indignation evoked by the question, by the early 70s, we had begun a series of
studies about what large groups of people actually meant when they heard male generics
used to describe public roles.
And the results?
We discovered the obvious.
When asked to think of what picture came to mind when they heard these terms, people
from grade school to middle age said, a man.
One example of the research with young people really hit home.
When they were asked to pick photographs for a new textbook called Urban Man versus Urban
Life and several other books with either male generic or neutral titles, they consistently
chose pictures of men when the title referred to man and pictures of both sexes when the
titles were gender neutral.
It wasn't until the 90s and under considerable social pressure that academic book publishers
and newspaper editors and those who edited language handbooks, particularly dictionaries,
began to move toward common usage of gender neutral titles for active public roles.
Now let's look for a moment at how language classifies and stereotypes reality.
Language does classify reality.
And as we said in an earlier lecture, it also simplifies it.
For instance, by using male generics for so long to name public active roles, our culture
implicitly assigned women to and rewarded them for taking more passive private roles
in our society in the arena of the household, the bearing and rearing of children.
Now, of course, these are not unimportant roles.
They just didn't seem quite as important to historians and the general public as the
starting of wars or the staging of corporate takeovers.
This public private dichotomy, which has been greatly undermined since women began taking
on careers and having children from the 80s onward, became the fundamental structure for
a set of supporting either or stereotypes.
Men in general were seen as physically stronger and mentally tougher than women.
This is still reinforced by sports news reporting on world-class athletes, stories on women,
medal winners, focus on their looks and dress first, and then their achievements second.
For males, the coverage is reversed, begins with their achievements.
Women were seen as more rational in their thinking while women were more seen as emotional
or implicitly weaker.
There are several examples of male politicians losing important races because they showed
personal emotion on the campaign trail.
And at least one recent example where an already tough-minded woman politician showed a bit
of emotion and became more real as a woman to her female supporters.
How about women are over-talkative and men just simply speak far less?
Now this stereotype seems to never go away and is reinforced by so-called experts.
In the first printing of her 2006 book, The Female Brain, neuropsychiatrist Luanne Bresendine
reported that a woman uses about 20,000 words per day while a man uses about 7,000.
Since she repeated this factoid every day during the time that she was making her book
promotions, it just came out of her mouth over and over again.
Now it turns out she had no idea whether or not this was true.
She simply asked a colleague and it was his opinion, so she put it in the book.
The problem with this kind of assertion is that it can easily achieve the status of a
cultural myth as it is passed around by not only the 24-7 television and online media looking
for something interesting to say, but is also picked up by the print media and enshrined
as a kind of fact.
In the same year, researcher Matthias, male of the University of Arizona, said, since
that there's never been a real study that systematically collected natural conversations
of a large group of people over time, there's actually no way anyone can make assertions
about the speaking rate between men and women.
But he had a study in progress and he published in 2007.
He wired up approximately 400 people with an unobtrusive self-starting recorder that
would record 30 seconds of conversation about every 12 minutes throughout the day for up
to 10 days.
The participant could not tell whether the device was on or off.
His findings?
Men speak an average of 16,215 words each day, whereas men speak about 15,669 words
over 17 waking hours.
A little different, but not significantly.
Mel concluded in fact that the data failed to reveal a reliable difference between the
speaking rates of the genders.
By the way, Bryzendine removed her assertion from later copies of her book and retracted
it on her website.
Also by the way, the most interesting bits of data are the ones around who spoke the
fewest words per day.
They were spoken by a male, about 500, strong silent type, right?
And the most words per day were spoken by, wait for it, a male at 47,000 words per day.
When the heck did he find the time to do anything else?
Now despite the apparent lack of significant differences in rates of speech between men
and women, research has confirmed that there are basic differences in the talk of men and
women in terms of two things.
First, why they talk, the purpose the talk serves for them.
And second, what their talk means when they are conversing with someone of the same gender
or across genders.
These differences can make interpersonal communication between men and women very complicated, unless
of course they're recognized by both sides.
So let's look at male and female patterns of talk from 5 to 55.
In her book, You Just Don't Understand, Deborah Tannen popularized her own research, and that
of many other sociolinguists, with children and adults on the effects of their gender,
on the style of, and the intentions behind, their talk.
In her own research, Tannen first started examining videotapes of all ages, children
of all ages, who were asked to talk together in front of a camera in a colleague's lab.
She began analyzing the tapes with the intention of supporting a research hypothesis around
the effects of age on talk.
She soon noticed, however, that once she discovered the basic talk patterns of the youngest children,
they would be replicated in older children, but not by age, but by gender.
In essence, 5-year-old boys behave more like 15-year-old boys and 55-year-old men than
like 5-year-old girls or women of any age.
One of the key differences Tannen discovered between boys and girls, and women and men,
is that they seemed to enact talk differently, and use their talk for different purposes.
When the little girls were asked to talk together in the lab, they immediately sat down, faced
each other, and proceeded to talk, eventually settling down to discussing one of the girls'
problems.
Little boys, on the other hand, sat in parallel to each other, jumped from topic to topic,
and when they did focus on a topic, it was on what they were going to do together as
soon as they got out of here.
She summarizes this basic pattern for children and adults with the phrase, report talk, to
describe men in conversation, and rapport talk, to describe how women talk.
We'll review the main patterns under these headings beginning with men.
Men and report talk.
Tannen reviewed research demonstrating that boys grow up in a world that takes hierarchy
and control for granted.
There's always some boy bigger and more demanding than you in the world, and they're trying
to push you around.
This is particularly true in playing childhood games that are often large, involving teams
of boys, and competitive.
In addition, boys are not often spoken to about their feelings by parents, except for
anger, of course, and then they're told to control it.
As children, they learn to use physical actions rather than words to display emotions and
get what they want, and when they mature, they use talk to do the same things.
They resist responding directly to a request for service to avoid feeling in a one-down
position relative to the asker.
And likewise, they avoid asking questions when they don't know something.
In summary, they want to feel that they have what observers call tough-minded autonomy.
When speaking as adults, men present facts, data, ideas, and arguments in discussion,
particularly with other men, to establish their autonomy relative to each other.
They compete to get the floor in discussion, to have their say and maintain their independence.
They use their talk to negotiate their status in the hierarchy, which they perceive to exist
among other males in the room.
And in general, whether competing with other men or women, men think of talk as a tool
to accomplish things, to give information, give advice, solve problems, or take a stand
on an issue.
Now let's compare men's report talk to what Tannen called report talk for women.
Unlike boys, who grow up in a world of vertical hierarchy and competition, to remain separate,
girls develop in a world of relationships, and metaphorically speaking, horizontal connections,
where talk is used to discover how close or distant another person is from you.
Instead of larger, competitive games, young girls tend to engage in smaller, more cooperative
activities with other girls, so getting along is important.
And unlike men, who think of words as tools to take action, for women, the rituals of
speech including feelings talk are used to make connections before taking action.
Girls also tend to grow up being talked to in some detail about feelings by their mothers.
Parents tend to use more feeling descriptors in their talk with daughters than with sons.
So girls' early language skills are put to use exploring and articulating internal
emotional states.
They have the vocabulary, and they develop a comfort with discussing feelings.
In conversation, women use talk particularly with other women to establish connections
and to cooperate to maintain those connections.
And at least to get a conversation started, talk deals with personal experiences and feelings,
and is aimed at building relationships and sustaining them throughout the discussion.
As a result, women take turns in speaking, and in general, overlap only to show support
for another idea, not to take the floor away.
Women are more likely to ask questions if they don't know something, and use speech
rituals to show connection rather than competition.
They tend to use more tag questions.
Isn't it?
Don't you think so?
To implicitly seek agreement.
They use more verbal and nonverbal encouragers while listening to others than men do, and
more affect or feeling words than males.
So how do these differences in socialization into two different language communities, speaking
the same language, affect everyday talk for men and women?
Well in general, they affect not only which kind of talk each gender considers to be important,
but also what they perceive to be the intentions behind the use of a particular type of talk.
Small talk.
Women grow up using small talk with other women to become closer with them.
Men on the other hand use talk to give direction or solve problems.
Their connections are made by doing things together with other men, and talk is simply
the device that connects them to a common task or activity.
To men, small talk for its own sake seems unnecessary or worse really boring, and many
try to avoid it.
So the meaning of small talk for building relationships is also not the same for each
gender.
And this difference is concisely described in the cartoon Why We'll Never Understand
Each Other.
The first panel is called What He Heard.
A husband and wife are talking while sitting on the sofa and watching the TV.
In his mind, she is saying, Honey, why don't you just put your head in a vice and I'll
turn the handle until your skull explodes.
The second panel is entitled What She Actually Said, which was, Honey, why don't we just
turn off the TV and talk?
The key reason for male avoidance of this kind of connective talk when women want to
talk about us has to do with one of the reasons men talk in the first place.
Generally for women, a relationship is working when you can discuss it.
Talk will only make it better.
For men, if it's working, you don't discuss it because talk is for solving problems.
So if we're going to be talking about us, we must be in trouble here, and it's time
to go into avoidance.
Troubles talk.
Men also don't understand why women have to tell each other their troubles.
For women, this is a way of showing connection, sharing something personal, expecting the
other, of course, to share in return.
Men interpret the sharing of problems as a seeking of advice.
Words have to do something, remember?
Getting quick advice from a man can often make a woman feel her problem has been somehow
diminished.
And another of my favorite Kathy cartoons drives this point home.
Kathy's boyfriend, Irving, is listening to Kathy, who's in tears about her frizzy new
hairdo.
She wails, Irving, I just feel so ugly, I feel so stupid.
He helpfully replies, wear a hat.
She turns on him in anger, wear a what?
He says, wear a hat, call the salon, make them fix your hair, crisis over, what's the
big deal?
And as she throws about and slams the door behind him, she thinks, men, all solution,
no sympathy.
And if a woman ignores male advice giving and keeps on sharing her complaints as a way
of getting him to share his, making the kind of connection, of course, that a female friend
would, the man can get really frustrated.
He's already given her the answer.
His inner question is, why are we still talking about this?
Claiming talk, Tannen outlines a classic example of some same words, different intentions processes
when she describes a married couple out driving and the wife asks her husband, would you like
to stop for a coffee?
No thanks.
He answers truthfully and he keeps on driving.
So what happened here?
The wife who actually wanted to stop becomes annoyed because she feels her wish wasn't
even considered.
The husband seeing his wife get angry also becomes angry.
The ensuing exchange comes down to, why didn't you just tell me what you wanted?
In a world of competition, men learn to claim what they want when they want it, dibs on
shotgun.
So the husband doesn't understand his wife's indirect request.
Speaking from a connective worldview, she didn't claim what she wanted, instead she
intended to begin a negotiation.
In her upbringing, to keep people connected and to get what you need, you negotiate, not
demand.
However, she also didn't realize that when he said no, he was simply expressing his preference,
not making a ruling on her preference.
When a man and woman can interpret the same exchange in different ways, they can take
the outcomes quite personally and level charges of selfishness at each other.
Let's move from relationships to workplace talk.
In her workplace observations of talk published in her book, Talking from 9 to 5, Tannen notes
that to resist being one down in meetings, men are more likely to compete in conversations
by debating rather than discussing topics.
Give answers rather than listen to others so they can keep the floor.
Stop so they can redirect the conversation back to themselves.
Expect to be attacked and attack others and treat this kind of talk as ritual combat.
A kind of fight it then drop it and move on ritual, all part of the game.
And perhaps most interesting leave for all of us, they are less likely to ask questions
if they don't know something.
In fact, let's talk more about this asking talk.
It may be obvious by now that when a man asks a question, he may see himself as losing
status as being one down in the moment.
In her May 2010 retrospective article in Scientific American Mind, Tannen opens with
the most widely referenced anecdote from her best-selling 1990 book.
It begins with the question, why don't men like to stop and ask directions?
At the time, she was actually very surprised at the size of the reaction this received
from both men and women.
People are still talking about it 20 years later.
It seemed to dramatically highlight for most people her argument that men feel one down
when asking a question.
In fact, in her original book, she pursued this with her husband, who answered that men
like to figure things out for themselves.
It keeps them in control.
And if you stop and ask another guy, he's likely to lie to you because he doesn't know
where it is either, and he's not going to say so.
The information you get isn't worth the loss of face by asking.
We can see that this might have some serious implications in the workplace.
We're having more information helps you make better, safer, and more effective decisions.
And here's a scary example from Tannen's talking from 9 to 5 book.
In a hospital emergency ward, she discovered that male interns were willing to risk the
health of a patient in order to avoid asking a superior a question about the treatment
being administered.
And a female internist, recognized by her peers as best on the shift, received a poor
evaluation from her male supervisor because she asked more questions than the men did.
So in whose hands would you rather put your life in an emergency ward, a young man who
can't ask when he needs to, or a young woman who can?
Here's another one that's interesting, saying I'm sorry at work.
Tannen noticed several women who were told by their bosses not to say I'm sorry as a
kind of regular part of their conversation.
It made them sound weak and sounded like they were apologizing for something.
Of course, from the women's point of view, that misses the whole point.
For women, this kind of I'm story works about the same way as how are you fine works for
both genders.
It's a ritual way of noting the possible discomfort of another before she offers a critique of
what they're saying, or simply tries to move the conversation along.
It's clearly not an apology.
It's just a moment of connection before she separates.
As one woman argued, when I attend a funeral and say I'm sorry to the bereaved, I'm sharing
their sorrow.
I'm recognizing it.
I'm not taking responsibility for killing the guy in the coffin.
How about saying I'm sorry at home?
Men seem to find this hard to do because of the perceived one down position that puts
them in when talking to another.
And as many women report, men often find other ritual ways of making amends.
As one spouse put it, my husband never said he was sorry, but after a fight, my car was
never cleaner.
Before we conclude today, I'd like to consider general steps you can take to avoid what I
call the mystery of the obvious struggle in gender talk.
Give up the assumption that we all speak the same language for a start.
So therefore, we should all understand without any extra effort on our parts.
And implicitly, of course, if they don't understand it, it's their fault all the way back to the
beginning of our lectures.
As a result, give up the three taken for granted control assumptions hidden away in the first
one.
In the first assumption we've just talked about, they are, I know all I need to know,
so I don't have to ask.
Stop mind reading, ask.
My listener must truly understand, so I don't have to reflect back what I hear or see.
Please, don't assume the other understands you.
My listener feels as I do, so I don't have to notice or acknowledge their feelings, or
I don't have to give them a chance to express them.
Hate to tell you, but acknowledging feelings is really important.
Our feelings are what separates us from machines.
It's maybe easier for women to do than men, but take a moment and do it.
Starting off with you seem statements, or are you okay questions, good place to start.
To summarize, in general, men use talk to do things and to manage their independence,
and women talk to build relationships and to feel connected.
Both sexes need to understand these fundamental differences in their communication styles,
so that they don't expect the other to respond like they do.
To help you find the middle ground between the two styles,
here are three more specific things you can do to be more effective in cross-gender talk.
Since many men think that being asked to do something comes across as an order,
and they don't like being told what to do,
they often delay doing it long enough to feel that they're making their own choice to comply.
So, women, if you want your favorite man to do something, plan ahead.
Make it a request for help, not a command,
and leave enough time before your internal deadline so he can delay before complying.
If you can't wait, get him to give you a done-by date in the future.
If you can't wait, then use the situational acknowledgement
that we talked about in a sort of dialogue to focus the timeline.
Your mother's coming on Friday, we have to get this done before she arrives.
And men, the words I'm sorry, spoken sincerely at the appropriate time,
can work wonders for your relationship.
And it doesn't mean defeat, it means reconnection.
Never underestimate the settlement value of an apology.
And as far as directions are concerned, get a GPS, it works great.
It seems that men are more than prepared to take directions from a female,
as long as that's a female computer.
And husbands, when apparently out of nowhere your wife asks a question
about what you would like, treat this as an indirect request for herself
and the opening movement in negotiation.
If she says, would you like to stop for a coffee?
Don't just say no, become more provisional in your style at first.
Say, I don't know, would you like to stop?
Her next response is the good information that you're actually looking for.
And finally, men, if sometimes she just wants to talk, put down the remote,
turn towards her and smile encouragingly, I know it may be tough work for some,
but a little pain means a lot of gain in this situation.
Now our everyday conversations are affected by our gender
in a number of obvious and subtle ways.
Those effects may complicate the communication process,
but they don't prevent us from doing that most human of things,
striving to create stable, dependable relationships with each other.
As a result, we talk our way into and out of relationships throughout our lives,
and in the next lecture, we're going to outline how this process actually works.
Thank you.
