Lecture 21 – Talking Our Way To Lasting Relationships
Hi there and welcome to Lecture 21.
We are born into a web of relationships and we spend most of our lives creating, sustaining
or ending them.
All to our emotional and social lives are friendship and long-term romantic relationships.
And the research is clear – living in a caring, long-term relationship with someone
we love is the key to living happier, healthier and longer lives.
And like most truths, this one is easier to say than it is to do.
Staying careingly coupled with another entirely unique person through the ups and downs of
life requires real work and the ability to know what to say when to maintain a positive
connection.
So, let's see how this process works.
Why do we begin new relationships?
Because in general, we don't like being alone.
We crave stimulation that comes from the presence of another person and particularly from someone
we think is similar to us.
That means we have to know ourselves and as we said back in lecture two, that is one
of the key reasons we build relationships in the first place.
Caring relationships meet our basic need to discover ourselves and the world around us.
Without them, we can't completely fill our need to know ourselves.
If you remember, our lecture about the four windows into the self, our open window of
the self, window one, would actually be much smaller.
And more things would be in our blind window – things people know about us but we don't
know about ourselves.
Because only someone in a close relationship will actually tell us all that stuff.
And if we consider one of the most widely recognized models of human needs, Abraham
Maslow's hierarchy of needs, humans are deeply motivated to fulfill not only the basic
physiological needs, survival needs – shelter, safety and reproductive needs – but also
their ego survival needs.
The need to belong and to be recognized as a unique human being.
This can only happen in a relationship with another human being.
It's hard for us to think of ourselves as valuable.
Do I matter to you?
The founding question for our self-esteem.
If we aren't treated that way, by someone we actually care about.
In fact, this is the dilemma faced by political tyrants and the very rich.
Am I loved because I have the power to demand it or the money to pay for it?
Or am I loved for myself?
The only way to find out is to build a relationship with someone using neither power nor riches.
The rest of us already have the answer.
We have to use what we have – ourselves and our story – to bring relationships into
the present and to build relationships of belonging.
There are several factors that help to predict who will begin a relationship with whom.
The most powerful predictor is the one that has predicted relationship creation for as
long as we've been around – propinquity or proximity.
At some point in our lives we all connect to the girl or boy next door.
Closer we are together in geographic space, the more we are likely to interact.
The more often we interact with people, the more we get to know them.
We also know that the more people know each other, the more they tend to like each other.
Robert Zion, remember Lecture 4, called this the mere exposure effect.
If you remember, his early work on the construction of non-conscious preferences showed people
images of the Chinese alphabet that they didn't know were paired with happy or smiling faces
that appeared so quickly that conscious mind didn't perceive them.
At the end they were easily able to choose their favorites – the ones with the subliminal
happy faces.
But in another variation of this experiment he brought participants back to the lab weeks
later and ran another list.
Again, all Chinese characters, but the list was built with characters they were seeing
for the first time as well as those they had seen before.
They had no trouble picking their favorites, the ones they had seen before.
When they were debriefed after the experiment they didn't remember they had seen them at all.
Repeated exposure works just fine in the real world too, and has since the late 1940s when
Top 40 radio was invented.
It works on exactly the same premise – select a few songs for high repetition in a short
time and suddenly they become people's favorites, their hits.
I need to know people near you does increase the odds for liking them, but only if in talking
with them we find each other a level of similarity – shared interests, values and attitudes.
This allows us to continue to interact regularly.
We like to talk to people who reflect back to us the way we think we are.
This is the key to the successful dating sites on the web.
We sell future connections based on detailed questionnaires and data collation that present
people as, quote, they really are, close quote, so that prospective connectors will be able
to accurately compare future candidates to themselves.
So the web seems to have overcome the proximity factor, but relationships will not develop
even online without some sense that the other is like you in important ways.
Our focus on background similarity to begin a relationship and sustain it through the
early interactions is also tempered to some degree by our search for complementary differences
of personal style.
Similarity of background enables us to start talking, but a little difference on several
key dimensions of personality and communication style will help us to continue talking, to
want to talk with them again.
For instance, two people with strong preferences for extroversion and socially dominant communication
styles talk a lot.
You might have a good time talking at a party, but for a lasting relationship I like to be
looking for someone a little less extroverted than they are, so in conversation they don't
have to fight to get a word in edgewise.
If you need to talk, I mean if you really need to talk, waiting to find a moment to talk
can be tiring.
So attraction can develop from continued connection, which in turn is aided by proximity and similarity
on key social factors and aided by complementary differences in personality factors, but it
won't develop very deeply without one last factor being present, perceived reciprocity
of liking.
So we can come to like someone to whom we have relatively easy access, similar interests
and complementary communication style, but still nothing long term will happen unless
we feel they like us back.
Another person's expressed liking increases our self-worth, so we feel better when they
give back the liking we give them when they reciprocate.
If we take the risk and express our liking for them and they respond in kind, we both
increase our sense of being valuable and enhance our self-esteem.
This reinforces a virtuous cycle of reciprocation and relationship deepening.
So what are the key characteristics of a satisfying long-term relationship?
How do we know we're in one?
Let's start with investment.
We and the other give our time, energy and mental focus to building and sustaining the
relationship.
We choose to invest our resources here with this person instead of somewhere else with
someone else.
And one of our most important investments is what we give to the other that we can't
get back if the relationship ends, and that's important pieces of ourselves, our history.
Then there's commitment.
As a result of our continued investment in the recent past, we believe in the future
of the relationship.
We talk to each other about that future and what we're going to do in it together.
We are enacting the joy plus anticipation emotions from Plucic's Circumplex of Emotions
that we reviewed in Lecture 7.
If you remember, these emotions are the basis for optimism and hope.
In fact, the decline of talk that plans or dreams about the future of a relationship
is often a good indicator of a relationship in stasis and potential decline.
In addition, our commitment to a joint future gives us the strength to deal with the 3Ds,
the unexpected differences hardened into disagreements or arriving in a surprisingly disorderly
kind of fashion that upsets us.
These will inevitably appear in that future.
Our commitment to the future now compels us to work through these problems rather than
just simply walk away from them.
Another feature of a satisfying long-term relationship, of course, is trust.
It is built by each of us being dependable, keeping our promises in the future.
When we do this, we show the other that we are trustworthy.
But it's also built by enacting trusting behavior, showing the other that we trust them.
We do this through investing ourselves in the relationship by gradually taking the risk
of disclosing more of ourselves to the other as the conversation continues.
In our revelations, we show them we trust the other and essentially ask for them to
trust us back by speaking more intimately about ourselves over time.
We go into window 3 of our 4-window model of the self, things that are known to us but
not to others.
And we tell this person something about ourselves that they couldn't know by just looking at
us, that we would ordinarily keep to ourselves, but we'll be engaging for them to hear, show
another facet of ourselves and of our value to them, but also make them feel of value
to me, to us, because I'm giving something I wouldn't ordinarily give to anyone else.
And of course, while we're doing all this, we look for their acceptance of our more complete
presentation of our self while we're disclosing it.
Intimacy and acceptance and trust are the companions on the road to building a long-term
commitment.
As each of us learns deeper truths about the other and comes to accept them, we are more
likely to trust and respect each other.
We can say we truly appreciate each other.
Now, let's not forget about the last three elements of a long-term relationship.
Enjoyment.
Being in each other's presence is simply more rewarding than being with others, particularly
as we reveal our likes and dislikes and find out that they're shared, or at least accepted
by the other.
We get pleasure from doing things together.
Interference support is vital.
When things go poorly for the other, we feel with them.
We do what we can to sustain them through the difficult moments in their lives.
We support them emotionally.
Also, we stand up for them when others are putting them down.
We care enough to defend them against other people's criticisms.
And finally, practical assistance.
We offer help in time of need and take pleasure in doing things for them they can't do for
themselves.
And we offer this with enthusiasm.
These characteristics can be found in long friendship relationships and in long-term
romantic relationships.
In romantic relationships, however, we also find what researchers call the key elements
of passion, fascination, constantly thinking about the other when they're not around in
a sense of inexplicable magic in their presence.
Exclusiveness.
Our felt experience has not, and we often say has never been felt with any other person
this way.
Sexual desire.
The biochemical basis of our feelings of passion and involvement.
Once these are added to the elements of long-term relationship building, we've already discussed
these, couples feel compelled to build a joint identity and us distinct from other relationships.
Commitment is extended to include loyalty and faithfulness to each other.
Loyalty is deepened, moving beyond sharing unique thoughts and feelings about ourselves
to sharing feelings of tenderness and deep emotional connection towards the other.
So what happens in romantic long-term relationships?
Well, first we experience the catalytic power of passion.
The feeling of magic changes everything.
And it can happen quickly.
Remember our discussion of the cognitive unconscious in lecture four.
Alex Pentland's successful prediction of early connection by measuring non-verbal communication
in a five-minute speed dating situation.
All this happens at the level of the cognitive unconscious.
And these early anticipations of positive connection are deep enough people can actually
fall in love in a rush of chemicals released into the body, including dopamine and oxytocin.
These stimulate the feelings of uniqueness and magical connection.
This is the basic chemistry of courtship that poets and ordinary people have always
talked about as the basis for a romantic long-term relationship.
What's interesting is the data from Cynthia Hazen's research on attachment and mating
patterns of humans.
Her work involved thousands of interviews across a wide variety of cultures.
Her data suggests that we are biologically and psychologically predisposed to be passionately,
romantically in love for up to two years, about enough time to have a baby.
And then the chemistry wears off.
And what wears off, of course, is the sex-linked erotic experience, the chemical cocktail that
made the connection seem so effortless, made talking together so easy, permitted the temporary
collapse of the defensive boundaries around our egos, somehow making us feel the other
was an extension of ourselves without any real work on our part.
Of course, what needs to appear in that same 18 to 24-month time period is what Scott Peck
calls real love, the will to extend oneself for the purpose of nurturing one's own or
another's spiritual growth.
We need to invest more deeply, tie our self-love with the love of the other.
And unlike the quick, automatic experience of romantic or passionate love, this requires
conscious effort.
It's an act of mindful choice and appreciation to continue to deal with the world as an us
over the long haul.
To put it into terms, we have already discussed in previous lectures to make a romantically
based relationship last beyond the early glow of biochemistry.
We need to be positively answering for each other three fundamental questions that lie
behind all talk and interaction.
Remember these from lecture two?
What's going on?
Each of us needs to act like they are in a lasting relationship today.
We talk to each other in ways that demonstrate loyalty and exclusiveness.
What's going to happen next?
We need to think about and dream out loud about how the relationship will look in the future,
four days, four years, even 40 years from now.
And perhaps the most important of the three questions.
Who am I to you in this situation?
Or as we've put it, how are you treating me?
We need to consistently talk in ways that show the other is valuable to us, without
contempt or dismissiveness in our tone of voice.
Is competent in our eyes, no condescension here, and has influence over decisions that
affect both of us.
Returning to our ideal model of talk from lecture 12, our talk about important things
needs to be emotionally self-managed.
Descriptive, provisional, and equal.
And we need to do this particularly when it comes to dealing with the three key tensions
that underlie all long-term relationships.
These occur when we are trying to balance two or more desirable but contradictory actions.
The open, closed-ness tension in all relationships.
Here the tension lies between maintaining the exclusivity of our connection to the other
while retaining some openness to other relationships in our lives.
This tension is highest in the early stages of permanent relationship building.
Each person and the couple tries to maintain a larger social net of connections, while
at the same time trying to create a deeper, exclusive relationship with one other.
And there's the autonomy connection tension.
We want to maintain togetherness with our partner, but at any point in the relationship
we also may want to make our own needs, our own interests, a priority.
For instance, in that moment when there's a need to get a better job that requires
moving to a new location and may force our partner to give up a job that they're actually
happy with.
Happy with.
What do we do then?
Then there's the novelty predictability tension.
This deals with the contradictory desires for newness and adventure on one hand and predictability
and comfort on the other.
After the exciting period of newness in relationship building, we create habitual patterns of behavior,
so newness and discovery become balanced by predictability.
But too much regularity and predictability can lead to boredom.
The question for the couple then becomes one of how to inject just enough newness into
the ongoing life of the relationship to maintain interest, stimulate, entertain, creatively
engage without undermining their stable interaction patterns and pushing each other into feelings
of uncertainty and fear.
The interesting thing about these tensions is that they don't have to be discussed as
part of relationship talk.
They can appear into the guise of any number of topics in everyday couple discussion, particularly
along the autonomy connectedness dimension.
I'm sure if you look into your own relationship you'll find such issues just hanging around
in your head waiting to spoil a great day with your beloved.
Now this can happen for two reasons because, first of all, we simply don't tell our new
found partners everything about ourselves in the relationship building stage.
With every disclosure of our hidden thoughts and feelings, there's a natural internal pressure
not to disclose too much more because we need to balance intimacy with vulnerability.
Some research indicates that after climbing steadily in the opening six months of a relationship,
the disclosure process seems to level off.
And secondly, we just don't think of all the things we could tell quite easily.
They just didn't come up in our conversation at the time.
But we run into them as the relationship stabilizes and the context changes.
For instance, a couple may discover that they have divergent views on how to raise children
or on some local community issue, topics that of course never appeared in the early stages
of getting to know each other when they fell in love.
If we discover differences that harden into full-fledged disagreements after a few and
sometimes quite surprising intense discussions, it's what we do next that actually matters.
Now one fairly simple solution is to not let it come up unless the issue is critical to
the day-to-day relationship and community issues are not.
The idea is to tacitly agree to disagree about it and not bring it up too often.
Implicitly, each recognizes that the other's views are important enough to them that they
can't be talked out of them and that each argument simply leaves the couple in the same
state of unhappy disagreeableness as they were before.
To maintain their larger connection to each other while preserving their sense of personal
autonomy, they decide to reduce the number of times the topic will come up.
They agree to disagree and they drop it.
Now if they don't do this, then the negative emotions that are generated could further
harden their topical positions and following the law of competitive control talk forced
them into taking the other's disagreement much more personally.
This can lead to the use of heavy control talk and the disintegration of their positive
emotional connections to each other.
The problem is that we generally use control talk when we're in disagreement about anything
and often we don't seem to notice that its repeated use can undermine the very relationship
we are trying to sustain.
Let's talk about bad talk and hurt feelings, but take a look at some of the forces behind
relationship disintegration.
John Gottberg reviews many years of detailed research on the behavior that leads to the
disintegration of established marital relationship.
In his book, What predicts divorce?
He got couples to fill out detailed inventories, directly observed them interacting and measured
their bodily responses to their exchanges, galvanic skin response, sweat rising on the
skin, changes in breathing and heart rate, as well he did before and after analyses
of changes in blood chemistry, levels of adrenaline and cortisol, the action and stress hormones.
After retesting couples he had interviewed and then tested three years before, Gottman
states that if marital conflict is repeated and problems remain unsolved, negative emotion
will pervade all the couples interactions and they will be less likely to rebound from
each conflict discussion.
When couples were unable to emotionally self-manage they were less likely to express enthusiasm
about the relationship and more likely to express disgust about it or contempt for the
other.
The sharing of negative feelings was a strong predictor of a change in relationship satisfaction
over the years and physiological arousal was a very strong predictor of declines in satisfaction
with the marriage.
Gottman summarized his findings into a negative interaction processed cascade that was so
highly predictive of divorce he called it the four horsemen of the apocalypse.
Repeated criticism leads to contempt in the speaker, that is the one doing the criticizing.
So as you criticize and complain about the other you actually develop a sense of contempt
about them.
This comes through in the sound of your voice and leads to habitual defensiveness in the
person receiving the criticism, which in turn leads to their withdrawal, their stonewalling
and not talking at all.
In another work he noted that in observing struggling couples over time he discovered
the negative power of contempt on the human body.
A person who regularly received contempt was much more likely to be afflicted with common
diseases that occur because of the depression of the immune system, colds and flus for instance.
And couples will struggle over issues, the underlying tension never goes away and some
issues are what he calls intractables, we just have to know how to fight about them
more effectively.
Really complaining or criticizing the other does nothing but wear out the connection.
So let's talk about fighting effectively and using dialogue talk to avoid emotional gridlock.
First of all we have to prepare ourselves emotionally, we've got to remember to avoid
below the belt emotional tax.
It just stimulates negative emotions that just overwhelm us, overwhelm the person who
gets it anyway.
And remember in this conversation somebody has to be the adult here and since you're
going to start this process you have to be the adult.
And to do this you need to soothe yourself, calm yourself.
Use the self-management tools we outlined in lecture 12.
This is essential to all the other steps in this process.
We need to use a softened start-up for a hard discussion.
This needs to be a compassionate confrontation.
Use the mutualizing acknowledgement we demonstrated in lecture 19 on structured dialogue.
Then of course we need to speak using descriptive eye messages.
Say what the fight is about and stay with that.
Stay in the present or at least in the immediate past.
No gunny sacking here, no sudden emptying of that emotional gunny sack.
We all carry around with the sins of the others all neatly labeled.
No throwing that on the table as a way of justifying your anger or upset in the present.
In fact I want you to show up in the present, stay there and speak out about this present.
Also openly acknowledge how the other might feel about it too and ask them a question
about it.
Repair and de-escalation is an important part of this entire process so if the temperature
starts to rise quickly in the discussion say so.
I think we better if we would back off on our anger just a little bit here.
You're using your medic communication to slow down the talk and refocus the relationship
in the moment.
And of course you're listening actively and encouraging the other to do the same.
In the process accept some influence.
Look for where you and the other actually agree about something.
Find a compromise.
There's always some common ground.
So see how you can help the other get some of what they want and still give you some
of what you want.
Of course repair attempts work best when you have some emotional credit in their bank
account or some credit in their emotional bank account.
So to do this, sustain the caring connection before the fight comes.
This is where the little things still count.
To maintain that five to one, five positive bid responses for every negative bid response
ratio, the one we reviewed in lecture 13 on Connect Talk, make polite and cheerful small
talk on a regular basis.
As we've said, talk about nothing means everything.
And of course, listen when the other makes small talk, very active giving your undivided
attention to your beloved reinforces your connection.
How about just calling to say hi once in a while?
I bet you've probably forgotten that once you did this, without thinking about it in
the courtship stage of the relationship, when your body was awash in the biochemistry of
attraction, now you choose to do it just to maintain your sense of attachment to the
other.
And choose also to avoid petty criticism.
Make tiny sacrifices to sustain the positive climate between the two of you.
After all, you don't have to be right all the time.
Do things together.
Plan and do fun joint activities of all kinds, including eating at your favorite restaurant.
And in the process, discuss past pleasurable moments.
It's nothing like saying, wasn't that great?
To bring the connective emotions of the past right back into the present.
And of course, talk about shared futures.
Next year's vacation, maybe paying off the mortgage in a few years, inviting the relatives
over next Christmas, whatever it is, make sure that you celebrate all these family occasions.
The larger connection rituals of family life are critical to maintaining the five to one
relationship.
Big birthdays, anniversaries, births, even the ceremonies around death.
They're all critical to relationship connection.
By the way, around that ladder, when I was never aware of this until I married into an
Italian family, viewings and wakes occur pretty often and pretty regularly in a large family
with an extended social network, connecting with grandparents, uncles, aunts, and particularly
cousins, and all of the friends that come attached to these folks in a moment of shared
sadness is a remarkably powerful way to deepen your connection to your beloved.
The maintenance of a long-term personal relationship requires work on our part, a persistent commitment
to connect talk, to create a positive balance in our emotional bank account, and to the use
of dialogue for relationship repair.
It turns out that this basic balance has to be struck in all types of relationships if
they are to last.
And according to recent research, including the relationships we have in the workplace
between managers and employees, it is going to be a healthy and productive workplace.
So in the next two lectures, we will review what is now known about how this critical
relationship works.
Thanks very much.
