Lecture 23. Dialogue and Appreciation. Engaged Employees.
Hi, and welcome to lecture 23. To lead an effective life, we need not only to create and sustain positive relationships with friends and loved ones, we need to create them at work.
And it turns out that the better we do that, the more productive, happy, and less stressed we are.
When we can't create or sustain positive relationships at work, we become disengaged. We lose energy. We lose spirit. We just don't care.
So we walk through our daily work giving the minimum throughout the day, a mere fraction of what we're capable of.
In fact, 74% of the people responding to Buckingham statements, which we reviewed in the previous lecture, felt this kind of disengagement.
And so did most of the people in Sarota's large study. Most employees were very unenthusiastic about their work, didn't have the emotional energy for real engagement in their work.
However, Sarota and his colleagues went a step further than reporting differing degrees of enthusiasm or motivation for work.
They asked the highly enthusiastic responders why they were so gung-ho, and they asked everyone else what it would take to motivate them to try harder and commit more deeply.
Both groups said the same thing. Enthusiasm came out of a sense of equity, a sense of being treated fairly by the organization in terms of the application of organizational policies.
It also meant being paid a fair wage, the industry standard, for their work and not being threatened with job loss every time the organization decided to cut costs.
Enthusiasm also came from a sense of achievement. People were enthusiastic when they were able to do their best work and make a difference.
And when they belonged to an organization in which they could personally take pride, an organization that seemed guided at every level by a purpose larger than making short-term profits.
And thirdly, a sense of camaraderie gave employees a boost in enthusiasm, and employees were most enthusiastic where they could work collaboratively with others in a workplace free of threat and suspicion.
They enjoyed having a fundamental sense of goodwill in their workplace. And although they did get pleasure from associating with others, making connect talk with peers at coffee breaks, for instance,
their greatest satisfaction came from interacting with others on a team in pursuit of a common performance goal. That is, working made them happy, working well with others.
Let's talk about the importance of connect talk and building relationships at work.
In many ways, the finding that people are motivated by positive relationships in the workplace should come as no surprise.
We've said a number of times throughout the course that we are relationship seekers in all parts of our lives.
I believe the reason we haven't automatically extended this natural human need into the workplace has to do with the deep organizing schema around top-down control.
It tells managers that having employees talk together can be inefficient and wasteful, time is money, and even dangerous to the profitability of the business.
But our personal work experience and hundreds of studies say we always find ways of talking informally with our colleagues, connecting with others around us.
It's a deep need and it turns out that connecting at work enhances rather than undermines productivity.
One couldn't tell that to the managers who organized what I call the high-control call centers until Alex Pentland and his research team came along.
Now you'll remember our reference to his research from lecture four using his sociometer, the device like a large ID card, that captured nonverbal signals between people at a speed dating event.
Well, it can capture patterns of interaction between people in larger groups too.
It can tell the observer who talks to whom, for how long, and whether they seem to be paying attention to each other.
Until they had the data, the high-control call center managers took the view that any time away from the phone was wasted time.
They started from the belief that their employees saw their interests as different from management's.
They didn't really want to work and have given the chance would waste as much time as possible on breaks and at lunch.
By the way, when Sarota asked employees about their interests in working, their views actually matched management's.
They saw overly long coffee breaks as a waste of time, but so also were overly long meetings.
They both cut into productive work time.
Now in the classic over-control call center, managers afraid of employees wasting time scheduled breaks so that employees couldn't go to coffee with people around them.
The people they were acquainted with because they were close in space.
Remember lecture 21, propinquity, physical proximity is a key force in building relationships.
Oh, Pentland's research team had 80 people in the call center wear these devices for a month so they could measure interaction patterns.
They also had management provide them with statistics on individual productivity.
And guess what they found?
The most productive people always managed to have more face-to-face conversations with their colleagues away from their workstations throughout the day.
So the researchers asked management to rearrange coffee breaks so that the people from the same work area could break together.
Their productivity numbers went through the roof.
Then management began to arrange common coffee breaks and lunch hours on all the shifts and again overall productivity rose.
Now please, let's just think together for a moment about Connect Talk at Work.
After this, after you kind of do the name rank and serial number deductions and what did you think about that game last night exchanges, what else would people talk about?
The work, of course, and not just about any part of it, but the strange, odd, and most importantly the difficult moments in their daily work.
And their colleagues will express opinions, give their ideas about what to do next time as well as commiserate and support them.
In essence, water cooler talk is mostly about people thinking out loud about their work, learning from their peers, and getting an emotional lift at the same time.
In fact, Connect Talk between people with common interests and burdens has always worked to energize the participants.
We're all in this together has been a spirit lifting force since the first hunting party of humans left the safety of the caves for the dangers of the belt and using only pointy sticks hunted down animals ten times their size.
Pentland argues that face time with colleagues is vital, up to 2.5 times more important to success and simply giving individuals more information.
Overall productivity can be increased by 10% at no additional cost by simply rearranging the environment to promote more employee interaction.
Now this is more support for Sirotus findings that a sense of camaraderie was one of the big three motivating factors for employees contributing to their morale and enthusiasm and in turn to their productivity.
So let's look at an organization that succeeded by combining employee needs for camaraderie with their needs to achieve something of value.
Now I picked this example because it involved a complete transformation of a classic top-down controlling model of management into an employee-centered and eventually co-managed organization.
I promise you such a transformation is rare in North America.
Because this transformation occurred in an industry where work is boring, repetitive and dirty, meat packing and food processing, where highly controlling Theory X style supervision is seen as vital to keeping the worker at it and where workers are hired for their endurance rather than their educational or technical backgrounds.
I also picked it because you might recognize the company name and the product.
The company is Johnsonville Sausage of Johnsonville, Wisconsin.
CEO Ralph Steyer wanted to change all of the things that he saw on the plant floor.
He wanted Johnsonville to have an employee-centered form of management and when he implemented this idea, the firm was doing quite well.
It was growing successfully in this region and the Steyer family was actually very enlightened in the way it treated the workers.
They treated their employees well and so at first everybody in the town and in the firm thought he was crazy because everybody knows everybody.
If it ain't broke, don't fix it, right?
Ralph was worried about two things.
He knew the firm would have to become bigger, more highly efficient and quality conscious if it was going to survive against two dominant national brands and he didn't like what he saw on the plant floor.
People didn't seem to care about the company or their work.
This led to many avoidable and wasteful mistakes.
Steyer was sure the company could do better if only the employees cared more about the results.
So he asked them to join him in a radical change of structure.
He told them that they could become the best paid workers in the industry as they shared the profits of a growing company.
But to do that they needed to figure out how to make the plant work better and in the next decade they did.
Beginning with the next five years, employees took control over many aspects of production.
As one interviewer said, they had employees who never finished high school who were learning to set production schedules and create budgets.
The hierarchy of the company was simplified and everyone was compensated in relation to their ability to meet performance goals.
They worked in a participative team-centered structure.
People spoke together about the work and motivated each other to meet goals.
Eventually the employees took responsibility for the traditional human resources roles of hiring, firing and training.
And managers, those who survived the change, and I guarantee you many did not, said they went from being tyrants to teachers.
They were there to assist the developing work teams to get what they needed in order to work better.
Lateness, absence and maintenance problems declined and the plant became much more efficient.
Workers were compensated for new roles they took on and as promised, they also earned a share of the company's profits.
Now this fundamental change has endured through the firm's growth from a regional to a nationally recognized brand.
We even have them in Canada.
Apparently when a company changes its structure and culture to harness the enthusiasm of employees,
that is it combines their needs to achieve something of value with their need for camaraderie, the company can move out ahead and lead its industry.
Well, only if they have a CEO like Ralph Steyer, who took a truly appreciative view of employee leadership and change.
As he said, there's a real fear on the part of CEOs that they won't be respected if they're not the decision maker, the causer of action.
The basic change you need is a change in your view of what people are all about.
That's the basic thing you have to get past.
If you understand that everyone wants to excel, wants to be a member of a winning team, takes great joy out of that and it's important for them in their lives.
Once you understand that and truly believe it, then you start acting that way.
By golly, it happens.
By the way, in speeches at conferences and business magazines and journals, managers laud these types of changes.
But very few actually implement them.
Cerota estimates that only about 14% of the firms in his very large sample can be described as having harnessed or enhanced employee enthusiasm.
And why is that?
Well, I think there are two reasons.
The first one we've already discussed in the previous lectures.
Managers deeply believe that control is the key to their success, not participation in camaraderie. They're not Ralph Steyer.
The second is that although managers may believe that great things can happen when employees get along, they're also very, very deeply uncertain, even afraid of what might happen if they don't.
Why?
Because as in the rest of their lives, neither they nor their employees are properly prepared for that eventuality.
For instance, what the articles about the change at John Seville Sausage ignore is that those first five years of the new process were pretty difficult and complex.
Folks on the plant floor and the managers went through lots of struggles with each other and also they went through lots of training in order to learn how to enact their new values of cooperation and participation in everyday talk.
Anticipating the results of Buckingham's engagement study by almost a decade, the employees and managers at John Seville had to learn how to act and speak with clarity, consideration, and collaboration.
Now, what happens when employees don't get along with each other or their managers?
Well, engagement falls and stress rises.
In my firm's own work with a thousand employees in a large regional hospital near Toronto, we carried out an employee engagement and emotional wellness survey.
Our inventory also included a 25-item measure of workplace burnout.
Like Buckingham's earlier findings, we also found correlations between disengagement and a perceived lack of respect and care by local managers.
But in this workplace, what really drove engagement down and drove stress up was the perceived failure of managers to resolve workplace conflict between employees in a fair and timely fashion.
Plus, the perceived failure of managers to deal appropriately with employees who weren't doing their fair share of the work.
And finally, the perceived failure of team members to behave with integrity, honesty, and fairness and to work in a spirit of collaboration rather than confrontation and competition.
All of these things together made people feel unfairly treated by their colleagues and by managers who didn't intervene appropriately.
So employees simply emotionally disengage from the work and their unit to handle the frustration and anger they felt.
As the Serota study indicated, equity or fairness is a very strong motivator for enthusiastic and engaged work.
And when people feel unfairly treated, their enthusiasm or engagement in their work not only falls, but the persistent negative feelings about the situation could literally burn them out emotionally.
Everyone thinks that burnout is about fatigue, and that's partly true.
However, the real force behind burnout is the feeling of hopelessness.
People feel this is just never going to change.
Now, it is possible to create positive change.
You can do this by focusing on raising engagement levels through improving the communication and problem solving effectiveness of both managers and employees.
Employees and their managers need to learn how to deal with inevitable differences, disagreements, and disorder that appear in the workplace every day, just like they do in the other parts of our everyday lives.
And by the way, in the first five years of Johnsonville's change process, communication consulting figured prominently.
Let's talk about some of the things that work in managing workplace differences and disagreements.
Preachive dialogue talk can help employees deal with problems more effectively and sustain their positive connection, their engagement with themselves and their work.
Both employees and managers need to replace control talk with a preachive dialogue.
Both need to practice calming themselves in order to stay connected, even in difficult moments.
In difficult moments, the power of both the descriptive eye message and the adult voice can help clear the air, clarify the issues, and keep everyone engaged until a solution is found.
How about using assertive dialogue for speaking truth to power?
Let's take an example of an employee who had to show up and stay in the moment and speak up when suddenly taken on by her boss.
Everyone can see that despite being attacked, she persists in speaking in her adult voice, asking questions and using descriptive eye messages to tell her story, and even to acknowledge her boss despite his moment of anger at her.
Let's talk about her.
Jones, a supervisor in a lab, and she changed the testing procedure without notifying her immediate boss, Bill, who was actually away on a business trip.
He came back, he went directly to a staff meeting where he heard about the change from his boss.
And he wasn't happy to be taken by surprise.
After the meeting, he strides into her lab, she looks up and notes that he looks angry.
As he throws down a report demanding to know what it is, she says, you are angry, what's the matter?
She speaks in her inquiring adult voice.
With heavy sarcasm, he stays angry, me?
Just because you bypassed me to get approval to change one of my testing procedures because of some crisis I never even heard about?
Jones takes a breath, mattedores her way around this sarcasm and repeats her thought by saying that she doesn't want this to happen again.
She wants him to know the facts of the situation.
He jumps on the word facts and yells, the facts are you went over my head to get something you should have gotten from me.
She takes another breath and replies that this wasn't her intention.
And moreover, she has a lot of respect for his work.
But she adds there's an important piece of information that he's missing and he needs to look at both sides of the story if they're going to resolve this.
She proceeds to tell her side by saying that she went to his boss because the test had run into a problem that in her judgment needed attention right away.
Bill was on the road, she couldn't get through to him, and she emphasized again that she needed an immediate approval to make a change to save the test.
And she acknowledges him by saying, Bill you designed this test, you know it better than I do.
I went to Bob because I couldn't get in touch with you, I had no intention of bypassing you, but I can see how that might look.
You have a right to be upset.
And finally she says, I know we can prevent this from happening again if we just work it through together.
Well, Bill releases a deep breath, finally relaxes his shoulders and pauses thoughtfully before he starts to speak.
And in a much more calm voice says, OK, OK, so tell me exactly what happened.
Joan's behavior models the most effective approach to dealing with unexpected differences.
She avoids any of the how dare you talk to me like this judgments from her critical parent or fearful whininess from her adapted child.
She asks questions and uses descriptive eye messages to explain the situation as she sees it in the moment.
She meta communicates as well as clarifying what happened in the recent past.
She even manages to provide her boss some support in the process by commenting that it's his test and no one knows it better than he does.
She never returns as anger and kind and she lets his negative energy go by as she steadfastly tries to explain.
Let's think about another workplace communication skill.
It's important in talking to employees we call cross management.
This form of dialogue talk allows employees to speak across differences in their work roles or technical specialization.
It keeps people connected and listening while influencing them to try and change.
Focuses on that moment all employees face when their firm reorganizes the workplace around what are called cross functional teams.
Most managers now accept the fact that improving work processes requires a team of people representing different aspects of the process.
It should be brought together to suggest improvements and reflect on how any improvements will affect them before the decisions are made.
The difficulty with this is that even though they work for the same organization, everyone carries around stereotypical schema of the other specialties or units in their heads,
the bobble heads in marketing, the bean counters in finance, the mastodons from market manufacturing.
Everybody has these in their head and it's hard to get people from different specializations to talk to each other openly and as equals.
Even harder to get them to actually listen to each other.
But employees have to overcome these differences to get anything done.
One of the ways they overcome these differences is by being reminded that the company's mission, vision, values, ideals and bottom line success is what brings us all together in this moment.
It's the thing that's bigger than all of us.
Every team meaning would be productive if every employee attending would spend some of his or her time finding that thing that's bigger than everyone and making whatever they want, whatever they are advocating for,
clearly in line with the common cause of the company.
That's the thing that's bigger than everyone.
Like the relationship that's bigger than two people who are disagreeing.
Facts make the case but common values make the argument because they compel people to look past their differences and at least for a moment consider their connections to a common higher ground.
So you start with logic and rationality, influence tactics.
You're making your case for your suggestion.
Always use descriptive messages and data wherever you can using your enthusiastic adult voice.
But then you put the thing that's bigger than all of us on the table to support your case.
You want them just for a moment to stop paying attention to how different you are from them and instead look with you at something they share with you.
For instance, I think that this approach will reduce costs but will sustain our company's very public commitment to maintaining high quality customer service.
What do you think?
You seek their input into your proposal.
Ask questions and listen actively.
And as you seek their expertise and gain wider knowledge of the issues being faced here, you frame their responses around the thing that's bigger than all of us.
People begin to disagree with each other about your idea, firmly but gently intervene with descriptive messages about what you think could be the consequences of not changing.
Openly casting them into the role of people who would understand these risks.
And finally, always, always remember that this is a negotiation.
You can't impose on anybody here.
It's the only way that any sort of change can be effectively invented.
So listen for common ground as it begins to appear.
Adapt their suggestions to yours as they contribute them and include them as long as they don't undermine the common values you've actually raised.
In the end, what comes out won't necessarily be your way or their way but a third way, one that works for everyone.
Finally, we're appropriate.
We need to talk about how to use a sort of dialogue to provide high quality customer service and to deal with difficult customers.
Customers often approach frontline service providers in a state of aroused negative emotion.
So of course we ask employees to self-manage on the spot.
Think a thought.
This person is upset.
This is not about me.
I will not take the bait.
I will deal with this assertively.
Take a deep breath and keep your face in a kind of positive or neutral state and of course balance and open your posture.
All of this to tell your cognitive unconscious not to go into its fight or flight mode and so you can consciously stay in your dialogue mode.
Listen actively.
Give them your undivided attention.
Provide feedback to show understanding and allow the person to speak without interruption.
Acknowledge their concerns.
I understand that you've been extremely inconvenienced by this delay.
Give a blameless apology.
I'm very sorry this happened.
Acknowledge their truth.
Let their negative energy go by like a matador.
If they offer you a, you guys never get this right kind of comment.
Don't defend.
Say, you know sometimes that does happen.
How can I help you in this particular situation?
Ask the 4W2H questions to fully understand the problem and come up with a way to solve it.
Use description and eye messages to suggest a solution to the customer and get their agreement.
And always emphasize what you can do and not what you can't.
And of course, repeat all this as needed.
I understand that it's important for you to get this quickly.
I can't get it to you tomorrow morning, but I can guarantee delivery the next day.
Yes, I can see that it's critical.
I can get it to you by 9 a.m. the day after tomorrow.
Now if the problem can't be solved on the spot, then initiate additional actions.
Keep your promises.
Follow up with customers to ensure their satisfaction.
All of these are the sort of standard approaches we take in using dialogue to create effective customer service,
but we have to add one more thing.
We're always asked, what do we do when the customer actually escalates the situation?
Usually after a couple of rounds of repeat as needed, here's what I can do for you.
The customer finally listens and kind of gets the frontliners offer of a solution.
However, in a very few cases, but they're always the one the service givers remember,
the customer seems to think that by making the employee take it personally,
it will somehow get more.
So they resort to yelling or swearing.
What you as an employee can do is a clear practice process for dealing with these very difficult situations.
We need to teach you a way to end the situation or to hand off an angry customer to a supervisor
without making the customer even angry or making yourself feel worse.
So what we do is we show them a three-tier termination process,
a kind of gently escalating warning system.
And the customer starts to lose it.
The customer front-line service provider begins with a tier one explanation.
I really want to help you, but I can't do that if you raise your voice
or swear at me if that's what they're doing.
We ask them to say this in their calm, well-modulated adult voice
and so that they can model this and the customer may then calm themselves.
However, if the customer raises their voice again, we ask them to go to tier two.
As I said before, I want to help you,
but raising your voice or swearing at me makes it difficult for me to help.
If you continue, I'll have to call my supervisor.
And if they do continue, and sometimes they do, go to tier three.
I've said twice now that I can't have you raising your voice or swearing at me.
I'm going to call my supervisor. Please wait. I'll be right back.
This is a no-surprise dialogue way of asking for change,
repeatedly describing the consequences if they don't change,
and smoothly handing off a situation when they won't.
And if you've discussed this previously with your supervisor,
he or she will know exactly what's happened when you contact them and say,
this is a tier three call.
This should cover the situation when the supervisor appears
and the customer tries to blame you and your behavior for their anger.
The supervisor will then be able to matador their way around that kind of defensive talk
and stay focused on the customer service.
Now, in summary, you've probably figured out by now
that positive work relationships are like other relationships at their core.
We still have to exchange emotional bids in our connect talk
and develop that five-to-one positive versus negative message ratio
so that as we become known to and accepted by our colleagues,
we can find support and get practical help when we need it.
So we build positive connections not only to feel good about going to work,
but to help us get the work done more effectively, to be more productive.
Comorotary matters to our enthusiasm for the work.
And when the tough stuff happens, and it will,
we can use dialogue talk to solve problems
and retain our positive connection with others at work,
just the way we do at home.
To do this, we can use the positive emotions generated by our relationships
and our ability to solve problems effectively to energize our work
and create a sense of personal achievement.
In the end, working well with others enables us to work well for ourselves.
Thanks very much.
