Lecture 24, Dialogue, Ethical Choices Behind Our Talk
Hi, and welcome to Lecture 24.
In 1962, Dean Barnland, one of the communication theorists
who developed the transactional model of interpersonal communication,
wrote that to understand everyday talk,
we need more than just a technically adequate description of the process.
We need a model that provides an ethical philosophy
that will protect and promote the healthiest communicative behavior.
That statement shaped my earliest beliefs as a researcher
and as a teacher of everyday communication practice.
Although much talk has performed unthinkingly,
we must choose to override this tendency in critical moments,
to wake up and make practical choices to deal positively
with the difficulties we face.
When we do this, we make ethical choices for life.
That's the subject of this last lecture,
the ethics of effective communication,
because there are ethical implications
in the practice of effective communication,
not just practical ones.
So, let's review the high points of our journey
to understand effective communication,
to see where in the process of everyday talk
we can and often must make choices about what to say
in ways that are not only good for us,
but also good for others.
First, this business of talking with one another
is not just lobbing words over a net,
although we often take that approach.
We tell them something, we assume our meaning is obvious,
they tell us something back that indicates
whether they got our first message,
the way we meant it or not.
If they indicate not, we tell them again,
and if they still don't seem to get it,
then it's their problem, not ours.
They're stubborn, they're resistant, they're stupid,
they're deliberately misunderstanding
or twisting our words or even manipulating us.
Now, we've talked about our belief
that we're good at communicating, we're good at talking.
In fact, we seem to be hardwired to think of ourselves
as better than average in this and other aspects of our lives.
But maybe we wonder whether we're really as effective
in our talk as we might be.
And given our sense of selves as very good communicators,
we handle our uncertainty about effectiveness this way,
by leaning on our culturally learned view of talk
as a word-centered back-and-forth game,
and everybody should understand, right?
It's just plain simple English.
That's what we tell ourselves.
So in the end, we're still going to believe
that we're very good communicators.
The problem is we want to be effective,
because that's how we'll get what we want out of every conversation.
But we also want to maintain a good relationship
with the other person, and there's the trick.
If we get what we want,
but we leave a spouse feeling overwhelmed or bullied,
if we get what we want,
but we leave an employee feeling unappreciated or humiliated,
then we haven't gotten what we could have gotten.
Effective communication, the point and purpose of this course,
consists in getting at least some of what you want,
even if it's only to be heard,
and keeping the relationship intact.
In the process of getting what we want,
we also have to manage our part of the talk.
So the other person also gets what they want,
and we both leave the moment feeling positive about the process.
So here is the first ethical implication of effective communication.
Both of us have to have gotten what we wanted.
It's interpersonal.
It isn't a tennis game with one lobbing it over the net
and waiting for the other to lob it back in competition.
It's more like a dance,
where at its best two people facilitate
a cooperative and productive exchange.
Now, if that seems awfully complicated
and perhaps a lot to hope for,
the answer is, it is.
If it weren't, this course would have been a lot shorter.
As lecture two showed,
from the theory point of view,
interpersonal communication is complicated.
It's not a game of word exchange.
It's a multi-level flow of gestures,
nonverbal gestures,
words that communicate
not only about how each speaker is feeling,
but also about their relationship to each other.
This happens while speakers
are actually talking about something else, a topic.
And this multi-layered flow can't be avoided.
Sorry, folks. It's never simple.
Meanings of our words can't be assumed to be obvious,
because they're affected by our experience and their experience.
And the flow of emotions between us
in our nonverbal communication in the moment
and by the context of the conversation,
where and when it's happening.
So we are confronted with the first of the contradictions
we live out as communicators.
The belief that the communication process is simple
when it's actually complex.
The belief that meaning is in words, it's not.
If meaning was in words,
then I would understand absolutely and exactly
what my friend, employer, employee,
or wife was saying to me all the time,
but I don't.
Because meaning is not in words, meaning is in people.
People come from families,
and families are themselves cultures
and participate in larger cultures.
In our lecture on culture,
we discussed how early in our lives
we learned the basic meanings
that our own culture has for many words and gestures
and the nature or the norms of normal conversation
and the meaning of many different situations.
This is very, very deep learning.
After hours of practice,
we can engage and talk without much conscious thought.
We talk naturally.
I mean, that's the idea, right?
Most of the time, it's a very good thing.
It's efficient.
We become natural talkers with practice.
In most situations, our mind knows how to respond without hesitation.
In fact, in the first five years of life,
children put many more practice hours
into becoming virtuosos of normal behavior
than musical or sports virtuosos
put into becoming leaders in their fields.
And like adult virtuosos,
the child spends a good deal of its time
observing and inwardly imitating,
not just outwardly performing.
But everybody in the society shares our cultural learning
and therefore shares many of the patterns of defining people,
places, things and situations.
So when we converse naturally in most situations,
we discover the meanings of others' words instantly
without much effort.
See? It is easy.
That's all complex.
And where does all this early learning go
so that we can perform fluidly in everyday talk
the way professional athletes perform their sport?
Well, as outlined in lecture four,
it goes into a part of our mind
called the cognitive unconscious,
which in turn guides us through most talk situations
in semi-automatic mode without thinking,
with little or no hesitation for words
or understanding typical phrases
or pausing to give meanings to gestures.
It just seems to happen.
In fact, we are so good at this
that we can instantly distinguish between those gestures
that are related to the talk
and those that are accidental or incidental.
And where is our conscious mind in all this?
Well, it's working on whatever is occupying our attention
in the moment.
So the conscious mind leans on our natural unconscious mind
to do a lot of its work
so that it can focus on new information.
We grow so accustomed to our closest partners, for instance,
that we frequently process what they're saying automatically
in the cognitive unconscious
so that we see in patterns learned in the past,
think in inferences and judgment
without getting any new data,
and most of the time let these processes be driven
by our feeling reactions.
So the first contradiction
in the human experience of communication
is that it is far from simple.
And this is the second contradiction
in the human experience of communication.
Our conscious mind thinks it's involved
in the process of communicating
but most of the time it's not.
It gives over most of the moment-to-moment decision-making
to our non-conscious mind
and it can often get us into some very difficult
communication situations.
Much of the time when we think we're paying attention
to the other in front of us, we aren't.
We're only paying attention to what we think
we already know about them,
to our judgments and beliefs about them.
We don't even notice, we aren't even conscious,
that we aren't getting any good information,
clear, honest and relevant,
and any new information about who they actually are
in this situation.
This is a trick of our mindlessness,
acting as if we are in this moment
but only reacting to patterns, beliefs and behaviors
that made sense in the past,
but not right here and right now.
To be fully aware of the present moment
and the person in it,
we would have to be acting out a fully conscious mind,
engaged with the details of the moment,
noticing new things and being sensitive
to changes in context.
In other words, in most of our conversations
we would have to be engaged the way we were
the first time we met the other,
using connect-talk to arouse their interest in us,
paying close attention to them
and their reactions to our words and gestures
and learning about them as they respond to what we say.
Imagine that.
Imagine talking to your wife,
your child, your employee
as if this was your first date,
your first day at work,
the first time you met.
Imagine talking like that
each and every time you have a conversation with them.
It sounds like an awful lot of work.
So instead, once we think we know them,
we recycle what we already know.
Thinking back to our four box window model of the self
in lecture nine, we skim the surface
of two aspects of the self.
Box one and box three.
And combine some of the information
from the open self box that everybody knows about them
with some patterns from their blind self,
things that we think we know about them,
but we haven't told them yet.
It is an awful lot of work.
We don't always have time to do this,
but just imagine if we did.
Ethical communication.
Every time you talk to someone,
listen as carefully as if you were meeting them
for the first time.
So here we are.
People are complex.
Communicating with them is a complex process,
which we do automatically
without much conscious thought.
Well, that's fine for pick up the milk on your way home
or please water the garden,
or did you call the gas company?
But what about more serious and difficult matters?
You haven't been pulling your weight around this department.
Other employees are twice as productive.
Or I'm doing all the housework
and taking primary care of the kids.
You're never home.
Or I don't understand what you want me to get
for you from this report.
Or what do you mean I'm not cutting it here?
As we've seen, automatic semi-conscious talk
in those situations is anything but effective.
And that's because in these difficult, complicated situations
where someone is unsatisfied,
what the cognitive unconscious will do time and again
is to perceive the situation as a threat to the self,
to our self-esteem,
and go into hyper-overdrive
to at all costs protect the self.
Now the self is a kind of container of our story,
our narrative of existence
that is built up the way boats used to be built.
Long, narrow boards of experience
bent around and firmly affixed to the ribs
of our inheritance, of temperament,
and our very, very early learning.
The sides of the boat get a little higher every day
as new pieces get added and strengthened by our experiences.
The idea is to keep us high and dry and safe,
to float on the surface of life,
not to go too deeply, not to overturn or spring leaks
in our certainty about the self,
about our self and our world,
particularly when we're being tossed about
on the rapids that always appear in the river of life.
And mostly the ribs of our self-boat
are strong enough to support the sides against the rocks
and shallows and turbulent water.
We all have to traverse,
but sometimes the shaping and holding power of these ribs,
our self-esteem,
is weakened to the point where they flex inward,
sometimes threatened to crack when they hit rough water,
or when we just fear they might.
We can't see the bottom of our boat.
It's too dark down there,
and many of the sideboards closest to the keel
actually sit below the water.
We all have an unknown side below the water,
below our consciousness.
We also have a blind side to our self
that others can see and we don't,
mostly because it's filled with automatic habits
for protecting our sense of self
from the most obvious tribulations on the river.
These are the defense mechanisms we described in Lecture 10.
We use our defense mechanisms
the way we might use caulk to repair any nick and dent
in our boat caused by the rigors of life.
That is caused by others' indirect criticisms of our talk
and behavior, or of us,
or to plug any leaks in our sense of reality
when we happen to get a direct hit.
We are driven by our feelings
to speak defensively in difficult, challenging situations
and to keep our self-boat upright in rough water,
automatically steering around the whirlpools of reality.
Now, when confronted by unavoidable rough water,
situations where people behave in ways that we don't expect
or that they directly disagree with our view or our actions
and that appear to threaten our sense of self,
we automatically choose a form of talk, control talk
that is focused on getting them to change
and that they won't make them take the blame
for the negative emotions we happen to be feeling.
We are trying to calm the waters for ourselves
by using persuasive influence or emotional threat
to impose our ideas, our rightness, on the other.
The final and possibly the cruelest contradiction
we have to deal with as communicators
is that just about the time in life
we develop a clear sense of our self
as a distinct human being
and expect others to accept and respect that,
we are incapable of the mental processes
and communication skills
to deny others that same respect and acceptance.
By the time we have a strong sense of self,
we have an equally strong set of skills
honed to defend that self.
And we do this while we pretend
that we are conscious and clear about who we are,
what's going on, and what's going to happen next.
But you know, we're not.
We're blinded by the cognitive unconscious's perception of threat.
It's quick, it's automatic,
and it's hard as anything to control.
Okay, so what should we do here?
Three things.
First, to be more effective as communicators
and as human beings, we need to make choices
based on more realistic assessments
of what's going on around us and inside of us.
Second, we need to stop thinking of communication as simple,
slow down our mental processes,
and know how to bring the problem-solving power
of the conscious mind to the forefront.
And finally, we need to recognize
that our self-boat mostly runs on autopilot
so that we can consciously take over
and steer it when things get complicated.
We need to rise above our contradictory belief
that we are consciously focused on the present
when we're not,
and that we are dealing directly with the other
when, in fact, we are only dealing with our inferences
and our judgments about them.
In the second half of the course,
we discuss ways to interrupt the speed of our emotional reactions,
to reduce the driving power of our feelings
on our thinking in 3D situations
where the differences, disagreements, and disorder appear,
and to truly bring our conscious mind into the here and now.
Doing so makes it possible to react to ourselves
and the situation we're facing in a much more realistic way,
as if it were a problem to be solved
rather than a terror to be hidden from.
We discussed using our breath to create a moment or two
of intercom in our reactive chatter
so we could actually hear what we have chosen to say
rather than what the over-defense of automatic response in us
would have us say.
Certainly calming our feelings and thinking more clearly,
not about ourselves, but about the importance of the relationship
can help us to manage more effectively in difficult situations.
But it's also more than a practical choice
to solve a communication problem.
It's essentially an ethical choice about leading a better life.
When we calm ourselves, we see and think more clearly.
And when we do, we look across the divide between us
and become truly mindful of what's right there in front of us.
The other.
We can feel a sense of human connection,
a sense of acceptance and compassion.
Now, acceptance doesn't mean agreement with what is.
It means at this moment, simply recognizing that what is, is.
And that the person you're talking to is who they are,
rather than wishing, wanting or demanding that this person be something
or be someone else.
It also means rejecting the critical judgment with which control talk begins
and sidestepping our self-defense of posture
in difficult situations I need to be and feel right has got to go.
As a result, accepting the present reality pulls us out of judgment,
pulls us down the inference that are towards the data in this situation
and reduces the heart emotions inside of us.
This allows us a chance to breathe deeply for a moment,
let go of feelings of threat to ourselves
and discover our freedom to choose another way to look at the situation.
Appreciatively.
When we shift to the appreciative mindset,
we are committed to fully understanding what's going on in the here and now.
What's going on for both parties in the exchange,
not just ourselves, before acting.
To valuing and honoring the other even in this moment of separation
and acting what Gandhi called our natural state of compassion.
That is our connection to another simply as a human being.
And to improving the situation for everyone involved
to be truly effective for us and for them
by replacing judge metal talk driven by fear, anger and shame
with words and gestures signifying acceptance and respect
and a complete commitment to getting good information,
clear, honest and relevant about what's going on between us
and inside of us by using dialogue talk.
Using appreciative dialogue in a difficult situation
positively changes the way we are in the world
and the way the world is in us.
We commit to be open, equal and non-judgmental in our talk
so as not to impose our views on ourselves on the other.
Refusing to invade their life and mind space in the name of defending ourselves.
We will honor and value their existence
by only talking about what we see, hear and feel,
not about what they ought to see, hear and feel.
We commit to staying in and with this present moment
despite the memories of their past words or actions
or our attributions of their motives,
the ones that are trying to overwhelm our consciousness in this moment.
We'll make no assumptions or prejudgements about them or their story.
So we commit to discovering them and their story by asking questions
and listening actively to fully understand.
This means that we will give them our undivided attention
and this is a gift of connection in the midst of separation.
We will listen with empathy by looking beyond the other's behavior
to what actually might be driving it.
In choosing dialogue over control talk,
we will choose only to describe our view of the situation
and to share our understandings, not to impose them on the other.
We'll start our descriptive sentences with I, not you.
We will openly acknowledge in clear terms
what we need and want from this situation
to ask for a change rather than demand it.
We also accept the fact that reality, this moment,
is co-constructed with the other.
So if the situation is to be resolved,
it will require change on both of our parts.
We will watch for and genuinely support any behavior in the other
that seems to move us towards a state of peaceful agreement.
We will go to the balcony, a place of quiet overall perspective
and find the values that will give us the reason to be patient
and persistent in our use of dialogue
and to give us the courage to carry on
and stay on the path of our appreciative dialogue
even if the other tries to use control talk on us.
All of these choices are ways of seeking fuller understanding
before deciding what needs to be changed
and to make changes without doing physical or psychological violence
or harm to the other.
In effect, appreciative dialogue is more than a conversational choice.
It's a life choice for nonviolence in difficult conversations.
Now, everything we said at the beginning of this lecture is still true.
Talking is still very complex
and talking consciously requires focus and effort.
Choosing appreciative dialogue is the harder choice,
the more difficult path to follow,
the way that requires our full attention and compassionate courage.
It means choosing to allow the other's negative emotions
to simply go by and not let them rock that boat of yours,
that very precious self you've built and that you rely on.
It means making a deliberate choice to calm your own feeling reactions
and to not do the one thing that human minds do more quickly than anything else,
judge the other and blame them.
We actually judge faster than we think.
It's part of the perception process.
We perceive patterns before we think about them.
In fact, in the experiments done on the cognitive unconscious,
Zion showed us that perception and preference, judgment of good and bad,
is automatic and virtually instantaneous.
And if you remember, these experiments were judgments about nonsense syllables.
You choose to suspend these judgments
and your assumptions for even a few minutes is to open yourself up to the world.
Our beliefs, judgments, and assumptions act as our shield against reality.
The stuff that is happening to us right now.
To suspend these is to enter into what Susan Scott calls a fierce conversation,
one in which we come out from behind ourselves into the conversation in the moment
and make it real.
It means that we take the risk of being known for who we are,
seen for what we are, and being changed in the process.
Now, that last one is a real threat.
But if we take the risk of dropping our judgment and our blame,
we will also discover understanding and create the possibility of positive change in the situation.
What I mean is captured, I think, in this parable from the Buddhist philosopher,
Thich Nhat Hanh, called no blame, just understanding.
When you plant lettuce, if it does not grow well, you don't blame the lettuce.
You look for reasons it is not doing well.
It may need fertilizer, or more water, or less sun, but you never blame the lettuce.
Yet if we have problems with our friends or our family, we blame the other person.
But if we know how to take care of them, they will grow well, like the lettuce.
Blaming has no positive effect at all, nor does trying to persuade using reason and arguments.
That is my experience.
No blame, no reasoning, no argument, just understanding.
If you understand, and you show that you understand, you can love, and the situation will change.
Appreciative dialogue represents a high level of ethical commitment to being real, seeking understanding,
and in the final outcome doing good for others in difficult situations.
Doing good for others is always good for us.
It demonstrates our commitment to open ourselves to genuine relationships with others.
Recognizing three of the key characteristics that distinguish us as human beings, according to philosopher Martin Buber.
Humans are distinctive creatures because we are unique.
Buber argued that we are not interchangeable parts of someone else's social life.
From our genetic inheritance right up through our personal life experiences, we are distinctive, one-of-a-kind creatures.
And impersonal relationships deny that about us.
And no matter what others think they know about us, they can't fully describe the person we are.
There is always something left out, our spirit or our soul.
We are also responsive creatures. Only objects can react.
As human beings, we respond.
Biological programming in animals and digital programming in machines can make them react to external stimuli,
but only human beings can choose what to do or not to do next.
And we don't have simple reactions to stimuli.
We have full-blown bodily responses, again shaped by our biochemical inheritance and our distinct cultural learning.
So our responses are not completely predictable.
And finally, as human beings, we're reflective.
Being reflective means not only that we are aware of what's around us,
but also that we can be aware of our awareness.
No matter how much of ourselves we can examine and describe,
the essential life-giving part of ourselves will always escape our examination.
The reflective part, the part of us that's actually doing the examination.
Only human beings are aware that we do all of these things.
So choosing appreciative dialogue means recognizing the other's uniqueness
and refusing to put them into some schematic or stereotypical category we learned long before this moment.
It's recognizing that we cannot fully predict what they will do or say,
and so therefore we have to be open to what comes.
It's recognizing that by not pushing them to defend themselves,
we may be encouraging their inherent need to reflect for a moment on what's going to happen next.
Choosing appreciative dialogue is our way of supporting their humanity and our own in a difficult moment.
But these are difficult choices, and even if we start down the road to using dialogue,
when we speak, we may sound awkward, strained, and uncomfortable, and we may fail.
You may, and of course that's how you learn to do better the next time.
Marsha McLuhan, when analyzing how society responds to change, said,
we look at the present through a rear view mirror.
We march backwards into the future.
And in the process of being his usual, clever, insightful, but sardonic self, he uttered a profound truth.
I believe that the only way human beings learn to do the unnatural things in life
is in the rear view mirror of their own remembered experiences.
And by trying something new in the circumstances where you have a chance of achieving some kind of win for yourself
and the other, you don't have to fight the big fight on the first day.
Here's a little guidance that I've always used, a prayer by Reinhold Niebuhr
at early 20th century theologian that you know everybody knows this prayer.
Grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change, the courage to change the things I can,
and the wisdom to know the difference.
However, you may not know this variation on the prayer.
The prayer for wisdom to start the process of effective ethical communication.
This variation on the original has an anonymous author.
Grant me the serenity to accept the ones I cannot change, the courage to change the one I can,
and the wisdom to know it's me.
The changes you want start with you.
And remember, our experience always begins in failure.
So, pick your moment to practice dialogue and learn from your experience
and remember the changes you want to make the next time.
And try again.
Like all teachers, I believe in the power of every person to remember.
To learn from that memory and to choose more wisely the next time, please try.
And thank you very much for your time and attention.
We hope you have enjoyed these lectures from The Great Courses.
Our courses are now available to order online.
Visit our website at thegreatcourses.com
or call our customer care representatives at 1-800-832-2412.
That's 1-800-832-2412.
Thank you very much.
