or it may be employed to attack someone's character or to eulogize him.
Only then you will not be doing what the political speaker as such has to do.
If any statement you make is hard to believe, you must guarantee its truth
and it runs off on explanation and then furnish it with such particulars as will be expected.
Thus, Carquinas, a tragic poet of the 5th century,
and Joe Castor in his edifices keeps guaranteeing the truth of her answers
to the inquiries of the man who is seeking her son, and so is Hymon in Sophocles.
The duty of the arguments is to attempt demonstrative proofs.
These proofs must be read directly upon the question in dispute, which must fall under one of four heads.
One, if you maintain that the act was not committed, your main task in court is to prove this.
Two, if you maintain that the act did no harm, prove this.
If you maintain that, three, the act was less than it alleged, or four, justified, prove these facts,
just as you would prove the act not to have been committed if you were maintaining that.
It should be noted that only where the question in dispute falls under the first of these heads
can it be true that one of the two parties is necessarily a rogue.
Here, ignorance cannot be pleaded, as it might if the dispute were whether the act was justified or not.
This argument must therefore be used in this case only, not in the others.
In ceremonial speeches, you will develop your case mainly by arguing that what has been done is, for example, noble and useful.
The facts themselves have to be taken on trust.
Proof of them is only submitted on those rare occasions when they are not easily credible
or when they have been set down to someone else.
In political speeches, you may maintain that a proposal is impracticable or that, though practicable, it is unjust
or will do no good or is not so important as its proposal thinks.
Note any falsehoods about irrelevant matters.
They will look like proof that these other statements also are false.
Argument by example is highly suitable for political oratory.
Argument by entomium better suits forensic.
Political oratory deals with future events, of which you can do no more than co-past events as examples.
Forensic oratory deals with what is or is not now true,
which can better be demonstrated because not contingent.
There is no contingency in what has now already happened.
Do not use a continuous succession of entomiums.
Interest them with other matter or they will spoil one another's effect.
There are limits to their number.
Friend, you have spoken as much as a sensible man would have spoken.
As much, says Homer, not as well.
Now, should you try to make entomiums on every point, if you do, you will be acting just like some students of philosophy
whose conclusions are more familiar and believable than the premises from which they draw them.
And avoid the entomium form when you are trying to rouse feeling,
for it will either kill the feeling or will itself fall flat.
All simultaneous motions tend to cancel each other either completely or partially,
nor should you go after the entomium form in a passage where you are depicting character.
The process of demonstrations can express neither moral character nor moral purpose.
Maxim's should be employed in the arguments and in the narration too, since they do express character.
I have given them this, though I am quite aware that one should trust no man,
or if you are appealing to the emotions.
I do not regret it, though I have been wronged.
If he has the profit on his side, I have justice on mine.
Political oratory is a more difficult task than forensic and naturally so since it deals with the future,
whereas the Peter deals with the past, which as Epimenides of Crete said, even the diviners already know.
Epimenides was a saint like figure known for a variety of religious practices.
Epimenides did not practice divination about the future, only about the obscurity of the past.
Besides, in forensic oratory you have a basis in the law, and once you have a starting point,
you can prove anything with comparative ease.
Then again, political oratory affords few chances for those leisurely digressions in which you may attack your adversary,
talk about yourself, or work on your hearer's emotions.
Fewer chances indeed than any other affords, unless your set purpose is to divert your hearer's attention.
Accordingly, if you find yourself in difficulties, follow the lead of the Athenian speakers and that of Isocrates,
who makes regular attacks upon people in the course of a political speech.
For example, upon the lack of dimonians and the panachylicos, and upon cares in the speech about the allies.
In ceremonial oratory, intersperse your speech with bits of episodic eulogy, like Isocrates,
who is always bringing someone forward for this purpose.
Isocrates has episodic passages on Precious, on Paris, on Pythagoras, and the Egyptian priests, on the poets, and on Agamemnon.
And this is what Gorgias meant by saying that he always found something to talk about.
For if he speaks of Achilles, he praises Peleus, then Iacus, then Zeus.
And in like manner, the virtue of valor, describing its good results, and saying what it is like.
Now, if you have proofs to bring forward, bring them forward, and your moral discourse as well.
If you have no enthamemes, then fall back upon moral discourse.
After all, it is more fitting for a good man to display himself as an honest teller than as a subtle reasoner.
Refutative enthamemes are more popular than demonstrative ones. Their logical cogency is more striking.
The fact about two opposites always stand out clearly when the two are put side by side.
The reply to the opponent is not a separate division of the speech.
It is part of the arguments to break down the opponent's case, whether by objection or by counter-syllagism.
Both in political speaking and when pleading in court.
If you are the first speaker, you should put your own arguments forward first and then meet the arguments on the other side
by refusing them and pulling them to pieces beforehand.
If, however, the case for the other contains a great variety of arguments, begin with these,
like Calistratus in the Messinian Assembly, when he demolished the arguments likely to be used against him before giving his own.
Calistratus was a distinguished Athenian artisan politician. He was sent on an embassy into the Peloponnesus in 362 BC.
If you speak later, you must first, by means of refutation and counter-syllagism, attend some answer to your opponent's speech,
especially if his arguments have been well received.
For just as our minds refuse a favorable reception to a person against whom they are prejudiced,
so they refuse it to a speech when they have been favorably impressed by the speech on the other side,
you should therefore make room in the minds of the audience for your coming speech,
and this will be done by getting your opponent's speech out of the way.
So, attack that first, either the whole of it, or the most important, successful or vulnerable points in it,
and thus inspire confidence in what you have to say yourself.
First champion will I be of goddesses never I wean would hear her,
where the speaker has attacked the silliest argument first, so much for the arguments.
With regard to the element of moral character, there are assertions which, if made about yourself,
may excite dislike, appear tedious, or expose you to the risk of contradiction,
and other things which you cannot say about your opponent without seeming abusive or ill-bred.
Put such remarks, therefore, into the minds of some third person.
This is what Isocrates does in the Philippus and in the Antedotus, an archilochus in his Tatars.
The latter represents the father himself as attacking his daughter in the lampoon,
think not impossible at all, nor swear that it shall not before,
and puts into the mouth of Charon, the carpenter, the lampoon which begins,
not for the wealth of geegus.
So, too, Socrates makes Hymon appeal to his father on behalf of Antigone,
as if it were others who were speaking.
Again, sometimes you should restate your entomines in the form of maxims.
For example, wise men will come to terms in the hour of success, for they will gain most if they do.
Express as an entomine, this would run, if we ought to come to terms,
when doing so will enable us to gain the greatest advantage, then we ought to come to terms in the hour of success.
Next, add to interrogation.
The best moment to employ this is when your opponent has so answered one question
that the putting of just one more lands him in absurdity.
Thus, Pericles questions Lampon about the way of celebrating the rights of the Saviour goddess.
Lampon declares that no uninitiated person could be told of them.
Pericles then asks, Do you know them yourself?
Yes, answered Lampon.
Why? said Pericles.
How can that be when you are uninitiated?
Another good moment is when one premise of an argument is obviously true,
and you can see that your opponent must say yes if you ask him whether the other is true.
Having first got this answer about the other, do not go on to ask him about the obviously true one,
but just state the conclusion yourself.
Thus, when Miletus denied that Socrates believed in the existence of gods,
but admitted that he talked about a supernatural power,
Socrates proceeded to ask whether supernatural beings were not either children of the gods or in some way divine.
But Miletus then, replies Socrates,
is that anyone who believed in the existence of children of the gods and yet not in the existence of the gods themselves?
Another good occasion is when you expect to show that your opponent is contradicting either his own words or what everyone believes.
A fourth is when it is impossible for him to meet your question except by an evasive answer.
If he answers true and yet not true or partly true and partly not true or true in one sense but not in another,
the audience thinks he is in difficulties and applauds his discomfort.
In other cases, do not attempt interrogation.
For if your opponent gets in an objection, you are felt to have been worsted.
You cannot ask a series of questions going to the incapacity of the audience to follow them.
And for this reason, you shall also make your enthronements as compact as possible.
In replying, you must meet ambiguous questions by drawing reasonable distinctions, not by a curt answer.
In meeting questions that seem to involve you in a contradiction,
offer the explanation at the outset of your answer before your opponent asks the next question or draws his conclusion.
For it is not difficult to see the drift of his argument in advance.
This point, however, as well as the various means of refutation may be regarded as known to us from the topics.
When your opponent, in drawing his conclusion, puts it in the form of a question, you must justify your answer.
Thus, when Sophocles was asked by Paisander whether he had, like the other members of the Board of Safety,
and voted for setting up the 400, he said, yes.
Why? Did you not think it wicked? Yes.
So you committed this wickedness. Yes, said Sophocles, for there was nothing better to do.
This Sophocles is a statesman and orator.
Again, the lack of dimonium, when he was being examined on his conduct as ephor,
was asked whether he thought that the other ephors had been justly put to death.
Yes, he said, well then, artis opponent, did not you propose the same measures as they? Yes.
Well then, would not you too be justly put to death? Not at all, said he.
They were bribed to do it, and I did it from conviction.
Hence, you should not ask any further questions after drawing your conclusion,
nor put the conclusion itself in the form of a further question, unless there is a large balance of truth on your side.
As to jest, these are supposed to be some servicing controversy.
Gorgias said that you should kill your opponent's earnestness with jesting, and they're jesting with earnestness, in which he was right.
Jests have been classified in the poetics. Some are becoming to a gentleman, others not.
See that you choose such as become you.
Are any better visits a gentleman than buffoonery, the ironical man jokes to amuse himself, the buffoon to amuse other people?
The epilogue has four parts. You must, one, make the audience well-disposed towards yourself and ill-disposed towards your opponent.
Two, magnify or minimize the leading facts. Three, excite the required state of emotion in your heroes, and four, refresh their memories.
One, having shown your own truthfulness and the untruthfulness of your opponent, the natural thing is to commend yourself, censor him, and hammer in your points.
You must aim at one of two objects. You must make yourself out a good man and him a bad one, either in yourselves or in relation to your heroes.
How this is to be managed, by what lines of argument you are to represent people as good or bad, this has been already explained.
Two, the facts having been proved, the natural thing to do next is to magnify or minimize their importance.
The facts must be admitted before you can discuss how important they are, just as the body cannot grow except from something already present.
The proper lines of argument to be used for this purpose of amplification and depreciation have already been set forth.
Three, next, when the facts and their importance are clearly understood, you must excite your heroes' emotions.
These emotions are pity, indignation, anger, hatred, envy, emulation, pugnacity.
The lines of argument to be used for these purposes also have been previously mentioned.
Four, finally you have to review what you have already said.
Here you may properly do what some wrongly recommend doing in the introduction.
Repeat your points frequently so as to make them easily understood.
What you should do in your introduction is to state your subject in order that the point to be judged may be quite plain.
In the epilogue you should summarize the arguments by which your case has been proved.
The first step in this reviewing process is to observe that you have done what you undertook to do.
You must then state what you have said and why you have said it.
Your method may be a comparison of your own case with that of your opponent,
and you may compare either the ways you have both handled the same point or make your comparison less direct.
My opponent said so and so on this point.
I said so and so, and this is why I said it.
Or with modest irony, for example, he certainly said so and so, but I said so and so.
Or how vain he would have been if he had proved all this instead of that.
Or put it in the form of a question.
What has not been proved by me?
Or what has my opponent proved?
You may proceed then either in this way by setting point against point,
or by following the natural order of the arguments as spoken,
first giving your own and then separately if you wish those of your opponent.
For the conclusion, the disconnected style of language is appropriate
and will mark the difference between the oration and the peroration.
I have done, you have heard me.
The facts are before you.
I ask for your judgment.
The extant logical writings of Aristotle are six treatises traditionally grouped under one name, the organon.
The categories, treats of simple terms and their peculiarities differentiating
ten most universal kinds or categories of terms, as well as the simple relations,
such as opposition, priority, simultaneity, which obtain between pairs of uncombined terms.
On interpretation, treats of propositions,
in which one term is asserted or denied of another and which therefore may be true or false,
as well as the simple relations of immediate inference which obtain between pairs of propositions.
The prior analytics, treats of inferences and proofs or oscilligisms, which are combinations of three terms.
Since all perfect inference may be reduced to a syllogym or a series of syllogisms,
further logical differentiation of claims of proofs is to be found in the premises on which they're based.
The posterior analytics treats of demonstration or scientific proof,
which is reasoning based on true and primary premises,
and that is premises which state the causes of the phenomena to be explained.
The topics, treats of dialectical reasoning, which is based on opinions generally accepted,
rather than on scientific premises, which are believed on the strengths not of something else but of themselves.
On statistical refutations, finally, treats of fallacious arguments,
which start from opinions that seem to be accepted generally, but are not really,
or which seem to reason from opinions that are or seem to be accepted generally.
Aristotle's discussion of scientific knowledge in the posterior analytics is the source of many of the distinctions
and of most of the technical terms used in stating the distinctions,
that have been important in the theories of scientific method developed by later logicians.
Yet, his formulation of the problems of scientific proof, although it involves the differentiation of induction and deduction,
does not turn on the simple opposition of the inductive discovery of principles and their deductive use in demonstration.
The problems of scientific proof, as he treated them, centre about two processes, instruction and inquiry.
All instruction by way of argument proceeds from pre-existent knowledge, whether the argument be deductive or inductive,
and the problems of scientific proof, so viewed, are concerned with the principles of the sciences and the conditions of inference from the principles.
The analysis of principles and proofs in this approach turns on the terms in which arguments are stated,
and Aristotle undertook to prove that each science had first principles proper to it,
and that an infinite regress of premises is impossible.
Therefore, predication must terminate in both the upward and the downward direction.
That is, in ascent to generality and descent to particularity,
and there must be a finite number of steps between the most universal and the most particular.
Inquiry, on the other hand, is into facts and causes, and the problems of scientific proof, so viewed,
are concerned with the relation between definition and proof.
The analysis of principles and proofs in this approach turns on the relation of knowledge to facts,
and Aristotle undertook to differentiate kinds of definition, some indemonstrable, some susceptible of demonstration,
and to prove that causes are the middle terms in scientific demonstration.
Aristotle's conception of scientific method depends, thus, on analysis of both the structure of knowledge
and the connection of things.
He would find of saying that we have scientific knowledge of something demonstrable when we possess a demonstration of it,
and he was no less fond of repeating that we have scientific knowledge when we know the cause.
In both formulations, the problem of scientific proof centres on the middle term,
both in the sense of the term which justifies the conclusion of a proof,
and in the sense of the cause which accounts for the connections in a situation.
The problem of finding a middle term depends on the solution in the one formulation,
as instruction, on the quick wit requisite for the discernment of middle terms,
and in the other, as inquiry on that inductive process by which universal and primary premises are derived from sense perception and experience.
The primary premises of scientific demonstration, however, are not themselves subject to scientific proof,
although they may be tested in indirect dialectical examination.
In light manner, the resolution of difficulties and the discovery of principles are dialectical problems
so long as they turn on the establishment and defence of propositions,
and they become scientific only when they are related to the statement of a basic cause.
Although Aristotle first formulated the distinctions and technical terms
in which much of the later discussion of scientific method was conducted,
his own distinctions have been used in criticism of his logic.
He has seen to writers who stress the development of inductive logic
to have given inadequate development to the methods of interpreting the facts of observation and experimentation.
While his treatment of principles and inference has seen to symbolic logicians
who stress the methods of mathematics,
too little concerned with the forms of validation and proof.
Yet, many of the problems which became central to these later discussions of scientific method are found in other contexts,
treated as metaphysics or dialectic or sophistic rather than scientific method,
as is appropriate in Aristotle's conception of the sciences.
Thus, the dialectical inquiry into first principles is found in book gamma of the metaphysics
and the formulation of the devices by which possible solutions to problems may be assembled
and tests of possible positions may be constructed are detailed in the topics.
Analytica posteriora, posterior analytics, translated by G. R. G. Muir, book one.
All instruction given or received by way of argument proceeds from pre-existent knowledge.
This becomes evident upon a survey of all the species of such instruction.
The mathematical sciences and all other speculative disciplines are acquired in this way,
and so are the two forms of dialectical reasoning, syllogistic and inductive.
For each of these latter makes use of old knowledge to impart new,
the syllogism assuming an audience that accepts its premises,
induction exhibiting the universal as implicit in the clearly known particular.
Again, the persuasion exerted by rhetorical arguments is in principle the same
since they use either example, a kind of induction,
or epimeme, a form of syllogism.
The pre-existent knowledge required is of two kinds.
In some cases, admission of the fact must be assumed.
In others, comprehension of the meaning of the term used and sometimes both assumptions are essential.
Thus, we assume that every predicate can be either truly affirmed or truly denied of any subject,
and that triangle means so-and-so.
As regards unit, we have to make the double assumption of the meaning of the word and the existence of the thing.
The reason is that these several objects are not equally obvious to us.
Recognition of a truth may in some cases contain as factors both previous knowledge
and also knowledge acquired simultaneously with that recognition.
Knowledge, this latter, of the particulars actually falling under the universal
and therein already virtually known.
For example, the student knew beforehand that the angles of every triangle are equal to right angles,
but it was only at the actual moment at which he was being led on to recognize this as true in the instance before him
that he came to know this figure inscribed in the semicircle to be a triangle.
For some things, with the singular's finally reached which are not predictable of anything else's subject,
I only learned in this way. That is, there is here no recognition through a middle of a minor term as subject to a major.
Before he was led on to recognition or before he actually drew a conclusion,
we should perhaps say that in a manner he knew, in a manner not.
If he did not, in an unqualified sense of the term, know the existence of this triangle,
how could he know without qualification that its angles were equal to right angles?
No, clearly he knows not without qualification, but only in the sense that he knows universally.
If this distinction is not drawn, we are faced with the dilemma in the mean-o.
Either a man will learn nothing or what he already knows,
but we cannot accept the solution which some people offer.
A man is asked, do you or do you not know that every pair is even?
He says he does know it.
The questioner then produces a particular pair of the existence,
and so our fortiori of the evenness over which he was unaware.
The solution which some people offer is to assert that they do not know that every pair is even,
but only that everything which they know to be a pair is even.
Yet what they know to be even is that of which they have demonstrated evenness,
that is what they made the subject of their premise, this,
not merely every triangle or number which they know to be such,
but any and every number or triangle without reservation.
For no premise is ever couched in the form every number which you know to be such,
or every rectilinear figure which you know to be such.
The predicate is always construed as applicable to any and every instance of the thing.
On the other hand, I imagine there's nothing to prevent a man in one sense knowing what he is learning,
in another not knowing it.
The strange thing would be not if in some sense he knew what he was learning,
but if he were to know it in that precise sense and manner in which he was learning it.
Chapter 2.
We suppose ourselves to possess unqualified scientific knowledge of a thing,
as opposed to knowing it in the accidental way in which the Sophist knows,
when we think that we know the cause on which the fact depends,
as the cause of that fact and of no other,
and further that the fact could not be other than it is.
Now, that scientific knowing is something of this sort is evident,
witness both those who falsely claim it and those who actually possess it,
since the former merely imagined themselves to be while the latter are also actually in the condition described.
Consequently, the proper object of unqualified scientific knowledge is something which cannot be other than it is.
There may be another manner of knowing as well.
That will be discussed later.
What I now assert is that as all events, we do know by demonstration.
By demonstration, I mean a syllogism, productive of scientific knowledge,
a syllogism, that is, the grasp of which is a o ipso such knowledge.
Assuming then that my thesis as to the nature of scientific knowing is correct,
the premises of demonstrated knowledge must be true, primary, immediate,
better known than and prior to the conclusion,
which is further related to them as effected to cause.
Unless these conditions are satisfied, the basic truth will not be appropriate to the conclusion.
Syllogism, there may indeed be without these conditions,
but such syllogism not being productive of scientific knowledge will not be demonstration.
The premises must be true, for that which is non-existent cannot be known.
We cannot know, for example, that the diagonal of a square is commensurate with its side.
The premises must be primary and indemonstrable, otherwise they will require demonstration in order to be known,
since to have knowledge, if it be not accidental knowledge, of things which are demonstrable
means precisely to have a demonstration of them.
The premises must be the causes of the conclusion, better known than it and prior to it.
Its causes, since we possess scientific knowledge of a thing only when we know its cause,
prior in order to be causes, antecedently known, this antecedent knowledge being
not our mere understanding of the meaning, but knowledge of the fact as well.
Now, prior and better known are ambiguous terms,
for there is a difference between what is prior and better known in the order of being
and what is prior and better known to man.
I mean that objects nearer to sense are prior and better known to man.
Objects without qualification prior and better known are those further from sense.
The most universal causes are furthest from sense, and particular causes are nearest to sense,
and they are thus exactly opposed to one another.
In saying that the premises of demonstrated knowledge must be primary,
I mean that they must be the appropriate basic truth, for I identify primary premise and basic truth.
A basic truth in a demonstration is an immediate proposition.
A proposition is one which has no other proposition prior to it.
A proposition is either part of an enunciation, that is, it predicates a single attribute of a single subject.
If a proposition is dialectical, it assumes either part indifferently.
If it is demonstrative, it lays down one part to the definite exclusion of the other because that part is true.
The term enunciation denotes either part of a contradiction indifferently.
A contradiction is an opposition which of its own nature excludes a middle.
The part of a contradiction which can join the predicates of a subject is an affirmation.
The part disjoining them is a negation.
I call an immediate basic truth of syllogism a thesis when, though it is not susceptible of proof by the teacher,
yet ignorance of it does not constitute a total bar to progress on the part of the pupil,
one which the pupil must know if he is to learn anything whatever is an axiom.
I call it an axiom because of such truths and we give them the name of axioms par excellence.
If a thesis assumes one part or the other of an enunciation,
that is asserts either the existence or the non-existence of a subject, it is a hypothesis.
If it does not so assert, it is a definition.
Definition is a thesis or a laying something down.
Since the arithmetician lays it down that to be a unit is to be quantitatively indivisible,
but it is not a hypothesis for to define what a unit is is not the same as to affirm its existence.
Now, since the required ground of our knowledge, that is of our conviction,
of a fact is the possession of such a syllogism as we call demonstration
and the ground of the syllogism is the fact constituting its premises.
We would not only know the primary premises, some if not all of them beforehand,
but know them better than the conclusion.
For the cause of an attribute's inheritance in the subject always itself inheres in the subject more firmly than that attribute.
For example, the cause of our loving anything is dearer to us than the object of our love.
So, since the primary premises are the cause of our knowledge, that is of our conviction,
it follows that we know them better, that is, are more convinced of them,
than their consequences precisely because our knowledge of the latter is the effect of our knowledge of the premises.
Now, a man cannot believe in anything more than in the things he knows,
unless he has either actual knowledge of it or something better than actual knowledge.
But we are faced with this paradox if a student whose belief rests on demonstration has not prior knowledge.
A man must believe in some if not in all of the basic truths, more than in the conclusion.
Moreover, if a man sets out to acquire the scientific knowledge that comes through demonstration,
he must not only have a better knowledge of the basic truths and affirm a conviction of them
than of the connection which is being demonstrated, more than this,
nothing must be more certain or better known to him than these basic truths in their character
as contradicting the fundamental premises which lead to their posed and erroneous conclusions.
For indeed, the conviction of pure science must be unshakeable.
Chapter 3. Some hold that owing to the necessity of knowing the primary premises, there is no scientific knowledge.
Others think there is, but that all truths are demonstrable.
Neither doctrine is either true or a necessary deduction from the premises.
The first school, assuming that there is no way of knowing other than by demonstration,
maintain that an infinite regress is involved on the ground that if behind the prior stands no primary,
we could not know the posterior through the prior, wherein they are right for one cannot traverse an infinite series.
If on the other hand, they say, the series terminates and there are primary premises,
yet these are unknowable because incapable of demonstration, which according to them is the only form of knowledge.
And since that one cannot know the primary premises, knowledge of the conclusions which follow from them is not pure scientific knowledge,
nor properly knowing at all, but rests on the mere supposition that the premises are true.
The other party agree with them as regards knowing, holding that it is only possible by demonstration,
but they see no difficulty in holding that all truths are demonstrated on the ground that demonstration may be circular and reciprocal.
Our own doctrine is that not all knowledge is demonstrative.
On the contrary, knowledge of the immediate premises is independent of demonstration.
The necessity of this is obvious, but since we must know the prior premises on which the demonstration is drawn,
and since the regress must end in immediate truths, those truths must be indemonstrable.
Such then is our doctrine, and in addition, we maintain that besides scientific knowledge, there is its originative source,
which enables us to recognize the definitions.
Now demonstration might be based on premises prior to and better known than the conclusion,
and the same things cannot simultaneously be both prior and posterior to one another.
So circular demonstration is clearly not possible in the unqualified sense of demonstration,
but only possible if demonstration be extended to include that other method of argument which rests on a distinction between truths prior to us
and truths without qualification prior, that is the method by which induction produces knowledge.
But if we accept this extension of its meaning, our definition of unqualified knowledge will prove faulty,
but there seem to be two kinds of it.
Perhaps however the second form of demonstration, that which proceeds from truths better known to us,
is not demonstration in the unqualified sense of the term.
The advocates of circular demonstration are not only faced with the difficulty we have just stated,
in addition, their theory reduces to the mere statement that if a thing exists, then it does exist, an easy way of proving anything.
That this is so can be clearly shown by taking three terms.
For to constitute the circle, it makes no difference whether many terms or few or even only two are taken.
Thus, my direct proof if A is B must be, if B is C must be.
Therefore if A is C must be.
Since then, by the circular proof, if A is B must be and if B is A must be, A may be substituted for C above.
Then if B is A must be equals if B is C must be, which above gave the conclusion if A is C must be.
But C and A have been identified.
Consequently, the upholders of circular demonstration are in the position of saying that if A is A must be, a simple way of proving anything.
Moreover, even such circular demonstration is impossible except in the case of attributes that imply one another with peculiar properties.
Now, it has been shown that the positing of one thing, be it one term or one premise, never involves a necessary consequent.
Two premises constitute the first and smallest foundation for drawing a conclusion at all and therefore are fortiori for the demonstrative syllogism of science.
If then A is implied in B and C and B and C are reciprocally implied in one another and in A, it is possible, as has been shown in my writings on the syllogism,
to prove all the assumptions on which the original conclusion rested by circular demonstration in the first figure.
But it has also been shown that in other figures either no conclusion is possible or at least none which proves both the original premises.
Propositions, the terms of which are not convertible, cannot be circularly demonstrated at all.
And since convertible terms occur rarely in actual demonstrations, it is clearly frivolous and impossible to say that demonstration is reciprocal and therefore everything can be demonstrated.
Chapter 4. Since the object of pure scientific knowledge cannot be other than it is, the truth obtained by demonstrative knowledge will be necessary.
And since demonstrative knowledge is only present when we have a demonstration, it follows that demonstration is an inference for necessary premises.
So we must consider what are the premises of demonstration, that is, what is their character.
And as a preliminary, let us define what we mean by an attribute true in every instance of its subject, an essential attribute, and a commensurate and universal attribute.
I call true in every instance what is truly predictable of all instances, not of one to the explosion of others, and at all times, not to this or that time only.
For example, if animal is truly predictable of every instance of man, then it would be true to say, this is a man, this is an animal, it's also true, and if the one be true now, the other is true now.
A corresponding account holds if point is in every instance predictable as contained in line.
There is evidence for this in the fact that the objection we raise against the proposition put to us as true in every instance is either an instance in which, or an occasion on which, it is not true.
Essential attributes are, one, such as belong to their subject as elements in its essential nature, for example, line that belongs to triangle, point to line,
for the very being or substance of triangle and line is composed of these elements, which are contained in the formulae defining triangle and line.
Two, such that, while they belong to certain subjects, the subjects to which they belong are contained in the attributes own defining formula.
Thus, straight and curved belong to line, odd and even, prime and compound, square and oblong, to number.
And also the formula defining any one of these attributes contains its subject, for example, line or number, as the case may be.
Extending this classification to all other attributes, I distinguish those that answer the above description as belonging essentially to their respective subject.
Whereas, attributes related in neither of these two ways to their subject, I call accidents or coincidence.
For example, musical or fight is a coincidence of animal.
Further, A, that is essential, which is not predicated of a subject other than itself.
For example, the walking thing walks and is wiped in virtue of being something else besides.
Whereas, substance, in the sense of whatever signifies it, this somewhat, is not what it is in virtue of being something else besides.
Things, then, not predicated of a subject I call essential.
Things predicated of a subject I call accidental or coincidental.
In another sense, again, B, a thing consequentially connected with anything is essential, while not so connected is coincidental.
An example of the latter is, while he was walking, it lightened.
The lightning was not due to his walking, it was, we should say, a coincidence.
If, on the other hand, there is a consequential connection, the predication is essential.
For example, if a beast dies when its throat is being cut, then its death is also essentially connected with the cutting because the cutting was the cause of death,
a coincidence of the cutting.
So far, then, as concerns the sphere of connections, scientifically known in the unqualified sense of that term,
or attributes which, within that sphere, are essential either in the sense that their subjects are contained in them or in the sense that they are contained in their subjects,
are necessary as well as consequentially connected with their subjects.
For it is impossible for them not to adhere in their subjects, either simply or in the qualified sense that one or other other pair of opposites must adhere in the subject.
For example, in line must be either straightness or curvature, in number, either oddness or evenness.
For, within a single identical genus, the contrary of a given attribute is either its privative or its contradictory.
For example, within numbers what is not odd is even in as much as within this sphere even is a necessary consequent of not odd.
So, since any given predicate must be either affirmed or denied of any subject, essential attributes must adhere in their subjects of necessity.
Thus, then, we have established the distinction between the attribute which is true in every instance and the essential attribute.
I term, commensurately universal, an attribute which belongs to every instance of its subject and to every instance essentially and as such.
From which it clearly follows that all commensurate universals adhere necessarily in their subjects.
The essential attribute and the attribute that belongs to its subject as such are identical.
For example, point and straight belong to line essentially, so they belong to line as such.
And triangle as such has two right angles, for it is essentially equal to two right angles.
An attribute belongs commensurately and universally to its subject when it can be shown to belong to any random instance of that subject
and when the subject is the first thing which it can be shown to belong.
Thus, for example, one, the equality of its angles to two right angles is not a commensurately universal attribute of figure.
For though it is possible to show that a figure has its angles equal to two right angles, this attribute cannot be demonstrated of any figure selected as haphazard,
nor in demonstrating does one take a figure at random, a square is a figure but its angles are not equal to two right angles.
On the other hand, any isosceles triangle has its angles equal to two right angles, yet isosceles triangle is not the primary subject of this attribute but triangle is prior.
So whatever can be shown to have its angles equal to two right angles or to possess any other attribute in any random instance of itself
and primarily, that is the first subject to which the predicate in question belongs commensurately and universally,
and the demonstration in the essential sense of any predicate is the proof of it as belonging to this first subject commensurately and universally,
while the proof of it as belonging to the other subject to which it attaches its demonstration only in a secondary and unessential sense.
Nor again, two, is equality to two right angles a commensurately universal attribute of isosceles, it is a wider application.
Chapter five.
We must not fail to observe that we often fall into error because our conclusion is not, in fact, primary and commensurately universal in the sense in which we think we prove it so.
We make this mistake, one, when the subject is an individual or individual above which there is no universal to be found.
Two, when the subject belongs to different species and there is a higher universal but it has no name.
Three, when the subject which the demonstrator takes as a whole is really only a part of a larger whole,
for then the demonstration will be true of the individual instances within the part and will hold in every instance of it,
yet the demonstration will not be true of this subject primarily and commensurately and universally.
When a demonstration is true of a subject primarily and commensurately and universally,
that is to be taken to mean that it is true of a given subject primarily and as such.
Case three.
Maybe thus exemplified.
If a proof were given that perpendicular to the same line are parallel,
it might be supposed that lines thus perpendicular were the proper subject of the demonstration because being parallel is true of every instance of them.
But it is not so, for the parallelism depends not on these angles being equal to one another because each is a right angle,
but simply on their being equal to one another.
An example of one would be a column.
If isosceles were the only triangle, it would be thought to have its angles equal to two right angles qua isosceles.
An instance of two would be the law that proportionals alternate.
Alternation used to be demonstrated separately of numbers, lines, solids and durations.
It could have been proved of them all by a single demonstration.
Because there was no single name to denote that in which numbers, lengths, durations and solids are identical,
and because they differed specifically from one another, this property was proved of each of them separately.
Today, however, the proof is commensurably universal, but they do not possess this attribute qua lines or qua numbers,
but qua are manifesting this generic character which they are postulated as possessing universally.
Hence, even if one proves of each kind of triangle that its angles are equal to two right angles,
whether by means of the same or different proofs, still, as long as one treats separately equilateral scaling and isosceles,
one does not yet know, except statistically, that triangle has its angles equal to two right angles,
nor does one yet know that triangle has this property commensurably and universally,
even if there is no other species of triangle but these.
For one does not know that triangle as such has this property, nor even that all triangles have it,
unless all means each taken singularly.
If all means as a whole class, then, though there be none in which one does not recognize this property,
one does not know it of all triangles.
When, then, does our knowledge fail of commensurability?
And when is it unqualified knowledge?
If triangle be identical in essence with equilateral, that is, with each or all equilaterals,
then clearly we have unqualified knowledge.
If, on the other hand, it be not and the attribute belongs to equilateral choir triangle,
then our knowledge fails of commensurability.
But, it will be asked, does this attribute belong to the subject of which it has been demonstrated choir triangle or choir isosceles?
What is the point at which the subject to which it belongs is primary?
That is, to what subject can it be demonstrated as belonging commensurately and universally?
Clearly, this point is the first term in which it is found to adhere as the elimination of inferior differential proceeds.
Thus, the angles of a brazen isosceles triangle are equal to two right angles,
but eliminate brazen and isosceles from the attribute remains.
But, you may say, eliminate figure or limit and the attribute vanishes.
True, but figure and limit are not the first differentiai whose elimination destroys the attribute.
Then, what is the first?
If it is triangle, it will be invert to a triangle that the attribute belongs to all the other subjects of which it is predicable,
and triangle is the subject to which it can be demonstrated as belonging commensurately and universally.
Chapter 6.
Demonstrative knowledge must rest on necessary basic truths,
for the object of scientific knowledge cannot be other than it is.
Now, attributes attaching essentially to their subjects attach necessarily to them.
For essential attributes are either elements in the essential nature of their subjects,
or contain their subjects as elements in their own essential nature.
The pairs of opposites which the latter class includes are necessary,
because one member or other necessarily inheres.
It follows from this that premises of the demonstrative syllogism must be connections essential, in a sense explained.
For all attributes must in here essentially or else be accidental,
and accidental attributes are not necessary to their subjects.
We must either state the case thus or else premise that the conclusion of demonstration is necessary
and that a demonstrated conclusion cannot be other than it is,
and then infer that the conclusion must be developed from necessary premises.
For though you may reason from true premises without demonstrating,
yet if your premises are necessary you will assuredly demonstrate,
in such necessity you have at once a distinctive character of demonstration.
That demonstration proceeds from necessary premises is also indicated by the fact
that the objection we raise against a professed demonstration is that a premise of it is not a necessary truth,
whether we think it altogether devoid of necessity, or at any rate so far as our opinion's previous argument goes.
This shows how naive it is to suppose one's basic truth is rightly chosen,
if one starts with a proposition which is one, popularly accepted, and two, true,
such as the softest assumption that to know is the same as to possess knowledge.
For one, popular acceptance or rejection is no criterion of a basic truth,
which can only be the primary law of the genius constituting the subject matter of the demonstration,
and two, not all truth is appropriate.
A further proof that the conclusion must be the development of necessary premises is as follows.
Where demonstration is possible? One who can give no account which includes the cause has no scientific knowledge.
If, then, we suppose a syllogism in which though A necessarily inheres in C,
yet B, the middle term of the demonstration, is not necessarily connected with A and C,
then the man who argues thus has no reason and knowledge of the conclusion.
Since this conclusion does not owe its necessity to the middle term,
for though the conclusion is necessary, the mediating link is a contingent fact.
Or again, if a man is without knowledge now, though he still retains the steps of the argument,
though there is no change in himself or in the fact, and no lapse of memory on his part,
then neither had he knowledge previously, but the mediating link not being necessary may have perished in the interval,
and if so, though there be no change in him nor in the fact, and though he will still retain the steps of the argument,
yet he has not knowledge and therefore had not knowledge before.
Even if the link has not actually perished but is laudable to perish, this situation is possible and might occur,
but such a situation cannot be knowledge.
When the conclusion is necessary, the middle for which it was proved may yet quite easily be normal necessary.
You can in fact infer the necessary even for a non-necessary premise,
just as you can infer the truth from the not true.
On the other hand, when the middle is necessary, the conclusion must be necessary,
just as true premises always give a true conclusion.
Thus, if A is necessarily predicated of B and B of C, then A is necessarily predicated of C,
but when the conclusion is non-necessary, the middle cannot be necessary either.
Let A be predicated non-necessarily of C, but necessarily of B, and let B be a necessary predicate of C,
then A, too, will be a necessary predicate of C, which by hypothesis it is not.
To sum up, then.
Demonstrative knowledge must be knowledge of a necessary nexus,
therefore must clearly be obtained through a necessary middle term.
Otherwise, it is possessible neither the cause nor the fact that its conclusion is a necessary connection.
Either he will mistake the non-necessary for the necessary and believe the necessity of the conclusion without knowing it,
or else he will not even believe it, in which case he will be equally ignorant
whether he actually insert the mere fact through middle terms or the reasoned fact and from immediate premises.
Of accidents that are not essential, according to our definition of essential,
there is no demonstrative knowledge.
For since an accident, in the sense in which I here speak of it, may also not in here,
it is impossible to prove its inherent as a necessary conclusion.
A difficulty, however, might be raised as to why in dialectic, if the conclusion is not a necessary connection,
such and such determinate premises should be proposed in order to deal with such and such determinate problems.
Would not the result be the same if one asked any questions whatever, and then merely stated one's conclusion?
The solution is that determinate questions have to be put,
not because the replies to them affirm facts which necessitate facts affirmed by the conclusion,
but because these answers are propositions which if the answer are affirmed,
he must affirm the conclusion and affirm it with truth if they are true.
Since it is just those attributes within every genus which are essential and possessed by their respective subjects as such that are necessary,
it is clear that both the conclusions and the premises of demonstrations which produce scientific knowledge are essential.
For accidents are not necessary.
And further, since accidents are not necessary, one does not necessarily have reason and knowledge of a conclusion drawn from them.
This is so, even if the accidental premises are invariable but not essential, as in proofs through signs.
For though the conclusion be actually essential, one will not know it as essential nor know its reasons.
But to have reasoned knowledge of a conclusion is to know it through its cause.
We may conclude that the middle must be consequentially connected with the minor and the major with the middle.
Chapter 7
It follows that we cannot, in demonstrating, pass from one genus to another.
We cannot, for instance, prove geometrical truths by arithmetic.
For there are three elements in demonstration.
One, what is proved, the conclusion, an attribute in hearing essentially in a genus.
Two, the axioms.
That is axioms which are premises of demonstrations.
Three, the subject genus whose attributes, that is essential properties, are revealed by the demonstration.
The axioms, which are premises of demonstrations, may be identical in two or more sciences.
In the case of two different generas, such as arithmetic and geometry, you cannot apply arithmetical demonstration to the properties of magnitudes
unless the magnitudes in questions are numbers.
How, in certain cases, transplants is possible, I will explain later.
Arithmetical demonstration and the other sciences likewise possess, each of them, their own genera,
so that if the demonstration is to pass from one sphere to another,
the genus must be either absolutely or to some extent the same.
If it is not so, transplants is clearly impossible because the extreme and the middle terms must be drawn from the same genus.
Otherwise, as predicated, they will not be essential and will thus be accidents.
That is why it cannot be proved by geometry that opposites four under one science,
nor even that the product of two cubes is a cube.
Nor can the theorem of any one science be demonstrated by means of another science
unless these theorems are related as subordinate to superior.
For example, as optical theorems to geometry or harmonic theorem to arithmetic.
Geometry, again, cannot prove of lines any property which they do not possess,
choir lines, that is, in virtue of the fundamental truth of their particular genus.
It cannot show, for example, that the straight line is the most beautiful of lines or the contrary of the circle.
For these qualities do not belong to lines in virtue of their peculiar genus,
but through some property which it shares with other genera.
Chapter 8.
It is also clear that if the premises from which the syllogism proceeds are commensurately universal,
the conclusion of such demonstration, demonstration, that is, in the unqualified sense, must also be eternal.
Therefore, no attribute can be demonstrated, nor known by strictly scientific knowledge,
to adhere in perishable things.
The proof can only be accidental because the attribute's connection with its perishable subject
is not commensurately universal but temporary and special.
If such a demonstration is made, one premise must be perishable and not commensurately universal.
Perishable, because only if it is perishable, will the conclusion be perishable,
not commensurately universal because the predicate will be predicable of some instances of the subject and not of others.
So that the conclusion can only be that the fact is true at the moment, not commensurately and universally.
The same is true of definitions.
Since a definition is either a primary premise or a conclusion of a demonstration or else,
only differs from a demonstration in the order of its terms.
Demonstration and science of merely frequent occurrences, for example, of eclipse as happening to the moon,
are as such clearly eternal, whereas so far as they are not eternal, they are not fully commensurate.
Other subjects, too, have properties attaching to them in the same way as eclipse attaches to the moon.
Chapter 9. It is clear that if the conclusion is to show an attribute in hearing as such,
nothing can be demonstrated except from its appropriate basic truths.
Consequently, a proof even from true, indemonstrable and immediate premises does not constitute knowledge.
Such truths are like Bryson's method of squaring the circle,
for they operate by taking as their middle a common character, a character therefore which the subject may share with another,
and consequently they apply equally to subjects different in kind.
They therefore afford knowledge of an attribute only as in hearing accidentally, not as belonging to its subject as such.
Otherwise, they would not have been applicable to another genus.
Our knowledge of any attribute's connection with a subject is accidental unless we know that connection
through the middle term, in virtue of which it inheres, and as an inference from basic premises essential and appropriate to the subject,
unless we know, for example, the property of possessing angles equal to two right angles as belonging to that subject
and which it inheres essentially, and as inferred from basic premises essential and appropriate to that subject.
So that, if that middle term also belongs essentially to the minor, the middle must belong to the same kind of the major and minor terms.
The only exceptions to this rule are such cases as theorems in harmonics which are demonstrable by arithmetic.
Such theorems are proved by the same middle terms as arithmetical properties, but with a qualification.
The fact falls under a separate sign for the subject genus is separate,
but the reason, in fact, concerns the superior sign to which the attributes essentially belong.
Thus, even these apparent exceptions show that no attribute is strictly demonstrable except from its appropriate basic truths,
which, however, in the case of these sciences, have the requisite identity of character.
It is no less evident that the peculiar basic truths of each adhering attribute are indemonstrable,
but basic truths from which they might be deduced would be basic truths of all that is,
and the science to which they belong would possess universal sovereignty.
This is so because he knows better whose knowledge is deduced from higher causes,
for his knowledge is from prior premises when it derives from causes themselves uncaused.
Hence, if he knows better than others or best of all, his knowledge would be science in a higher or the highest degree.
But as things are, demonstration is not transferable to another genus.
With such exceptions, as we have mentioned in the application of geometrical demonstrations to theorems in mechanics or optics,
or of arithmetical demonstrations to those of harmonics,
it is hard to be sure whether one knows or not,
but it is hard to be sure whether one's knowledge is based on the basic truths appropriate to each attribute,
the differential of true knowledge.
We think we have scientific knowledge if we have reason from true and primary premises,
but that is not so.
The conclusion must be homogeneous with the basic facts of the signers.
Chapter 10.
I call the basic truths of every genus those elements in it, the existence of which cannot be proved.
As regards both these primary truths and the attributes dependent on them, the meaning of the name is assumed.
The fact of their existence as regards the primary truths must be assumed,
but it has to be proved of the remainder, the attribute.
Thus we assume the meaning alike of unity, straight and triangular,
but while as regards unity and magnitude, we assume also the fact of their existence.
In the case of the remaining, proof is required.
Of the basic truths used in the demonstrative sciences, some are peculiar to each science and some are common,
only in the sense of analogous being a views only and so far as they fall within the genus constituting the province of the science in question.
Peculiar truths are, for example, the definitions of line and spect.
Common truths are such as take equals, bump equals, and equals remain.
Only so much of these common truths is required as falls within the genus in question
for a truth of this kind will have the same force even if not used generally,
but applied by the geometer only to magnitudes or by the arithmetic only to numbers.
Also peculiar to a science are the subjects of the existence as well as the meaning of which it assumes
and the essential attributes of which it investigates, for example, in arithmetic units, in geometry points and lines.
Both the existence and the meaning of the subjects are assumed by these sciences,
but of their essential attributes only the meaning is assumed.
For example, arithmetic assumes the meaning of odd and even, square and cube,
geometry that of incommensurable or of deflection or verging of lines,
whereas the existence of these attributes is demonstrated by means of the axioms
and from previous conclusions as premises.
Astronomy 2 proceeds in the same way, for indeed, every demonstrative science has three elements.
One, that which it posits, the subject genus whose essential attributes it examines.
Two, the so-called axioms which are primary premises of its demonstrations.
Three, the attributes, the meaning of which it assumes.
Yet some sciences may very well pass over some of these elements.
For example, we might not expressly posit the existence of the genus if its existence were obvious.
For instance, the existence of hot and cold is more evident than that of number,
or we might admit to assume expressly the meaning of the attributes if it were well understood.
In the same way, the meaning of axioms such as take equal, make equal, and equal to remain
is well known if they're not expressly assumed.
Nevertheless, in the nature of the case the essential elements of demonstration are three,
the subject, the attributes, and the basic premises.
That which expresses necessary self-grounded fact, and which we must necessarily believe,
is distinct both from the hypotheses of a science and from illegitimate postulate.
I say must believe because all syllogism and therefore our fortiori demonstration
is addressed not to the spoken word, but to the discourse within the soul.
And though we can always raise objections to the spoken word,
to the inward discourse we cannot always object.
That which is capable of proof but assumed by the teacher without proof is,
if the pupil believes and accepts it, hypothesis.
Though only in a limited sense hypothesis, that is, relatively to the pupil.
If the pupil has no opinion or a contrary opinion on the matter,
the same assumption is an illegitimate postulate.
Therein lies the distinction between hypothesis and illegitimate postulate.
The latter is the contrary of the pupil's opinion, demonstrable,
but assumed and used without demonstration.
The definitions with those which are not expressed as statements that anything is or is not,
are not hypotheses.
But it is in the premises of a science that its hypotheses are contained.
Definitions require only to be understood, and this is not hypothesis,
unless it is intended that the pupil's hearing is also a hypothesis required by the teacher.
Hypotheses, on the contrary, postulate facts on the being of which depends the being of the fact inferred,
nor are the geometers' hypotheses false, as some are held,
urging that one must not employ falsehood,
and that the geometer is uttering falsehood in stating that the line which he draws is a foot long or straight,
when it is actually neither.
The truth is that the geometer does not draw any conclusions from the being of the particular line of which he speaks,
but from what his diagrams symbolize.
A further distinction is that all hypotheses and illegitimate postulates are either universal or particular,
whereas a definition is neither.
Chapter 11.
So demonstration does not necessarily imply the being of forms, nor a one beside a many.
But it does necessarily imply the possibility of truly predicating one of many,
since without this possibility we cannot save the universal,
and if the universal goes, the middle term goes with it, and so demonstration becomes impossible.
We conclude then that there must be a single identical term unequivocally predictable of a number of individuals.
The law, that it is impossible to affirm and deny simultaneously the same predicate of the same subject,
is not expressly posited by any demonstration except when the conclusion also has to be expressed in that form,
in which case the proof lays down in its major premise that the major is truly affirmed of the middle but falsely denied.
It makes no difference, however, if we add to the middle or again to the minor term the corresponding negative.
For grant a minor term of which it is true to predicate man, even if it be also true to predicate not man of it,
still grant simply that man is animal or not not animal, and the conclusion follows,
for it will still be true to say that caleas, even if it be also true to say that not caleas, is animal and not not animal.
The reason is that the major term is predictable not only of the middle but of something other than the middle as well,
being of wider application so that the conclusion is not affected even if the middle is extended to cover the original middle term
and also what is not the original middle term.
The law, that every predicate can be either truly affirmed or truly denied of every subject is posited by such demonstration
as uses reductio ad impossibile and then not always universally but so far as it is requisite within the limits that is of the genus.
The genus, I mean, as I have already explained, to which the man of science applies his demonstration.
In virtue of the common elements of demonstration, I mean the common axioms which are used as premises of demonstration,
not the subjects or the attributes demonstrated as belonging to them.
All the sciences have communion with one another, and in communion with them all is dialectic and any science which might attempt a universal proof of axiom
such as the law of excluded middle, the law that the subtraction of equals from equals leaves equal remainders, or other axioms of the same kind.
Dialectic has no definite sphere of this kind not being confined to a single genus.
Otherwise its method would not be interrogative, but the interrogative method is barred to the demonstrator who cannot use the opposite facts to prove the same nexus.
This was shown in my work on the syllogism.
Chapter 12.
If a syllogistic question is equivalent to a proposition embodying one of the two sides of the contradiction,
but if each science has its peculiar propositions from which its peculiar conclusion is developed,
then there is such a thing as a distinctively scientific question, and it is the interrogative form of the premises from which the appropriate conclusion of each science is developed.
Hence, it is clear that not every question will be relevant to geometry, nor to medicine, nor to any other science.
Only those questions will be geometrical to form premises for the proof of the theorems of geometry or of any other science such as optics,
which uses the same basic truth as geometry.
Of the other sciences, the like is true.
Of these questions, the geometer is bound to give his account using the basic truths of geometry in conjunction with his previous conclusion.
Of the basic truth, the geometer as such is not bound to give any account.
The like is true of the other sciences.
There is a limit, then, to the questions which we may put to each man of science,
nor is each man of science bound to answer all inquiries on each several subjects,
but only such as fall within the defined field of his own science.
If, then, in controversy with the geometer, qua geometer, the discipline confines himself to geometry
and proves anything from geometrical premises, he is clearly to be applauded.
If he goes outside these, he will be at fault, and obviously cannot even refute the geometer except accidentally.
One should therefore not discuss geometry among those who are not geometers,
for in such a company an unsound argument will pass unnoticed.
This is correspondingly true in the other sciences.
Since there are geometrical questions, does it follow that there are also distinctively ungeometrical questions?
Further, in each special science, geometry, for instance,
what kind of error is it that may vitiate questions and yet not exclude them from that science?
Again, is the erroneous conclusion one constructed from premises opposite to the true premises,
or is it formal fallacy though drawn from geometrical premises,
or perhaps the erroneous conclusion is due to the drawing of premises from another science?
For example, in a geometrical controversy, a musical question is distinctively ungeometrical,
whereas the notion that parallels meat is, in one sense, geometrical, being ungeometrical in a different fashion.
The reason being that ungeometrical, like unrhythmical, is equivocal,
meaning, in the one case, not geometry at all, in the other, bad geometry.
It is this error that is error based on premises of this kind, of the science, but false.
That is the contrary of science.
In mathematics, the formal fallacy is not so common because it is the middle term in which the ambiguity lies,
since the major is predicated as the whole of the middle and the middle of the whole of the minor.
The predicate, of course, never has the prefix at all.
And in mathematics, one can, so to speak, see these middle terms with an intellectual vision,
while in dialectic, the ambiguity may as depth detection.
For example, is every circle a figure?
A diagram shows that this is so, but the minor premise are epic circles
is shown by the diagram to be false.
If a proof has an inductive minor premise, one should not bring an objection against it,
since every premise must be applicable to a number of cases,
otherwise it will not be true in every instance, which since the syllogism proceeds from universal,
it must be, then assuredly the same is true of an objection, since premises and objections
are so far the same that anything which can be validly advanced as an objection
must be such that it could take the form of a premise, either demonstrative or dialectical.
On the other hand, arguments formally illogical do sometimes occur through taking as middles
mere attributes of the major and minor terms.
An instance of this is Kinect's proof that fire increases in geometrical proportion.
Fire, he argues, increases rapidly and serves geometrical proportion.
There is no syllogism so, but there is a syllogism if the most rapidly increasing proportion is geometrical
and the most rapidly increasing proportion is attributable to fire and its motion.
Sometimes no doubt it is impossible to reason from premises predicating mere attributes,
but sometimes it is possible, though the possibility is overlooked.
If false premises could never give true conclusions, resolution would be easy
if premises and conclusions would in that case inevitably reciprocate.
I might then argue thus, let A be an existing fact, that the existence of A implies such and such fact
actually known to me to exist, which we may call B.
Now, since they reciprocate, infer A from B.
Preciprication of premises and conclusions is more frequent in mathematics,
because mathematics takes definitions, but never an accident, for its premises,
a second characteristic distinguishing mathematical reasoning from dialectical disputation.
A science expands not by the interposition of fresh middle terms,
but by the apposition of fresh extreme terms.
Therefore, A is predicated to B, B of C, C of D, and so indefinitely.
Or, the expansion may be lateral.
For example, one major A may be proved to minus C and E.
Let A represent number, A number or number taken indefinitely.
B, determinate odd number.
C, any particular odd number.
We can then predicate A of C.
Next, let D represent determinate even number and E, even number.
Then A is predicable of B.
Chapter 13.
Knowledge of the fact differs from knowledge of the reasoned fact.
To begin with, they differ within the same science and in two ways.
One, when the premises of the syllogism are not immediate,
for then the proximate cause is not contained in them,
a necessary condition of knowledge of the reasoned fact.
Two, when the premises are immediate but instead of the cause,
the better known of the two reciprocals is taken as the middle.
For of two reciprocally predicable terms,
the one which is not the cause may quite easily be the better known
and so become the middle term of the demonstration.
Thus, two, A, you might prove as follows that the planets are near
because they do not twinkle.
Let C be the planets, B not twinkling, A proximity.
Then B is predicable of C, but the planets do not twinkle.
But A is also predicable of B, since that which does not twinkle is near.
We must take this truth as having been reached by induction or sense perception.
Therefore, A is a necessary predicate of C
so that we have demonstrated that the planets are near.
This syllogism then proves not the reasoned fact, but only the fact.
Since they are not near because they do not twinkle,
but because they are near, do not twinkle.
The major and middle of the proof, however, may be reversed
and then the demonstration will be of the reasoned fact, thus.
Let C be the planets, B proximity, A not twinkling.
Then B is an attribute of C and A not twinkling of B.
Consequently, A is predicable of C
and the syllogism proves the reasoned fact since its middle term is approximate cause.
Another example is the influence of the moon is spherical from its manner of waxing.
Since that which so waxes is spherical and since the moon so waxes,
clearly the moon is spherical.
But in this form, the syllogism turns out to be proof of the fact,
but if the middle and major be reversed, it is proof of the reasoned fact.
Since the moon is not spherical because it waxes in a certain manner,
but waxes in such a manner because it is spherical.
Let C be the moon, B spherical and A waxing.
Again, B, in cases where the cause and the effect are not reciprocal
and the effect is a better known, the fact is demonstrated, but not the reasoned fact.
This also occurs, one, when the middle falls outside the major and minor,
so here two of the strict cause is not given
because the demonstration is of a fact, not of the reasoned fact.
For example, the question, why does not a wall breathe might be answered
because it is not an animal.
But that answer would not give the strict cause
because if not being an animal causes the absence of respiration,
then being an animal should be the cause of respiration according to the rule
that if the negation of X causes the non-inherence of Y,
the affirmation of X causes the inheritance of Y.
For example, if the disproportion of the heart and the cold elements is the cause of ill health,
their proportion is the cause of health.
And conversely, if the assertion of X causes the inheritance of Y,
the negation of X must cause wise non-inherence.
But in the case given, this consequence does not result for not every animal breathe.
A syllogism with this kind of cause takes place in the second figure of that.
Let A be animal, B respiration, C wall.
Then A is predictable of all B, for all that breathes is animal, but of no C.
And consequently, B is predictable of no C, that is, the wall does not breathe.
Such causes are like far-fetched explanations which concisely consist in making the cause to remote,
as in Anacartic's account of why the Scythians have no flute players,
namely because they have no vines.
Thus, then, do the syllogism of the fact and the syllogism of the reasoned fact differ within one science
and according to the position of the middle terms.
But there is another way, too, in which the fact and the reasoned fact differ,
and that is when they are investigated respectively by different sciences.
This occurs in the case of problems related to one another as subordinate and superior,
as when optical problems are subordinated to geometry, mechanical problems to stereometry,
harmonic problems to arithmetic, the data of observation to astronomy.
Some of these sciences bear almost the same name, for example, mathematical and nautical astronomy,
mathematical and acoustical harmonics.
Here it is the business of the empirical observers to know the fact of the mathematicians
to know the reasoned fact, for the latter are in possession of the demonstrations given the causes
and are often ignorant of the fact, just as we often have a clear insight into a universal,
but through lack of observation are ignorant of some of its particular instances.
These connections have a perceptible existence, though they are manifestations of form.
For the mathematical sciences concerned forms, they do not demonstrate properties of a substratum,
since even though the geometrical subjects are predictable as properties of a perceptible substratum,
it is not as predictable that the mathematician demonstrates properties of them.
As optics is related to geometry, so another science is related to optics, namely the theory of the rainbow.
Here knowledge of the fact is within the province of the natural philosopher,
knowledge of the reasoned fact within that of the optician, either choir optician or choir mathematical optician.
Many sciences not standing in this mutual relation enter into it at points.
For example, medicine and geometry.
It is the physician's business to know that circular wounds heal more slowly,
the geometers to know the reason why.
Chapter 14.
Of all the figures, the most scientific is the first.
Thus, it is the vehicle of the demonstrations of all the mathematical sciences,
such as arithmetic, geometry and optics, and practically of all sciences that investigate causes.
For the syllogism of the reasoned fact is either exclusively or generally speaking,
and in most cases in this figure, a second proof that this figure is the most scientific.
For the grasp of a reasoned conclusion is the primary condition of knowledge.
Thirdly, the first is the only figure which enables us to pursue knowledge of the essence of a thing.
In the second figure, no affirmative conclusion is possible, and knowledge of a thing's essence must be affirmative.
While in the third figure, the conclusion can be affirmative, but cannot be universal,
and essence must have a universal character.
For example, man is not two-footed animal in any qualified sense, but universally.
Finally, the first figure has no need of the others, while it is by means of the first
that the other two figures are developed and have their intervals close packed until immediate premises are reached.
Clearly, therefore, the first figure is the primary condition of knowledge.
Chapter 15.
Just as attribute A may, as we say, be atomically connected with the subject B,
so its disconnection may be atomic.
I call atomic connections or disconnections which involve no intermediate term,
since in that case the connection or disconnection will not be mediated by something other than the terms themselves.
It follows that if either A or B, or both A and B, have a genus, their disconnection cannot be primary.
Thus, let C be the genus of A, then if C is not the genus of B,
for A may well have a genus which is not the connection of B,
there will be a syllogism proving A's disconnection from B thus.
All A is C, no B is C, therefore no B is A.
Or if it is B, which has a genus D, we have all B is D,
no D is A, therefore no B is A, by syllogism.
And the proof will be similar if both A and B have a genus,
that the genus of A need not be the genus of B, and vice versa,
is shown by the existence of mutually exclusive coordinate series of predication.
If no term in the series A, C, D is predictable of any term in the series B, E, F,
and if G, a term in the former series, is the genus of A, clearly G will not be the genus of B.
Since if it were, the series would not be mutually exclusive.
So also if B has a genus, it will not be the genus of A.
If on the other hand neither A nor B has a genus and A does not inherit B,
this disconnection must be atomic.
If there be a middle term, one or other of them is bound to have a genus,
because the syllogism will be either in the first or the second figure.
If it is in the first, B will have a genus, for the premise containing it must be affirmative.
If in the second, either A or B, indifferently,
since syllogism is possible if either is contained in a negative premise,
but not if both premises are negative.
Entities clear that one thing may be atomically disconnected from another,
and we have stated when and how this is possible.
Chapter 16, ignorance, defined not as the negation of knowledge,
but as a positive state of mind, is error produced by inference.
One, let us first consider propositions asserting a predicate's immediate connection with
or disconnection from a subject.
Here it is true.
The error may be four-one in alternative ways,
for it may arise where one directly believes a connection or disconnection,
as well as where one's belief is acquired by inference.
The error, however, that consists in a direct belief is without complication,
but the error resulting from inference, which here concerns us, takes many forms.
Thus, let A be atomically disconnected from all B,
then the conclusion inferred through a middle term C that all B is A
will be a case of error produced by syllogism.
Now, two cases are possible, either A, both premises, or B.
One premise only may be false.
A, if neither A is an attribute of any C nor C of any B,
whereas the contrary was posited in both cases, both premises will be false.
C might quite well be so related to A and B that C is neither subordinate to A
nor a universal attribute of B.
For B, since A was said to be primarily disconnected from B, cannot have a genus,
and A need not necessarily be a universal attribute of all things.
Consequently, both premises may be false.
On the other hand, B, one of the premises may be true, though not either indifferently,
but only the major A to C.
Since B having no genus, the premise C to B will always be false, while A to C may be true.
This is the case if, for example, A is related atomically to both C and B,
because when the same term is related atomically to more terms than one,
neither of those terms will belong to the other.
It is, of course, equally the case if A to C is not atomic.
Error of attribution, then, occurs through these causes and in this form only,
for we found that no syllogism of universal attribution was possible in any figure but the first.
On the other hand, an error of non-attribution may occur either in the first or in the second figure.
Let us therefore first explain the various forms it takes in the first figure
and the character of the premises in each case.
C. It may occur when both premises are false.
For example, supposing A, atomically connected with both C and B,
if it be then assumed that no C is A and all B is C, both premises are false.
D. It is also possible when one is false.
This may be either premise in different way.
A to C may be true, C to B false.
A to C true because A is not an attribute of all things.
C to B false because C, which never has the attribute A, cannot be an attribute of B.
For if C to B were true, the premise A to C would no longer be true.
And besides if both premises were true, the conclusion would be true.
Or again, C to B may be true and A to C false.
For example, both C and A contain B as genera.
One of them must be subordinate to the other so that if the premise takes the form no C is A, it will be false.
This makes it clear that whether either or both premises are false, the conclusion will equally be false.
In the second figure, the premises cannot both be wholly false, for if all B is A,
no middle term can be with truth universally affirmed of one extreme and universally denied of the other.
But premises in which the middle is affirmed of one extreme and denied of the other are the necessary conditions if one is to get a valid inference at all.
Therefore, if taken in this way, they are wholly false, their contrary is conversely should be wholly true.
But this is impossible.
On the other hand, there is nothing to prevent both premises being partially false.
For example, if actually some A is C and some B is C, then if it is premised that all A is C and no B is C, both premises are false, yet partially not wholly false.
The same is true if the major is made negative instead of the minor, or one premise may be wholly false and it may be either of them.
Thus, supposing that actually an attribute of all A must also be an attribute of all B, then if C is yet taken to be a universal attribute of all A but universally non attributable to B, C to A will be true but C to B false.
Again, actually that which is an attribute of no B will not be an attribute of all A either.
For if it be an attribute of all A, it will also be an attribute of all B, which is contrary to supposition.
But if C be nevertheless assumed to be a universal attribute of A but an attribute of no B, then the premise C to B is true but the major is false.
The case is similar if the major is made the negative premise, for in fact what is an attribute of no A will not be an attribute of any B either.
And if it be yet assumed that C is universally non attributable to A but a universal attribute of B, the premise C to A is true but the minor wholly false.
Again, in fact it is false to assume that that which is an attribute of all B is an attribute of no A, for if it be an attribute of all B it must be an attribute of some A.
If then C is nevertheless assumed to be an attribute of all B but of no A, C to B will be true but C to A false.
It is thus clear that in the case of atomic propositions erroneous inference will be possible not only when both premises are false but also when only one is false.
Chapter 17.
Two. In the case of attributes not atomically connected with or disconnected from their subjects, A, one, as long as the false conclusion is inferred through the appropriate middle, only the major and not both premises can be false.
By appropriate middle, I mean the middle term through which the contradictory, that is the true, conclusion is inferrable.
Thus, let A be attributable to B through a middle term C, then, since to produce a conclusion the premise C to B must be taken affirmatively, it is clear that this premise has always be true for its quality is not changed.
But the major A to C is false, for it is by a change in the quality of A to C that the conclusion becomes its contradictory, that is true.
Similarly, two. If the middle is taken from another series of predication, for example suppose D could be not only contained within A as a part within its whole but also predicable of all B.
Then the premise D to B must remain unchanged but the quality of A to D must be changed, so that D to B is always true, A to D always false.
Such error is practically identical with that which is inferred through the appropriate middle.
On the other hand, B. If the conclusion is not inferred through the appropriate middle, one, when the middle is subordinate to A but is predicable of no B, both premises must be false.
Because if there is to be a conclusion both must be posited as asserting the contrary of what is actually the fact and so posited both become false.
For example suppose that actually all D is A but no B is D, then if these premises are changed in quality a conclusion will follow and both of the new premises will be false.
When, however, two, the middle D is not subordinate to A, A to D will be true, D to B false, A to D true because A was not subordinate to D, D to B false because if it had been true the conclusion two would have been true but it is X hypothesis, false.
When the erroneous inference is in the second figure both premises cannot be entirely false, since if B is subordinate to A there can be no middle, predicable of all of one extreme and of none of the other as was stated before.
One premise, however, may be false and it may be either of them. Thus if C is actually an attribute of both A and B but is assumed to be an attribute of A only and not of B, C to A will be true, C to B false.
Or again if C be assumed to be attributable to B but to know A, C to B will be true, C to A false.
We have stated when and through what kind of premises error will result in cases where the erroneous conclusion is negative. If the conclusion is affirmative, A, one, it may be inferred through the appropriate middle term.
In this case both premises cannot be false since, as we said before, C to B must remain unchanged if there is to be a conclusion and consequently A to C is the quality of which is changed will always be false.
This is equally true if two. The middle is taken from another series of predication as was stated to be the case also with regard to negative error.
For D to B must remain unchanged while the quality of A to D must be conversed and the type of error is the same as the four.
B. The middle may be inappropriate. Then one, if D is subordinate to A, A to D will be true but D to B false.
Since A may quite well be predictable of several terms, no one of which can be subordinated to another.
If, however, two, D is not subordinate to A, obviously A to D, since it is affirmed, will always be false while D to B may be either true or false.
For A may very well be an attribute of no D whereas all B is D. For example, no science is animal, all music is science.
Equally well A may be an attribute of no D and D of no B.
It emerges then that if the middle term is not subordinate to the major, not only both premises but either thinkly may be false.
Thus we have made it clear how many varieties of erroneous inference are liable to happen and through what kinds of premises they occur,
in the case both of immediate and of demonstrable truths.
Chapter 18.
It is also clear that the loss of any one of the senses entails the loss of a corresponding portion of knowledge and that,
since we learn either by induction or by demonstration, this knowledge cannot be acquired.
Thus demonstration develops from universal induction from particulars.
But since it is possible to familiarize the people with even the so-called mathematical abstractions only through induction,
that is only because each subject genus possesses, in virtue of a determinate mathematical character,
certain prophecies which can be treated as separate even though they do not exist in isolation,
it is consequently impossible to come to grasp universals except through induction.
But induction is impossible for those who have not sensed perception,
for it is sense perception alone which is adequate for grasping the particulars.
They cannot be objects of scientific knowledge because neither can universals give us knowledge of them without induction,
nor can we get it through induction without sense perception.
Chapter 19.
Every syllogism is affected by means of three terms.
One kind of syllogism serves to prove that A inheres in C by showing that A inheres in B and B in C.
The other is negative and one of its premises asserts one term of another while the other denies one term of another.
It is clear then that these are the fundamentals and so-called hypotheses of syllogism.
Assuming that they have been stated and proof is bound to follow,
proof that A inheres in C through B and again that A inheres in B through some other middle term
and similarly that B inheres in C.
If our reasoning aims at gaining credence and so is merely dialectical,
it is obvious that we have only to see that our inference is based on premises as credible as possible.
So that if a middle term between A and B is credible, though not real,
one can reason through it and complete a dialectical syllogism.
If however one is aiming at truth, one must be guided by the real connections of subjects and attributes.
Thus, since there are attributes which are predicated of a subject essentially or naturally
and not coincidentally, not that is in a sense in which we say that white thing is a man,
which is not the same mode of predication as when we say the man is white.
The man is white not because he is something else but because he is man,
but the white is man because being white coincides with humanity within one substratum.
Therefore, there are terms such as our naturalist subject of predication.
Suppose then C, such a term, not itself attributable to anything else as to a subject,
but the proximate subject of the attribute B, that is, so that B to C is immediate.
Suppose further, E related immediately to F and F to B.
The first question is, must this series terminate or can it proceed to infinity?
The second question is as follows.
Suppose nothing is essentially predicated of A, but A is predicated primarily for H
and of no intermediate prior term, and suppose H similarly related to G and G to B.
Then must this series also terminate or can it, too, proceed to infinity?
There is this much difference between the questions.
The first is, is it possible to start from that which is not itself attributable to anything else
but is the subject of attribute and the send to infinity?
The second is a problem whether one can start from that which is a predicate
but not itself a subject of predicate and descend into infinity.
The third question is, if the extreme terms are fixed, can there be an infinity of middles?
I mean this.
Suppose, for example, if A inheres in C and B is intermediate between them,
but between B and A there are other middles, and between these, again, fresh middles,
can these proceed to infinity, or can they not?
This is the equivalent of inquiring.
Do demonstrations proceed to infinity, that is, is everything demonstrable,
or do ultimate subject and primary attributes limit one another?
I hope that the same questions arise with regard to negative conclusions and premises.
This, if A is attributable to no B, then either this predication will be primary
or there will be an intermediate term prior to B to which A is not attributable.
G, let us say, which is attributable to all B.
And there may still be another term, H, prior to G, which is attributable to all G.
The same questions arise, I say, because in these cases, too,
either the series of prior terms to which A is not attributable is infinite or it terminates.
One cannot ask the same questions in the case of reciprocating terms,
since when subject and predicate are convertible, there is neither primary nor ultimate subject,
seeing that all the reciprocal qua subjects stand in the same relation to one another.
Whether we say that the subject has an infinity of attributes, or that both subjects and attributes,
and we raise the question in both cases, are infinite in number.
These questions then cannot be asked, unless indeed the terms can reciprocate by two different modes,
by accidental predication in one relation and natural predication in the other.
Chapter 20.
Slide is clear that if the predication is terminating both the upward and the downward direction,
and the upward, I mean the ascent to the more universal, by downward, the descent to the more particular,
the middle terms cannot be infinite in number.
For suppose that A is predicated of F, and that the intermediates, call them B, B degrees, B minutes, are infinite,
then clearly you might descend from A and find one term predicated of another ad infinitum,
since you have an infinity of terms between U and F.
And equally, if you ascend from F, there are infinite terms between U and A.
It follows that if these processes are impossible, it cannot be an infinity of intermediates between A and F,
nor is it of any effect to urge that some terms of the series AB to F are contiguous so as to exclude intermediates,
while others cannot be taken into the argument at all.
Whichever terms of the series B to I take, the number of intermediates in the direction of either A or of F must be finite or infinite.
Where the infinite series starts, whether from the first term or from a later one, is of no moment,
for the succeeding terms in any case are infinite in number.
Chapter 21.
Further, if in affirmative demonstration the series terminates in both directions,
clearly it will terminate to a negative demonstration.
Let us assume that we cannot proceed to infinity either by ascending from the ultimate term,
by ultimate term I mean a term such as F was not itself attributable to a subject but itself a subject of attributes,
or by descending towards an ultimate from the primary term.
By primary term I mean a term predictable of a subject but not itself a subject.
If this assumption is justified, the series will also terminate in the case of negation.
For a negative conclusion can be proved in all three figures.
In the first figure it is proved plus.
No B is A, all C is B.
In packing the interval B to C, we must reach immediate propositions,
as is always the case with the minor premise, since B to C is affirmative.
As regards the other premise, it is telling that if the major term is denied of a term D prior to B,
D will have to be predictable of all B.
And if the major is denied of yet another term prior to D, this term must be predictable of all D.
Consequently, since the ascending series is finite, the descent will also terminate,
and there will be a subject of which A is primarily non-predicable.
In the second figure, the syllogism is all A is B, no C is B, therefore no C is A.
If proof of this is required, plainly it may be shown either in the first figure as above,
in the second as here, or in the third.
The first figure has been discussed and we will proceed to display the second,
proof by which will be as follows. All B is D, no C is D.
Since it is required that B should be a subject of which a predicate is affirmed.
Next, since D is to be proved not to belong to C, then D has a further predicate which is denied of C.
Therefore, since the succession of predicates affirmed of an ever higher universal terminates,
the succession of predicates denied terminates of two.
The third figure shows it as follows. All B is A, some B is not C, therefore some A is not C.
This premise, that is C to B, will be proved either in the same figure or in one of the two figures discussed above.
In the first and second figures, the series terminates.
If we use the third figure, we shall take its premises, all E is B, some E is not C,
and this premise again will be proved by a similar prosilagism.
But since it is assumed that the series of descending subjects also terminates,
plainly the series of more universal, non-predictables will terminate also.
Even supposing that the proof is not confined to one method but employs them all
and is now in the first figure and now in the second or third, even so the regress will terminate
for the methods are finite in number and if finite things are combined in a finite number of ways,
the results must be finite.
Thus it is plain that the regress of middles terminates in the case of negative demonstration
if it does so also in the case of affirmative demonstration.
But in fact, the regress terminates in both these cases may be made clear
by the following dialectical considerations.
Chapter 22.
In the case of predicates constituting the essential nature of a thing, it clearly terminates
seeing that if definition is possible, or in other words, if essential form is knowable
and an infinite series cannot be traversed, predicates constituting a thing's essential nature
must be finite in number.
But as regards predicates generally, we have the following preparatory remarks to make.
One, we can affirm without falsehood the white thing is walking
and that big thing is a log.
Or again, the log is big and the man walks.
But the affirmation differs in the two cases.
When I affirm the white is a log, I mean something which happens to be white is a log.
Not that white is the substratum in which the log inheres,
but it was not qua white or qua a species of white that the white thing came to be a log
and the white thing is consequently not a log except incidentally.
On the other hand, when I affirm the log is white, I do not mean that something else,
which happens also to be a log, is white, as I should if I said a musician is white,
which would mean the man who happens also to be a musician is white.
On the contrary, log is here the substratum, the substratum which actually came to be white
and did so qua wood or qua a species of wood and qua nothing else.
If we must lay down a rule, let us entitle a latter kind of statement of predication
and the former not predication at all or not strict but accidental predication.
White and log will thus serve as types respectively of predicate and subject.
We shall assume then that the predicate is invariably predicated strictly and not accidentally
of the subject for on such predication demonstrations depend for their force.
It follows from this that when a single attribute is predicated of a single subject,
the predicate must affirm of the subject either some element constituting its essential nature
or that it is in some way qualified, quantified, essentially related, active, passive, placed, or dated.
2. Predicates which signify substance. Signify that the subject is identical with the predicate
or with a species of the predicate. Predicates not signifying substance which are predicated
of a subject not identical with themselves or with a species of themselves are accidental
or coincidental. For example, white is a coincidence of man seeing that man is not identical with white
or a species of white but rather with animal since man is identical with the species of animal.
These predicates which do not signify substance must be predicates of some other subject
and nothing can be fight which is not also other than white.
The forms we can dispense with for their mere sound without sense
and even if there are such things they are not relevant to our discussion.
Since demonstrations are concerned with predicates such as we have defined.
3. If A is a quality of B, B cannot be a quality of A, a quality of equality.
Therefore A and B cannot be predicated reciprocally of one another in strict predication.
They can be affirmed without falsehood of one another but not genuinely predicated of each other.
For one alternative is that they should be substantially predicated of one another.
That is B would become the genus or differential of A. The predicate now becomes subject.
But it has been shown that in these substantial predications neither the ascending predicates
nor the descending subjects form an infinite series.
For example neither the series, man is biped, biped is animal, etc.
nor the series predicating animal of man, man of callous, callous of a further subject
as an element of its essential nature is infinite.
For all such substances definable and an infinite series cannot be traversed in thought.
Consequently neither the ascending nor the descent is infinite
since a substance whose predicate for an infinite would not be definable.
Hence they will not be predicated each of the genus of the other
for this would equate a genus with one of its own species.
Nor the other alternative can a quality be reciprocally predicated of a quality
nor any term belonging to an adjectival category of another such term except by accidental predication.
For all such predicates are coincidence and are predicated of substances.
On the other hand in proof of the impossibility of an infinite ascending series
every predication displays the subject is somehow qualified or quantified
or is characterized under one of the other adjectival categories
or else is an element in its substantial nature.
These latter are limited in number and the number of the widest kinds
under which predication's fall is also limited.
For every predication must exhibit its subject is somehow qualified, quantified,
essentially related, acting or suffering or in some place or at some time.
I assume first that predication implies a single subject and a single attribute
and secondly that predicates which are not substantial are not predicated of one another.
I assume this because such predicates are all coincidence
and although some are essential coincidence others of a different type
yet we maintain that all of them alike are predicated of some substratum
and that a coincident is never a substratum since we do not class as a coincidence
anything which does not owe its designation to its being something other than itself
always holds that any coincidence is predicated of some substratum other than itself
and that another group of coincidents may have a different substratum.
Subject to these assumptions then, neither the ascending nor the descending series
of predications in which a single attribute is predicated of a single subject is infinite.
For the subjects of which coincidents are predicated
there are as many as the constitutive elements of each individual substance
and these we have seen are not infinite in number
while in the ascending series are contained those constitutive elements with their coincidence
both of which are finite.
We conclude that there is a given subject infinity D
of which some attribute infinity C is primarily predicable
and there must be an attribute infinity B primarily predicable of the first attribute
and that the series must end with a term infinity A not predicable of any term
prior to the last subject of which it was predicated infinity D
and of which no term prior to it is predicable.
The argument we have given is one of the so-called proofs.
The alternative proof follows predicates so related to their subjects
that there are other predicates prior to them predicable of those subjects are demonstrable
but of demonstrable propositions one cannot have something better than knowledge
nor can one know them without demonstration.
Secondly, if a consequent is only known to an antecedent
then there is premises prior to it and we neither know this antecedent
nor have something better than knowledge of it
then we shall not have scientific knowledge of the consequent.
Therefore, if it is possible through demonstration to know anything without qualification
and not merely a dependent on the acceptance of certain premises that is hypothetically
the series of intermediate predications must terminate.
If it does not terminate and beyond any predicate taken as higher than another
there remains another still higher then every predicate is demonstrable.
Consequently, since these demonstrable predicates are infinity number
and therefore cannot be traversed we shall not know them by demonstration.
If therefore we have not something better than knowledge of them
we cannot, through demonstration, have unqualified but only hypothetical signs of anything.
As dialectical proofs of our contention these may carry conviction
but an analytic process will show more briefly
that neither the assent nor the decent of predication can be infinite
in the demonstrative sciences which are the object of our investigation.
Demonstration proves the inheritance of assessor attributes in things.
Now attributes may be essential for two reasons
either because they are elements in the essential nature of their subjects
or because their subjects are elements in their essential nature.
An example of the latter is odd as an attribute of number though it is numbers attribute
yet number itself is an element in the definition of odd.
Of the former, multiplicity or the indivisible which are elements in the definition of number.
In neither kind of attribution can the terms be infinite.
They are not infinite where each is related to the term below it as odd is the number
for this would mean the inheritance in odd of another attribute of odd
in whose nature odd was an essential element
but then number will be an ultimate subject of the whole infinite chain of attributes
and be an element in the definition of each of them.
Hence, since an infinity of attributes such as complain their subject in their definition
cannot inherit a single thing, the ascending theory is equally finite.
Note moreover that all such attributes must so inherit the ultimate subject
for example its attributes in number and number in them
as to be commensurate with the subject and not of wider extent.
Attributes which are essential elements in the nature of their subject are equally finite
otherwise definition would be impossible.
Hence, if all the attributes predicated are essential and these cannot be infinite
the ascending series will terminate and consequently the descending series too.
If this is so it follows that the intermediate between any two terms are also always limited in number
and immediately obvious consequence of this is that demonstrations necessarily involve basic truth
and that the contention of some referred to at the outset that all truths are demonstrable is mistaken.
For if there are basic truths A, not all truths are demonstrable
and B, an infinite regress is impossible.
Since if either A or B were not a fact it would mean that no interval was immediate and indivisible
but that all intervals were divisible.
This is true because the conclusion is demonstrated by the interposition
not the apposition of a fresh term.
If such interposition could continue to infinity there might be an infinite number of terms between any two terms
but this is impossible if both the ascending and descending series of predication terminate.
And of this fact which before was shown dialectically analytic proof has now been given.
Chapter 23.
It is an evident corollary of these conclusions that if the same attribute A and has in two terms C and D
predictable either not at all or not of all instances of one another
it does not always belong to them in virtue of a common middle term.
Isosceles and scalenes possess the attribute of having their angles equal to two right angles in virtue of a common middle
but they possess it in so far as they are both a certain kind of figure
and not in so far as they differ from one another.
But this is not always the case.
For were it so, if we take B as the common middle in virtue of which A inheres in C and D
clearly B would inherit in C and D through a second common middle
and this in turn would inherit in C and D through a third
so that between two terms an infinity of intermediates would fall, an impossibility.
Thus it need not always be in virtue of a common middle term that a single attribute inheres in several subjects
since there must be immediate intervals.
Yet if the attribute to be proved common to two subjects is to be one of their essential attributes
the middle terms involved must be within one subject genus
and be derived from the same group of immediate premises
but we have seen that processes of proof cannot pass from one genus to another.
It is also clear that when A inheres in D this can be demonstrated if there is a middle term.
Further, the elements of such a conclusion are the premises containing the middle in question
and they are identical in number with the middle terms.
Seeing that the immediate propositions or at least such immediate propositions as are universal are the elements.
If on the other hand there is no middle term, demonstration ceases to be possible.
We are on the way to the basic truth.
Similarly, if A does not inherit in D this can be demonstrated if there is a middle term
or a term prior to B in which A does not inherit.
Otherwise there is no demonstration and a basic truth is reached.
There are moreover as many elements of the demonstrated conclusion as there are middle terms
since it is propositions containing these middle terms that are the basic premises on which the demonstration rests.
And as there are some indemonstrable basic truths asserting that this is that or that this inheres in that
so there are others denying that this is that or that this inheres in that.
In fact, some basic truths will affirm and some will deny being.
When we are to prove a conclusion we must take a primary essential predicate.
Suppose it's C of the subject B and then suppose A similarly predicable of C.
If we proceed in this manner no propositional attribute which falls beyond A is admitted in the proof.
The interval is constantly condensed until subject and predicate become indivisible, that is one.
We have our unit when the premise becomes immediate.
Since the immediate premise alone is a single premise in the unqualified sense of single.
And as in other spheres the basic element is simple but not identical in all.
In a system of weight it is the mina in music, the quartet tone and so on.
So in syllogism the unit is an immediate premise and in the knowledge that demonstration gives it is an intuition.
In syllogism then which proves the inheritance of an attribute nothing falls outside the major term.
In the case of negative syllogisms on the other hand, one.
In the first figure nothing falls outside the major term whose inheritance is in question.
For example to prove through a middle C that A does not inherit B the premises required are
or B is C, no C is A.
Then if it has to be proved that no C is A, a middle must be found between A and C
and this procedure will never vary.
Two.
If we have to show that E is not D by means of the premises or D is C, no E or not all E is C
then the middle will never fall beyond E and E is the subject of which D is to be denied in the conclusion.
Three.
In the third figure the middle will never fall beyond the limits of the subject and the attribute denied of it.
Chapter 24.
Since demonstrations may be either commensurately universal or particular and either affirmative or negative
the question arises which form is the better?
The same question may be put in regard to the so-called direct demonstration and reductio ad impossibile.
Let us first examine the commensurately universal and the particular forms
and when we have cleared up this problem proceed to discuss direct demonstrations and reductio ad impossibile.
The following considerations might lead some minds to prefer a particular demonstration.
One.
The superior demonstration is the demonstration which gives us greater knowledge
but this is the ideal of demonstration
and we have greater knowledge of a particular individual when we know it in itself
than when we know it through something else.
For example, we know Choruscus the musician better when we know that Choruscus is musical
than when we know only that man is musical under like argument holds in all other cases.
But commensurately universal demonstration instead of proving the subject itself actually is X
proves only that something else is X.
For example, in attempting to prove that isosceles is X it proves not that isosceles
but only that triangle is X whereas particular demonstration proves that the subject itself is X.
The demonstration then that a subject as such possesses an attribute is superior.
If this is so and if the particular rather than the commensurately universal form so demonstrates
particular demonstration is superior.
Two.
The universal has not a separate being over against groups of singular.
Demonstration nevertheless creates the opinion that its function is conditioned by something like this.
Some separate entity belonging to the real world that for instance of triangle or of figure or number
over against particular triangles, figures and numbers.
But demonstration which touches the real and will not mislead is superior to that which moves
among unrealities and is delusory.
Now commensurately universal demonstration is of the latter kind.
If we engage in it we find ourselves reasoning after a fashion well illustrated by the argument
that the proportionate is what answers to the definition of some entity which is neither line, number,
solid nor plane but a proportionate apart from all these.
Since then such a proof is characteristically commensurate and universal and less touches reality
than that particular demonstration and creates a false opinion.
It will follow that commensurate and universal is inferior to particular demonstration.
We may retort thus.
One.
The first argument applies no more to commensurate and universal than to particular demonstration.
If equality to two right angles is attributable to its subject not qua isosceles but qua triangles,
he who knows that isosceles possesses that attribute knows the subject as qua itself possessing the attribute
to a less degree than he who knows that triangle has that attribute.
To sum up the whole matter, if a subject is proved to possess qua triangle,
an attribute which does not in fact possess qua triangle, that is not demonstration.
But if it does possess it qua triangle, the rule applies that the greater knowledge is his who knows the subject
as possessing its attribute qua that in virtue of which it actually does possess it.
Since that triangle is a wider term and there is one identical definition of triangle,
that is the term is not equivocal, and since equality to two right angles belongs to all triangles,
it is isosceles qua triangle and not triangle qua isosceles which has its angles so related.
It follows that he who knows the connection universally has greater knowledge of it as it in fact is than he who knows the particular
and the inference is that commensurate and universal is superior to particular demonstration.
Two, if there is a single identical definition, that is if the commensurate universal is unequivocal,
then the universal possesses being not less but more than some of the particulars in as much as it is universal
which comprises the imperishable particulars that tend to perish.
Three, because the universal has a single meaning, we are not therefore compelled to suppose that in these examples it has
being as a substance apart from its particulars any more than we need to make a similar supposition
in the other cases of unequivocal universal predication, namely where the predicate signifies not substance
but quality, essential relatedness or action.
If such a supposition is obtained, the blame rests not for the demonstration but with the hearer.
Four, demonstration is syllogism that proves the cause, that is the reasoned fact,
and it is rather the commensurate universal than the particular which is causative as may be shown thus.
That which possesses an attribute to its own essential nature is itself the cause of the inheritance,
and the commensurate universal is primary. Hence, the commensurate universal is the cause.
Consequently, commensurate universal demonstration is superior as more especially proving the cause,
that is the reasoned fact.
Five, our search for the reason ceases, and we think that we know when the coming-to-be or existence of the fact before us
is not due to the coming-to-be or existence of some other fact, for the last step of a search thus conducted
is A.O. Ipsow, the end and limit of the problem. Thus, why did he come to get the money where we've prepared debt
that he might thereby do what was right?
When in this regress we can no longer find an efficient or final cause, we regard the last step of it as the end of the coming
or being or coming-to-be, and we regard ourselves as then only having full knowledge of the reason why he came.
If then, all causes and reasons are alike in this respect, and if this is the means for full knowledge,
in the case of final causes such as we have exemplified, it follows that in the case of the other causes also
full knowledge is attained when an attribute no longer inheres because of something else.
Thus, when we learn that exterior angles are equal to poor right angles because they are the exterior angles of an isosceles,
there still remains the question, why has isosceles this attribute?
And its answer, because it is a triangle and a triangle has it because a triangle is a rectilinear figure.
If rectilinear figure possesses the property for no further reason, at this point we have full knowledge,
but at this point our knowledge has become commensurately universal,
and so we conclude that commensurately universal demonstration is superior.
Six, the more demonstration becomes particular, the more it sinks into an indeterminate manifold
while universal demonstration tends to be simple and determinate.
But objects, so far as they are an indeterminate manifold, are unintelligible,
so far as they are determinate, intelligible.
They are therefore intelligible rather than so far as they are universal than in so far as they are particular.
From this it follows that universals are more demonstrable,
but since relative and correlative increase concomitantly, of the more demonstrable there will be fuller demonstration.
Hence, the commensurate and universal form being more truly demonstration is the superior.
Seven, demonstration which teaches two things is preferable to demonstration which teaches only one.
He who possesses commensurately universal demonstration knows the particular as well,
but he who possesses particular demonstration does not know the universal.
So that this is an additional reason for preferring commensurately universal demonstration.
And there is yet this further argument.
Eight, proof becomes more and more proof of the commensurate universal as its middle term approaches nearer to the basic truth,
and nothing is so near as the immediate premise which is itself the basic truth.
If then, proof from the basic truth is more accurate than proof not so derived,
demonstration which depends more closely on it is more accurate than demonstration which is less closely dependent.
But commensurately universal demonstration is characterised by this closer dependence and is therefore superior.
Thus, if A had to be proved to inherit in B and the middles were B and C,
B being a higher term would render the demonstration which is mediated the more universal.
Some of these arguments, however, are dialectical.
The clearest indication of the precedence of commensurately universal demonstration is as follows.
If of two propositions, a prior and a posterior, we have a grasp of the prior,
we have a kind of knowledge, a potential grasp of the posterior as well.
For example, if one knows that the angles of all triangles are equal to two right angles,
one knows in a sense, potentially, that the isosceles angles also are equal to two right angles,
even if one does not know that the isosceles is a triangle.
But to grasp this posterior proposition is by no means to know the commensurate universal either potentially or actually.
Moreover, commensurately universal demonstration is through and through intelligible.
Particular demonstration issues in sense perception.
Chapter 25. The preceding arguments constitute our defence of the superiority of commensurately universal to particular demonstration.
That affirmative demonstration, excelled negative, may be shown as follows.
One, we may assume the superiority, catterish parable, of the demonstration which derives from pure postulates or hypotheses,
in short, from pure premises.
Four, given that all these are equally well known, where they are pure, knowledge will be more severely acquired,
and that is a digital atom.
The argument implied in our contention that demonstration from pure assumptions is superior,
may be set out in universal form as follows.
Assuming that in both cases are like the middle terms are known, and that middles, which are prior, are better known than such as our posterior,
we may suppose two demonstrations of the inheritance of A in E,
the one proving it through the middles, B, C and D, the other through F and G.
Then, A to D is known to the same degree as A to E, in the second proof,
but A to D is better known than and prior to A to E, in the first proof.
Since A to E is proved to A to D, and the ground is more certain than the conclusion.
Hence, demonstration by pure premises is Keteris Paribus superior.
Now, both affirmative and negative demonstration operate through three terms and two premises.
But whereas the former assumes only that something is, the latter assumes both that something is and that something else is not,
and thus operating through more kinds of premise is interior.
Two, it has been proved that no conclusion follows if both premises are negative,
but that one must be negative to other affirmative.
So, we are compelled to lay down the following additional rule.
As the demonstration expands, the affirmative premises must increase in number,
but there cannot be more than one negative premise in each complete proof.
Thus, suppose no B is A, and all C is B.
Then, if both premises are to be again expanded, a middle must be interposed.
Let us interpose D between A and B, and E between B and C.
Then clearly E is affirmatively related to B and C, while B is affirmatively related to B, but negatively to A.
So, all B is D, but there must be no D, which is A.
Thus, there proved to be a single negative premise, A to D.
In the further prosilagism, too, it is the same, because in the terms of an affirmative syllogism,
the middle is always related affirmatively to both extremes.
In a negative syllogism, it must be negatively related only to one of them,
but this negation comes to be a single negative premise, the other premises being affirmative.
If then, that through which a truth is proved is a better known and more certain truth,
and if the negative proposition is proved through the affirmative and not vice versa,
affirmative demonstration, being prior and better known and more certain, will be superior.
Three, the basic truth of the monstrative syllogism is the universal immediate premise,
and the universal premise asserts an affirmative demonstration and in negative denies,
and the affirmative proposition is prior to and better known than the negative.
Since affirmation explains denial and is prior to denial, just as being is prior to not being.
It follows that the basic premise of affirmative demonstration is superior to that of negative demonstration,
and the demonstration which uses superior basic premises is superior.
Four, affirmative demonstration is more of the nature of a basic form of proof,
because it is a sine qua non of negative demonstration.
Chapter 26, since affirmative demonstration is superior to negative,
it is clearly superior also to reductio ad impossibile.
We must first make certain what is the difference between negative demonstration and reductio ad impossibile.
Let us suppose that no B is A, and that all C is B.
The conclusion necessarily follows that no C is A.
If these premises are assumed, therefore, the negative demonstration that no C is A is direct.
Reductio ad impossibile, on the other hand, proceeds as follows.
Supposing we are to prove that A does not inherit B, we have to assume that it does inherit,
and further that B inheres in C, with the resulting inference that A inheres in C.
This we have to suppose a known and admitted impossibility,
and we then infer that A cannot inherit in B.
Thus, if the inheritance of B and C is not questioned, A's inheritance in B is impossible.
The order of the terms is the same in both proofs.
They differ according to which of the negative propositions is the better known,
the one denying A of B, or the one denying A of C.
When the falsity of the conclusion is the better known, we use reductio ad impossibile.
When the major premise of the syllogism is the more obvious, we use direct demonstration, all the same.
The proposition denying A of B is, in the order of being, prior to that denying A of C.
The premises are prior to the conclusion which follows from them,
and no C is A is the conclusion, no B is A one of its premises.
For the destructive result of reductio ad impossibile is not a proper conclusion,
nor are its antecedents proper premises.
On the contrary, the constituents of syllogism are premises related to one another as whole to part or part to whole,
whereas the premises A to C and A to B are not thus related to one another.
Now, the superior demonstration is that which proceeds from better known and prior premises,
and while both these forms depend for credence on the not being of something,
yet the source of the one is prior to that of the other.
Therefore, negative demonstration will have an unqualified superiority to reductio ad impossibile,
and affirmative demonstration being superior to negative will consequently be superior also to reductio ad impossibile.
Chapter 27, the science which is knowledge at once of the fact and of the reasoned fact,
not of the fact by itself without the reasoned fact, is the more exact and the prior science.
A science such as arithmetic, which is not a science of properties choir in hearing in a substratum,
is more exact than and prior to a science like harmonics, which is a science of properties in hearing in a substratum.
And similarly, a science like arithmetic, which is constituted of fewer basic elements,
is more exact than and prior to geometry, which requires additional elements.
What I mean by additional elements is this.
A unit is substance without position, while a point is substance with position.
The latter contains an additional element.
Chapter 28, a single science is one whose domain is a single genus,
namely all the subjects constituted out of the primary entities of the genus,
the parts of this total subject, and their essential properties.
One science differs from another when their basic truths have neither a common source,
nor are derived those of the one science from those of the other.
This is verified when we reach the indemonstrable premises of a science,
for they must be within one genus with its conclusions.
And this, again, is verified if the conclusions proved by means of them fall within one genus.
That is, a homogeneous.
Chapter 29, one can have several demonstrations of the same connection,
not only by taking from the same series of predication middles,
which are other than the immediately co-hearing term.
For example, by taking C, D, and F separately to prove A to B,
but also by taking a middle from another series.
Thus, let A be changed, D alteration of a property, B feeling pleasure, and G relaxation.
We can then, without false predicate, D of B and A of D.
The U is these, suffers alteration of a property, and that which alters a property changes.
Again, we can predicate A of G without falsehood and G of B.
For to feel pleasure is to relax, and to relax is to change.
So the conclusion can be drawn from middles which are different, that is, not in the same series.
Yet, not so that neither of these middles is predicable of the other,
for they must both be attributable to some one subject.
A further point worth investigating is how many ways of proving the same conclusion can be obtained by varying the figure.
Chapter 30, there is no knowledge by demonstration of chance conjunctions.
The chance conjunctions exist neither my necessity nor as general connection,
but comprise what comes to be as something distinct from these.
Now, demonstration is concerned only with one or other of these two,
for all reasoning proceeds from necessary or general premises.
The conclusion being necessary if the premises are necessary, and general if the premises are general.
Consequently, if chance conjunctions are neither general nor necessary, they are not demonstrable.
Chapter 31, scientific knowledge is not possible through the act of perception,
even if perception of the faculty is of the such, and not merely of this somewhat.
Yet, one must at any rate actually perceive this somewhat, and at a definite present place in time.
But that which is commensurately universal and true in all cases, one cannot perceive, since it is not this, and it is not now.
If it were, it would not be commensurately universal, the term we apply to what is always and everywhere.
Seeing, therefore, that demonstrations are commensurately universal and universals imperceptible,
we clearly cannot obtain scientific knowledge by the act of perception.
There, it is obvious that even if it were possible to perceive that a triangle has its angles equal to two right angles,
we should still be looking for a demonstration.
We should not, as some say, possess knowledge of it.
For perception must be of a particular, whereas scientific knowledge involves the recognition of the commensurately universal.
So, if we were on the moon and saw the earth shutting out the sun's light, we should not know the cause of the eclipse.
We should perceive the present fact of the eclipse, but not the reason and fact at all, since the act of perception is not of the commensurately universal.
I do not, of course, deny that by watching the frequent recurrence of this event,
we might, after tracking the commensurately universal, possess a demonstration
for the commensurately universal is elicited from the several groups of singular.
The commensurately universal is precious because it makes clear the cause.
So that in the case of facts like these which have a cause out of themselves,
universal knowledge is more precious than sense perceptions and than intuition.
As regards primary truths, there is, of course, a different account to be given.
Hence, it is clear that knowledge of things demonstrable cannot be acquired by perception
unless the term perception is applied to the possession of scientific knowledge through demonstration.
Nevertheless, certain points do arise with regard to connections to be proved
which are referred to their explanation to a failure in sense perception.
There are cases when an active vision would terminate our inquiry,
not because in seeing we should be knowing, but because we should have elicited the universal promise seeing.
If, for example, we saw the pause in the glass and the light passing through,
the reason of the kindling would be clear to us because we should at the same time see it in each instance
and intuit that it must be so in all instances.
Chapter 32. All syllogisms cannot have the same basic truth.
This may be shown, first of all, by the following dialectical considerations.
One, some syllogisms are true and some false.
But there are true influences possible from false premises, yet this occurs once only.
I mean if A, for instance, is truly predictable of C, but B, the middle, is false.
Both A to B and B to C being false.
Nevertheless, if middles are taken to prove these premises, they will be false
because every conclusion which is a falsehood has false premises.
While true conclusions have true premises and false and true differ in kind.
Then again, two, falsehoods are not all derived from a single identical set of principles.
There are falsehoods which are the contrary of one another and cannot coexist.
For example, justice is injustice and justice is cowardice.
Man is horse and man is ox.
The equal is greater and the equal is less.
From our established principles, we may argue the case of fires,
confining ourselves with the appropriate true conclusions.
Not even all these are inferred from the same basic truth.
Many of them, in fact, have basic truths which differ generically and are not transferable.
Units, for instance, which are without position and cannot take the place of point, which have position.
The transferred terms could only fit in as middle terms or as major or minor terms,
or else have some of the other terms between them, others outside them.
Nor can any of the common axioms, such I mean as the law of excluded middle,
serve as premises for the proof of all conclusions.
For the kinds of being are different and some attributes attach to quanta and some to qualia only.
And proof is achieved by means of the common axioms taken in conjunction with these several kinds and their attributes.
Again, it is not true that the basic truths are much fewer than the conclusions.
The basic truths are the premises and the premises are formed by the apposition of a fresh extreme term
or the interposition of a fresh middle.
Moreover, the number of conclusions is indefinite that the number of middle terms is finite.
And lastly, some of the basic truths are necessary, others variable.
In this way, we see that since the number of conclusions is indefinite,
the basic truths cannot be identical or limited in number.
If, on the other hand, identity is used in another sense.
And it is said, for example, these and no other are the fundamental truths of geometry.
These are the fundamentals of calculation.
These, again, are medicine.
Would the statement mean anything except that the sciences have basic truths?
To call them identical because they are self-identical is absurd,
since everything can be identified with everything in that sense of identity.
Nor, again, can the contention that all conclusions have the same basic truths
mean that from the math of all possible premises any conclusion may be drawn.
That would be exceedingly naive, but it is not the case in the clearly evident mathematical sciences
nor is it possible in analysis, since it is the immediate premises which are the basic truths.
And the fresh conclusion is only formed by the addition of a new immediate premise.
But if it be admitted that it is these primary immediate premises which are basic truths,
each subject genius will provide one basic truth.
If, however, it is not argued that from the math of all possible premises any conclusion may be proved,
nor yet admitted that basic truths differ so as to be generically different for each sense,
it remains to consider the possibility that while the basic truths of all knowledge are within one genius,
special premises are required to prove special conclusions.
But that this cannot be the case has been shown by our proof,
that the basic truths of things generically different themselves differ generically.
For fundamental truths you have two kinds, those which are premises of demonstration and the subject genius,
and though the former are common, the latter, number, for instance, and magnitude, are peculiar.
Chapter 33.
Scientific knowledge and its object differ from opinion and the object of opinion
in that scientific knowledge is commensurately universal and proceeds by necessary connections,
and that which is necessary cannot be otherwise.
So though there are things which are true and real and yet can be otherwise,
scientific knowledge clearly does not concern them.
If it did, things which can be otherwise would be incapable of being otherwise.
Nor are they any concern of rational intuition.
By rational intuition, I mean an originative source of scientific knowledge.
Nor are in demonstrable knowledge which is the grasping of the immediate premise.
Since then, rational intuition, science, and opinion, and what is revealed by these terms are the only things that can be true.
It follows that it is opinion that is concerned with that which may be true or false and can be otherwise.
Opinion, in fact, is the grasp of a premise which is immediate but not necessary.
This view also fits the observed fact that opinion is unstable and so is the kind of being we have described as its object.
Besides, when a man thinks the truth is incapable of being otherwise, he always thinks that he knows it.
Never, but he opines it.
He thinks that he opines when he thinks that connection, though actually so, may quite easily be otherwise.
For he believes that such is the proper object of opinion while the necessary is the object of knowledge.
In what sense, then, can the same thing be the object of both opinion and knowledge?
And if anyone chooses to maintain that all that he knows he can also opine, why should not opinion be knowledge?
For he that knows and he that opines will follow the same train of thought through the same middle terms until the immediate premises are reached.
Because it is possible to opine not only the fact but also the reason, in fact, and the reason is the middle term,
so that since the former knows, he that opines also has knowledge.
The truth, perhaps, is that if a man grasps the truth that cannot be other than they are,
in the way in which he grasps the definitions through which demonstrations take place, he will not have opinion but knowledge.
If, on the other hand, he apprehends these attributes as inhering in their subjects but not in virtue of the subject's substance and essential nature,
he possesses opinion and not genuine knowledge, and his opinion, if obtained through immediate premises, will be both of the fact and of the reason fact,
if not so obtained, of the fact alone.
The object of opinion and knowledge is not quite identical.
It is only in a sense identical, just as the object of true and false opinion is in a sense identical.
The sense in which some maintain that true and false opinions can have the same object leads them to embrace many strange doctrines,
particularly the doctrine that what a man opines falsely, he does not opine at all.
There are really many senses of identical, and in one sense the object of true and false opinion can be the same, in another it cannot.
Thus, to have a true opinion that the diagonal is commensurate with the side would be absurd, but because the diagonal with which they are both concerned is the same,
the two opinions have objects so far the same.
On the other hand, as regards their essential definable nature, these objects differ.
The identity of the objects of knowledge and opinion is similar.
The knowledge is the apprehension of, for example, the attribute animal as incapable of being otherwise, opinion, the apprehension of animal as capable of being otherwise.
For example, the apprehension that animal is an element in the essential nature of man is knowledge.
The apprehension of animal as predictable of man, but not as an element in man's essential nature, is opinion.
Man is a subject in both judgments, but the mode of inheritance differs.
This also shows that one cannot opine and know the same thing simultaneously, for then one would apprehend the same thing as both capable and incapable of being otherwise, an impossibility.
Knowledge and opinion of the same thing can coexist in two different people in the sense they have explained, but not simultaneously in the same person.
That would involve a man simultaneously apprehending, for example, one, that man is essentially animal, that is, cannot be other than animal,
and two, that man is not essentially animal, that is, we may assume, maybe the other than animal.
Further consideration of modes of thinking and their distribution under the heads of discursive thought, intuition, science, art, practical wisdom and metaphysical thinking,
belongs rather partly to natural science, partly to moral philosophy.
Chapter 34.
Quick wit is a faculty of hitting upon the middle term instantaneously.
It would be exemplified by a man who saw that the moon has her bright side always turned towards the sun and quickly grasped the cause of it,
namely that she borrows her light from him, or observed somebody in conversation with a man of wealth and divine that he was borrowing money,
or that the friendship of these people sprang from a common enmity.
In all these instances he has seen the major and minor terms and then grasped the causes of the middle term.
Let A represent bright side term sunward, B lighted from the sun, C the moon, then B lighted from the sun is predictable of C the moon,
and A, having her bright side towards the source of her light, is predictable of B.
So A is predictable of C through B.
Book two, chapter one.
The kinds of questions we ask are as many as the kinds of things which we know.
They are in fact four, one, whether the connection of an attribute with a thing is a fact, two, what is the reason of the connection?
Three, whether a thing exists?
Four, what is the nature of the thing?
Thus, when our question concerns the complex of thing and attribute and we ask whether the thing is thus or otherwise qualified,
whether, for example, the sun suffers eclipse or not, then we are asking as to the fact of a connection.
That our inquiry ceases with the discoveries that the sun does suffer eclipse is an indication of this,
and if we know from the start that the sun suffers eclipse, we do not inquire whether it does so or not.
On the other hand, when we know the fact, we ask the reasons.
As for example, when we know that the sun is being eclipsed and that an earthquake is in progress,
it is the reason of eclipse or earthquake into which we inquire.
Where a complex is concerned, then, those are the two questions we ask.
But to some objects of inquiry, we have a different kind of question to ask, such as whether there is or is not a centaur or a god.
By is or is not, I mean is or is not without further qualification as opposed to is or is not, for example, white.
On the other hand, when we have ascertained the things existence, we inquire as to its nature,
asking, for instance, what then is God or what is man?
Chapter 2.
These then are the four kinds of questions we ask, and it is in the answers to these questions that our knowledge consists.
Now, when we ask whether a connection is a fact or whether a thing without qualification is,
we really are asking whether the connection or the thing has a middle.
And when we have ascertained either that the connection is a fact or that the thing is,
that is ascertained either the partial or the unqualified being of the thing,
and are proceeding to ask the reason of the connection or the nature of the thing,
then we are asking what the middle is.
By distinguishing the fact of the connection and the existence of the thing as respectively the partial and the unqualified being of the thing,
I mean that if we ask, does the moon suffer eclipse or does the moon wax?
The question concerns the part of the thing's being for what we are asking in such questions is whether a thing is this or that,
that is has or has not this or that attribute.
Whereas if we ask whether the moon or night exists, the question concerns the unqualified being of a thing.
We conclude that in all our inquiries we are asking either whether there is a middle or what the middle is.
For the middle here is precisely the cause and it is the cause that we seek in all our inquiries.
But does the moon suffer eclipse?
It means is there or is there not a cause producing eclipse of the moon?
And when we've learned that there is, our next question is what then is this cause?
The cause through which a thing is not is this or that, that is has this or that attribute but without qualification is.
And the cause through which it is not is without qualification but is this or that,
as having some essential attribute or some accident, are both alike, the middle.
By that which is without qualification I mean the subject.
For example, moon or earth or sun or triangle.
By that which the subject is, in the partial sense I mean a property.
For example, eclipse, equality or inequality, interposition or non-interposition.
For in all these examples it is clear that the nature of the thing and the reason of the fact are identical.
The question, what is eclipse?
And its answer, the privation of the moon's light by the interposition of the earth are identical with the question,
what is the reason of eclipse or why does the moon suffer eclipse?
And the reply, because of the failure of light through the earth's shutting it out.
Again, for what is a concord, a commensurate numerical ratio of a high and a low note?
We may substitute what reason makes a high and a low note concordant.
The relation according to a commensurate numerical ratio.
Are the high and the low note concordant is equivalent to, is their ratio commensurate?
And when we find that it is commensurate we ask, what then is their ratio?
Cases in which the middle is sensible show that the object of our inquiry is always the middle.
We inquire because we have not perceived it whether there is or is not a middle causing, for example, an eclipse.
On the other hand, if we were on the moon we should not be inquiring either as to the fact or the reason,
but both fact and reason would be obvious simultaneously.
For the act of perception would have enabled us to know the universal too.
Since the present fact of an eclipse being evident, perception would then at the same time give us the present fact
of the earth screening the sun's light, and from this would arise the universal.
Thus, as we maintain, to know a thing's nature is to know the reason why it is.
And this is equally true of things insofar as they are said without qualification to be as opposed to being possessed of some attribute.
And insofar as they are said to be possessed of some attribute such as equal to two right angles or greater or less.
Chapter 3. It is clear then that all questions are a search for a middle.
Let us now state how essential nature is revealed and in what way it can be reduced to demonstration.
What definition is and what things are definable?
And let us first discuss certain difficulties which these questions raised,
beginning what we have to say with a point most intimately connected with our immediately preceding remarks,
namely the doubt that might be felt as to whether or not it is possible to know the same thing in the same relation,
both by definition and by demonstration.
It might, I mean, be urged that definition is held to concern essential nature and is in every case universal and affirmative.
Whereas, on the other hand, some conclusions are negative and some are not universal.
For example, all in the second figure are negative, none in the third are universal.
And again, not even all affirmative conclusions in the first figure are definable.
For example, every triangle has its angles equal to two right angles.
An argument proving this difference between demonstration and definition is that to have scientific knowledge of the demonstrable
is identical with possessing a demonstration of it.
Hence, if demonstration of such conclusions as these is possible, there clearly cannot also be definition of them.
If they could, one might know such a conclusion also in virtue of its definition without possessing the demonstration of it,
for there is nothing to stop by having the one without the other.
Induction too will sufficiently convince us of this difference.
For never yet, by defining anything, essential attribute or accident, did we get knowledge of it?
Again, if to define is to acquire knowledge of a substance, at any rate such attributes are not substances.
It is evident then that not everything demonstrable can be defined.
What then?
Can everything definable be demonstrated or not?
There is one of our previous arguments which covers this too.
Of a single thing, choir single, there is a single scientific knowledge.
Hence, since to know the demonstrable scientifically is to possess the demonstration of it, an impossible consequence will follow.
Possession of its definition without its demonstration will give knowledge of the demonstrable.
Moreover, the basic premises of demonstrations are definitions and it has already been shown that these will be found in demonstrable.
Either the basic premises will be demonstrable and will depend on prior premises and the regress will be endless,
or the primary truth will be in demonstrable definitions.
But if the definable of the demonstrable are not wholly the same, may they yet be partially the same?
Or is that impossible because there can be no demonstration of the definable?
There can be none because definition is of the essential nature or being of something,
and all demonstrations evidently posit and assume the essential nature, mathematical demonstrations for example,
the nature of unity and the odd, and all the other sciences likewise.
Moreover, every demonstration proves a predicate of a subject as attaching or as not attaching to it,
but in definition one thing is not predicated of another.
We do not, for example, predicate animal of biped nor biped of animal, nor yet figure of plane,
plane not being figure nor figure, plane.
Again, to prove essential nature is not the same as to prove the fact of a connection.
Now definition reveals essential nature.
Demonstration reveals that a given attribute attaches or does not attach to a given subject,
but different things require different demonstrations unless the one demonstration is related to the other as part to whole.
I add this because if all triangles have been proved to possess angles equal to two right angles,
then this attribute has been proved to attach to isosceles, for isosceles is a part of which all triangles constitute the whole.
But in the case before us, the fact and the essential nature are not so related to one another since the one is not a part of the other.
So it emerges that not all the definable is demonstrable nor all the demonstrable definable,
and we may draw the general conclusion that there is no identical object of which it is possible to possess both a definition and a demonstration.
It follows obviously that definition and demonstration are neither identical nor contained either within the other.
If they were, their objects would be related either as identical or as whole and part.
Chapter 4
So much then for the first stage of our problem.
The next step is to raise the question whether syllogism, that is demonstration, of the definable nature is possible or, as our recent argument assumed, impossible.
We might argue it impossible on the following grounds.
A, syllogism proves an attribute of a subject through the middle term.
On the other hand, B, its definable nature is both peculiar to a subject and predicated of it as belonging to its essence.
But in that case, one, the subject, its definition and the middle term connecting them must be reciprocally predictable of one another,
for if A is peculiar to C, obviously A is peculiar to B and B to C.
In fact, all three terms are peculiar to one another.
And further, two, if A inheres in the essence of all B and B is predicated universally of all C as belonging to C's essence,
A also must be predicated of C as belonging to its essence.
If one does not take this relation as thus duplicated, if that is A is predicated as being of the essence of B,
but B is not of the essence of the subject of which it is predicated,
A will not necessarily be predicated of C as belonging to its essence.
So, both premises will predicate essence and consequently B also will be predicated of C as its essence.
Since therefore both premises do predicate essence, that is, definable form,
C's definable form will appear in the middle term before the conclusion is drawn.
We may generalize by supposing that it is possible to prove the essential nature of man.
Let C be man, A man's essential nature, two-footed animal, or else it may be.
Then, if we are to syllogize, A must be predicated of all B,
but this premise will be mediated by a fresh definition which consequently will also be the essential nature of man.
Therefore, the argument assumes what it has to prove, since B, too, is the essential nature of man.
It is, however, the case in which there are only the two premises,
that is, in which the premises are primary and immediate, which we ought to investigate,
because it best illustrates the point under discussion.
Thus, they who prove the essential nature of soul or man or anything else through reciprocating terms beg the question.
It would be begging the question, for example, to contend that the soul is that which causes its own life
and that what causes its own life is a self-moving number.
For all one would have to postulate that the soul is a self-moving number in the sense of being identical with it.
For if A is predictable as a mere consequence of B and B of C, A will not on that account be the definable form of C.
A will merely be what it was true to say of C.
Even if A is predicated of all B and as much as B is identical with the species of A, still it will not follow.
Being an animal is predicated of being a man, since it is true that in all instances to be human is to be animal,
just as it is also true that every man is an animal, but not as identical with being man.
We conclude then that unless one takes both the premises as predicating essence,
one cannot infer that A is the definable form and essence of C.
But if one does so take them, in assuming B one will have assumed before drawing the conclusion what the definable form of C is,
so that there's been no influence for one has begged the question.
Chapter 5.
Nor, as was said in my formal logic, is the method of division a process of inference at all,
since at no point does the characterization of the subject follow necessarily from the premises of certain other facts.
Division demonstrates as little as does induction.
From a genuine demonstration, the conclusion must not be put as a question nor depend on a concession,
but must follow necessarily from its premises, even if the respondent denied.
The definer asks, is man animal or inanimate?
And then assumes he has not inferred that man is animal.
Next, when presented with an exhaustive division of animal into terrestrial and aquatic, he assumes that man is terrestrial.
Moreover, that man is the complete formula terrestrial animal does not follow necessarily from the premises.
This too is an assumption and equally an assumption whether the division comprises many differenti or few.
Indeed, as this method of division is used by those who proceed by it, even truths that can be inferred actually fail to appear as such.
For why should not the whole of this formula be true of man and yet not exhibit his essential nature or definable form?
Again, what guarantee is it against an unessential addition or against the omission of the final or of an intermediate determinant of the substantial being?
The champion of division might hear urge that though these lapses do occur, yet we can solve that difficulty if all the attributes we assume are constituents of the definable form,
and if postulating the genus we produce by division the requisite uninterrupted sequence of terms and omit nothing.
And that indeed we cannot fail to fulfill these conditions if what is to be divided pulls whole into the division at each stage and none of it is omitted.
And that this, the dividendum, must without further question be, ultimately, incapable of fresh specific divisions.
Nevertheless, we reply, division does not involve inference. If it gives knowledge, it gives it in another way.
Nor is there any absurdity in this. Induction perhaps is not demonstration any more than is division, yet it does make evidence some truth.
Yet, the stated definition reached by division is not stated conclusion, as, when conclusions are drawn without their appropriate middles,
the alleged necessity by which the inference follows from the premises is open to a question as to the reason for it.
So, definitions reached by division invite the same question.
Last to the question, what is the essential nature of man, the divider replies, animal, mortal, footed, biped, wingless.
And when at each step he is asked why, he will say, and as he thinks, proved by division, that all animal is mortal or immortal,
but such a formula taken in its entirety is not definition.
So that even if division does demonstrate its formula, definition at any rate does not turn out to be a conclusion of inference.
Chapter 6. Can we, nevertheless, actually demonstrate what a thing essentially and substantially is,
but hypothetically, that is by premising one, that its definable form is constituted by the peculiar attributes of its essential nature,
two, that such and such are the only attributes of its essential nature, and that the complete synthesis of them is peculiar to the thing,
and thus, since in this synthesis consists of the being of the thing, obtaining our conclusion,
or is the truth that since proof must be through the middle term, the definable form is once more assumed in this minor premise, too?
Further, just as in syllogizing, we do not premise what syllogistic inference is, since the premises from which we conclude must be related as a whole and part,
so the definable form must not fall within the syllogism, but remain outside the premises positive.
It is only against a doubt as to its having been a syllogistic inference at all that we have to defend our argument as conforming to the definition of syllogism.
It is only when someone doubts whether the conclusion proved is the definable form that we have to defend it as conforming to the definition of definable form which we assumed.
Hence, syllogistic inference must be possible even without the express statement of what syllogism is or what definable form is.
The following type of hypothetical proof also begs the question, if evil is definable as the divisible and the definition of a thing's contrary,
if it has one, is the contrary of the thing's definition, then if good is the contrary of evil and the indivisible of the divisible,
we conclude that to be good is essentially to be indivisible.
The question is begged because definable form is assumed as a premise and as a premise which is to prove definable form, but not the same definable form you may object.
That, I admit, for in demonstrations also we premise that this is predictable of that, but in this premise the term we assert at the minor is neither the major itself nor a term identical in definition or convertible with the major.
Again, both proof by division and the syllogism just described are open to the question why man should be animal, biped, terrestrial and not merely animal and terrestrial.
Since what they premise does not ensure that the predicate shall constitute a genuine unity and not merely belong to a single subject as do musical and grammatical and predicated of the same man.
Chapter 7. How then, by definition, shall we prove substance or essential nature?
We cannot show it as a fresh fact necessarily following from the assumption of premises admitted to be facts, the method of demonstration.
We may not proceed as by induction to establish a universal on the evidence of groups of particulars which offer no exception because induction proves not what the essential nature of a thing is, but that it has or has not some attribute.
Therefore, since presumably one cannot prove essential nature by an appeal to sense perception or by pointing with the finger, what other method remains?
To put it another way, how shall we by definition prove essential nature?
He who knows what human or any other nature is must know also that man exists, for no one knows the nature of what does not exist.
One can know the meaning of the phrase or name goat stag, but not what the essential nature of a goat stag is.
But further, if definition can prove what is the essential nature of a thing, can it also prove that it exists?
And how will it prove them both by the same purpose?
Since definition exhibits one single thing and demonstration another single thing, and what human nature is and the fact that man exists are not the same thing.
Then, too, we hope that it is by demonstration that the being of everything must be proved, unless indeed to be were its essence.
And since being is not a genus, it is not the essence of anything.
Hence, the being of anything as fact is not of a demonstration.
And this is the actual procedure of the sciences, for the geometer assumes the meaning of the word triangle, but that it is possessed of some attribute he proves.
What is it then that we shall prove in defining essential nature? Triangle?
In that case, a man will know by definition what a thing's nature is without knowing whether it exists.
But that is impossible.
Moreover, it is clear.
If we consider the methods of defining actually in use, the definition does not prove that the thing defined exists.
Since even if there does actually exist something which is equidistant from a center, yet why should the thing named in the definition exist?
Why, in other words, should this be the formula defining the circle?
One might equally well call it the definition of mountain copper.
The definitions do not carry a further guarantee that the thing defined can exist, or that it is what they claim to define.
One can always ask why?
Since, therefore, to define is to prove either a thing's essential nature or the meaning of its name,
we may conclude that definition, if it in no sense proves essential nature, is a set of words signifying precisely what a name signifies.
But that were a strange consequence for, one, both what is not substance and what does not exist at all would be definable,
since even non-existence can be signified by a name.
Two, all sets of words or sentences would be definitions since any kind of sentence could be given a name.
So that we should all be talking in definitions, and even the inliad would be a definition.
Three, no demonstration can prove that any particular name means any particular thing.
Neither, therefore, do definitions, in addition to revealing the meaning of a name, also reveal that the name has this meaning.
It appears then from these considerations that neither definition and syllogism nor their objects are identical.
And further, that definition neither demonstrates nor proves anything,
and that knowledge of essential nature is not to be obtained either by definition or by demonstration.
Chapter 8, we must now start a question, consider which of these conclusions are sound and which are not,
and what is the nature of definition, and whether essential nature is in any sense demonstrable and definable or in none.
Now, to know its essential nature is, as we said, the same as to know the cause of a thing's existence,
and the proof of this depends on the fact that a thing must have a cause.
Moreover, this cause is either identical with the essential nature of the thing or distinct from it,
and if its cause is distinct from it, the essential nature of the thing is either demonstrable or indemonstrable.
Consequently, if the cause is distinct from the thing's essential nature and demonstration is possible,
the cause must be the middle term, and the conclusion proved being universal and affirmative, the proof is in the first figure.
So the method just examined of proving it through another essential nature would be one way of proving essential nature,
because the conclusion containing essential nature must be inferred through a middle, which is an essential nature,
just as a peculiar property must be inferred through a middle, which is a peculiar property.
So that of the two definable natures of a single thing, this method will prove one and not the other.
Now, it was said before that this method could not amount to demonstration of essential nature.
It is actually a dialectical proof of it.
So let us begin again and explain by what method it can be demonstrated.
When we are aware of a fact, we seek its reason, although sometimes the fact and the reason dawn on us simultaneously,
yet we cannot apprehend the reason a moment sooner than the fact.
And clearly, in just the same way, we cannot apprehend a thing's definable form without apprehending that it exists.
Since, while we are ignorant whether it exists, we cannot know its essential nature.
Moreover, we are aware whether a thing exists or not sometimes through apprehending an element in its character,
and sometimes accidentally, as for example, when we are aware of thunder as a noise in the clouds,
of eclipse as a provision of light, or of man as some species of animal, or of the soul as a self-moving thing.
As often as we have accidental knowledge that the thing exists, we must be in a wholly negative state
as regards the awareness of its essential nature, for we have not got genuine knowledge even of its existence.
And to search for a thing's essential nature when we are unaware that it exists is to search for nothing.
On the other hand, whenever we apprehend an element in a thing's character, there is less difficulty.
Thus, it follows that the degree of our knowledge of a thing's essential nature is determined by the sense in which we are aware that it exists.
Let us then take the following as our first instance of being aware of an element in the essential nature.
Let A be eclipse, C the moon, B the earth's acting as a screen.
Now, to ask whether the moon is eclipsed or not is to ask whether or not B has occurred,
but that is precisely the same as asking whether A has a defining condition.
And if this condition actually exists, we are certain A also actually exists.
Or again, we may ask which side of a contradiction the defining condition necessitates.
Does it make the angles of a triangle equal or not equal to two right angles?
When we have found the answer, if the premises are immediate, we know fact and reason together.
If they are not immediate, we know the fact without the reason as in the following example.
Let C be the moon, A eclipse, B the fact that the moon fails to produce shadows though she is full and though no visible body intervenes between us and her.
Then it B, failure to produce shadows in spite of the absence of an intervening body, is attributable to C and A eclipse is attributable to B.
It is clear that the moon is eclipsed, but the reason why is not yet clear.
And we know that eclipse exists, but we do not know what its essential nature is.
But when it is clear that A is attributable to C and we proceed to ask the reason of this fact, we are inquiring what is the nature of B.
Is it the earth's acting as a screen or the moon's rotation or her extinction?
But B is the definition of the other term in these examples of the major term A.
For eclipse is constituted by the earth acting as a screen.
Thus, one, what is thunder, the quenching of fire in cloud and two, why does it thunder?
Because fire is quenched in the cloud, our equivalent.
Let C be cloud, A is thunder, B the quenching of fire.
Then B is attributable to C, cloud, since fire is quenched in it and A, noise, is attributable to B and B is assuredly the definition of the major term A.
If there be a further mediating cause of B, it will be one of the remaining partial definitions of A.
We have stated then how essential nature is discovered and becomes known and we see that while there is no syllogism,
that is no demonstrative syllogism of essential nature, yet it is through syllogism,
there is demonstrative syllogism, that essential nature is exhibited.
So we conclude that neither can the essential nature of anything which has a cause distinct from itself be known without demonstration,
nor can it be demonstrated. And this is what we contended in our preliminary discussions.
Chapter 9. Now, while some things have a cause distinct from themselves, others have not.
Hence, it is evident that there are essential natures which are immediate, that is, our basic premises.
And of these, not only that they are, but also what they are must be assumed or revealed in some other way.
This too is the actual procedure of the Arithmatician who assumes both the nature and the existence of unit.
On the other hand, it is possible, in a manner explained, to exhibit through demonstration the essential nature of things which have a middle,
that is, a cause of their substantial being other than that being itself.
But we do not thereby demonstrate it.
Chapter 10. Since definition is said to be the statement of a thing's nature,
obviously one kind of definition will be a statement of the meaning of the name or of an equivalent nominal formula.
A definition in this sense tells you, for example, the meaning of the phrase, triangular character.
When we are aware that triangle exists, we inquire the reason why it exists.
But it is difficult for us to learn the definition of things, the existence of which we do not genuinely know,
because of this difficulty being, as we said before, but we only know accidentally whether or not the thing exists.
Moreover, a statement may be a unity in either of two ways, by conjunction, like the Iliad,
or because it exhibits a single predicate as in hearing not accidentally in a single subject.
That then is one way of defining definition.
Another kind of definition is a formula exhibiting the cause of a thing's existence.
Thus the formula signifies without proving, but the latter will clearly be a quasi-demonstration of essential nature
differing from demonstration in the arrangements of its terms.
But there is a difference between stating why it comes as and stating what is the essential nature of thunder,
since the first statement will be because fire is crunched in the clouds,
while the statement of what the nature of thunder is will be the noise of fire being quenched in the clouds.
Thus the same statement takes a different form.
In one form it is continuous demonstration in the other definition.
Again, thunder can be defined as noise in the clouds, which is the conclusion of the demonstration embodying essential nature.
On the other hand, the definition of immediate is an indemonstrable positing of essential nature.
We conclude then that definition is A, an indemonstrable statement of essential nature,
or B, a syllogism of essential nature differing from demonstration in grammatical form,
or C, the conclusion of a demonstration giving essential nature.
Our discussion has therefore made plain, one, in what sense and of what things the essential nature is demonstrable
and in what sense and of what things it is not.
Two, what are the various meanings of the term definition and in what sense and of what things it proves the essential nature
and in what sense and of what things it does not.
Three, what is the relation of definition to demonstration and how far the same thing is both definable and demonstrable
and how far it is not.
Chapter 11.
We think we have scientific knowledge when we know the cause and there are four causes.
One, the definable form.
Two, an antecedent which necessitates a consequent.
Three, the efficient cause.
Four, the final cause.
Hence each of these can be the middle term of a proof for A.
Though the inference from antecedent to necessary consequent does not hold if only one premise is assumed,
two is the minimum.
Still, when there are two, it holds on condition that they have a single common middle term.
So it is from the assumption of this single middle term that the conclusion follows necessarily.
The following example will also show this.
Why is the angle in a semicircle a right angle?
Or, from what assumption does it follow that it is a right angle?
Thus, let A be right angle B, the half of two right angles, C the angle in a semicircle.
Then B is the cause in virtue of which A, right angle, is attributable to C, the angle in a semicircle,
since B equals A and the other, with C equals B, for C is half of two right angles.
Therefore, it is the assumption of B, the half of two right angles, from which it follows that A is attributable to C.
That is, that the angle in a semicircle is a right angle.
Moreover, B is identical with B, the defining form of A, since it is what A's definition signifies.
Moreover, the formal cause has already been shown to be the middle.
C. Why do the Athenians become involved in the Persian War?
That means, what cause originated the waging of war against the Athenians?
And the answer is, because they raided Sardis with the Eritreans.
Since this originated the war, let A be war, be unprovoked raiding, see the Athenians.
Then B, unprovoked raiding, is true of C, the Athenians, and A is true of B,
as men make war on the unjust aggressor.
So A, having war waged upon them, is true of B, the initial aggressors,
and B is true of C, the Athenians, who were the aggressors.
Hence, here too, the cause, in this case the efficient cause, is the middle term.
D. This is no less true where the cause is the final cause.
For example, why does one take a walk after supper for the sake of one's health?
Why does the house exist for the preservation of one's goods?
The end in view is, in one case, health and the other, preservation.
To ask the reason why one must walk after supper is precisely to ask to what end one must do it.
Let C be walking after supper, B, the non-negurgitation of food, A, health.
Then, let walking after supper possess the property of preventing food from rising to the orifice of the stomach,
and let this condition be healthy, since it seems that B, the non-negurgitation of food,
is attributable to C, taking a walk, and that A, health, is attributable to B.
What then is the cause, through which A, the final cause, inheres in C?
It is B, the non-negurgitation of food, but B is the kind of definition of A for A will be explained by it.
Why is B the cause of A belonging to C?
Because to be in a condition such as B is to be in health.
The definitions must be transposed, and then the detail will become clear.
Incidentally, here the order of coming to D is the reverse of what it is in proof through the efficient cause.
In the efficient order, the middle term must come to be first, whereas in the teleological order, the minor, C,
must first take place, and the end in view comes last in time.
The tempting may exist for an end, and be necessitated as well.
For example, light shines through a lantern.
One, because that which consists of relatively small particles necessarily passes through pores larger than those particles,
assuming that light does issue bi-penetration, and two, for an end, namely, to save us from stumbling.
If anything can exist through two causes, can it come to be through two causes?
As for instance, it's thunder, be a hiss, and a roar necessarily produced by the quenching of fire,
and also designed, as the Pythagorean say, for a threat to terrify those lion-tartarus.
Indeed, there are very many such cases, mostly among the processes and products of the natural world.
For nature, in different senses of the term, nature, produces now for an end, now by necessity.
Necessity, too, is of two kinds. It may work in accordance with a thing's natural tendency, or by constraint,
adding opposition to it, as, for instance, by necessity, a stone is born both upwards and downwards, but not by the same necessity.
Of the products of man's intelligence, some are never due to chance or necessity, but always to an end.
As, for example, a house or a statue, others, such as health or safety, may result from chance as well.
It is mostly in cases where the issue is indeterminate, though only where the production does not originate in chance,
and the end is consequently good, but the result is due to an end, and this is true, like in nature or in art.
By chance, on the other hand, nothing comes to be for an end.
Chapter 12.
The effect may be still coming to be, or its occurrence may be past or future, yet the cause will be the same as when it is actually existent,
for it is the middle, which is the cause, except that if the effect actually exists, the cause is actually existent.
If it is coming to be, so is the cause. If its occurrence is past, the cause is past. If future, the cause is future.
For example, a moon was eclipsed because the Earth intervened, is becoming eclipsed because the Earth is in process of intervening,
will be eclipsed because the Earth will intervene, is eclipsed because the Earth intervenes.
To take a second example, assuming that the definition of ice is solidified water, let C be water, A solidifies B the middle,
which is the cause, namely total failure of heat, then B is attributed to C, and A solidification to B.
Ice forms when B is occurring, has formed when B has occurred, and will form when B shall occur.
This sort of cause, then, and its effect come to be simultaneously when they are in process of becoming and exist simultaneously when they actually exist,
and the same holds good when they are past and when they are future.
But what if the case is where they are not simultaneous? Can causes and effects different from one another form, as they seem to ask to form,
a continuous succession, a past effect resulting from a past cause different from itself, a future effect from a future cause different from it,
and an effect which is coming to be from a cause different from and prior to it?
Now on this theory, it is from the posterior events that we reason, and this, though these later events actually have their source of origin in previous events,
a fact which shows that also when the effect is coming to be, we still reason from the posterior event.
And from the prior event, we cannot reason. We cannot argue that because an event A has occurred, therefore an event B has occurred subsequently to A,
but still in the past, and the same holds good if the occurrence is future.
We cannot reason because B in the time interval definite or indefinite, it will never be possible to infer that because it is true to say that A occurred,
therefore it is true to say that B, the subsequent event, occurred.
For in the interval between the events, though A has already occurred, the latter statement will be false.
And the same argument applies also to future events, that is one cannot infer from an event which occurred in the past that a future event will occur.
The reason of this is that the middle must be homogeneous, past when the extremes are past, future when they are future, coming to be when they are coming to be,
actually existent when they are actually existent.
And there cannot be a middle term homogeneous with extremes respectively past and future.
And it is a further difficulty in this theory that the time interval can be neither indefinite nor definite, since during it the inference will be false.
We have also to inquire what it is that holds events together so that the coming to be now occurring in actual things follows upon a past event.
It is evident, we may suggest, that a past event and the present process cannot be contiguous, for not even two past events can be contiguous.
For past events are limit and atomic, so just as points are not contiguous neither are past events, since both are indivisible.
For the same reason, a past event and the present process cannot be contiguous, for the process is divisible, the event indivisible.
Thus the relation of present process to past event is analogous to that of line to point, since the process contains an infinity of past events.
These questions, however, must receive a more explicit treatment in our general theory of change.
The following must suffice as an account of the manner in which the middle would be identical with the cause on this opposition that coming to be is a series of consecutive events.
For in the terms of such a series, too, the middle and major terms must form an immediate premise.
For example, we argue that since C has occurred, therefore A occurred, and C the current was posterior, A is higher.
But C is the source of the inference because it is nearer to the present moment and the starting point of time is the present.
We next argue that since D has occurred, therefore C occurred, then we conclude that since D has occurred, therefore A must have occurred.
And the cause is C, or since D has occurred, C must have occurred, and since C has occurred, A must previously have occurred.
If we get our middle term in this way, will the series terminate in an immediate premise, or since, as we said, no two events are contiguous, will a fresh term always intervene because there is an infinity of middles?
No.
Though no two events are contiguous, yet we must start from a premise consisting of a middle and the present event as major.
The like is true of future events, too. Since if it is true to say that D will exist, it must be a prior to say that A will exist.
And the cause of this conclusion is C, for if D will exist, C will exist prior to D, and if C will exist, A will exist prior to it.
And here, too, the same infinite divisibility might be urged since future events are not contiguous.
But here, too, an immediate basic premise must be assumed, and in the world of fact, this is so.
If a house has been built, then blocks must have been quarried and shaped.
The reason is that a house having been built necessitates the foundation having been laid, and if a foundation has been laid, blocks must have been shaped beforehand.
Again, if a house will be built, blocks will similarly be shaped beforehand, and proof is through the middle in the same way, for the foundation will exist before the house.
Now, we observe in nature a certain kind of circular process of coming to be, and this is possible only if the middle and extreme terms are reciprocal,
since conversion is conditioned by reciprocity in the terms of the proof.
This, the convertibility of conclusions and premises, has been proved in our early chapters, and the circular process is an instance of this.
In actual fact, it is exemplified thus.
When the earth had been moistened, an exhalation was bound to rise, and when an exhalation had risen, cloud was bound to form,
and from the formation of cloud rain necessarily resulted, and by the fall of rain, the earth was necessarily moistened.
But this is the starting point, where the encirclement can take it, proposes any one of the terms and another follows from it,
and from that another, and from that again the first.
Some accounts is a universal, for they are, or come to be, what they are, always and in every case.
Others, again, are not always what they are, but only as a general rule.
For instance, not every man can grow a beard, but it is the general rule.
In the case of such connections, the middle term too must be a general rule, but if A is predicted universally of B and B of C,
A too must be predicted always and in every instance of C, since the whole in every instance and always is of the nature of the universal.
But we have assumed a connection, which is a general rule.
Consequently, the middle term B must also be a general rule.
So, connections which embody a general rule, that is, which exist or come to be as a general rule, will also derive from immediate basic premises.
Chapter 13.
We have already explained how essential nature is set out in the terms of a demonstration and the sense in which it is or is not demonstrable or definable.
So, let us now discuss the method to be adopted in tracing the elements predicated as constituting the definable form.
Now, of the attributes which in here always in each several thing, there are some which are wider in extent than it, but not wider than its genus.
By attributes of wider extent, I mean all such as the universal attributes of each several subject, but in their application are not confined to that subject.
That is, while an attribute may inherit in every triad, yet also in a subject not a triad, as being inheres in triad, but also in subjects not numbers at all,
odd on the other hand, is an attribute inhering in every triad and a wider application inhering as it does also in pentad, but which does not extend beyond the genus of triad.
For pentad is a number, but nothing outside number is odd.
It is such attributes which we have to select, up to the exact point at which there are several of wider extent than the subject, but collectively co-extensive with it.
For this synthesis must be the substance of the thing.
For example, every triad possesses the attributes number, odd, and prime in both senses.
That is not only possessing no divisors, but also is not being a sum of numbers.
This then is precisely what triad is.
This is a number, odd, and prime in the former, and also the latter sense of the term.
For these attributes taken separately apply, the first two to all odd numbers, the last to the diad also as well as to the triad, but taken collectively to no other subject.
Now, since we have shown above that attributes predicated as belonging to the essential nature are necessary and that universals are necessary,
and since the attributes which we select as inhering in triad or in any other subject whose attributes we select in this way are predicated as belonging to its essential nature,
triad will thus possess these attributes necessarily.
Further, that the synthesis of them constitutes the substance of triad is shown by the following argument.
If it is not identical with the being of triad, it must be related to triad as a genus named or nameless.
It will then be a wider extent than triad, assuming that wider potential extent is the character of a genus.
If, on the other hand, this synthesis is applicable to no subject other than the individual triad,
it will be identical with the being of triad because we make the further assumption that the substance of each subject is the predication of elements in its essential nature down to the last differential characterizing the individuals.
It follows, but any other synthesis thus exhibited will likewise be identical with the being of the subject.
The author of a handbook on a subject that is a generic whole should divide the genus into experts in stimuli, species, number, for example, into triad and dyad,
and then endeavor to seize their definitions by the method we have described, the definition, for example, of straight line or circle or right angle.
After that, having established what the category is to which the subaltern genus belongs, quantity or quality, for instance,
he should examine the properties peculiar to the species working through the proximate common differential.
He should proceed thus because the attributes of the genera compounded of the infimized species will be clearly given by the definitions of the species,
since the basic element of them all is the definition, that is, the simple infimized species, and the attributes in here essentially in the simple infimized species in the genera only in virtue of these.
Divisions according to differential are a useful accessory to this method, what force they have as proofs we did indeed explain above,
but that merely towards collecting the essential nature they may be of use we will proceed to show.
They might indeed seem to be of no use at all, but rather to assume everything at the start and to be no better than an initial assumption made without division.
But in fact, the order in which the attributes are predicated does make a difference.
It matters whether we say animal, tame, biped, or biped animal, tame.
For if every definable thing consists of two elements and animal, tame forms a unity, and again out of this and the further differential man,
or whatever else is the unity under construction, is constituted, then the elements we assume have necessarily been reached by division.
Again, division is the only possible method of avoiding the omission of any element of the essential nature.
Thus, if the primary genus is assumed, and we then take one of the lower divisions, the dividendum will not fall whole into this division.
For example, it is not all animal which is either whole winged or split winged, but all winged animal, for it is winged animal to which this differentiation belongs.
The primary differentiation of animal is that within which all animals fall.
The like is true of every other genus, whether outside animal or a subaltern genus of animal.
For example, the primary differentiation of bird is that within which falls every bird, or fish that within which falls every fish.
So, if we proceed in this way, we can be sure that nothing has been omitted by any other method, one is bound to omit something without knowing it.
To define and divide, one need not know the whole of existence, yet some hold it impossible to know the differential distinguishing each thing from every single other thing without knowing every single other thing.
And one cannot, they say, know each thing without knowing its differential, since everything is identical with that from which it does not differ, and other than that from which it differs.
Now, first of all, this is a fallacy. Not every differential precludes identity, there's many differential I and here in things specifically identical, but not in the substance of these, nor essentially.
Secondly, when one has taken one differing pair of opposites and assumed that the two sides exhaust the genus, and that the subject one seeks to define is present in one or other of them, and one is further verified as present in one of them,
then it does not matter whether or not one knows all the other subjects of which the differentiator also predicated.
It is obvious, but when, by this process, one reaches a subject incapable of further differentiation, one will possess the formula defining the substance.
Moreover, to postulate that the division exhausts the genus is not illegitimate if the opposites exclude a middle.
Since if it is the differential of that genus, anything contained in the genus must lie on one of the two sides.
In establishing a definition by division, one should keep three objects in view.
One, the admission only of elements in the definable form.
Two, the arrangement of these in the right order.
Three, the omission of no such elements.
The third is feasible because one can establish genus and differentiate through the topic of the genus,
just as one can conclude the inheritance of an accident through the topic of the accident.
The right order will be achieved if the right term is assumed as primary,
and this will be ensured if the term selected is predictable of all the others, but not all they of it, since there must be one such term.
Having assumed this, we at once proceed in the same way with the lower terms.
For our second term will be the first of the remainder, our third, the first of those which follow the second in a contiguous series.
Since when the higher term is excluded, that term of the remainder which is contiguous to it will be primary and so on.
Our procedure makes it clear that no elements in the definable form have been omitted.
We have taken the differential that comes first in the order of division, pointing out that animal, for example, is divisible exhaustively into A and B,
and that the subject accepts one of the two as its predicate.
Next, we have taken the differential of the whole, thus reached, and shown that the whole we finally reach is not further divisible.
That is, that as soon as we have taken the last differential to form the concrete totality,
this totality admits of no division into species.
But it is clear that there is no superfluous addition since all these terms we have selected are elements in the definable form,
and nothing lacking that any omission would have to be a genus or a differential.
Now, the primary term is a genus, and this term taken in conjunction with its differential is a genus.
Moreover, the differential are all included because there is now no further differential.
If there were, the final concrete would admit of division into species, which we said is not the case.
To resume our account of the right method of investigation, we must start by observing a set of similar, that is specifically identical,
individuals, and consider what element they have in common.
We must then apply the same process to another set of individuals which belong to one species and are generically but not specifically identical with the former set.
When we have established what the common element is in all members of the second species and likewise in members of further species,
we should again consider whether the results are established to possess any identity and persevere until we reach a single formula,
since this will be the definition of the thing.
But if we reach not one formula but two or more, evidently the day finiendum cannot be one thing but must be more than one.
I may illustrate my meaning as follows.
If we were inquiring what the essential nature of pride is, we should examine instances of proud men we know of to see what, as such, they have in common.
For example, if Alcibiades was proud, or Achilles and Ajax were proud, we should find, not inquiring what they all had in common, that it was intolerance of insult.
It was this which drove Alcibiades to war, Achilles to wrath, and Ajax to suicide.
We should next examine other cases like Sander, for example, or Socrates, and then if these have in common indifference to good and ill fortune,
I take these two results and inquire what common elements have equanimity amid the vicissitudes of life and impressions of dishonor.
If there have none, there will be two genera of pride.
Besides, every definition is always universal and commensurate.
The physician does not prescribe what is healthy for a single eye, but for all eyes, or for a determinate species of eye.
It is also easier by this method to define the single species than the universal,
and that is why our procedure should be from the several species to the universal genera.
This for the further reason too, but equivocation is less readily detected in genera than an infimized species.
Indeed, perspecurity is essential in definitions, just as inferential movement is the minimum required in demonstrations.
And we shall attain perspecurity if we can collect separately the definition of each species through the group of singular which we have established.
For example, a definition of similarity not unqualified but restricted to colors and figures, the definition of acuteness but only of sound,
and so proceed to the common universal with a careful avoidance of ethical vocation.
We may add that if dialectical disputation must not employ metaphors,
kernet metaphors and metaphorical expressions are precluded in definition, otherwise dialectic would involve metaphors.
Chapter 14. In order to formulate the connections we wish to prove, we have to select our analyses and divisions.
The method of selection consists in laying down the common genus of all our subjects of investigation.
If, for example, they are animals, we lay down what the properties are which inherit in every animal.
Desestablished, we next lay down the properties essentially connected with the first of the remaining classes.
For example, if this first subgenus is bird, the essential properties of every bird and so on always characterizing the proximate subgenus.
This will clearly at once enable us to say in virtue of what character the subgenera, man, for example, or horse, possess their properties.
Let A be the animal, B the properties of every animal, C, D, E, various species of animal.
Then it is clear in virtue of what character B inheres in D, namely A, and that it inheres in C and E for the same reason.
And throughout the remaining subgenera always the same rule applies.
We are now taking our examples from the traditional class names, but we must not confine ourselves to considering these.
We must collect any other common character which we observe and then consider with what species it is connected and what properties belong to it.
For example, as the common properties of horned animals, we collect the possession of a third stomach and only one row of teeth.
Then, since it is clear in virtue of what character they possess these attributes, namely their horned character,
the next question is to what species does the possession of horns attach?
Yet a further method of selection is by analogy, for we cannot find a single identical name to give to a squid's punse, a fish's spine, and an animal's bone,
although these two possess common properties as if they were a single, auspicious nature.
Chapter 15. Some connections that require proof are identical in that they possess an identical middle.
For example, a whole group might be proved through reciprocal replacement and of these one class are identical in genus,
namely all those whose difference consists in their concerning different subjects or in their mode of manifestation.
These latter class may be exemplified by the questions as the causes respectively of echo, of reflection, and of the rainbow.
The connections to be proved which these questions embody are identical generically because all three are forms of repercussion, but specifically they are different.
Other connections that require proof only differ in that the middle of the one is subordinate to the middle of the other.
For example, why does the Nile rise towards the end of the month? Because towards its close the month is more stormy.
Why is the month more stormy towards its close? Because the moon is waning.
Here the one cause is subordinate to the other.
Chapter 16. The question might be raised with regard to cause and effect, whether when the effect is present the cause also is present.
Whether for instance if a plant shed its leaves or the moon is eclipsed, there is present also the cause of the eclipse or the fall of the leaves.
The possession of broad leaves, let us say in the latter case, in the former the earth's interposition.
For one might argue if this cause is not present these phenomena will have some other cause.
If it is present its effect will be at once implied by it, the eclipse by the earth's interposition, the fall of the leaves by the possession of broad leaves.
But if so, they will be logically coincident and each capable of proof through the other.
Let me illustrate. Let A be deciduous character, B the possession of broad leaves, C vine.
Now if A inheres in B for every broad leaf's plant is deciduous and B in C, every vine possessing broad leaves, then A inheres in C.
Every vine is deciduous and the middle term B is the cause.
But we can also demonstrate that the vine has broad leaves because it is deciduous.
Thus let D be broad leaf, E deciduous, F vine.
Then E inheres in F since every vine is deciduous and D in E for every deciduous plant has broad leaves.
Therefore every vine has broad leaves and the cause is its deciduous character.
If however they cannot each be the cause of the other, for cause is prior to effect and the earth's interposition is the cause of the moon's eclipse and not the eclipse of the interposition,
if then demonstration through the cause is of the reasoned fact and demonstration not through the cause is of the bare fact,
one who knows it through the eclipse knows the fact of the earth's interposition but not the reasoned fact.
Moreover, that the eclipse is not the cause of the interposition but the interposition of the eclipse is obvious because the interposition is an element in the definition of eclipse
which shows that the eclipse is known through the interposition and not vice versa.
On the other hand, can a single effect have more than one cause?
One might argue as follows, if the same attribute is predictable of more than one thing as its primary subject, let B be a primary subject in which A inheres and C another primary subject of A
and D and E primary subjects of B and C respectively.
A will then inherit D and E and B will be the cause of A's inheritance in D, C of A's inheritance in E.
The presence of the cause thus necessitates that of the effect but the presence of the effect necessitates the presence not of all that may cause it but only of a cause which it need not be the whole cause.
We may however suggest that if the connection to be proved is always universal and commensurate, not only will the cause be a whole but also the effect will be universal and commensurate.
For instance, deciduous character will belong exclusively to a subject which is a whole and if this whole has species, universally and commensurately to those species, that is, either to all species of plant or to a single species.
So, in these universal and commensurate connections, a middle and its effect must reciprocate, that is, be convertible.
Supposing, for example, the reason why trees are deciduous is the coagulation of sap.
Then if a tree is deciduous, coagulation must be present and if coagulation is present, not in any subject but in a tree, then that tree must be deciduous.
Chapter 17.
Can the cause or an identical effect be not identical in every instance of the effect but different or is that impossible?
Perhaps it is impossible if the effect is demonstrated as essential and not as in hearing in virtue of a symptom or an accident because the middle is then the definition of the major term, though possible if the demonstration is not essential.
Now, it is possible to consider the effect and its subject as an accidental conjunction, though such conjunctions would not be regarded as connections demanding scientific proof.
But if they are accepted as such, the middle will correspond to the extremes and be equivocal if they are equivocal, generically one if they are generically one.
Take the question why proportionals alternate? The cause, when they are lines and when they are numbers, is both different and identical?
Different insofar as lines are lines and not numbers, identical as involving a given determinant increment in all proportionals that is so.
Again, the cause of likeness between color and color is other than that between figure and figure.
For likeness here is equivocal, meaning perhaps in the latter case equality of the ratios of the sides and equality of the angles.
In the case of colors, identity of the act of perceiving them or something else of the sort.
Again, connections requiring proof, which are identical by analogy, have middles also analogous.
The truth is that cause, effect and subject are reciprocally predicable in the following way.
If the species are taken separately, the effect is wider than the subject.
For example, the possession of external angles equal to four right angles is an attribute wider than triangle or square, but it is co-extensive with the species taken collectively in this instance with all figures whose external angles are equal to four right angles.
And the middle, likewise reciprocates for the middle, is the definition of the major, which is incidentally the reason why all the sciences are built up through definition.
We may illustrate as follows. Deciduous is the universal attribute of vine and is at the same time of wider extent than vine and of fig and is of wider extent than fig.
But it is not wider than but co-extensive with the totality of the species.
Then if you take a middle, which is proximate, it is a definition of deciduous.
I say that because you will first reach a middle, next to the subject, and a premise, inserting it of a whole subject, and after that a middle, the coagulation of sap or something of the sort, proving the connection of the first middle with the major.
But it is the coagulation of sap or the junction of leaf, stalk and stem, which defines deciduous.
If an explanation in formal terms of the interrelation of cause and defect is demanded, we shall offer the following.
Let A be an attributable B and B of every species of B, but so that both A and B are wider than their respective subjects.
Then B will be a universal attribute of each species of D, since I call such an attribute universal even if it is not commensurate, and I call an attribute primarily universal if it is commensurate.
Not with each species separately, but with their totality, and it extends beyond each of them taken separately.
Thus, B is the cause of A's inheritance in the species of D. Consequently, A must be of wider extent than B.
Otherwise, why should B be the cause of A's inheritance in D? Any more than A, the cause of B's inheritance in D.
Now, if A is an attribute of all the species of E, all the species of E will be united by possessing some common cause other than B.
Otherwise, how shall we be able to say that A is predictable of all of which E is predictable, while E is not predictable of all of which A can be predicated?
I mean, how can there fail to be some special cause of A's inheritance in E, as there was of A's inheritance in all the species of D?
Then, are the species of E too united by possessing some common cause? This cause we must look for. Let us call it C.
We conclude then that the same effect may have more than one cause, but not in subjects specifically identical.
For instance, the cause of longevity in quadrupeds is lack of bile. In birds, a dry constitution, or certainly something different.
Chapter 18. If immediate premises are not reached at once, and there is not merely one middle but several middles, that is, several causes,
is the cause of the property's inheritance in the several species the middle, which is approximate to the primary universal, or the middle, which is approximate to the species?
Clearly, the cause is that near to each species, several M, which is manifested, so that is the cause of the subject falling under the universal.
To illustrate formally, C is the cause of B's inheritance in D, hence C is the cause of A's inheritance in D, B of A's inheritance in C,
while the cause of A's inheritance in B is B itself.
Chapter 19. As regards syllogism and demonstration, the definition of and the conditions required to produce each of them are now clear,
and with that also the definition of and the conditions required to produce demonstrative knowledge, since it is the same as demonstration.
As to the basic premises, how they become known and what is the developed state of knowledge of them is made clear by raising some preliminary problems.
We have already said that scientific knowledge through demonstration is impossible unless a man knows the primary immediate premises.
But there are questions which might be raised in respect of the apprehension of these immediate premises.
One might not only ask whether it is of the same kind as the apprehension of the conclusions, but also whether there is or is not scientific knowledge of both,
or scientific knowledge of the latter and of the former, a different kind of knowledge.
And further, whether the developed states of knowledge are not innate would come to be in us or are innate but at first unnoticed.
Now it is strange if we possess them from birth, but it means that we possess apprehensions more accurate than demonstration and fail to notice them.
If on the other hand we acquire them and do not previously possess them, how could we apprehend and learn without a basis of pre-existent knowledge?
For that is impossible as we used to find in the case of demonstration.
So it emerges that neither can we possess them from birth, nor can they come to be in us if we are without knowledge of them to the extent of having no such developed state at all.
Therefore, we must possess a capacity of some sort, but not such as to rank higher in accuracy than these developed states.
And this at least is an obvious characteristic of all animals, for they possess a congenital discriminative capacity which is called sense perception.
For those sense perception is innate in all animals, in some the sense impression comes to persist, in others it does not.
So animals in which this persistence does not come to be have either no knowledge at all outside the act of perceiving or no knowledge of objects of which no impression persists.
Animals in which it does come into being have perception and can continue to retain the sense impression in the soul.
And when such persistence is frequently repeated, a further distinction at once arises between those which out of the persistence of such sense impressions develop a power of systematizing them and those which do not.
So, out of sense perception comes to be what we call memory, and out of frequently repeated memories of the same thing develops experience.
For a number of memories constitute a single experience.
From experience again, that is from the universal now stabilized in its entirety within the soul, the one beside the many, which is a single identity within them all,
originate the skill of the craftsman and the knowledge of the man of science, skill in the sphere of coming to be and science in the sphere of being.
We conclude that these states of knowledge are neither innate in a determinate form nor developed from other higher states of knowledge but from sense perception.
It is like a route in battle stopped by first one man making a stand and then another until the original formation has been restored.
The soul is so constituted as to be capable of this process.
That is now restate the account given already though with institution's clearness.
When one of a number of logically indiscriminable particulars has made a stand, the earliest universal is present in the soul.
For though the act of sense perception is of the particular, its content is universal, is man, for example, not the man Kaliath.
A fresh stand is made among these rudimentary universals and the process does not cease until the indivisible concepts, the true universals, are established.
For example, such and such a species of animal is a step towards the genus animal which by the same process is a step towards a further generalization.
Thus it is clear that we must get to know the primary premises by induction for the method by which even sense perception implants the universal is inductive.
Now of the thinking state by which we grasp truth, some are unfailingly true, others admit an error, opinion, for instance, and calculation whereas scientific knowing and intuition are always true.
Further, no other kind of thought except intuition is more accurate than scientific knowledge whereas primary premises are more knowable than demonstrations
and all scientific knowledge is discursive.
From these considerations it follows that there will be no scientific knowledge of the primary premises and since except intuition nothing can be truer than scientific knowledge, it will be intuition that apprehends the primary premises.
A result which also follows from the fact that demonstration cannot be the originative source of demonstration nor consequences scientific knowledge of scientific knowledge.
If therefore it is the only other kind of true thinking except scientific knowing, intuition will be the originative source of scientific knowledge and the originative source of science grasps the original basic premise while science as a whole is similarly related as the originative source to the whole body of fact.
Rhetoric and Poetic. Introduction.
Rhetoric is closely allied to logic which is a counterpart of dialectic in Aristotle's analysis and it is not infrequently been used by his successes to suggest improvements or substitutions for logical devices.
It has a moral and political dimension and the sophist, as Aristotle views their practices, confused it with the art of politics.
It is finally a verbal art, the development of which both before Aristotle's analysis and since has been closely associated with the interpretation of poetry.
Consistent with his differentiations among the arts and sciences, Aristotle separates the arts of rhetoric and poetic.
Rhetoric, like dialectic, is limited to know a specific subject matter but may be used in any consideration and it is by that fact opposed to the method of science and limited to questions on which variation of opinion is possible.
Aristotle emphasized the consideration of arguments which are the form and essence of persuasion and which had been neglected by the previous writers on the art of rhetoric.
There are three modes of persuasion available to a speaker, the use of his character to make his speech credible, the excitation of desired emotions in the audience and proof or apparent proof.
Rhetoric is therefore defined as a faculty or power of observing in any given case the available means of persuasion.
It is the audience, however, which determines the means, the kinds of oratory, political or deliberative, forensic or legal, and epidiotic or display are determined by consideration of kinds of audience.
The character which will be effective in the speaker depends on the susceptibility of audiences and questions of rhetorical style and arrangements are in large part questions of appropriateness of the various kinds of oratory.
Poetics, too, treats of an art which employs words and the end of that art is, as in all arts, the basic consideration.
But the end is found not in the peculiarities of audiences but in the proper pleasure of the varieties of poetry.
Poetry is defined in terms of imitation, not persuasion, and the consideration of the historical development of tragedy and the examination of particular tragedies and use to date the definition of tragedy in accordance with which the plot is the form or soul of tragedy.
When finally tragedy is compared with other forms of poetry, and particularly with the epic in the last four chapters of the Poetics as it has come to us, the kinds of poetry are not distinguished in terms of audiences but in terms of a comparison of values achieved and a distinction of devices employed.
Like other Greek philosophers, Aristotle was fond of comparing the arts and the sciences, whereas Socrates used the likeness of the physician, the pilot, the shepherd, and the cobbler to demonstrate the virtuous knowledge that philosophers should be kings and that statesmen are supreme poets.
Aristotle used the analogy of the arts to distinguish them as poetic or productive sciences from the practical and theoretic sciences. Art is like virtue in its mode of acquisition and destruction, for both are produced by performing the same actions which they will in turn cause and both are destroyed by the same causes that produce them,
but they differ from each other in that virtues are judged by the state of character from which the action is produced and arts are judged by the quality of the objects produced by the action.
Art is like nature in its objects and the manner in which artificial and natural objects are produced. For Aristotle is fond of repeating the observation that the objects of art are produced as nature would have produced them and that in the processes of production and the objects produced, art imitates nature.
But nature is a cause of motion internal to the thing moved, while art is an external cause employed by the artist to impose on NASA a form first conceived in his mind and artificial objects are not in natures or substances and therefore have no strict definitions comparable to those discovered in physics for natural objects.
Day Poetica, Poetics, translated by Ingram by Water
Chapter 1
Our subject being poetry, I propose to speak not only of the art in general, but also of its species and their respective capacities, of the structure of plots required for a good poem, of the number and nature of the constituent parts of a poem, and likewise of any other matters in the same line of inquiry.
Let us follow the natural order and begin with the primary facts.
Ethic poetry and tragedy, as also comedy, dithirambic poetry and most flute playing and lyre playing are all, viewed as a whole, modes of imitation.
But at the same time, they differ from one another in three ways, either by a difference of kind in their means or by differences in the objects or in the manner of their imitations.
One, just as color and form are used as means by some, who, whether by art or constant practice, imitate and portray many things by their aid and the voice is used by others, so also in the above mentioned group of arts, the means with them as a whole are rhythm, language and harmony.
Used, however, either singly or in certain combinations.
A combination of harmony and rhythm alone is the means in flute playing and lyre playing, and any other arts there may be of the same description.
For example, imitative piping.
Rhythm alone, without harmony, is the means in the dance of imitations, for even he, by the rhythms of his attitudes, may represent men's characters, as well as what they do and suffer.
There is further an art which imitates by language alone, without harmony, in prose or in verse, and if in verse, either in someone or in a plurality of meters.
This form of imitation is to this day without a name.
We have no common name for a maim of Sofron or Xenarchus and a Socratic conversation, and we should still be without one, even if the imitation in the two instances were in primitives or elegiacs or some other kind of verse.
Though it is the way with people to tack on poet to the name of a meter and talk of elegiac poets and epic poets, thinking that they call them poets not by reason of the imitative nature of their work, but indiscriminately by reason of the meter they write in.
Even if a theory of medicine or physical philosophy be put forth in a magical form, it is usual to describe the writer in this way.
Homer and Empedocles, however, have really nothing in common apart from their meter, so that if the one is to be called a poet, the other should be termed a physicist rather than a poet.
We should be in the same position also if the imitation in these instances were in all the meters, like the centaur, a rhapsody and a medley of all meters, of Carimond, and Carimond one has to recognize as a poet, so much then as to these arts.
There are lastly certain other arts which combine all the means enumerated, rhythm, melody and verse, for example the derambic and nomic poetry, tragedy and comedy.
With this difference, however, that the three kinds of means are in some of them all employed together and in others brought in separately one after the other.
These elements of difference in the above art, I term the means of their imitation.
Chapter 2, 2.
The objects the imitator represents are actions with agents who are necessarily either good men or bad.
The diversities of human characters being nearly always derivative from this primary distinction, since the line between virtue and vice is one dividing the whole of mankind.
It follows therefore that the agents represented must be either above our own level of goodness or beneath it, or just such as we are.
In the same way as with the painters, the personages of polygnotus are better than we are, those of porcelain worse, and those of Dionysius just like ourselves.
It is clear that each of the above mentioned arts will admit of these differences and that it will become a separate art by representing objects with this point of difference.
Even in dance, in flute playing and lyre playing, such diversities are possible, and they're also possible in the nameless art that uses language, prose or verse without harmony as its means.
Homer's personages, for instance, are better than we are, clayophones are on our own level, and those of Hegemon of Thassos, the first writer of Paradis, and Nicocares, the author of the dilliad, are beneath it.
The same is true of the disiram and the normay. The personages may be presented in them with the difference exemplified in the blank of blank and argas, and in the psychopsies of Timotheus and Philoxenus.
This difference, it is, that distinguishes tragedy and comedy also. The one would make its personages worse, and the other better, than the man of the present day.
Chapter 3
A third difference in these arts is in the manner in which each kind of object is represented, given both the same means and the same kind of object for imitation.
One may either, one, speak at one moment in narrative, and of another in an assumed character, as Homer does, or two, one may remain the same throughout, without any such change, or three.
The imitators may represent the whole story dramatically, as though they were actually doing the thing we described.
As we said at the beginning, therefore, the differences in the imitation of these arts come under three heads, their means, their objects, and their manner, so that as an imitator, properties will be on one side akin to Homer, both portraying good men,
and on another, to Aristophanes, since both present their personages as acting and doing. This, in fact, according to some, is the reason for plays being termed dramas, because in a play, the personages act for story.
Hence, too, both tragedy and comedy are claimed by the Dorians as their discoveries, comedy by the Megarians, by those in Greece as having arisen when Megara became a democracy, and by the Sicilian Megarians on the grounds of the poet Epicharmus was a fair country,
and a good deal earlier than Chianides and Magnes. Even tragedy also is claimed by certain of the Peloponnesian Dorians.
In support of this claim, they point to the words comedy and drama. Their word for the outlying hamlets, they say, is kumai, where Athenians call them dimmes, thus assuming that comedians got the name not from their komoi or rebels, but from their strolling from hamlet to hamlet, lack of appreciation keeping them out of the city.
Their word also for to act, they say, is dran, whereas Athenians use pratane. So much, then, adds to the number and nature of the points of difference in the imitation of these arts.
Chapter 4. It is clear that the general origin of poetry was due to two causes, each of them part of human nature. Imitation is natural to men from childhood, one of his advantages over the lower animals being this, that he is the most imitated creature in the world and learns at first by imitation.
And it is also natural for all to delight in works of imitation. The truth of this second point is shown by experience. Though the objects themselves may be painful to see, we delight to view the most realistic representations of them in art, the forms, for example, of the lowest animals and of dead bodies.
The explanation is to be found in a further fact. To be learning something is the greatest of treasures not only to the philosopher but also to the rest of mankind, however small their capacity for it. The reason of the delight in seeing the picture is that one is at the same time learning, gathering the meaning of things.
For example, the demand there is so and so, for if one has not seen the thing before, one's pleasure will not be in the picture, the imitation of it, but will be due to the execution or coloring or some similar cause.
Imitation then being natural to us, as also the sense of harmony and rhythm, the meters being obviously a speci of rhythms, it was through their original aptitude and by a series of improvements for the most part gradual on their first efforts that they created poetry out of their improvisations.
Poetry, however, soon broke up into two kinds according to the differences of character in the individual poets. For the graver among them would represent noble actions and those of noble personages and the meaner sort, the actions of the ignoble.
The lighter class produced invectives at first, just as others did hymns and panagyrics. We know of no such poem by any of the pre-homeric poets, though there were probably many such writers among them.
Instances, however, may be found from Homer Downwood, for example, his Margites and the similar poems of others. In this poetry of invective, its natural fitness brought an iambic meter into use, hence our present term, iambic, because it was the meter of their yams or invectives against one another.
The result was that the old poets became some of them writers of heroics and others of iambic firsts. Homer's position, however, is peculiar. Just as he was in a serious style, a poet of poets standing alone not only through the literary excellence but also through the dramatic character of his imitations,
so too he was the first to outline for us the general forms of comedy by producing not a dramatic invective but a dramatic picture of the ridiculous. His Margites, in fact, stands in the same relation to our comedies as the Iliad and Odyssey to our tragedies.
As soon, however, as tragedy and comedy appeared in the field, those naturally drawn to the one line of poetry became writers of comedies instead of yams and those naturally drawn to the other writers of tragedies instead of epics because these new modes of art were grander and of more esteem than the old.
If it be art where the tragedy is now all that it need be in its formative elements, to consider that and decide it theoretically and in relation to the theaters is a matter for another inquiry.
It certainly began in improvisation, as did also comedy, the one originating with the authors of the Didiram, the other with those of the phallic songs which still survive as institutions in many of our cities.
And its advance after that was little by little, through their improving on whatever they had before them at each stage. It was, in fact, only after a long series of changes that the movement of tragedy stopped on its attaining to its natural form.
One, the number of actors was first increased to two by Aeschylus who curtailed the business of the chorus and made the dialogue or spoken portion take the leading part in the play.
Two, a third actor and scenery were due to Sophocles. Three, tragedy acquired also its magnitude, discarding short stories and the ludicrous fiction through its passing out of its satiric stage.
It assumed, though only at a late point in its progress, a tone of dignity and its meter changed then from croquette to yambic.
The reason for their original use of the trochaic tetrameter was that their poetry was satiric and more connected with dancing than it now is.
As soon, however, as the spoken part came in, nature herself found the appropriate meter.
The yambic, we know, is the most speakable of meters, as is shown by the fact that we very often fall into it in conversation, whereas we rarely talk hexameters and only when we depart from the speaking tone of voice.
Four, another change was a plurality of episodes or acts.
As for the remaining matters, the super-added embellishments and the account of their introduction, these might be taken as said, as it will probably be a long piece of work to go through the details.
Chapter Five
As for comedy, it is, as has been observed, an imitation of men worse than the average.
Worse, however, not as regards any and every sort of fault, but as only regards one particular kind, the ridiculous, which is a species of the ugly.
The ridiculous may be defined as a mistake or deformity not productive of pain or harm to others.
The mask, for instance, that excites laughter, is something ugly and distorted without causing pain.
Though the successive changes in tragedy and their authors are not unknown, we cannot say the same of comedy.
Its early stages passed unnoticed because it was not as yet taken up in a serious way.
It was only at a late point in its progress that a cause of comedians was officially granted by the Archon.
They used to be mere volunteers.
It had also already certain definite forms at the time when the record of those termed comic poets begins.
Who it was, who supplied it with masks or prologues or plurality of actors and the like, has remained unknown.
The Invented Sable or Plot, however, originated in Sicily with Epicomas and Formis.
Of Athenian poets, Cretace was the first to drop the comedy of invective and frame the stories of a general and non-personal nature, in other words, fables or plots.
Epic poetry, then, has been seen to agree with tragedy to this extent, that of being an imitation of serious subjects in a grand kind of verse.
It differs from it, however, one, in that it is in one kind of verse and in narrative form, and two, in its length,
which is due to its action and having no fixed limit of time, whereas tragedy endeavours to keep as far as possible within a single circuit of the sun or something near that.
This, I say, is another point of difference between them, though at first the practice in this respect was just the same in tragedies as in epic poems.
They differ also, three, in their constituents, some being common to both and others peculiar to tragedy, and the judge of good and bad in tragedy is a judge of that in epic poetry also.
All the parts of an epic are included in tragedy, but those of tragedy are not all of them to be found in the epic.
Chapter 6. Reserving hexameter poetry and comedy from consideration hereafter, let us proceed now to the discussion of tragedy.
Before doing so, however, we must gather up the definition resulting from what has been said.
A tragedy, then, is the imitation of an action that is serious and also, as having magnitude, complete in itself.
In language with pleasurable accessories, each kind brought in separately in the parts of the work, in a dramatic, not in a narrative form,
with incidents arising pity and fear, wherewith to accomplish its classes of such emotions.
Here, by language with pleasurable accessories, I mean that with rhythm and harmony, or song, super-added, and by the kinds separately.
I mean that some portions have worked out with verse only, and others, in turn, with song.
One, as they act the stories, it follows that in the first place, the spectacle or stage appearance of the actors must be some part of the whole,
and in the second, melody and diction, these two being the means of their imitation.
Here, by diction, I mean merely this, the composition of the verses, and by melody, what is too completely understood to require explanation.
But further, the subject represented also is an action, and the action involves agents who must necessarily have their distinctive qualities,
both of character and thought, since it is from these that we ascribe certain qualities to their actions.
There are, in the natural order of things, therefore, two causes, thought and character, of their actions, and consequently of their success or failure in their lives.
Now, the action, that which was done, is represented in the play by the fable or plot.
The fable, in our present sense of the term, is simply this, the combination of the incidents or things done in the story,
whereas character is what makes us ascribe certain moral qualities to the agents, and thought is shown all the way, say, when proving a particular point,
or it may be enunciating a general truth.
For the six parts, consequently of every tragedy, as a whole, that is, of such or such quality, there is a fable or plot, characters, diction, thought, spectacle and melody.
Two of them are rising from the means, one from the manner, and three from the objects of the dramatic imitation, and there is nothing else besides these six.
Of these, its formative elements, then, not a few of the dramatists have made due use, as every play, one may say, admits of spectacle, character, fable, diction, melody and thought.
Two, the most important of the six is the combination of the incidents of the story.
Tragedy is essentially an imitation, not a person, but of action and life, of happiness and misery.
All human happiness or misery takes the form of action.
The end for which we live is a certain kind of activity, not a quality.
Character gives us qualities, but it is in our actions what we do that we are happy or the reverse.
In a play, accordingly, they do not act in order to portray the characters, they include the characters for the sake of the action.
So that it is the action in it, that is, its fable or plot, that is, the end and purpose of the tragedy, and the end is everywhere the chief theme.
Besides this, a tragedy is impossible without action, but there may be one without character.
The tragedies of most of the moderns are character less, a defect common among poets of all kinds, and with its counterpart in painting and duxes, as compared with polygnotus.
But whereas the latter is strong in character, the work of the duxes is devoid of it.
And again, one may string together a series of characteristic speeches of the utmost finish as regards diction and thought, and yet sales produce a true tragic effect.
But one will have much better success with a tragedy which, however inferior in these respects, has a plot, a combination of incidents in it.
And again, the most powerful elements of attraction in tragedy, the peripities and discoveries, are parts of the plot.
A further proof is in the fact that beginners succeed earlier with the diction and characters than with the construction of a story, and the same may be said of nearly all the early dramatists.
We maintain therefore that the first essential, the life and soul, so to speak, of tragedy is the plot, and that the characters come second.
Compare the parallel in painting where the most beautiful colours laid on without order will not give one the same pleasure as a simple black and white sketch of a portrait.
We maintain that tragedy is primarily an imitation of actions, and that it is mainly for the sake of the action that it imitates the personal agents.
Third comes the element of thought, that is the power of saying whatever can be said or what is appropriate to the occasion.
This is what, in the speeches in tragedy, falls under the arts of politics and rhetoric,
for the older poets make their personages discourse like statesmen and the modern like returitions.
One must not confuse it with character.
Character in a play is that which reveals the moral purpose of the agents, that is the sort of thing they seek or avoid, where that is not obvious,
hence there is no room for character in a speech on a purely indifferent subject.
Thought, on the other hand, is shown in all they say when proving or disproving some particular point or enunciating some universal proposition.
Fourth among the literary elements is the diction of the personages, that is, as before explained, the expression of their thoughts in words,
which is practically the same thing with verse as with prose.
As for the two remaining parts, the melody is the greatest of the pleasurable accessories of tragedy.
The spectacle, though an attraction, is the least artistic of all the parts and has least to do with the art of poetry.
The tragic effect is quite possible without a public performance and actors,
and besides, the getting up of the spectacle is more a matter for the costumia than the poet.
Chapter 7
Having us distinguished the parts, let us now consider the proper construction of the table or plot,
as that is at once the first and the most important thing in tragedy.
We have laid it down that a tragedy is an imitation of an action that is complete in itself as a whole of some magnitude,
for a whole may be of no magnitude to speak of.
Now a whole is that which has beginning, middle, and end.
A beginning is that which is not itself necessarily after anything else and which has naturally something else after it.
An end is that which is naturally after something itself, either as it's necessary or usual consequence, and with nothing else after it.
And a middle, that which is by nature after one thing and has also another after it.
A well-constructed plot, therefore, cannot either begin or end with any point one likes.
Beginning and end in it must be of the forms just described.
Again, to be beautiful, a living creature and every whole made up of parts
must not only present a certain order in its arrangement of parts, but also be of a certain definite magnitude.
Beauty is a matter of size and order, and therefore impossible either one,
in a very minute creature, since our perception becomes indistinct as it approaches instantanity,
or two, in a creature of vast size, one say one thousand miles long,
as in that case, instead of the object being seen all at once, the unity and wholeness of it is lost to the beholder.
Just in the same way, then, as a beautiful whole made up of parts, or a beautiful living creature,
must be of some size, but a size to be taken in by the eye,
so a story or plot must be of some length, but of a length to be taken in by the memory.
As for the limit of its length, so far as that is relative to public performances and spectators,
it does not fall within the theory of poetry.
If they had to perform a hundred tragedies, they would be timed by water clocks,
as they are said to have been at one period.
The limit, however, set by the actual nature of the thing is this.
The longer the story, consistently with its being comprehensible as a whole,
the finer it is by reason of its magnitude.
As a rough general formula, a length which allows a hero passing by a series of probable or necessary stages
from misfortune to happiness, or from happiness to misfortune,
may suffice as a limit for the magnitude of the story.
The unity of a plot does not consist, as some suppose, in its having one man as its subject,
an infinity of things before that one man, some of which it is impossible to reduce to unity.
And in like manner, there are many actions of one man which cannot be made to form one action.
One sees, therefore, the mistakes of all the poets who have written a heraclit, a thesyed, or similar poems.
They suppose that because Heracles was one man, the story also of Heracles must be one story.
Homer, however, evidently understood this point quite well, whether by art or instinct,
just in the same way as he excelled the rest in every other respect.
In writing an Odyssey, he did not make the poem cover all that ever befell his hero.
It would tell him, for instance, to get wounded on pine masses,
and also to pay in madness at the time of the call to arms.
But the two incidents had no necessary or probable connection with one another.
Instead of doing that, he took as the subject of the Odyssey, as also of the Iliad,
an action with a unity of the kind we are describing.
The truth is that just as in the other imitative arts, one imitation is always the one thing.
So in poetry, the story as an imitation of action must represent one action, a complete whole,
with its several incidents so closely connected that the transposal or withdrawal of any one of them
will disjoin and dislocate the whole.
For that which makes no perceptible difference by its presence or absence is no real part of the whole.
Chapter 9.
From what we have said, it will be seen that the poet's function is to describe not the thing that has happened,
but the kind of thing that might happen, that is, what is possible as being probable or necessary.
The distinction between historian and poet is not in the one writing prose and the other verse.
You might put the work of Herodotus into verse, and it would still be a species of history.
It consists really in this, that the one describes the thing that has been, and the other a kind of thing that might be.
Hence poetry is something more philosophic and of greater import than history,
since its statements are of the nature rather of universals, whereas those of history are singular.
By a universal statement, I mean one as to what such or such a kind of man will probably or necessarily say or do,
which is the aim of poetry, though it affixes proper names to the characters.
By a single statement, one as to what say Alcibiades did or had done to him.
In comedy, this has become clear by this time.
It is only when their plot is already made up of probable incidents that they give it a basis of proper names,
choosing to the purpose any names that may occur to them, instead of writing like the old Iambic poets about particular persons.
In tragedy, however, they still adhere to the historic names, and for this reason.
What convinces is the possible.
Now, whereas we are not yet sure as to the possibility of that which has not happened, that which has happened is manifestly possible,
else it would not have come to pass.
Nevertheless, even in tragedy there are some plays with but one or two known names in them, the rest being inventions.
And there are some without a single known name, for example Agathons and Thales,
in which both incidents and names are of the poet's invention, and it is no less delightful on that account.
So that one must not aim at a rigid adherence to the traditional stories on which tragedy is abased.
It would be absurd, in fact, to do so, as even the known stories are only known to a few, though they are a delight nonetheless to all.
It is evident from the above that the poet must be more the poet of his stories or plots than of his verses,
inasmuch as he is a poet by virtue of the imitative element in his work, and it is actions that he imitates.
And if he should come to take a subject from actual history, he is nonetheless a poet for that,
since some historic occurrences may very well be in the probable and possible order of things.
And it is in that aspect of them that he is their poet.
Of simple plots and actions, the episodic are the worst.
I call a plot episodic when there is neither probability nor necessity in the sequence of its episodes.
Actions of this sort, bad poets constructs through their own fault and good ones on account of the players.
His work being for public performance, a good poet often stretches out a plot beyond its capabilities,
and is thus obliged to twist the sequence of incidents.
Tragedy, however, is an imitation not only of a complete action, but also of incidents arising pity and fear.
Such incidents have the very greatest effect on the mind when they occur unexpectedly and at the same time in consequence of one another.
There is more of the marvellous in them than if they happen to themselves or by mere chance.
Even matters of chance seem most marvellous if there is an appearance of design, as it were, in them,
as, for instance, a statue of Mites at Argos killed the author of Mites's death by falling down on him
when a looker honored a public spectacle.
For incidents like that, we think to be not without a meaning.
A plot, therefore, of this sort is necessarily finer than others.
Chapter 10.
Plots are either simple or complex since the actions they represent are naturally of this twofold description.
The action, proceeding in a way defined as one continuous whole, I call simple,
when the change in the hero's fortune takes place without peripetti or discovery,
and complex when it involves one or the other or both.
These should, each of them, arise out of the structure of the plot itself,
so as to be the consequence, necessary or probable, of the antecedent.
There's a great difference between thing happening pop to hock and post-hock.
Chapter 11.
A peripetti is the change of the kind described from one state of things within the plot which is opposite,
and that, too, in the way we are saying in the probable or necessary sequence of events,
as it is, for instance, in Oedipus.
Here, the opposite state of things is produced by the messenger who, coming to gladden Oedipus
and to remove his fears out to his mother, reveals the secret of his birth.
And in Lincaus, just as he is being led off for execution with Danau set his side to put him to death,
the incidents preceding this bring it about that he has saved and Danau has put to death.
A discovery is, as the very word implies, a change from ignorance to knowledge,
and thus to either love or hate, in the personages marked for good or evil fortune.
The finest form of discovery is one attended by a peripettis, like that which goes with the discovery in Oedipus.
There are no other forms of it, what we have said may happen in a way in reference to inanimate things,
even things of a very casual kind.
And it is also possible to discover whether someone has done or not done something.
But the form most directly connected with the plot and the action of the piece is the first mentioned.
Thus, with a peripetti will arise either pity or fear, actions of that nature being what tragedy is assumed to represent,
and it will also serve to bring about the happy or unhappy ending.
The discovery then, being of persons, it may be that of one party owned it to the other, the latter being already known,
or both the parties may have to discover themselves.
Iphigenia, for instance, was discovered to a resty by sending a letter,
and another discovery was required to reveal him to Iphigenia.
Two parts of the plot then, peripetti and discovery, are all matters of this sort.
A third part is suffering, which we may define as an action of a destructive or painful nature,
such as murders on the stage, tortures, woundings, and the like.
The other two have already been explained.
Chapter 12.
The parts of tragedy to be treated as formative elements in the whole were mentioned in the previous chapter.
From the point of view, however, of its quantity, that is the separate sections into which it is divided,
a tragedy has the following parts.
Prologue, episode, exode, and a choral portion, distinguished into parode and stashimon.
These two are common to all tragedies, whereas songs from the stage and come away are only found in songs.
The prologue is all that precedes the parode of the chorus,
an episode, all that comes in between two whole choral songs,
the exode, all that follows after the last choral song.
In the choral portion, the parode is the whole first statement of the chorus.
A stashimon, a song of the chorus without anapest or trochees,
a commerce, a lamentation sung by chorus and actor in concert.
The parts of tragedy to be used as formative elements in the whole we have already mentioned.
The above are its parts from the point of view of its quantity or the separate sections into which it is divided.
Chapter 13.
The next points after what we have said above will be these.
One, what is the poet to aim at and what is he to avoid in constructing his thoughts?
And two, what are the conditions on which the tragic effect depends?
We assume that for the finest form of tragedy, the plot must be not simple but complex,
and further that it must imitate actions arising fear and pity,
since that is the distinctive function of this kind of imitation.
It follows, therefore, that there are three forms of plot to be avoided.
One, a good man must not be seen passing from happiness to misery,
or two, a bad man from misery to happiness.
The first situation is not fear-inspiring or piteous but simply odious to us.
The second is the most untragic that can be.
It has no one of the requisites of tragedy.
It does not appeal either to the human feeling in us or to our pity or to our fears.
Nor, on the other hand, should three, an extremely bad man be seen falling from happiness into misery.
Such a story may arouse the human feelings in us, but it will not move us to either pity or fear.
Pity is occasioned by undeserved misfortune and fear by that of one like ourselves,
so that there will be nothing either piteous or fear-inspiring in the situation.
There remains, then, the intermediate kind of personage, a man not preeminently virtuous and just,
whose misfortune, however, is brought upon him not by vice and depravity,
but by some error of judgment of the number of those in the enjoyment of great reputation and prosperity,
for example, Oedipus, Thiestes, and the men of note of similar families.
The perfect plot, accordingly, must have a single and not, as some tell us, a double issue.
The change in the hero's fortunes must be not from misery to happiness, but on the contrary from happiness to misery,
and the cause of it must lie not in any depravity, but in some great error on his part.
The man himself being either such as we have described, or better, not worse than that.
Fact also confirms our theory, that the poet began by accepting any tragic story that came to hand.
In these days, the finest tragedy is always on the story of some few houses,
or not of Alcmaeon, Oedipus, Orestes, Miliaga, Thiestes, Telephus,
or any others that may have been involved as either agents or sufferers in some deed of horror.
The theoretically best tragedy, then, has a plot of this description.
The critics therefore are wrong who blame Euripides for taking this line in his tragedies and giving many of them an unhappy ending.
It is, as we have said, the right line to take.
The best proof is this.
On the stage, and in the public performances, such plays properly worked out are seen to be the most truly tragic.
And Euripides, even if his execution be faulty in every other point, is seen to be nevertheless the most tragic certainly of the dramatists.
After this comes the construction of plot, which some rank first, one with a double story, like the Odyssey,
and an opposite issue for the good and the bad personages.
It is ranked as first only through the weakness of the audiences.
The poets merely follow their public, writing as its wishes dictate.
But the pleasure here is not that of tragedy.
It belongs rather to comedy, where the bitterest enemies in the piece, for example, are restes and the giftsless,
walk off good friends at the end with no slaying of anyone by anyone.
Chapter 14.
The tragic fear and pity may be aroused by the spectacle,
but they may also be aroused by the very structure and incidence of the play, which is a better way and shows the better poet.
The plot, in fact, should be so framed that even without seeing the things take place,
he who simply hears the account of them shall be filled with horror and pity at the incidence,
which is just the effect that the mere sight of the story in Oedipus would have on one.
To produce the same effect by means of the spectacle is less artistic and requires extraneous aid.
Those, however, who make use of the spectacle to put before us that which is nearly monstrous and not productive of fear
are wholly out of touch with tragedy.
Not every kind of pleasure should be required of a tragedy, but only its own proper pleasure.
The tragic pleasure is that of pity and fear, and the poet has to produce it by a work of imitation.
It is clear, therefore, that the causes should be included in the incidence of his story.
Let us see, then, what kinds of incidents strike one as horrible or other as piteous.
In the deed of this description, the parties must necessarily be either friends or enemies or indifferent to one another.
Now, when an enemy does it on an enemy, there's nothing to move us to pity,
either in his doing or in his meditating the deed, except so far as the actual pain of the sufferer is concerned.
And the same is true when the parties are indifferent to one another.
Whenever the tragic deed, however, is done within the family, when murder or the like is done or meditated by brother on brother,
by son on father, by mother on son or son on mother, these are the situations the poet should seek after.
The traditional stories, accordingly, must be kept as they are.
For example, the murder of Clytemnestra by our Estes and of Eryphile by Alcmaeon.
At the same time, even with these, there is something left to the poet himself.
It is for him to devise the right way of treating them.
Let us explain more clearly what we mean by the right way.
The deed of horror may be done by the doer knowingly and consciously, as in the old poet and in Medea's murder of her children in Euripides.
Or he may do it by the ignorance of his relationship and discover that afterwards, as does the Oedipus in Sophocles.
Here, the deed is outside the clay.
But it may be within it, like the act of the Alcmaeon in Astidamus or that of the Telegonus in Ulysses Wounded.
A third possibility is for one meditating some deadly injury to another, in ignorance of his relationship, to make the discovery in time to draw back.
These exhaust the possibilities, since the deed must necessarily be either done or not done, and either knowingly or unknowingly.
The worst situation is when the personage is with full knowledge on the point of doing the deed and leaves it undone.
It is odious and also, through the absence of suffering, untragic.
Hence, it is that no one is made to act thus except in some few instances, for example, Human and Creon in Antigone.
Next after this comes the actual perpetration of the deed meditated.
A better situation than that, however, is for the deed to be done in ignorance and the relationship discovered afterwards,
since there is nothing odious in it and the discovery will serve to astound us.
But the best of all is the last, what we have in Crescentes, for example, where Merope, on the point of slaying her son, recognizes him in time.
In Iphigenia, where sister and brother are in a like position, and in Helle, where the son recognizes his mother when on the point of giving her up to her enemy.
This will explain why our tragedies are restricted, as we said just now, to such a small number of families.
It is accidents rather than art that led the poets in quest of subjects to embody this kind of incident in their plots.
They are still obliged, accordingly, to have recourse to the families in which such horrors have occurred.
On the construction of a plot, and the kind of plot required for tragedy, enough has now been said.
Chapter 15.
In the characters, there are four points to aim at.
First and foremost, that they shall be good.
There will be an element of character in the play if, as has been observed, what a person has said or does reveal a certain moral purpose.
And a good element of character as a purpose so revealed is good.
Such goodness is possible in every type of person, even in a woman or a slave, though the one is perhaps inferior, and the other are wholly worse with being.
The second point is to make them appropriate.
The character before us may be, say, manly, but it is not appropriate in a female character to be manly or clever.
The third is to make them like the reality, which is not the same as their being good and appropriate in our sense of the term.
The fourth is to make them consistent and the same throughout, even if inconsistency be part of the man before one for imitation as presenting that form of character.
It should still be consistently inconsistent.
We have an instance of baseness of character and not required for the story in the Menelaus and Orestes of the incongruous and unbefitting and the lamentation of Ulysses in Scylla
and in the clever speech of Mellenipe and of inconsistency in Iphigenia at Orlis, where Iphigenia the Supliant is utterly unlike the later Iphigenia.
The right thing, however, is in the characters, just as in the incidents of the play, to endeavor always after the necessary or the probable.
So that whenever such and such a person is said or does such and such a thing, it shall be the necessary or probable outcome of his character.
And whenever this incident follows on that, it shall be either the necessary or the probable consequence of it.
From this one sees, to digress for a moment, that the day no more also should arise out of the plot itself and not depend on the stage artifice, as in Madeira,
or in the story of the arrested departure of the Greeks in the Iliad.
The artifice must be reserved for matters outside the play, for past events beyond human knowledge or events yet to come, which require to be foretold or announced.
Since it is the privilege of the gods to know everything, there should be nothing improbable among the actual incidents.
If it be unavoidable, however, it should be outside the tragedy, like the improbability and the edifice of Sophocles.
But, to return to the characters. As tragedy is an imitation of personages better than the ordinary man, we in our way should follow the example of good portrait painters,
who reproduce the distinctive features of a man, and at the same time, without losing his likeness, make him handsomer than he is.
The poet in like manner, in portraying men quick or slow to anger, or with similar infirmities of character, must know how to represent them as such,
and at the same time as good men, as Agathon and Homer have represented Achilles.
All these rules one must keep in mind throughout, and further, those also for such points of stage effect as directly depend on the art of the poet,
since in these two, one may often make mistakes.
Enough, however, has been said on the subject in one of our published writings.
Chapter 16.
Discovery, in general, has been explained already.
As for the species of discovery, the first to be noted is one, the least artistic form of it, of which the poets make most use through mere lack of invention,
discovery by signs or marks.
Of these signs, some are congenital, like the lambs head, which the earth's born have on them, or stars, such as Cassinas brings into his siestes.
Others acquired after birth, these latter being either marks on the body, for example, stars, or external tokens, like necklaces,
or, to take another sort of instance, the arc in the discovery in Tyro.
Even these, however, admit of two uses are better and worse.
The scar of Ulysses is an instance.
The discovery of him through it is made in one way by the nurse, and in another by the swine herds.
A discovery using signs as a means of assurance is less artistic, as indeed are all such as imply reflection.
Whereas, one bringing them in all of a sudden, as in the bath story, is of a better order.
Next, after these are two.
Discover is made directly by the poet, which are inartistic for that very reason.
For example, Orestes' discovery of himself in Artigenaire, whereas his sister reveals who she is by the letter,
Orestes is made to say himself what the poet, rather than the story, demands.
This, therefore, is not far removed from the first mentioned thought, since you might have presented certain tokens as well.
Another instance is the shuttled voice in the Tyraeus of Sophocles.
Three, a third species is discovery through memory from a man's consciousness being awakened by something seen.
Just in the Cyprioe of Dichyogenes, the sight of the picture makes the man birthed into tears.
And in the tale of Alcinus, hearing the Harper, Ulysses is reminded of the past and weeps, the discovery of them being the result.
A fourth kind is discovery through reasoning, for example, in the Coifere.
If one like me is here, there is no one like me but Orestes, he, therefore, must be here.
All that which polliates the Sophists suggests for Iphigenaire, since it was natural for Orestes to reflect,
my sister was sacrificed and I am to be sacrificed like her.
Or that in the Tyraeus of Thodectes, I came to find a son and am to die myself.
Or that in the Finidae.
I'm seeing the place the women inferred their fate that they were to die there, since they had also been exposed there.
Five, there is, too, a composite discovery arising from bad reasoning on the side of the other party.
An instance of it is in Ulysses, the false messenger.
He said he should know the bow, which he had not seen.
But to suppose from that that he wouldn't know it again, as though he had once seen it, was bad reasoning.
Six, the best of all discoveries, however, is that arising from the incidents themselves,
when the great surprise comes about through a probable incident, like that in the Oedipus of Sophocles
and also in Iphigenaire, for it was not improbable that she should wish to have a letter taken home.
These last are the only discoveries independent of the artifice of signs and necklaces.
Next after them come discoveries through reasoning.
Chapter 17.
At the time when he is constructing his plots and engaged on addiction in which they are worked out,
the poet should remember, one, to put the actual scenes as far as possible before his eyes.
In this way, seeing everything with the vividness of an eyewitness, as it were,
he will devise what is appropriate and be least likely to overlook incongruities.
This is shown by what was censured in Cassinas, the return of Amphiaraus from the sanctuary.
It would have passed unnoticed if it had not been actually seen by the audience,
but on the stage his play failed, the incongruity of the incident ascending the spectators.
Two, as far as may be to, the poet should even act his story with the very gestures of his personages.
Given the same natural qualifications, he who feels the emotions to be described will be the most convincing.
Distress and anger, for instance, are portrayed most truthfully by one who is feeling them at the moment.
Hence it is that poetry demands a man with a special gift for it, or else one with a touch of madness in him.
The former can easily assume the required mood, and the latter may be actually besides himself with emotion.
Three, his story, again, whether already made or of his own making,
he should first simplify and reduce to a universal form before proceeding to link it out by the insertion of episodes.
The following will show how the universal element in Iphidunia, for instance, may be viewed,
a certain maiden having been offered in sacrifice and spilleted away from her sacrifices into another land,
where the custom was to sacrifice all strangers to the goddess.
She was made there the priestess of this rite.
Long after that, the brother of the priestess happened to come.
The fact, however, of the oracle having for a certain reason bidden him go-diver and his object ingoing outside the plot of the play.
On his coming, he was arrested and about to be sacrificed when he revealed who he was,
either as Euripides puts it, or as suggested by Polyidus, by the not improbable explanation,
so I too am doomed to be sacrificed as my sister was, and the disclosure led to his salvation.
This done, the next thing after the proper names have been fixed as a basis for the story,
is to work in episodes or accessory incidents.
One must mind, however, that the episodes are appropriate, like the fit of madness and arrestes,
which led to his arrest, and the purifying, which brought about his salvation.
In plays, then, the episodes are short.
In epic poetry, they serve to lengthen out the poem.
The argument of the Odyssey is not a long one.
A certain man has been abroad many years, Poseidon is ever on the watch for him, and he is all alone.
Matters at home, too, have come to this, that his substance is being wasted,
and his son's death clotted by suitors to his wife.
Then he arrives there himself, after his grievous sufferings, reveals himself and falls on his enemies,
and the end is his salvation and their death.
This being all that is proper to the Odyssey, everything else in it is episode.
Chapter 18, 4.
There is a further point to be borne in mind.
Every tragedy is in part complication and in part denouement.
The incidents before the opening scene, and often certain authors within the play, form in the complication.
And the rest, the denouement.
By complication, I mean all from the beginning of the story to the point just before the change in the hero's fortunes.
By denouement, all from the beginning of the change to the end.
In the linkeas of theodectes, for instance, the complication includes, together with the presupposed incidents,
the seizure of the child and that in turn of the parents.
And the denouement, all from the indictment for the murder to the end.
Now, it is right, when one speaks of a tragedy of the same or not the same as another,
to do so on the ground before all else of the plot.
That is, as having the same or not the same complication of denouement.
Yet, there are many dramatists who after a good complication fail in the denouement.
But it is necessary for both points of construction to be always duly mastered.
Five.
There are four distinct species of tragedy, that being the number of the constituents also that have been mentioned.
First, the complex tragedy, which is all peripetian discovery.
Second, the tragedy of suffering, for example, the Ajaxes and Ixions.
Third, the tragedy of character, for example, the Theotides and Pellius.
The fourth constituent is that of spectacle, exemplified in the fourth sidees,
impermitious, and it all plays with the scene late in the netherworld.
The poet's aim then should be to combine every element of interest, if possible,
or else the more important and the major part of them.
This is now especially necessary owing to the unfair criticism to which the poet is subjected in these days.
Just because there have been poets before him, strong in the several species of tragedy,
the critics now expect the one man to surpass that which was the strong point of each one of his predecessors.
Six, one should also remember what has been said more than once, and not write a tragedy on an epic body of incidents,
that is, one with a plurality of stories in it, while attempting to dramatize, for instance, the entire story of the Iliad.
In the epic, owing to its scale, every part is treated at proper length.
With the drama, however, on the same story, the result is very disappointing.
This is shown by the fact that all who have dramatized the fall of Ilium in its entirety are not part-by-part, like Euripides,
of the whole of the Nairobi story, instead of a portion, like Aeschylus, either fair utterly or have but ill success on the stage.
For that, and that alone was enough to ruin even a play by Agathon.
Yet in their pelipetes, as also in their simple plots,
the poets I mean show wonderful skill in aiming at the kind of effect they desire,
a tragic situation that arises with the human feeling in one, like the clever villain, for example, Sisyphus, deceived,
or the brave Rondra, worsted.
This is probable, however, only in Agathon's sense when he speaks of the probability of even improbability is coming to pass.
In Part 7, the chorus too should be regarded as one of the actors.
It should be an integral part of the whole and take a share in the action,
that which it has in Sophocles rather than in Euripides.
With the later parts, however, the songs and the play of theirs have no more to do with the plot of that than of any other tragedy.
The point is that they are now singing intercalary pieces, a practice first introduced by Agathon,
and yet what real difference is there between singing such intercalary pieces and attempting to fit in a speech
or even a whole act from one play into another?
Chapter 9, Peking.
The plot of characters having been discussed demands to consider the diction and thought.
As for the thought, we may assume what is said of it in our art of rhetoric,
as it belongs more properly to that department of inquiry.
The thought of the personages is shown in everything to be affected by their language,
in every effort to prove or disprove, to arouse emotion, pity, fear, anger and the like,
or to maximize or minimize things.
It is clear also that their mental procedure must be on the same lines in their actions likewise,
whenever they wish them to arise pity or horror, or to have a look of importance or probability.
The only difference is that with the act the impression has to be made without explanation,
whereas with the spoken word it has to be produced by the speaker and result from his language.
What, indeed, would be the good of the speaker if things appeared in the required light
even apart from anything he says?
As regards the diction, one subject for inquiry under this head is the terms given to the language when spoken.
For example, the difference between command and prayer, simple statement and threat,
question and answer and so forth.
The theory of such matters, however, belongs to Elocution and the professors of that art.
Whether the poet knows these things or not, his art as a poet is never seriously criticized on that account.
What thought can one see in Homer's Sing of the Roth Goddess, which Protagoras has criticized as being command
where prayer was meant?
Since the bid one do or not do, he tells us is a command.
Let us pass over this then as appertaining to another art and not to that of poetry.
Chapter 20.
The diction, viewed as a whole, is made up of the following parts.
The letter or ultimate element, the syllable, the conjunction, the article, the noun, the verb, the case and the speech.
One, the letter is an indivisible sound of a particular kind, one that may become a factor in an intelligible sound.
Indivisible sounds are uttered by the Brutes also, but no one of these is a letter in our sense of the term.
Elementary sounds are either vowels, semi vowels or mutes.
A vowel is a letter having an audible sound without the addition of another letter.
A semi vowel, one having an audible sound by the addition of another letter, for example S and R.
A mute, one having no sound at all by itself but becoming audible by an addition
of that of one of the letters which have a sound of some sort of their own, for example G and D.
The letters differ in various ways, as produced by different conformations or in different regions of the month,
as aspirated, not aspirated or sometimes one and sometimes the other, as long, short or a variable quantity
and further as having an acute, grave or intermediate accent.
The details of these matters we must leave to the metricians.
Two, a syllable is a non-significant composite sound made up of a mute and a letter having a sound, a vowel or semi vowel.
For G-R without an A is just as much a syllable as G-R-A with an A.
The various forms of the syllable also belong to the theory of meter.
Three, a conjunction is A, a non-significant sound which, when one significant sound is formable out of several,
neither hinders nor aids the union and which, if the speech thus formed stands by itself,
apart from other speeches, must not be inserted at the beginning of it.
For example, mute, D, toy, D.
Or B, a non-significant sound capable of combining two or more significant sounds into one.
For example, ante, peri, etc.
Four, an article is a non-significant sound marking the beginning, end or dividing point of a speech,
its natural place being either at the extremities or in the middle.
Five, a noun or name is a composite significant sound not involving the idea of time
with parts which have no significance by themselves in it.
It is to be remembered that in a compound we do not think of the parts as having a significance also by themselves.
In the name Theodoros, for instance, the Doron means nothing to us.
Six, a verb is a composite significant sound involving the idea of time
with parts which, just as in the noun, have no significance by themselves in it.
Whereas the word man or white does not imply when walks and has walked
involve, in addition to the idea of walking, that of time present or time past.
Seven, a case of a noun or verb is when the word means of or to, I think, and so forth,
of a one or many, for example, man and men.
Or it may consist merely in the mode of usherence, for example, in question, command, etc.
Walked and walk are cases of the verb to walk of this last kind.
Eight, a speech is a composite significant sound, some of the parts of which have a certain significance by themselves.
It may be observed that a speech is not always made up of noun and verb.
It may be without a verb, like the definition of man, but it will always have some part
with a certain significance by itself.
In a speech, Cleon walks.
Cleon is an instance of such a part.
A speech is said to be one in two ways, either as signifying one thing
or as a union of several speeches made into one by conjunction.
Thus, the Iliad is one speech by conjunction of several.
And the definition of man is one through its signifying one thing.
Chapter 21.
Nouns are of two kinds, either one simple, that is made up of non-significant parts, like the word ge, or two double.
In the latter case, the word may be made up either of a significant and a non-significant part,
a distinction which disappears in the compound, or of two significant parts.
It is possible also to have triple, quadruple, or higher compounds,
like most of our amplified names, for example, Helmo, Caicox, Anthus, and the like.
Whatever its structure and nouns, it must always be either one, the ordinary word for the thing,
or two, a strange word, or three, a metaphor, or four, an ornamental word, or five,
a coined word, or six, a word lengthened out, or seven, curtailed, or eight, altered in form.
By the ordinary word, I mean that in general use in a country, and by a strange word, one in use elsewhere.
So that the same word may obviously be at once strange and ordinary, not in reference to the same people.
Sigunon, for instance, is an ordinary word in Cyprus, and a strange word with us.
A metaphor consists in giving the thing a name that belongs to something else,
the transference being either from genus to species, or from species to genus,
or from species to species, or on grounds of analogy.
That from genus to species is exemplified in, here stands my ship.
Flying at anchor is the standing of a particular kind of thing.
That from species to genus in truly ten thousand good deeds has eulogy wrought,
where ten thousand, which is a particular large number, is put in place of the generic a large number.
That from species to species in drawing the life with the bronze, and in severing with the enduring bronze,
where the poet uses draw in the sense of sever, and sever in that of draw, both words meaning to take away something.
That from analogy is possible whenever there are four terms so related to the second,
B is to the first A, as the fourth D to the third C.
For one may then metaphorically put D in lieu of B, and B in lieu of D.
Now and then, too, they qualify the metaphor by adding onto it that to which the word supplants is relative.
Thus a cup, B, is in relation to Dionysus A, what a shield D is to Areas C.
The cup, accordingly, will be metaphorically described as the shield of Dionysus D plus A,
and the shield of the cup of Areas B plus C.
Or to take another instance, as old age D is to life C, so is evening B to day A.
One will, accordingly, describe evening B as the old age of the day D plus A,
or by the Empedoclean equivalent, and old age D as the evening or sunset of life B plus C.
It may be that some of the terms thus related have no special name of their own,
but for all that they will be metaphorically described in just the same way.
Thus the cast forth seed corn is called sowing, but the cast forth flame, as said of the sun, has no special name.
This nameless act, B, however, stands in just the same relation to its object, sunlight A,
as sowing D to the seed corn C. Hence the expression in the poet, sowing around a God created flame, D plus A.
There is also another form of qualified metaphor, having given the thing the alien name,
and made by a negative addition deny of it one of the attributes naturally associated with its new name.
An instance of this would be to call the shield not the cup of Areas, as in the former case,
but a cup that holds no wine.
A coined into word is a name which, being quite unknown among our people, is given by the poet himself.
For example, for there are some words that seem to be of this origin,
elogues, for horns, and arreter, for priest.
A word is said to be lengthened out when it has a short vowel made long or an extra syllable inserted.
For example, poleos, for poleos.
Pele iadeu, for Pele aidu.
It is said to be curtailed when it is lost apart, for example, Cri, Do, and Ops.
In mia guinettai am forteron Ops.
It is an altered word when part is left as it was and part is of the poet's making.
For example, dexiteron for dexion, in dexiteron catamaxon.
The nouns themselves, to whatever class they may belong, are either masculine, feminine, or intermediate, neuter.
All ending in new row, sigma, or in the two compounds of this last, psi and psi, are masculines.
All ending in the invariably long vowels, e and o, and in a, among the vowels that may be long, are feminines.
There is an equal number of masculine and feminine terminations as psi and psi are the same as sigma and need not be counted.
There is no noun, however, ending in a mute, or in either of the two short vowels, e and o.
Only three, melly, comey, perpery, end in iota, and five in gamma.
The intermediates, or neuters, end in the variable vowels, or in new row, sigma.
Chapter 22. The perfection of dexion is for it to be at once clear and not mean.
The clearest, indeed, is that made up of the ordinary words for things, but it is mean, as is shown by the poetry of Cleophon and Senelus.
On the other hand, dexion becomes distinguished and non-preserved by the use of unfamiliar terms, that is, strange words, metaphors, lengthened forms, and everything that deviates from the ordinary modes of speech.
But a whole statement in such terms will be either a riddle or a barbarism, a riddle if made up of metaphors, a barbarism if made up of strange words.
The very nature indeed of a riddle is this, to describe a fact in an impossible combination of words, which cannot be done with the real names for things, but can be with their metaphorical substitutes.
For example, I saw a man glue brass on another with fire, and the like.
The corresponding use of strange words results in a barbarism.
For certain admixture, accordingly of unfamiliar terms, is necessary. These, the strange word, the metaphor, the ornamental equivalent, etc., will save the language from seeming mean and precise, while the ordinary words in it will secure the requisite clearness.
What helps most, however, to render the diction at once clear and non-prosec, is the use of the lengthened, curtailed, and altered forms of words.
Their deviation from the ordinary words will, by making a language unlike that in general use, give it a non-prosec appearance, and their having much in common with the words in general use will give it the quality of clearness.
It is not right, then, to condemn these modes of speech and ridicule the poet for using them.
As some have done, for example, the elder Euclid, who said it was easy to make poetry if one were to be allowed to lengthen the words in the statement itself as much as one likes.
A procedure he caricatured by reading Epixaren, Aydon, Marathonade, Badexonta, and Uck and Geraminoshton, Akinu, Eleboron, as verses.
A true apparent use of these licenses has certainly a ludicrous effect, but they are not alone in that.
The rule of moderation applies to all the constituents of the poetic vocabulary.
Even with metaphors, strange words, and the rest, the effect will be the same if one uses them improperly and with a view to provoking laughter.
The proper use of them is a very different thing.
To realize the difference, one should take an epic verse and see how it reads when the normal words are introduced.
The same should be done, too, with the strange word, the metaphor, and the rest.
For one has only to put the ordinary words in their place to see the truth of what they're saying.
The same iambic, for instance, is found in Aeschylus and Euripides, and as it stands in the form where it is a poor line,
whereas the Euripides, by the change of a single word, the substitution of a strange for what is by usage the ordinary word, has made it seem a fine one.
Aeschylus, having said in his delectities, fagedaena e musarkas estiai por dos.
Euripides is merely altered the estiai here into aonaitai.
Or suppose, nun dim eon oligos te cae uditanos cae aikes,
to be altered by the substitution of the ordinary words into nun dim eon mikros te cae ascenicos cae aides,
or the line, dipron aikeleon caetaitais oligante trapeccan into dipron mocheron caetaitais mikros te trapeccan.
Or aionis buousin into aionis gradzousin.
Add to this that Arefrades used to ridicule the tragedians for introducing expressions unknown in the language of common life.
Domoton apor, for apor domoton, sethen ego denin.
Achileos peri, for peri achileos, and the like.
The mere fact that they're not being in ordinary speech gives addiction a norm for their character,
but Arefrades was unaware of that.
It is a great thing indeed to make a proper use of these poetical forms as also of compounds and strange words,
but the greatest thing by far is to be a master of metaphor.
It is the one thing that cannot be learnt from others, and it is also a sign of genius,
since a good metaphor implies an intuitive perception of the similarity and dissimilarity.
Of the kinds of words we have enumerated, it may be observed that compounds are most in place in the disiran,
strange words in heroic, and metaphors in iambic poetry.
Heroic poetry indeed may avail itself of them all,
but in iambic press, which models itself as far as possible on the spoken language,
only those kinds of words are in place which are allowable also in an oration.
That is the ordinary word, the metaphor, and the ornamental equivalent.
Let this then suffice as an account of tragedy, the art imitating by means of action on the stage.
As for the poetry which millinerates or imitates by means of versified language without action,
it is evident that it has several points in common with tragedy.
One, the construction of its stories should clearly be like that in a drama.
They should be based on a single action, one that is a complete whole in itself, with a beginning, middle, and end.
So it enables the work to produce its own proper pleasure with all the organic unity of a living creature.
Nor should one suppose that there is anything like them in our usual histories.
A history has to deal not with one action, but with one period and all that happened in that to one or more persons,
however disconnected the several events may have been.
Just as two events may take place at the same time, for example a sea fight of Salamis
and the battle with the Carthaginians in Sicily, without converging to the same end,
so two of two consecutive events one may sometimes come after the other with no one end as their common issue.
Nevertheless, both of our epic poets, one may say, ignore the distinction.
Herein then, to repeat what we have said before, we have a further proof of Homer's marvelous superiority to the rest.
He did not attempt to deal even with the Trojan War and its entirety, though it was a whole with a definite beginning and end,
through a feeling, apparently, that it was too long a story to be taken in in one view.
Or if not that, too complicated from the variety of incident in it.
As it is, he has singled out one section of the whole.
Many of the other incidents, however, he brings in as episodes using the catalogue of the ships, for instance,
and other episodes to relieve the uniformity of his narrative.
As for the other epic poets, they treat it as one man or one period,
or else of an action which, although one, has a multiplicity of parts in it.
This last is what the authors of the Cypria and Little Iliad have done.
And the result is that, whereas the Iliad or Odyssey supplies materials for only one or at most two tragedies,
the Cypria does that for several and the Little Iliad for more than eight.
For an adjudgment of arms, a phylloctomy, a neoptolomus, a uripulus, a ulicidae's beggar, a laconian woman,
a foal of Iliam and a departure of the fleet, as also a synon, and a women of Troy.
Chapter 24. Two.
Besides this, epic poetry must divide into the same species as tragedy.
It must be either simple or complex, a story of character or one of suffering.
Its parts, too, with the exception of song and spectacle, must be the same,
as it requires peripatis, discoveries and scenes of suffering just like tragedy.
Lastly, the thought and fiction in it must be good in their way.
All these elements appear in Homer first, and he has made due use of them.
His two poems are each examples of construction, the Iliad Simple and the Story of Suffering,
the Odyssey Complex, through its discovery throughout it, and the Story of Character.
And they are more than this, since in Diction and Thought II, they surpass all other poems.
Those have a difference in the epic as compared with tragedy, one in its length and two in its meter.
One. As for its length, the limit already suggested will suffice.
It must be possible for the beginning and end of the work to be taken in one view,
a condition which will be fulfilled if the poem be shorter than the old epics,
and about as long as the series of tragedies offered for one hearing.
For the extension of its length, epic poetry has a special advantage of which it makes large use.
In a play, one cannot represent an action with a number of parts going on simultaneously.
One is limited to the part on the stage and connected with the actors.
Whereas in epic poetry, the narrative form makes it possible for one to describe a number of simultaneous incidents.
And these, if germane to the subject, increase the body of the poem.
This, then, is a gain to the epic. They need to give it grandeur and also a variety of interest and room for episodes of diverse kinds.
Uniformity of incident by the satiety it soon creates is up to ruin tragedies on the stage.
Two. As for its meter, the heroic had been assigned it from experience.
Were anyone to attempt a narrative poem in someone or in several of the other meters,
the incongruity of the thing would be apparent.
The heroic, in fact, is the gravest and weightiest of meters, which is what makes it more tolerant from the rest of strange words and metaphors,
but also being a point in which the narrative form of poetry goes beyond all others.
The I am, Vic and Trocay, on the other hand, are meters of movement, the one representing that of life and action, the other that of the dance.
Still more unnatural would it appear if one were to write an epic in a medley of meters as Kyromon did.
Hence it is that no one has ever written a long story in anybody's heroic verse.
The nature herself, as we have said, teaches us to select the meter appropriate to such a story.
Homer, admirable as he is in every other respect, is especially so in this that he alone among epic poets is not unaware of the part to be played by the poet himself in the poem.
The poet should say very little in appropriate persona, as he is no imitator when doing that.
Whereas the other poets are perpetually coming forward in person and say but little, and that only here and there, as imitators.
Homer, after a brief preface, brings in forth with a man, a woman, or some other character.
No one of them character less, but each with distinctive characteristics.
The marvellous is certainly required in tragedy.
The epic, however, affords more opening for the improbable, the chief factor in the marvellous, because in it the agents are not visibly before one.
The scene of the pursuit of Hector would be ridiculous on the stage.
The Greeks halting instead of pursuing him, and Achilles shaking his head to stop them.
But in the poem, the absurdity has ever looked.
The marvellous, however, is a cause of pleasure, as is shown by the fact that we all tell a story with additions in the belief that we are doing our here as a pleasure.
Homer, more than any other, has taught the rest of us the art of framing lies in the right way.
I mean the use of parallelogism.
Whenever, if A is or happens, a consequent B is or happens, men's notion is that if the B is, the A also is, but that is a false inclusion.
Accordingly, if A is untrue but there is something else, B, that on the assumption of its truth follows as its consequent, the right thing then is to add on the B.
Just because we know the truth of the consequent, we are in our own minds led onto the erroneous influence of the truth of the antecedent.
Here is an instance from the Basque story in the Odyssey.
A likely impossibility is always preferable to an unconvincing possibility.
The story should never be made up of improbable incidents. There should be nothing of the sort in it.
If, however, such incidents are unavoidable, they should be outside the piece, like the hero's ignorance and edipus of the circumstances of Lyos' death,
not within it, like the report of the Pythian games in Electra, or the man's having come to Misia from Tegea without uttering a word on the way in the Misians.
So that it is ridiculous to say that one's plot would have been spoiled without them, since it is fundamentally wrong to make up such plots.
If the poet has taken such a plot, however, and one sees that he might have put it in a more probable form,
he is guilty of absurdity as well as a fault of art.
Even in the Odyssey, the improbabilities in the setting ashore of Ulysses would be clearly intolerable in the hands of an inferior poet.
As it is, the poet conceals them, his other excellences veiling their absurdity.
Elaborate diction, however, is required only in places where there is no action and no character or thought to be revealed.
Whether it is character or thought, on the other hand, an over-ornate diction tends to obscure them.
Chapter 25
As regards problems and their solutions, one may see the number and nature of the assumptions on which they proceed by viewing the matter in the following way.
One, the poet being an imitator just like the painter or other maker of likenesses,
he must necessarily, in all instances, represent things in one or other of three aspects,
either as they were or are, or as they are said or thought to be or to have been, or as they ought to be.
Two, all that he does in language, with an admixture, it may be, of strange words and metaphors,
as also of the various modified forms of words, since the use of these is conceited in poetry.
Three, it is to be remembered, too, that there is not the same kind of correctness in poetry as in politics or indeed any other art.
There is, however, within the limits of poetry itself a possibility of two kinds of error.
The one directly, the other only accidentally connected with the art.
If the poet meant to describe the thing correctly and failed through lack of power of expression, his art itself is at fault.
But if it was through his having meant to describe it in some incorrect way, for example, to make the horse in movement
have both right legs thrown forward, that's a technical error, one in a matter of, say, medicine or some other special science.
All impossibilities of whatever kind they may be have got into his description.
His error, in that case, is not in the essentials of the poetic art.
These, therefore, must be the premises of the solutions in answer to the criticisms involved in the problems.
One, as to the criticisms relating to the poet's art itself, any impossibilities there may be in his descriptions of things are false.
But from another point of view, they are justifiable if they serve the end of poetry itself.
If, to assume what we have said at that end, they make the effect of either that very portion of the work or some other portion more astounding.
The pursuit of hector is an instance in point.
If, however, the poetic end might have been as well or better attained without sacrifice of technical correctness in such matters,
the impossibility is not to be justified since the description should be, if it can, entirely free from error.
One may ask to do whether the error is in a matter directly or only accidentally connected with the poetic art,
since it is a lesser error in an artist not to know, for instance, that the hind has no horns
and to produce an unrecognizable picture of one.
Two, if the poet's description be criticized as not true to fact, one may urge perhaps that the object ought to be as described.
An answer like that of Sophocles, who said that he drew men as they ought to be and euripides as they were.
If the description, however, be neither true nor of the thing as it ought to be, the answer must be there, but it is in accordance with opinion.
The tales about gods, for instance, may be as long as they're not on these things,
neither true nor the better thing to say, but they are certainly in accordance with opinion.
Of other statements in poetry, one may perhaps say not that they are better than the truth, but that the fact was so at the time.
For example, the description of the arms. Their spears stood upright but end upon the ground.
For that was the usual way of fixing them then, as it is still with the allerians.
As for the question whether something said or done in a poem is morally right or not,
in dealing with that one should consider not only the intrinsic quality of the actual word or deed,
but also the person who says or does it, the person to whom he says or does it, the time, the means, and the motive of the agent,
whether he does it to attain a greater good or to avoid a greater evil.
Three, other criticisms one must meet by considering a language of the poet.
One, by the assumption of a strange word in a passage like Ureas Men Proton, whereby Ureas, homo, may perhaps mean not mules but sentinels,
and in saying of Dolon,
Os re toi aidos men aene cacos, is meaning may perhaps be not that Dolon's body was deformed,
but that his face was ugly, as why days is the Cretan work a handsome face.
So to Zoroteron de Carae, may mean not mix the wine stronger, as though for topos, but mix it quicker.
Two, other expressions in Homo, may be explained as metaphorical, for example, in A loi men ra ae oi te cae aene res oodon apantes panu cioi.
As compared with what he tells us at the same time,
It's metaphorically put for many, since all is a species of many.
So also his oe damoros is metaphorical, the best known standing alone.
Three, a change as Cipias of Cassos suggested in the mode of reading a word will solve the difficulty in the domain de oi
and in Cromen who catapulte ae ubro.
Four, other difficulties may be solved by another punctuation.
For example, in Empedocles,
I'd say the snet es vonto da prin mafon atanata zora te prin checretto.
Or five, by the assumption of an equivocal term, as in parocheken, the pleo nukes, where pleo is equivocal.
Or by an appeal to the custom of language, wine and water, we call wine.
And it is on the same principle that Homer speaks of a
A worker in iron, we call a brazier, and it is on the same principle that Ganymede is described as the wine-server of Zeus.
Though the gods do not drink wine, this latter, however, may be an instance of metaphor.
But whenever also a word seems to imply some contradiction, it is necessary to reflect how many ways there may be of understanding it in the passage in question.
For example, in Homer's Tresketo Charchion Encos, one should consider the possible senses of was stocked there,
whether by taking it in this sense or in that one, would best avoid the thought of which Glaucon speaks.
They start with some improbable presumption, and having so decreed it themselves, proceed to draw influences and censure the bird,
as though he had actually said whatever they happened to believe, if his statement conflicts with their own notion of things.
This is how Homer's silence about Icarios has been treated, starting with the notion of his having been a Lachodimonian.
The critics think it strange for Telemachus not to have met him when he went to Lachodimon,
whereas the fact may have been, as the Cephalinians say, that the wife of Ulysses was of a Cephalinian family,
and that her father's name was Icarios, not Icarios.
Further, it is probably a mistake of the critics that is given wise to the problem.
Speaking generally, one has to justify one, the impossible by reference to the requirements of poetry, or to the better, or to opinion.
For the purposes of poetry, a convincing impossibility is preferable to an unconvincing possibility,
and if men such as Ulysses depicted be impossible, the answer is that it is better they should be like that, as the artist ought to improve on his model.
Two, the improbable one has to justify either by showing it to be in accordance with opinion, or by urging that at times it is not improbable,
or there is a probability of things happening also against probability.
Three, the contradictions found in the poet's language, one should first test as one does an opponent's consultation in a dialectical argument,
so to see whether he means the same thing in the same relation and in the same sense,
before admitting that he has contradicted either something he has said himself, or what a man of sound sense assumes as true.
But there is no possible apology for improbability of plot or depravity of character when they are not necessary,
and no use is made of them, like the improbability and the appearance of Egeus in Medea, and the baseness of men allows in arrestees.
The objections then of critics start with thoughts of five kinds.
The allegation is always that something is either one, impossible, two, improbable, three, corrupting, four, contradictory, or five against technical correctness.
The answers to these objections must be sought under one or other of the above mentioned heads, which are twelve in number.
Chapter 26, The Last Chapter.
The question may be raised whether the epic or the tragic is the higher form of imitation.
It may be argued that if the less vulgar is the higher, and the less vulgar is always that which addresses a better public,
an art addressing any and every one is of a very vulgar order.
It is a belief that their public cannot see the meaning unless they add something themselves that causes the perpetual movements of the performers,
bad flute players, for instance, rolling about.
It's quite showing it to be represented and pulling at the conductor if Silla is the subject of the piece.
Tragedy, then, is said to be an art of this order and to be intact just what the later actors were in the eyes of their predecessors,
for Maniscus used to call Calipides the ape, because he thought he so overacted his parts.
And the similar view was taken of Pindarus also.
All tragedy, however, is said to stand to the epic as the newer to the older school of actors.
The one, accordingly, is said to address a cultivated audience which does not need the accompaniment of gesture.
The other, an uncultivated one.
If, therefore, tragedy is a vulgar art, it must clearly be lower than the epic.
The answer to this is twofold.
In the first place, one may urge, one, that the censor does not touch the art of the dramatic poet,
but only that of his interpreter.
For it is quite possible to overdo the gesturing even in an epic recital, as did Sossi's Stratus.
And in a singing contest, as did Nassitius of Opus.
Two, that one should not condemn all movement unless one means to condemn even the dance,
but only that of ignoble people, which is the point of the criticism passed on Calipides
and in the present day on others, that their women are not like gentle women.
Three, that tragedy may produce its effect even without movement or action in just the same way as epic poetry.
Four, from the mere reading of a play its quality may be seen.
So that, if it be superior in all other respects, this element of inferiority is no necessary part of it.
In the second place, one must remember, one, that tragedy has everything that the epic has,
even the epic meter being admissible, together with a not inconsiderable addition in the shape of the music,
a very real factor in the pleasure of the drama, and the spectacle.
Two, that its reality of presentation is felt in the play as read, as well in the play as acted.
Three, that the tragic imitation requires less space for the attainment of its end,
which is a great advantage, since the more concentrated effect is more pleasurable
than one with a large admixture of time to dilute it.
Consider the edifice of Sophocles, for instance, and the effect of expanding it into the number of lines of the Iliad.
Four, that there is less unity in the imitation of the epic poets,
as is proved by the fact that any one work of theirs supplies matter for several tragedies.
The result being that if they take what is really a single story it seems curt when briefly told,
and thin and waterish when on the scale of length usual with their verse.
In saying that there is less unity in an epic, I mean an epic made up of a plurality of actions,
in the same way as the Iliad and Odyssey have many such parts, each one of them in itself of some magnitude.
Yet the structure of the two Homeric poems is as perfect as can be,
and the action in them is as nearly as possible one action.
If then tragedy is superior in these respects and also besides these in its poetic effect,
since the two forms of poetry should give us not any or every pleasure, but the very special kind we have mentioned,
it is clear that as attaining the poetic effect better than the epic, it will be the higher form of art.
So much for tragedy and epic poetry, for these two are arts in general and their species,
the number and nature of their constituent parts, the causes of success and failure in them,
the objections of the critics and the solutions in answer to them.
This concludes the reading of Logic, Poetics and Rhetoric by Aristotle.
This book was read by Frederick Davidson.
Audible hopes you have a limit of gesture.
The other, an uncultivated one.
If therefore tragedy is a vulgar art, it must clearly be lower than the epic.
The answer to this is twofold.
In the first place, one may urge one that the censor does not touch the art of the dramatic poet,
but only that of his interpreter, for it is quite possible to overdo the gesturing even in an epic recital,
as did Sossi's Stratus, and in a singing contest, as did Nassi's Heirs of Opus.
Two, that one should not condemn all movement unless one means to condemn even the dark,
but only that of ignoble people, which is the point of the criticism passed on Calypides
and in the present day on others, that their women are not like gentle women.
Three, that tragedy may produce its effect even without movement or action in just the same way as epic poetry.
Four, from the mere reading of a play its quality may be seen.
So that, if it be superior in all other respects, this element of inferiority is no necessary part of it.
In the second place, one must remember, one, that tragedy has everything that the epic has,
even the epic meter being admissible, together with a not inconsiderable addition in the shape of the music,
a very real factor in the pleasure of the drama, and the spectacle.
Two, that its reality of presentation is felt in the play as read, as well in the play as acted.
Three, that the tragic imitation requires less space for the attainment of its end, which is a great advantage,
since the more concentrated effect is more pleasurable than one with a large admixture of time to dilute it.
Consider the edifice of Sophocles, for instance, and the effect of expanding it into the number of lines of the Iliad.
Four, that there is less unity in the imitation of the epic poets, as is proved by the fact that any one work of theirs
supplies matter for several tragedies, the result being that if they take what is really a single story,
it seems curt when briefly told, and thin and waterish when on the scale of length usual with their verse.
In saying that there is less unity in an epic, I mean an epic made up of a plurality of actions,
in the same way as the Iliad and Odyssey have many such parts, each one of them in itself of some magnitude.
Yet the structure of the two Homeric poems is as perfect as can be, and the action in them is as nearly as possible one action.
If then, tragedy is superior in these respects and also besides these in its poetic effect,
since the two forms of poetry should give us not any or every pleasure, but the very special kind we have mentioned,
it is clear that as attaining the poetic effect better than the epic, it will be the higher form of art.
So much for tragedy and epic poetry, for these two arts in general and their species,
the number and nature of their constituent parts, the causes of success and failure in them,
the objections of the critics and the solutions in answer to them.
This concludes the reading of Logic, Poetics and Rhetoric by Aristotle.
This book was read by Frederick Davidson.
This book was read by Frederick Davidson.
